                                                            NASA SP-4005




ASTRONAUTICS AND
A E R O N A U T I C S , 1964
Chronology o n Science,Technology, and Policy




           Prepared by the NASA Historical Staff,
                     Office of Policy Planning




         Scientific and Technical Information Division            1965
         N A T I O N A L AERONAUTICS A N D SPACE ADMINISTRATION
                                                         Washington, D .C.
       ~




FOR SALE BY THE SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS. U S . GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                       WASHINGTON. D.C.. 20402 -PRICE 11.75
                                Foreword
   The year 1964, the seventh o the space age, was a year 6:achievement,
                                   f
especially in space science. It was also a building year in which many com-
ponents and techniques basic to manned flight capability were proved out.
Because of the foundations laid in 1964, we can proceed with more sureness
toward the long-duration manned missions, culminating with the moon land-
ing, scheduled for the coming years.
   The dramatic flight of RANGER VII leads the list of accomplishments. Before
crashing into the moon, the satellite snapped more than 4,000 photographs
of its surface. Many of the pictures were of such high resolution that they
amounted to a thousand-fold improvement over the best taken by earth-
mounted telescopes. MARINER IV is well started on its long journey to Mars.
Early in its flight, it was ordered to perform an intricate midcourse maneuver.
The spacecraft followed its instructions to the letter; and barring accident it
will pass within 5,400 miles of its objective as planned.
   NIMBUS I, the first of the second generation of meteorological satellites, func-
tioned long enough to demonstrate that its TV cameras and infrared scanners
could provide day and night weather coverage far superior to that supplied by
its predecessors.
   The data produced by these and the numerous other investigations of space
noted in this chronology were sent to more than 2,300 scientists and engineers
in more than a hundred university laboratories and space centers for study
and analysis. These researchers are thus obtaining a broader and deeper
scientific and technical base for their future activities. Scientists and engi-
neers not in space-related work benefit from the creation of a facility that
permits storage and retrieval of data resulting from space experiments.
   The buildup of the national capability in advanced research and technology
in the area of aeronautics and astronautics has been more rapid than in any
previous period.
   As this chronology shows, many of the basic components and techniques
required for manned flight were proved out during 1964. The seventh suc-
cessful test launch of the Saturn I booster paved the way to the next phase
 of the Apollo project. More particularly, it assured that this booster’s more
powerful successors, the Saturn I and the Saturn V, can be relied upon to
discharge their appointed roles in the lunar landing program.
    Centaur passed the half-way mark on its way to operational status. Aloqg
with the other test activities, the Centaur flights proved that the use of liquid
hydrogen as an engine fuel had been mastered.
    The unmanned Gemini capsule testing was completed except for a h a 1
 ballistic shot to determine the ability of the heat shield to withstand the tem-
peratures generated by high-speed reentry. The way was thus opened to
proceed in 1965 with manned flights, to practice rendezvous and docking, and
to undertake long-duration orbital missions. Such missions will provide
essential information on the effect of weightlessness and other aspects of the
                                                                          m
IV                                FOREWORD

space environment on the human organism. Additionally, the checkout of
many of the components, stages, and subsystems that will go into the Saturns,
the Apollo capsule, and the LEM was finished.
   The construction of new ground facilities for housing, handling, and launch-
ing the giant boosters to come was well advanced. Progress was made in
expanding Cape Kennedy to meet the future needs of the program.
   During 1964, good headway was made in focusing the resources needed for
the execution of the Apollo program and other manned missions. Some 1,600
prime contractors and thousands of subcontractors went forward with the
design, production, and test of a variety of equipment made for ground test-
ing. NASA’s comprehensive system of ground-testing was largely completed.
     ’

In this system, many aspects of the space environment are simulated on the
ground, giving us a capability to subject the equipment to conditions that
will be encountered in flight and thus to uncover difiiculties and find solutions
for them before flight testing begins.
   This has a double significance. In the coming months, equipment will
be coming off the production line in greatly increased volume, imposing a
heavy requirement for testing which we will be able to meet. Secondly,
the problems that the simulated environmental testing uncovers, the need
for alterations or improvements that are revealed, can be quickly fed back
to the production lines so that what has been learned can be promptly applied
to equipment in the process of fabrication.
   As a result, when the flight-test stage is reached we have greater assurance
that the flight equipment delivered by the contractors will perform according
to specificationsand that we can execute the missions that have been scheduled.
Our experience with ground simulation of the space environment has also
supplied information which- has enabled us to upgrade equipment so that it
will outperform its design specifications. Because of this system of ground
testing, the thrust of some of the new boosters has been substantially increased.
   Improved manqgement techniques which enhance the effectiveness of the
all-up system wherein the complete unit is tested at once have been put into
effect. Configuration control has been tightened to ensure that systems and
subsystems are compatible and that design requirements are met.
   These and other significant improvements were made in NASA’s overall
management system for the production and flight of very large and very
complex rockets and spacecraft. In many ways this system is now further
advanced than any previously developed on an equivalent scale.
   The sum of this chronology is an encouraging increase in our space capa-
bilities and experience. The developments cited herein are proof that the
space effort is moving forward on a broad front at a steadily accelerating pace.
These facts give assurance that the National requirement of preeminence
in space will be met.
                                             ROBERT SEAMANS,
                                                   C.     JR.,
                                                   Associate Administrator.
Contents
                                Preface
   This chronology is a first step in the historical process of documenting the
dynamic and complex undertaking of space exploration and exploitation.
It was prepared from open public sources to provide a ready reference for
current use as well as for future analysts and historians. This chronicle of
the seventh year of the Space Age also will assist other scholars, students,
and writers. As the years pass perhaps its value may actually increase.
   Previous volumes in this series may be of interest to new readers. They
are:
     Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1915-1960 (Washington: NASA, 1961,
  @




         available from Supt. of Documents, GPO, $1.75).
   * Aeronautical and Astronautical Events of 1961 (published by the House
         Committee on Science and Astronautics, June 1963, available from
         Supt. of Documents, GPO, $1.50).
     Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1963 (Washington: NASA, 1964, SP40M,
         available from Supt. of Documents, GPO, $2.00).
   In the preparation of Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1964, Dr. Frank W .
Anderson, Assistant NASA Historian, carried major responsibility. Mrs.
Helen T. Wells drafted the bulk of the text and also prepared the list of ab-
breviations. In the last two months of the year, the Science and Technology
Division of the Library of Congress took over responsibility for the text.
Miss Nancy Ebert (ATSP) prepared the index, while Miss Sara Corbett was
responsible for preparation of the copy, ably assisted by Dema Nappier
             Lloyd Robbins and Creston ‘Whiting (ATSS-T) continued to
(AFEE-1).
provide timely translations of Russian materials. Center historians and
historical monitors were helpful in validating material as well as providing
items. Without the comments of busy scientific and technical personnel, this
volume would have been much the poorer.
   Appendix A, “Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights -1964,”
was prepared by Dr. Anderson, as was Appendix B, “Major NASA Launch-
ings, 1964.” As historical documentation and analysis are dynamic processes,
comments and criticism are welcomed at any time.


                                                        EUGENE EMME
                                                                M.
                                                  NASA Historian (APPH)
                                                    Ofice of Policy Planning
                                                                     VII
                         January 19M
January 1: NASA position paper on DOD’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory,
    embodying eight principles of NASA policy toward the MOL, was made
    public. The paper stated:
       “The DOD Manned Orbital Laboratory is a single military project
     (a specific goal; not a broad program) within the overall National
                      ..
    Space Program. .
       “The MOL should not be construed as the national space station, a
    separate program currently under joint study by NASA and the DOD.
    Such a space station project would be considered under the terms of
    the Webb/McNamara agreement on manned orbital research and devel-
    opment systems larger than Gemini and Apollo. The MOL is, rather,
    a specific experimental test bed utilizing NASA’s  Gemini project and the
    Titan 111 for certain potential military space applications not within
                                        . .”
                            activities. .      (Text; Simons, Wash. Post,
    the scope of NASA’s
    1/2/64,1; A&A, 2/64,90; A F Mag., 74)
* Head designer of Soviet spacecraft, name not identified, was interviewed in
                                                      “. .. permanently op-
    Izvestiu. His predictions for the next five years:
    erating orbital stations consisting of sputniks having various purposes
    such as providing service in investigating the Earth, the Sun, forecasting
                                                                     ...
    weather, monitoring the radiation conditions in space, etc.;            an
    all-purpose radio and TV system for transmitting through space, with
                                                               ...
    the aid of the so-called ‘hanging’ (‘stationary’) satellites;     ways of
                 ..  . for mail-freight deliveries, requiring high speed, and
    using space
                                  ..
    finally passenger service; .        permanent orbiting stations [where]
    regular shifts of scientific workers of the most diversified specialties
                            ..
    will live and work. .        In general, during this period flights into
    near space and return to Earth will become very commonplace. I think
    that in the next five years, many comrades will sojourn in space.”
       Regarding “direct investigations in the region of the Moon and on
    its surface,” the designer said: “In all likelihood, in the imminent
    years such studies can be accomplished only with the aid of small auto-
    matic devices transmitting the data to Earth by radio.” (Zzvestia,
    1/1/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
  Two mathematicians at Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of Univ. of C l f  ai.
    achieved first accurate description of the orbit of Mars, Univ. of Calif.
    announced. The mathematicians, Joseph L. Brady and Edna Vienop,
    calculated the planet’s orbit with aid of computers used to develop
    nuclear weapons. Brady said calculation left Mercury as the solar
    system’s only planet without accurate description of its orbit. (AP,
    Wash. Post, 1/2/64, A3)
  Beginning of cable circuit connecting New York and Offenbach, West Ger-
    many, announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of US. Weather Bureau,
    for exchange of meteorological information between North America and
    Europe. Inauguration of cable circuit, expected to yield improved
                                                                     1
2              ASTRONAU’M.C!S AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

     reception of weather data because of freedom from radio propagation
     occurring on radioteletypewriter circuit, represented major achievement
     in global exchange of weather information. International meteorolo-
     gical community now was planning for future exchanges using high-
    speed computers and communications satellites. (Commerce Dept.
     Release WB Sal)
January 1 : Fiftieth anniversary of first scheduled airline flight, from St.
     Petersburg to Tampa, Fla., by Benoist flying boat. Plane made two
     round-trip flights daily, six days per week across Tampa Bay. 18-mi.
    flights took 2 hrs. by steamer, 6 hrs. by car and 12 hrs. by rail. During ‘
    50th year (1963) , US. scheduled airlines carried 71,418,000 revenue
    passengers 50,361,300,000 mi. (Aerospace, Summer 1964)
January 2: NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, appearing on
     CBS radio program “Capitol Cloakroom,” said that before US. and
    U.S.S.R. could cooperate in a manned space flight effort, the U.S.S.R.
    would have to radically change its secrecy policy in space exploration.
    Some changes might be required in US. space policies also. “To con-
    duct cooperative manned flights,” Dr. Dryden said, “I think you’d have
        ..
    to . start from the beginning with a joint team to consider all the
    problems together.” Regarding U.S.4.J.S.S.R. agreements reached on
    weather satellites, communications satellites, and magnetic field studies,
    Dr. Dryden commented that “implementation of the agreements has
    been proceeding rather slowly. . . . We hope they’ll give us some clear
    indication as to whether they are ready to exchange cloud pictures in
     1964, or not.”
       Regarding Project Apollo timetable, Dr. Dry den said that if Con-
    gress supported the proposed budget for the project it should be possible
    to land a man on the moon by 1970. However, two year’s ccslackyy
    built into the schedule to allow for contingencies was lost by the FY
    1964, budget reduction. (UPI, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/3/64; Wilson, Min-
    neapolis Morning Trib., 1/3/M)
* President Lyndon B. Johnson said in article for The Journal of the Na-
    tional Education Association:
       “The nation that has the schools has the future. No less than our
    rocket thrusts into outer space, there is urgently needed a national edu-
    cation thrust of massive proportions that will help us master the prob-
    lems of our age.
          . . . figuratively and physically we are building not only a pathway
       CL

    to the stars but also-hopefully-bridges         of understanding here on
    earth.
       “It is here on earth that our task begins. And for that task, the educa-
    tion attainments of our fellow Americans are, in some categories, far
    less than they should be. . . .” (AP, NYT, 1/3/64, 21)
  Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) , Chairman of House Committee on Sci-
    ence and Astronautics, announced agreement with National Academy
    of Sciences that the academy would serve as adviser to the Congrm.
    In recent years NAS, created a century ago by act of Congress, has
    established active working relationship with Executive Branch. To-
    day’s agreement was to establish similar relationship with the Con-
    gress. Agreement was result of recommendation by Subcommittee on
    Science, Research and Development, chaired by Rep. Emilio Q. Dad-
    dario (D.-Conn.) , which has been investigating relationship of science
                                                                           3
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     and Government. (Finney, NYT, 1/3/@, 9; Simons, Wash. Post,
     1/3/w
January 2: AFSC established Hq. National Range Division (NRD) ,Provisional,
    at Patrick AFB, Fla., with Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (USAF),as com-
    mander. Replacing General Davis as AFMTC commander was Brig.
    Gen. Harry J. Sands, Jr., vice commander of AFMTC.     At the same time,
    AFSC established Air Force Space Test Center, Provisional (AFSTC), at
    Vandenberg AFB, with Brig. Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, commander of
    659th Aerospace Test Wing (SSD) as commander. To become fully
    operational on July 1,Hq. NRD would coordinate activities of AMR (man-
    aged by AFMTC commander) and of that portion of PMR transferred from
    USN to USAF (managed by AFSTC commander). (AFSC Release 41-5-1;
    SBD, 1 / 7 / a , 26; M&R, 1/13/@, 10)
  DOD announced additional $30,414,000 had been obligated to Martin
    Marietta Corp., Denver, on cost-plus-incentive-feecontract for design,
    development, and fabrication of Titan I11 space booster. (DOD Release
    3-64)
  According to survey by the Foundation Library Center, US. philanthropic
    foundations have assets totaling $14.5 billion, increase of $3 billion
    since 1960. Foundations make grants at rate of $779 million per year,
    increase of more than $150 million since 1960. Education receives
    most in foundation grants, $315 million; sciences receive fifth largest
    amount, $86 million. (Hechinger, NYT, 1/3/64,18)
January 3: RELAY I communications satellite continued transmitting despite
    an onboard timer set to turn it off after one year. Electrolytic solution
    was supposed to have eaten through main power lead to switch off
    transmission power. NASA and RCA experts speculated erosion was
    slowed because environmental temperatures were cooler than anticipated.
    Launched into orbit Dec. 13,1962, RELAY I has been used for 2,000 com-
    munications experiments with more than 290 hours of transmission time,
    most of which was wideband transmission or TV. (NASA Release 6d-1)
  AEC announced preliminary evaluation of mockup space reactor re-entry
    flight (RFD-1) ,conducted May 22,1963, with a Scout booster, indicated
    that “space reactors can be designed to break apart and disintegrate
    when they re-enter the earth’s atmosphere.” During re-entry, telemetry
    recorded disassembly events and measured heating rates at critical
    points on the reactor “until blackout of radiofrequency occurred-just
    before disassembly of the reactor. The data on the temperature rises
    and the times of the disassembly events transmitted by the telemetry
    system were essentially as predicted.” Test results were still being
    evaluated by Sandia Corp. and Atomics International in an effort to
    substantiate the conclusions inferred from optical tracking of re-entry.
     (AEC Release G 1 )
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced selection of RCA to build and
    install ultrahigh-vacuum chamber and associated equipment at MSC,
    the fixed-price contract totaling $245,000. ( MSC Release 64-41)
  Seven noctilucent clouds visible in southwest US. in past six months
    probably were caused by PMR rocket launchings, according to Dr. Aden
    B. Meinel and Carolyn P. Meinel in Science magazine. The Meinels,
    astronomers at Univ. of Arizona’s Stewart Observatory (Tucson) ,
    described cloud appearing Nov. 2 at mean altitude of 35 mi. By
    measuring speed and direction of cloud’s drift, Meinels traced it back
              .    I
4                                AND                    1964
               ASTRONAUTICS            AERONAUTIOS,

    to vicinity of ~ m , as they had traced 44-mi. altitude cloud of June 15.
                       just
    Dr. Meinel and colleagues had described the clouds in Science last Sep-
    tember, tentatively linking the June 15 cloud to Scout launching at PMR.
    Now, despite fact that no firing was announced for Nov. 2, Meinels con-
    cluded that “the coincidence of the clouds of June 15 and 2 November
    1963 with a drift vector indicating origin from the Pacific Missile
    Range would appear to remove the probability of a fortuitous occur-
    rence that could be argued from one cloud alone.” (Science, 1/3/64,
    CSM,1/6/64)
January 4: 1,100 students at 131 colleges and universities would participate
    in NASA graduate training program during 196445, NASA announced.
    Students in space-related predoctoral fields would be selected by the
    participating universities. Each student would receive $2,400 stipend
    for twelve months, plus dependents’ allowance up to $1,000. Program
    is administered by Grants and Research Contracts Div. of NASA Office
    of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 64-2)
January 5: Evidence obtained from instruments carried aloft by balloons
    supports the theory that supernovae are a source of electrons in cosmic
    rays reaching vicinity of earth, scientists reported in Physical Review
    Letters. Experiments revealed primary cosmic rays in earth’s upper
    atmosphere contain average of three times as many electrons as posi-
    trons. The high-altitude balloon experiments, conducted last summer
    near Ft. Churchill, Manitoba, by physicists of Univ. of Chicago and
    Argonne National Laboratory, also demonstrated for first time the
    existence of positrons in primary cosmic rays. ( Wush. Post, 1/6/64;
    Schmeck, NYT, 1/6/64,47)
* Dr. Richard Head, formerly Associate Director in NASA Office of Plans
    and Program Evaluation, was appointed Deputy Director of Policy
    Planning Division, NASA Office of Technology Utilization and Policy
    Planning. Dr. Thomas P. Murphy, Assistant to Assistant Administrator
    for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, was appointed Acting
    Director of Policy Planning Div. pending selection of permanent
    Director. (NASA Announcement 64-3)
January 6: Supersonic Transport Evaluation Group, formed under overall
    management of FAA, convened in Washington to begin its task of evalu-
    ating airframe and engine manufacturers’ initial design proposals for
    SST. Its 210 members representing FAA, NASA, CAB, USAF, USN, and Dept.
    of Commerce, the group would complete evaluation of proposals by
    early March. Concurrently, 10 airlines would conduct independent
    evaluations of the proposals, and on March 25-26 joint Government-
    airline discussions would formally review the results of their respective
    evaluations. By May 1, FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby would
    announce which direction the US. SST effort would take. (FAA Release
    64-21
* Dr. Edward C Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, National
                .
    Aeronautics and Space Council, said in Space Business Daily interview
    that major US. space accomplishments during 1963 were: decision to
    develop Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL),progress of Saturn launch
    vehicle, orbiting of Syncorn communications satellites, L. Gordon Coo-
    per’s 22-orbit Project Mercury flight, the successful Atlas-Centaur flight
    test, and the military achievements in space. Dr. Welsh pointed out
    that in 1963 “70% of all US. orbital shots” were made by the military.
     (SBD, 1/6/tX, 18-19)
                                                                              5
                                  AND   AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

January 6: NASA MSC announced Gemini test vehicle for training astronauts
     in recovery procedures had arrived at MSC, and water tests w t the  ih
     astronauts and recovery forces would be conducted in nearby Galveston
     Bay. ( MSC Release &2)
* Lt. Col. Peter Romo, staff meteorologist of AFMTC, said his office was
     using photographs from TIROS V ~ in its weather predictions for missile
                                           I
     launchings from Cape Kennedy. APT (Automatic Picture Transmis-
     sion) ground-receiving station was installed in mobile trailer at AFMTC
     for receiving the TIROS VIII photographs. (M&R, 1/6/64, 16)
  USAF F-104 squadron completed first nonstop tactical fighter deployment
     from U.S. West Coast to Europe, flying from George AFB, Calif., 6,150
     mi. to Moron Air Base, Spain, in 10 hrs. 20 min. The 18 aircraft were
     refueled in flight six times. ( DOD Release 11-64)
Januarr 7 : NASA Manned Spacecraft Center issued request for urouosals for
     stidy of deep space la& acquisition and trackingtechniquks h manned
     space missions. Specifications called for high priority development of
     laser tracking techniques between earth and a manned deep space
     vehicle or between a satellite and two manned deep space vehicles. Sys-
     tem must be capable of handling two-way telemetry and voice com-
     munications, as well as spacecraft-to-ground TV. 22 companies were
     invited to bid on the six- to nine-month study. (MSC Release 64-3)
  NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced that tests of flashing beacon
     were being conducted with a T-33 aircraft for evaluation of similar
     beacons for use in Gemini rendezvous operations. Beacon is a white
     sphere, weighs 10 h , flashing power of 12 candleseconds. (MSC
                              .has
     Release 64-1)
  First power tool built specifically for use in space was demonstrated by
     its co-producers, Martin Co. and Black & Decker Manufacturing Co.,
     who developed it for WAF. Similar in shape and size to home power-
     drill, the battery-powered “electric minimum reaction space tool” has
     99.97% less reactive torque than ordinary utility drills, a feature made
     possible by its freely revolving casing rotating in opposite direction from
     revolution of the motor. Tool has been tested in simulated 100-mi.
     altitude space environment. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64; SBD,
     1/8/64,37)
  NASA submitted to Bureau of the Budget its proposed reports on three patent
     bills: H.R. 4482, to prescribe national policy encouraging invention by
     providing for administration of property rights to inventions resulting
     from research financed by public funds; S. 1290, to establish uniform
     national policy for property rights to inventions resulting from publicly
     financed work; and S. lM, to amend National Aeronautics and Space
     Act of 1958 to waive US. proprietary rights to inventions. (NASA LAR
     11/21
  Senate Committee on Commerce held hearings on S. 1278, to provide that
     the National Bureau of Standards study practicability of U.S. adoption
     of the metric system. (NASA LAR II/1)
  John Stack, vice president and director of engineering at Republic Avia-
     tion, predicted that early in the 1970’s a traveler flying westward in
     supersonic transport will be able to keep up w t the sun: “Whether
                                                        ih
     it is a Mach 2 plane or a Mach 3 or better, you could leave London at
     8 A.M., arrive in New York at 8 A.M., refuel and be in Los Angeles
     before 8 A.M., refuel again and be in Hawaii at 8 A.M.” (UPI, NYT,
    1/8/64 13)
6               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICEIS, 1964

Jmuary 7 In keynote address to 10th National Symposium on Reliability
           :
     and Quality Control, Lt. Gen. Howell M. Estes, Jr. (USAF), AFSC Vice
     Commander, reviewed the reasons for reliability in missile and space
     systems and specific measures taken by AFSC to improve reliability and
                                                                    .
     quality control. Discussing space systems he said: L L . . Payload
     weight will always be a major factor in the systems effectiveness equation
     for space systems. In unmanned systems, redundancy can never be ac-
     ceptable but only reluctantly tolerated. Even in manned space systems,
     any provisions for in-flight maintenance or replacement of components
     will reduce payload weight which might otherwise be available for more
                                                                .
     productive use. Our greatest challenge thus lies in space. . .,’ (Text,
     AFSC Release 41-R-4)
  USN launched Polaris A-3 missile from land site at Cape Kennedy in suc-
     cessful flight test down AMR. This was 14th success in 23 land launches
                     (M&R, 1/13/M, 10)
     of the A-3.
First Week in January: NASA lifted hiring freeze on about six manned space
     flight projects, including Apollo work at North American Aviation, Inc.
      (L.A. Times, Miumi Herald, 1/10/64; N A AS&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
e North American Aviation, Inc., began testing prototype Apollo environ-
     mental control system, developed by Garrett Corp.’s AiResearch Div.
     Unmanned tests would continue for about six months, with manned
     tests scheduled to begin June 1. (Av.Wk., 12/25/63,23)
January 8: X-15 No. 1, piloted by Capt. Joe H. Engle (USAF), reached
     139,500-ft. altitude and 3,716 mph (mach 5.36) in test near Edwards
     AFB, Calif. Flight plan called for Capt. Engle to shut off X-15’s Sta-
     bility Augmentation System (SAS) ,then the Alternate Stability Augmen-
     tation System (ASAS), to evaluate basic stability of the aircraft during
     re-entry. At peak of flight the X-15’s altimeter, air speed, and rate-of-
     climb instruments failed, but Capt. Engle followed flight plan and landed
     the X-15 safely on Rogers Dry Lake with assistance from a ground
     control station. (FRC Release; AF’, Balt. Sun, 1/9/64; UPI, N.Y. Her.
     Trib., 1/9/64)
0 In his State of the Union message to Congress, President Lyndon B. John-

     son said:
        ...
        LC
               our ultimate goal is a world without war, a world made safe
     for diversity, in which all men, goods and ideas can freely move across
     every border and boundary.
        “We must advance toward this goal in 1964 in at least ten different
                                             .
     ways, not as partisans but as patriots. . .
        “Fourth, we must assure our preeminence in the peaceful explora-
     tion of outer space, focusing on an expedition to the moon in this dec-
     ade--in cooperation with other powers if possible, alone if necessary.”
      (Text, NYT, 1/9/M, 16)
  Second rocket in India’s space program, a Nike-Apache, was launched
     from Thumba Range on southern tip of Indian peninsula, releasing
     sodium vapor clouds used to study high-altitude conditions. The Nike-
     Apache’s peak altitude was estimated at 106 mi. The Physical Re-
     search Laboratory of Ahmedabad provided the instrumented payload
     for the NASA rocket. (NASA Rpt. SRL; Reuters, NYT, 1/9/6LE, 15)
a D . Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman,
   r
     spoke at 10th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control
     on misconceptions about national space policy :
                                                                          7
           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    “First, the lunar project should not be confused with our total space
 effort. Of course, it is a complex, expensive, and difficult task, but it’s
 just a part of our young and growing national space program. Its
 major significance is that it sets a goal for an orderly development of
 competences--all of which will be useful for a wide range of space
activities in the future.
    “Second, the national security aspects of space are not being neglected.
The National Aeronautics and Space Act requires that they receive
 attention and they are receiving it, Careless thinking prompts critics
 to assert that practically nothing is being done by the military in the
 space field. For example, about two-thirds of all our space flights in the
 past two years have been launched by the Department of Defense. And
just as careless thinking assumes that a larger space budget for NASA
than for Defense means a neglect of the latter. While one need not be
 satisfied with the rate of progress in either the civilian or non-civilian
 aspects of space, nevertheless it is worth noting that national security
objectives are being pursued by both NASA and the Defense Depart-
       ...
ment.          The fact that we do not plan space programs for aggres-
 sion does not mean that we have a national security space gap or that
we will allow one to develop.
    “Third, there is another misconception to the effect that the national
space program is employing an unduly large portion of our engineering
 and scientific manpower. Added to this misconception is the parallel
view that the space program is creating a shortage of such talents which
 otherwise would be applied in our civilian economy. Actually, profits
in private enterprise are at an all-time high and, in general, higher
 in the non-space and non-defense companies than in those whose busi-
ness is primarily government-financed for space and defense. If those
very profitable companies do not hire scientists and engineers to engage
in research and development, it is not because they can’t get them as
their profit position gives them remarkable bargaining power. Rather,
failure to employ such scarce talents in large numbers is the result of
deliberate decisions on the part of private entrepreneurs and not because
there are no such persons available. . . . Furthermore, government-
financed research and development-particularly in such challenging
fields as space-is having a salutary effect in stimulating an increase
in the number of highly trained scientists and engineers.
   “Fourth, there has also been some criticism and confusion on the
subject of international cooperation in the space program. We have
formed a useful base for peaceful and constructive relationships with
some 60 other countries in space activities. The benefits are mutual.
Some of our projects could just not have been conducted successfully
without the tracking facilities, sites, and other cooperative efforts of
countries around the world. In no case do we impair our national
                                                                       ...
security through such cooperation, and we do not plan to do so.
   “Fifth, there are those who argue that it would be better to slow
down-or even stop-our space effort in order to divert the resources
to education, slum clearance, medical research, and other such pur-
poses. As much as we need to do more in those important area, it
is unrealistic to believe that the resources are transferable-even if it
                                       ...     What is more, there is no
were desirable to attempt the shift.
assurance that the Congress would vote more funds for education or
                                                       . . .”   (Text)
public housing just because it voted less for space.
8              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIOS, 19 6 4

Janucry 8: Edward Z. Gray, Director of Advanced Studies in NASA Office of
    Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that when
    NASA builds a manned space station it would be “more sophisticated”
    than the DOD Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL). NASA now has 13
    studies dealing with concepts leading toward development of an orbit-
    ing manned space station; when these studies are completed, N A S A
    would be able to appraise “the space station requirements and what
    will be the best method of pursuing the development of a manned
    orbiting space station system.” (SBD, 1/8/64, 34)
* DOD announced W. S. Bellows Construction Corp. and Peter Kiewit and
    Sons, Inc., were awarded $4,211,377 contract for construction of Mis-
    sion Simulation and Training Facility and the MSC Center Support
    Facility at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex. Contract was
    awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. (DOD Release 21-64)
* Mating assembly of Saturn V rocket sections would be accomplished with
     aid of air cushions, Marsha22 Stur reported. General Motors’ Defense
     Research Laboratories was developing for MSFC a special tool-basically
    20 “air pads”-for lifting rocket section and its wheeled carrier. Air
    pads would lift the huge sections about 1% in. from the floor. Tool
    designers were also working on mechanical mover for the air-cushion
    device so that one man would be able to move the stages forward and
    laterally. (Marshall Star, 1/8/64, 1-2)
* Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing Harvard Busi-
    ness School of Washington, presented an appraisal of U.S. aerospace
    power in 1964:
       “My appraisal for 1964 indicates continuing increase in airpower.
     All of the ATLAS and TITAN missile squadrons were operational by the
     end of 1963. Our total U.S. strategic power, the backbone and start-
     ing point of deterrence, will more than double in 1964 when new MIN-
                                                            ..
     UTEMAN strategic missile wings become operational. .
        LL
           Today’s appraisals of airpower must also cover the space front.
        “The Air Force space program will have a Manned Orbital Labora-
     tory as its central project. The switch from Dynasoar to MOL reflects
     a change in emphasis toward on-orbit experiment rather than re-entry
                  .
     experiments. . .” (Text, DOD Release 1 M )
* CAB Chairman Alan S. Boyd told House Committee on Interstate and For-
     eign Commerce’s Public Health and Safety Subcommittee hearings on
     recent jet airliner crashes that investigation showed air turbulence no
     more hazardous for jets than for other airliners. (Witkin, NYT,
     1/9/64, 52)
* Washington Evening Star editorialized about recent discovery that “Mars
     is covered by great yellow clouds of gaseous compounds of nitrogen
     and oxygen, or smog” and about scientists’ conclusion that the clouds
     preclude any chance of man’s finding life on Mars:
        L‘Quitethe contrary. This clearly indicates that Martian life exists
     and the Martians are one, hopefully two, generations ahead of us in
     smogging up the atmosphere. As for landing there, all we need are
     spacemen from Los Angeles.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/64)
January 9: USN announced a solar-powered, 120-lb. satellite was launched
     pickaback last Sept. 28 along with a previously announced nuclear-
     powered satellite. On board the solar-powered satellite were six tran-
     sistors and several radiation detectors, testing means of protecting the
     transistors from radiation damage. (AP, NYT, 1/10/64, 86)
                                                                              9
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 19 6 4

January 9: Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) stated in Portsmouth, N.H.,
    press conference: “I don’t feel safe at a l about our missiles, to tell
                                                l
    you the truth. I wish the Defense Department could tell the American
    people how undependable the missiles in our silos actually are.” Secre-
    tary of Defense Robert McNamara announced that Senator Goldwater’s
    charge was “completely misleading, politically irresponsible, and dam-
    aging to the national security. There is no information, classified or
    otherwise, to support the false implications that our long-range missiles
                                                                  ..  .” (NYT,
    cannot be depended upon to accomplish their mission.
    1/10/64,1,14)
  Following Senator Goldwater’s charge that US. missiles are undependa-
    ble, unnamed official sources at Cape Kennedy pointed out that newest
    US. IcBM’s-Minutemen and Titan II’s--can be fired in less t a a       hn
    minute’s notice, have been successful in nearly 7 out of 10 test firings,
    partially successful in 2 out of 10, and completely unsuccessful in only
    1 out of 10 firings. (UPI, NYT, l/lO/a, 14)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb told University Club in New York
    that NASA’s 25 attempts to place satellites in orbit were all success-
                 last
    ful. Of the 25, only one payload failed to function. Mr. Webb pointed
    out that in 1959, NASA’s full year of operation, the record showed
                               first
    6 successes and 13 failures. By 1961, rocket reliability “had improved
    to the point that we had 54 successful space flights with five successes
    for each failure.” (NYT, 1/1O/a, 85)
January 10: Static-test firing of Titan I1 rocket for first Project Gemini flight
    was postponed at Cape Kennedy until Jan. 14 because of possible mal-
    function of first-stage propellant valve during countdown. (UPI, Wmh.
    Post, 1/11/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/64)
  Preliminary design for re-entry spacecraft for manned Mars missions dur-
    ing 1971-75 period was submitted to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center
    after six-month study by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., MSC an-
    nounced. The earth re-entry module would travel to Mars and Back at-
    tached to 4- to 6-man M r spacecraft, then would be detached and used
                             as
    for last eight hours. It is designed to withstand re-entry heating of
    about 35,000’ F. at speeds up to 44,000 mph, protecting crew with abla-
    tive heat shield about 3% in. thick. ( MSC Release 64-6; MSC Roundup,
     1/22/&, 1 , 3 )
a USAF Ofc of Aerospace Research announced Dr. Sanford Freedman of
        fie
    Tufts Univ. and Dr. Richard Held, Prof. of Experimental Psychology
    at MIT, had been conducting experiments of human performance in
    space and had expressed less optimism toward man’s adaptability in
    space than previously had been felt. The experimenters studied human
    performance under conditions of reduced and abnormal visual and audial
    inputs related to restriction of body movements. They found that the
    subject was able to adapt only when he was allowed free movement of
    his body or appropriate limb. Besides supporting the view that accuracy
    of performance was degraded under prolonged exposure to conditions
    not permitting a correlated motor-sensory feedback, the experimenters
    concluded that stimulus changes accompanying body movements were
    an important source of order in human adaptation. This order was
    dependent upon relative constancy of environmental factors, such as
    gravity. Where one or more of these factors was absent-such as in
    space-body coordinations depending upon their regularizing influence
    may in time be lost. (OAR Release 144-1)
      Wf3-~0-65---2
10              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,              196 4

January 10: Contradictory speculation among scientists about nature o red    f
    spots observed recently on the moon, William J. Perkinson of Baltimore
    Sun said, should force NASA “to step up its badly lagging Ranger and
    Surveyor programs for unmanned exploration of the moon, and also
    force NASA to reconsider the standards that at this time bar any trained
    scientist from becoming an astronaut.” (Balt. Sun, 1/10/64)
* More than 20 Martlet rockets were launched from Barbados site during
    first year of the high-altitude research project conducted by Canada’s
    McGill Univ., New York Times reported. Fired from 16-in. naval can-
    non, Martlet has motor that ignites once the rocket is in flight, sending
    rocket to altitudes between 60 and 100 mi. It lands about 100 mi.
    southeast of Batbados in the Atlantic. 200 shots, financed by US.,
    were planned for 1%4. (AP, NYT, 1/11/64)
* DOD announced award of $15,599,775 contract to Boeing Co. for Project
    Hibex (Hi-G Booster Experiment), an ARPA research experiment in-
    vestigating high performance missile boosters. (DOD Release 38-64)
January 11 : Philco Gorp. had begun cable and pneumatic tubs installation
    in the Mission Control Center under construction at NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center, MSC announced. Philco was prime contractor for flight
    control equipment for the Project Gemini/Apollo facility, which was
    scheduled for occupancy in mid-1964. (MSC Release 64-8)
* USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster from PMR with unidentified satellite
    payload. It was later disclosed that five satellites were orbited with
    the single booster. (HHN-4 8 )
* James J. Haggerty, Jr., predicted that assignment of Manned Orbiting
    Laboratory to DOD was “an ominous harbinger of a reversal in trend,
    an indication that the military services may play a more prominent role
                                                          .
                                              expense. . .
    in future space exploration at NASA’s
       “MOL is a starting point. Whether you label it development platform,
    satellite or laboratory, it is clearly intended as a beginning for space
    station technology. It is also clearly the intent of this Administration
    that, at least in the initial stages, space station development shall be under
                                               . .”
    military rather than civil, cognizance. .            (A-N-AF J&R, 1/11/64,
    10)
January 12: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with sodium-vapor payload
    was launched to 106-mi. altitude from Thumba Range, Trivandrum,
    India, in joint effort of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Physi-
    cal Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. Rocket performed as
    predicted, sodium ejected as predicted, and temperature and turbulence
    measurements were made with ground-based cameras and instrumen-
    tation. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Three USAF test pilots entered Apollo command module at Martin Co.,
    Baltimore, for simulated 7-day lunar landing mission. (AP, NYT,
    1/13/64,9)
* USN evacuated staff and dependents (25 persons) at NASA tracking station
    in Zanzibar, where military coup overthrew the government of the one-
    month-old nation. (GSFC Historian)
* Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolaveva-Tereshkova. wife of Cosmonaut Andrian
     G. Nikolayev, was an expectant mother; Moscow sources reported.
     (UPI, NYT, 1/13/64,5)
                                                                              11
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 190 4

                                                                            Office
Janzmry 13: Management changes in propulsion programs in NASA’s
     of Advanced Research and Technology were effective this date. John L.
     Sloop, head of QART Div. of Chemical Propulsion and Power Genera-
    tion, was appointed to new position of Assistant Associate Administra-
    tor for Advanced Research and Technology, assisting Dr. Raymond L.
    Bisplinghoff. Propulsion division was redesignated Div. of Chemical
    Propulsion, with Adelbert 0. Tischler of NASA Office of Manned Space
    Flight as Director. At the same time, management of M-1 engine
    project was transferred from QMSF to Div. of Chemical Propulsion,
    OART. (NASA Release 64-4)
0 In White House Ceremony, President Johnson awarded 1%3 National

    Medal of Science to the recipients: Drs. Jerome B. Wiesner, Cornelius B.
    van Neil, Luis W. Alvara, Vannevar Bush, John R. Pierce, and Norbert
    Wiener. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/14/64)
0 USN launched three Polaris A-2      missiles in first operational tests of new
    steam ejection system, the launchings conducted from U.S.S. Nathan
    Hale submerged off Cape Kennedy. Second of the three firings was
    successful, the first failing when second-stage motor did not ignite and
    the third veering off course after 15 sec. of flight (destroyed by range
    safety officer). (M&R, 1/20/64, 11)
0 DOD announced Army Materiel Command award of $1,170,751 contract to

    Western Electric Co. for work in support of Project Sleighride, re-entry
    vehicle vulnerability test program. (DOD Release 36-64)
January 14: Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Is-
    land, Va., with Rice Univ. experiment “Sammy 1’’ to measure and study
    causes of auroras and airglow. Vehicle carried 68-lb. payload, designed
    and built by professors and students in Rice Space Science Dept., to
    peak altitude of 56 mi. before impacting 74 mi. downrange in the At-
    lantic Ocean. No recovery operation was conducted; telemetry data
    during flight would be analyzed by the Space Science Dept. This was
    first of four similar experiments to be conducted under NASA grant;
    remaining three flights would take place at Ft. Churchin, Canada.
     (Wallops Release 6 3 )
0 NASA and Canada’s Defence Research Board announced reaching agree-

    ment for joint multi-satellite ionosphere-monitoring research program,
    designated Isis (International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies) .
    Agreement called for orbiting of a second Alouette and Isis A, B, and C
    satellites at intervals between 1965 and 1970. The satellites would
    continue and expand experiments of ALQUETTE I topside sounder, and
    data obtained from the satellites would be made freely available to the
    scientific community. Under terms of the agreement, DRB would design,
    construct, and test the satellites, provide basic onboard experiment, and
    operate at least one ground station io supply data on spacecraft oper-
    ation. NASA would provide four launch vehicles, conduct launch oper-
    ations, and provide and launch up to five sounding rockets to test
    components, subsystems, and experiments for the satellites. NASA also
    would launch an Explorer satellite in conjunction with the Alouew to
     obtain coordinated direct measurements. (NASA Release 64-6)
  Static test-firing of Titan I1 at Cape Kennedy postponed for a week, this
     second postponement due to failure of gas generator starter cartridge.
     (M&R,1/20/64,12)
12             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONATJTIB, 19 6 4

January 14: Senate received President Johnson’s nomination of Dr. Donald
     F. Hornig to be Director of Office of Science and Technology, succeed-
     ing Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner. (CR, 1/14/64,371)
  In keeping with NASA reorganization, subcommittees of the House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics were revised as follows: Manned
    Space Flight; Space Sciences and Applications; Advanced Research
    and Tracking; and Science, Research, and Development. (NASA LAR
    III/6)
* Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., said in
    speech before Tennessee Valley Post of American Ordnance Association,
    Redstone Arsenal, Ala. :
       “Space can be nothing less than a total national undertaking.
       “Space has to do with our future, with our country’s future, and
    with the progress of civilization. It also has to do with our personal
                                 .
    and our national security. . .
       “I personally believe that the working partnership between NASA and
    the Department of Defense will grow increasingly close in the months
    and years just ahead, and that joint efforts in ventures such as Gemini,
    and the lunar expedition, will serve to identify this country’s slate of
                                          . .”
    space activities as national programs. .
       Discussing role of the military in space, he said: “AS a national
    policy, we have declared that space will be reserved for peaceful pur-
    poses. This, I submit, serves to put the military into space-not restrict
                                              .
    space to purely non-military activities. . .
       “In describing the military mission, I like to say that the Defense
    Department’s job is to insure that space is used for us-not against us.”
     (Marshdl Star, 1/15/64,1-2)
* Engineers Joint Council would request this session of Congress for charter
    to establish National Academy of Engineering, EJC president Eric A.
    Waker said in Washington press conference. NAE would be patterned
    after National Academy of Sciences, which was working with EJC in
    setting up NAE, but the two bodies would have no organizatiohd ties.
     (M&R, 1/20/64, 10)
* Boeing Go. scientists announced invention of lightweight telescope with
    more than lO@mi. range for use by astronaut in satellite interceptor
    in spotting another orbiting spacecraft. (SBD, 1/15/64, 74)
January 15: President Johnson sent to Congress his propowd $5.304 billion
    authorization for NASA in FY 1965, $600 million less than NASA earlier
    had requested. The proposed legislation (H.R. 9641) was introduced
    in the House by Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) and referred to Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics. Of this sum, $641,000,000 would
    be for administrative operations; $281,000,000 for construction of fa-
    cilities; and $4,382,000,000 for research and development. Of R&D
    amount, $3,011,900,000 would be for manned space flight-$2,677,-
    500,000 for Project Apollo; $308,400,000 for Project Gemini; and
    $26,000,000 for advanced missions. At press conference on the budget,
    NASA made public its plans to request $141 million supplemental appro-
    priation for F”Y 1%4, to restore some of the budget cut by Congress. The
    NASA position, as expressed by Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C    .
    Seamans, Jr.: “We have now been cut back to a point where we’ll have
    to admit we cannot carry out the [lunar landing] program in this dec-
    ade without the full support of Congress for the supplemental and for
                                                                          13
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    our 1965 request.” Of supplemental request, $31 million would be for
    Apollo spacecraft development and the rest for Saturn launch vehicle.
     (NASA LAR 111/7; Finney, NYT, 1/16/@, 1; VSJ, 1/16/@; Dodd,
    Chic. Trib., 1/16/64)
January 15: Nike-Apache launched from Wallops Island, Va., in flight to
    measure light intensity and particle fluxes from 150,000 ft. to apogee.
    Good data were received throughout the flight, but experiment was only
    partially successful because Nike-Apache reached only 56.1-mi. altitude.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  USAF launched Titan I1 rocket from AMR on successful 5,000-mi. flight to
    test its ability to function both as an ICBM and as booster for Project
    Gemini manned spacecraft. The Titan I1 carried Gemin’, malfunction
    detection system and damping device to counteract vibrations. (M&R,
    1/20/64,11)
                                        Mex.) , Chairman of Senate Commit-
0 Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.

    tee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed National Capital Sec-
    tion of AIAA and questioned whether hazard of intense solar radiation in
    the 1968-70 period might postpone Project Apollo lunar flight. H e
    pointed out that 1968-70 is period of maximum solar activity in the
    11-year solar cycle, and radiation intensity might require “very substan-
    tial shielding for the Apollo capsule.” This raised question of whether
    heavy shielding imposes too great a weight penalty on Apollo. Citing
    recent scientific recommendation that there was “relatively low prob-
    ability” of Apollo crew’s encountering solar flare, he questioned whether
    maintaining the schedule would be worth such a gamble. (Finney,
    NYT, 1/16/M, 1; SBD, 1/16/a, 8 0 4 1 )
  Army Corps of Engineers awarded $2,295,220 contract for Saturn S-I1
    stage test-site development at NASA Mississippi Test Operations to C. H.
    Leave11 and Co. and Peter Kiewit and Sons, Inc,, DOD announced. (DOD
    Release 50-64)
  Bendix Products Aerospace Div. was awarded $99,973 NASA study contract
    for shock absorbing device to permit soft landing on moon, NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Center announced. Bendix would test various sizes and
    shapes of crushable aluminum honeycomb structures to determine per-
    formance characteristics under lunar environmental conditions. (MSC
    Release 64-9)
0 Three airframe manufacturers and three engine manufacturers submitted

    initial design proposals for the U S . supersonic transport, FAA Deputy
    Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development Gordon M. Bain
    announced. The airframe manufacturers: Lockheed Aircraft, Boeing
    Co., and North American Aviation; engine builders: Curtiss-Wright,
    General Electric Co., and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft.
     (FAARelease 6 4 4 )
a Rep. Harold M. Ryan (D.-Mich.) said on House floor that if NASA’s        pro-
    posed electronics research center were located in Michigan it “would
    provide a stimulus to the heartland of America, and bring into geo-
    graphical balance the national capability in the field closely related
     with the electronic industry.
       “It is important that the resources of our part of the country be taken
    into consideration and the fact recognized that they are not presently
                                          ..   .” (CR,1/15/64,43&35)
    being used to their fullest capacity.
14             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICB, 1 9 6 4

January 15: France’s preparations for hydrogen bomb development in the
    South Pacific were reaching unexpectedly large proportions, New York
    Times reported. Gaston Palewski, French Minister for Scientific Re-
    search, had recently said in Papeete that “France has engaged herblf
    in Polynesia for a very big task.” Test site and military installations
    were ‘being constructed at Mururoa in the Tuamotu Islands, 720 mi.
    southeast of Tahiti. French sources indicated France would become a
    thermonuclear power by late 1967 or early 1968. (NYT, 1/16/64,4)
January 15-16: Series of four sodium-vapor experiments was launched on
    Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station in sunset-to-
    sunrise comparative measurements of winds and turbulence in the upper
    atmosphere. First two rockets were launched at sunset, third at mid-
    night, and fourth at sunrise. First flight was unsuccessful because
    Nike-Apache reached only 28.4mi. altitude instead of desired 118 mi.
    The remaining three rockets fired successfully, their 70-lb. payloads
    ejecting sodium vapor trails from about 25-mi. to as high as 123-mi.
    altitudes. Pink and reddish clouds were visible for several hundred
    miles. Photographic observations of the clouds would be analyzed
    by Geophysics Corp. of America, which provided payloads for the GSFC-
    managed project. (NASA Release 6&7; Wallops Release 64-5; NASA
    Rpts. SRL)
Mid-January:Work on test site for Project Apollo at White Sands Missile
    Range was halted by strike of operating engineers. (SBD,1/15/64+, 72)
January 16: NASA announced selection of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.,
    to supply liquid hydrogen to NASA Mississippi Test Operations and Mar-
    shall Space Flight Center for Saturn launch vehicle test program. Con-
    tract called for supply of up to 30 tons of liquid hydrogen per day by
    no later than mid-1965, would be renewable annually through December
    1970. (NASA Release 64-10)
* X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Milton 0. Thompson to 3,170 mph (mach
    4.80) and 70,000-ft. altitude in test to investigate heat-transfer rates
    with sharpleading-edged vertical tail. The sharp leading edge on top
    portion of aircraft’s vertical tail is l/loo-inch radius, as compared t9
    previous blunt edge of %-inch radius. Change was designed to reduce
    complexity of air flow around aircraft’s tail surfaces; this would cause
    difference in heat-transfer rates. During flight Thompson performed
    several control maneuvers to evaluate aircraft stability. (FRC Release;
    FRC X-15 Flight Log)
* The lowest altitude at which demarcation line between air space and outer
    space should be assigned is 100 km. (60 mi.) , according to Norman
    Sissenwine, USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories scientist and co-
    chairman of U.S. Committee on the Extension of the Standard Atmos-
    phere. Sissenwine’s definition had been requested by Hyman, Hayman,
    and Harris law firm, which was attempting legislative interpretation
    for the International Astronautical Federation and the International
    Institute of Space Law. Sissenwine acknowledged that ultimately the
    line must be drawn arbitrarily, explained considerations favoring 100
    k . “Aerodynamic forces on most of the ballistic re-entry, lifting
     m:
    re-entry, and boost-glide orbital aerospace vehicles can generally be
    neglected at altitudes above 100 km. (This may vary from 80 to 120
    km, depending upon the vehicle concept, but I believe 100 km is a good
                              ..  .” He pointed out that atmosphere’s basic
    nominal altitude to use.)
                                                                           15
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    composition begins to change near 100 km. “Spec,ifically it has been
     determined that disassociation of molecular oxygen into atomic oxygen
     should be depicted at an altitude of 90 km in the Standard Atmosphere.
     ..  .’, Another consideration was that relationships of temperature
     and pressure fields to wind fields are generally constant to nearly 100
     km. This is also true for speed of sound, coefficient of viscosity, kine-
     matic viscosity, and thermal conductivity. Finally, he pointed out that
    meteors entering the atmosphere generally disintegrate below 120-km.
     altitude, and most meteor trails formed in atmospheric entry are ob-
    served below 100 km. (OAR Release 1-644)
January 16: US. Army Corps of Engineers awarded $63,366,378 contract
    for NASA to joint bidders Paul Hardeman, Inc., Morrison-Knudsen Co.,
     Inc., and the Perini Corp., for construction of Saturn V-Apollo assembly
    building at Cape Kennedy. (NYT, 1/17/64,32; WSJ, 1/17/64)
  Sen. John Stennis (D.-Miss.) , Chairman of Senate Armed Services’ Pre-
     paredness Investigating Subcommittee, said he had directed his staff “to
     update and review the current information and data relating to the relia-
    bility and dependability of the Nation’s long range ballistic missiles as
    soon as possible.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64; Raymond, NYT,
    1/17/64,13)
* In interview with Space Business Daily, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.)
    cited two factors he believed would improve NASA’s    relations with House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics this session. First, committee
    members now have more knowledge of NASA’s        problems and needs, hav-
    ing visited NASA installations and learned first-hand about NASA’s   activ-
    ities. Last session, he pointed out, 10 of committee’s 31 members were
    new to space legislation. Second, NASA was perfecting its procedures
    of informing Congress, improving the information flow and clarifying
    its justifications. (SBD, 1/16/64,80)
* 34 scientists fled East Germany to West Germany in 1963, German Ministry
    for Refugees reported. Since Jan. 1, 1958, the Ministry added, 1,710
    scientists had emigrated from East to West Germany. (UPI, NYT,
     1/16/64,2)
* USAF fired two Minuteman ICBM’s, one from AMR and one from PMR. AMR
    flight was test of devices on warhead design to confuse enemy defenses;
    PMR flight was routine training launch by SAC crew. (M&R, 1/27/64
     10)
January 17: Four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket vehicle was launched
     at 12:Ol a.m. EST from Wallops Station, Va., carrying 120-lb. instru-
    mented payload to 587.22-mi. altitude. Payload experiments: magnetic
     mass spectrometer to identify ions in upper atmosphere and measure
    their distribution; Lyman-alpha radiation experiment to determine spa-
    tial variation of atomic hydrogen in atmosphere; and experiment to
     measure altitude distr$bution and intensity of night airglow from atomic
     oxygen. Impact occurred 727 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean.
    Data were telemetered to ground stations and no recovery operation
    was attempted. Experiment w s designed and built by E. 0 Hulburt .
                                     a
     Center for Space Research at US.Naval Research Laboratory and flown
    in cooperation with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. ( a l p Re
                                                                   Wlos
    lease 64-6)
0 In Columbus, Ohio, L . Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut
                          t
    to orbit the earth,announced that he would be a candidate for the Ohio
16             ASTRONAU’MCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    Democratic nomination for US. Senator in the May 5 primary. He
    added that he was retiring from the US. Marine Corps after 22 years
    of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is
    an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body
    whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is
    certainly a challenge and a high calling.”
       Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It
    could very well be wishful thinking on my part to train for another
    six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old.
       “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best op-
    portunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of
    Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes
    toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other
    research and development activities. These are areas with which I am
                        .
    well acquainted. . .” (Ap,       Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/a, A l ; Finney,
    NYT, 1/17/641,17)
January 17: James C. Elms, Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft
    Center, resigned to accept a position with industry, Director Dr. Robert
    R. Gilruth announced. Resignation would be effective in February.
    (MSC Release 6 4 1 3 )
  New York Times editorialized that delay of the 1969 target date for Project
    Apollo “may increase the chance that the project of landing a man on
    the moon will become an international effort, mobilizing all the resources
    of world technology. That certainly would be most appropriate for
    man’s first landing in the cosmos beyond this tiny planet.” (NYT,
    1/17/64,42)
* MSC reported that Astronaut Man B. Shepard had had a small benign tumor
    removed from his thyroid gland by surgery. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64+,
    A21
January 18: At ceremonies dedicating the new National Geographic Society
    headquarters in Washington, D.C., President Lyndon B. Johnson called
    for international sharing of knowledge: “The last four centuries of
    human experience have been centuries of exploration, discovery and
                                                        ..
    advancement of the frontiers of man’s knowledge .
       “America, as we know it-freedom, as we know it-could well not
    exist tomorrow for our children and their children if we should lose
    from our national life that confidence in the future and that enthusiasm
    for exploration which has brought us to this high moment of history
    and hope.
       “All the seas have been sailed-all the continents explored.
       “The highest mountains have been scaled-the            darkest jungles
    penetrated.
       “We have reached into the realms of space-and outward toward the
    domain of the stars.
       “This generation o Americans is challenged to live a life of high
                           f
    adventure. If we are to keep our trust of freedom, we must-in these
    last four decades of this century-undertake explorations in many realms
                                                          .
    which dwarf all those of the last four centuries. . .
      “Scientific exploration and research know no national boundaries.
    Human knowledge is never the captive of international blocs.
      “Common sense dictates that all nations lend their learning to all other
    nations. This is a loan in which the science o all nations is the bemfi-
                                                   f
                                                                               17
                                                          196 4
                ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS,

    ciary and the good of all mankind is advanced. The more we share with
    each other, the less we misunderstand each other . . .
       “This Nation is committed now to the most intensive effort ever made
    by any peoples to advance the frontier of human knowledge.
                                          .
       “We shall remain committed . .                        I

       “The United States shall welcome any who wish to join with us in
    seeking to serve the common good of mankind. But if others are not
    willing-or if they are not able-to join with us our own endeavors
                      . . .”  (Text, Vash. Post, 1/19/64, A6)
    will not slacken
January 18: President Johnson sent letter to Soviet Premier Khrushchev,
    replying to Khrushchev’s Dec. 31 letter which declared “the use of force
    for the solution of territorial disputes is not in the interest of any people
                                                                           .
    or any country.” President Johnson said: “Let us emphasize . . our
    agreement on the importance your letter places on preserving and
    strengthening peace, and on the need to accompany efforts for disarma:
    ment with new efforts to remove the causes of friction and to improve
    the world’s machinery for peacefully settling disputes. In this spirit, let
    us both present new proposals to the Geneva Disarmament Conference,
    in pursuit of the objectives we have previously identified: To prevent
    the spread of nuclear weapons; to end the production of fissionable
    material for weapons; to transfer large amounts of fissionable materials
    to peaceful purposes; to ban all nuclear weapons tests; to place limita-
    tions on nuclear weapons systems; to reduce the risk of war by accident
                                                            . . .”     (Text, CR,
    or design; to move toward general disarmament.
    1/22/64, 812-13)
January 19: George M. Low, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for
    Manned Space Flight, was named Deputy Director of NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Center, replacing James C. Elms. Low would assume his
    new duties in February, would continue present position until May 1.
    Low joined NACA Lewis Research Center in 1949, became Chief of
    Manned Space Flight Programs upon formation of NASA in October 1958.
     (NASA Release 64-13)
* By this date US. still did not know whether U.S.S.R. would participate in
    tracking Echo I1 balloon satellite, scheduled for launching Jan. 23.
    Earlier this month NASA sent cable to Soviet Academy of Sciences out-
    lining launch schedule and inquiring about Soviet tracking plans, agreed
    on in principle last summer. NASA received cable in reply, acknowledg-
    ing receipt of US. message but providing no details of Soviet plans.
    NASA planned to launch the satellite as scheduled, hoped to hear fur-
    ther word from U.S.S.R. (Finney, NYT, 1/19/64)
* USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg AFB with unidenti-
    fied satellite. It was later disclosed that two satellites were placed in
    orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64,10; H H N - ~ S )
January 20: NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced
    U.S.S.R. had notified US. that it would participate in space communi-
    cations experiments using Echo I1 passive communications satellite
    which NASA would orbit in the coming week. Soviet officials planned
    to begin optical and radio experiments with the 135-ft.-diameterballoon
    satellite a week after it was orbited. Soviets would photograph Echo I1
    and track it with telescopes as it passed over U.S.S.R., bounce radio
    signals off the balloon between U.S.S.R. and England. US.-U.S.S.R.
    cooperative experiments were based on 1963 agreement reached by
18                                                      1964
               ASTRONAUTICS AND A E R O N A U T I B ,

    Dr. Dryden and Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonravov. (Simons,
    Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
January 20: In his Economic Report to the Congress, President Lyndon B.
    Johnson reviewed progress toward economic goals and presented his
    programs for “achieving our national economic potential.” On trans-
                                                 “. .    . Federal Government
    portation and technology, he said that the
    provides major support for the research and development which under-
    lie our striking technological advances. In the past much of our re-
    search and development has been connected with national defense.
     Now, as military outlays level off, we face:
        “ 0 A challenge to apply the nation’s growing scientific and engineering

     resources to new socially profitable uses;
        ‘‘0 An opportunity to accelerate the technological progress of our

    civilian industries.
        “The Federal Government should join with private business and our
    universities in speeding the development and spread of new technology.
     I have directed the Department of Commerce to explore new ways to
     accomplish this.” (Text, NYT, 1/21/M, 16)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,Chairman of Senate Committee on
    Aeronautical and Space Sciences, amplified his concern for solar radia-
    tion danger in Project Apollo manned flights in 1969-70, saying it would
     be a “sound” decision to delay the Apollo flight into the 1970’s to in-
     crease safety. “We don’t know all there is to know about these flares.”
    He repeated that adding shielding to ApoIIo spacecraft could impose
     weight penalty, added that NASA was “intensifying” its study of solar
    radiation. (SBD, 1/21/64,1M)
* Bill to authorize appropriations to NASA for FY 1965 (S. 2446) was intro-
     duced in the Senate by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, and referred to the
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (NASA LAR 1II/9)
0 Bill to establish a Commission on Federal Expenditure Policy (S. 2 4 1 )

     was introduced in the Senate by Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R.-N.Y.) on
     behalf of minority of Joint Economic Committee, and was referred to
     the Committee on Government Operations. The proposed Commission
     would be composed of 16members from the Executive Branch, Congress,
     and private life, would review Government expenditure policy and make
    specific studies and policy recommendations. Bill was also introduced
                                                        .
     in the House, by Rep. Thomas B. Curtis (R.-Mo.)         (NASA LAR III/lO;
     CR, 1/20/&, 592-96)
* NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations
    Walter C. Williams said in Space Business Daily interview that “we
     are over the hump financially on the Gemini program and that the Apollo
     target of mid-1969 is still realistic with proper funding and if an in-
     ordinant amount of problems doesn’t appear.” He added that Project
     Gemini was on schedule if the December 1 M flight was successful and
     if no new “pacing headaches” arose. (SBD, 1/24/64, 98)
  AFSC Ballistic Systems Div. awarded $1,218,500 obligation on previous
     contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for Titan I1 propulsion systems and
     related spare parts; and $2,578,000 obligation to AC Spark Plug EV.
     of General Motors for production of gyros and accelerometers for Titan
     11. (DOD Release 67-64)
                                                                          19
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

January 20: USN successfully launched Polaris A-3 missile from surface ship
    off Cape Kennedy on 2,000-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range.
    (AP, NYT, 1/21/64,4)
9 USAF planned four tests of the six-vehicle Asset re-entry program during

    the coming year. The first test, in September 1963, was very successful.
    The second test shot, in March, was planned to attain re-entry speed
    of 18,000 fps; later tests would attain maximum series velocity of 19,500
    fps. First five vehicles would have zirconium-rod nose caps and sixth
    vehicle a coated tungsten nose cap. (M&R, 1/20/64, 17; USAF Astro-
    nautics Div., DCS/R&D)
* Program to encourage development and use of “crash locator beacons”
    was announced by FAA, which was inquiring whether industry can
    produce crash locator beacons at reasonably low prices and whether
    individual aircraft owners would buy or rent them if available. Direc-
    tor of FAA Flight Standards Service George S. Moore said tests con-
    ducted by FAA “clearly indicated that such a beacon can successfully
    radiate energy to permit suitably equipped search aircraft to identify and
    ‘home-in’ on the transmitted signal.” (FAARelease 64-5)
  FAA announced Australia’s Qantas Empire Airways had requested six
    supersonic transport aircraft, bringing total of reservations to 51 held
    by 8 airlines. (FAA Release 64-6)
0 With nuclear explosives new sea-level canal could be built across Isthmus

    of Panama for $500 million or less, according to Lawrence Radiation
    Laboratory’s Gerald W. Johnson, Director of AEC Project Plowshare.
    Technical and economic feasibility of such a project was discussed in
    letter from Johnson to Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.-R.L) , Chairman of
    Joint Congxessional Committee on Atomic Energy. Use of nuclear
    explosives to dig new Panama canal had been under study since 1958,
    when Panama Canal Co. requested Lawrence Radiation Laboratory for
    preliminary feasibility study of the project. (Finney, NYT, 1/21/64,
    10)
* Retiring science editor of New York Times William L. Laurence was hon-
    ored at dinner in New York by wide range of scientific societies.
    Laurence was science journalist for 34 years, winner of two Pulitzer
    Prizes. (NYT, 1/21/64,1)
January 21: RELAY 11 active communications satellite launched into orbit
    with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from AMR (4,606-mi. apogee; 1,298-mi.
    perigee; 195-min. period; 46.3’ inclination to the equator). The
    184-lb. satellite would continue communications tests of RELAY I, still
    orbiting the earth, and provide evaluation of improvements in the new
    comsat. RELAY II completed its first communications test during its
    first orbit, receiving radio signals and TV test pattern from Mojave,
    Calif., ground station and beaming them back to earth. RELAY II was
    initially in excellent mutual visibility position between North America
    and Europe for TV transmission between the two hemispheres. Mutual
    visibility with Japan, about 40 min. at maximum, would decrease
    gradually to nothing by mid-July and continue with no mutual visibility
    again until mid-November. RELAY II w s equipped for transmitting
                                               a
    one-way wideband communications (one-way TV, 300 one-way voice
    channels or high-speed data) or two-way narrow-band communications
     (12 two-way telephone conversations or teletype, photo-facsimile and
    data). Unlike its predecesor, RELAY 11 had no automatic cutoff device;
20             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIC%, 19 64

     it had negative-on-positive (n-on-p) solar cells for greater resistance
    to radiation than RELAY 1’s p-on-n solar cells. RELAY II was 22nd
    straight launch success of Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (GSFC Historian:
     Goddard News, 1/27/64,1; AP, NYT, 1/22/64,17)
January 21: Both stages of first Titan I1 launch vehicle for Project Gemini
    were successfully static-fired for 30 seconds at Launch Complex 19,
    Cape Kennedy, producing combined total thrust of more than half a
    million pounds. Purpose of test was to evaluate overall Gemini launch
    vehicle system performance-fueling, countdown, ignition and cutoff
    commands, guidance control, and telemetry; and to verify engine per-
    formance by thrust generation and engine gimbaling. The stages were
    mounted side-by-side on separate mounts; electrical signal cut off
    first-stage engine after 30 sec., then started second-stage engine, which
    was cut off by radio signal from ground computer just as in actual
     flight. Charles W. Matthews, Gemini Project Manager, MSC, said
    static-firing test met all prelaunch requirements. (MSC Release 6&9 ;
    M&R, 1/27/64,10)
  Presidefit Johnson sent $97.9 billion N 1965 budget to Congress. Of
    space research and technology, he said :
        “Our plan to place a man on the moon in this decade remains un-
    changed. It is an ambitious and important goal. In addition to pro-
    viding great scientific benefits, it will demonstrate that our capability
    in space is second to no other nation’s. However, it is clear that no
    matter how brilliant our scientists and engineers, how farsighted our
    planners and managers or how frugal our administrators and contract-
    ing personnel, we cannot reach this goal without sufficient funds. There
    is no second-classticket to space.
        “Appropriations enacted for 1964 for the National Aeronautics and
    Space Administration were $6001million below the amount requested.
    As a result, major development programs leading to the manned lunar
    landing have fallen behind schedule. Careful replanning of the entire
    program, including a reduction in the number of test flights, will offset
    some of this delay. Even so, more funds are needed in 1964, and I
    am therefore recommending a supplemental appropriation of $141
    million for this year.
        “For 1965, I am requesting appropriations of $5.3 billion, $63 million
    above the 19M amount, including the proposed supplemental appro-
    priation. The 1964 and 1965 recommendations represent the minimum
    amount needed to achieve our goals in space. The estimated increase
    of $590 million in expenditures in 1965 is due principally to payments
    required ,by commitments made in 1964 and earlier years. With the
    leveling off of appropriations, annual outlays should remain relatively
    stable in subsequent years.
        “In addition to the manned space flight program, though related
    to it, funds are included to support unmanned space flights for lunar
    exploration and supporting research and development. Funds are also
    included for scientific satellites, planetary probes, and experiments with
    meteorological and communications satellites.
        <<
          The programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
    are designed to maintain American supremacy in space and to demon-
    strate this supremacy by achieving a manned landing on the moon in
                  ..
    this decade.
                                                                            21
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AeRONAUTICS, 19 6 4

       “The level of activity in support of the 3-man Apollo lunar spacecraft
     development program will reach its peak during 1965 with 13 flight
     spacecraft in production by the end of the year. The Saturn V rocket
    program will be proceeding rapidly along its development cycle in prep-
    aration for launching the Apollo spacecraft, and will account for about
                                                          .. .” (Text, NYT,
    $850 million of the estimated 1965 expenditures.
                i
     1/22/64,19-21)
Janwtry 21 : he Federal budget for N 1965 estimated expenditures for R&D
    in FY 1965 at $15.3 billion, only a three per cent increase over FY 1 9 a .
    For past decade Federal R&D spending averaged 20% increase each year
    over the preceding year; a decade ago, Government spent $3.3 billion
    on R&D. (Finney, NYT, 1/22/a, 18)
e In the President’s proposed budget for FY 1965, DOD expenditures were
    estimated at $51.2 billion, of which $5.5 was for research and develop-
                                                    .
    ment (including military space expenditure) Requested budgets for
    operation of ranges: $231 million for AMR, $159 million for PMR, and
    $93 million for WSMR. (NYT, 1/22/64,21,22; M&R, 2/3/64, 9 )
e 17-nation Disarmament Conference resumed in Geneva. In his letter of
    Jan. 19 to the Conference, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “There
    is only one item on the agenda of this conference-it is the leading item
    on the agenda of mankind-and that one item is peace.
       Lb
          Already this conference has led to more concrete and effective results
    than any disarmament conference in modern history. Your efforts and
    deliberation laid the ground work for the nuclear test ban treaty-for
    the communications link between Washington and Moscow-and for
    the U.N. General Assembly action against nuclear weapons in
            .
    space. . .’,
       President Johnson then proposed five major types of potential agree-
    ment: to stop spread of nuclear weapons to nations not now possessing
    them; to accept observation posts on both sides; to stop all produc-
    tion of fissionable material; to ban threat or use of force in changing
    boundaries or controlling territories; and to freeze numbers and kinds
                                                                     .
    of strategic nuclear-carrying vehicles (aircraft and missiles) (Text,
    CR, 1/22/a, 812; “Statement to American People,” CR, 122/64, 813)
* Vice president of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail A. Lavrentev’s
    disclosure that U.S.S.R. had been forced to abandon attempt to .drill
    through the earth’s crust was reported by Howard Simons in Washington
    Post. Soviet drillers reached depth of about 20,000 ft. near Caspian
    Sea when economic and technical difficulties forced them to give up
    the project. Lavrentev said Soviet scientists now were “seeking more
    effective methods of drilling and shoring up the hole.” Project was
    akin to U.S. Project Mohole, directed by National Science Foundation,
    which would attempt to drill through sea floor to penetrate earth’s crust
    and sample the mantle beneath. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
* Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, was presented
     1964 Sylvanus Albert Reed Award at AIAA dinner in New York. Dr.
    Silverstein was cited for “major contributions toward the development
    of propulsion systems for aircraft and spacecraft and for outstanding
    leadership in the nation’s programs of scientific satellites and manned
    space flight.” Also presented were AIAA’S Research Award to Henry M.
    Shuey and Space Science Award to Herbert Friedman. (LRC Release
    64-6; “MAA Honors & Awards”)
22             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

January 21: Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) included in Congressional
     Record a resolution by Florida Library and Historical Commission ap-
     pealing to the President, the Florida Governor, and the U.S. Board of
     Geographic Names “to carefully consider the possibility of retaining the
     name, Cape CanaveraI, as the geographic designation only of the east-
     ernmost tip of the land formation known as Cape Canaveral (that tip
     upon which no portion of the missile complex is located) thereby de-
     tracting none whatever from the widespread desire to honor our late
     President John F. Kennedy.” (CRY1/21/64, A214)
* Testimonial dinner for Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, resigning to return to MIT
     as Dean of Science, held in Washington. For three years Dr. Wiesner
     had been Director of the Office of Science and Technology, Chairman
     of the Federal Council of Science and Technology, Chairman of the
     President’s Science Advisory Committee, Special Assistant to the Presi-
     dent, and Acting Director for Telecommunications Management.
      (Miller, Wash. Daily News, 1/22/64)
January 22: First intercontinental communications tests conducted with
     RELAY 11 communications satellite were successful : NASA officials de-
     scribed the satellite’s performance as “excellent.yy The tests were con-
     ducted between ground stations at Nutley, N.J., and Raisting, West
     Germany, consisted of voice transmissions and radio signals. (AP,
     NYT, 1/23/64,7)
   NASA announced selection of Eclipse-Pioneer Div. of Bendix Corp. for ne-
     gotiation of cost-plus-incentive-feecontract for stabilization platforms
     for Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicle guidance systems. The ST-
      124-M platform systems were modifications of Bendix ST-124 systems
     used in Saturn I launch vehicle, the modifications resulting in simpler
     system and reduced weight and cost. (NASA Release 64-17)
0 Cape Canaveral Missile Test Annex was officially redesignated Cape Ken-

     nedy Air Force Station. (Special Order GA-7, issued by USAF CofS
     Curtis E. LeMay, in KHN-1)
* Evidence that the electron is smallest indivisible unit and that the proton
     lacks a core, as had been postulated, was reported at annual meeting
      of American Physical Societv in New York. Experiments were made
      with electron accelerator built by Harvard Univ. and MIT and were
      described bv Dr. Rov Weinstein of Northeastern Univ. (Boston). Dr.I   ,




      Richard Wiison of Harvard, and Dr. Louis S. Osborne of MIT. (Sul-
      livan, NYT, 1/23/64, 20)
* Dr. Edward Teller, nuclear Dhvsicist, testified before House Select Com-
      mittee on Government R&earch on the Federal Government’s role in
      research. Dr. Teller criticized DOD’S secrecy in scientific developments,
      saving practice had been to keep them secret unless it could be proved
      without a doubt that making them public would be in the national
      interest. “I think the burden of proof should be on the other side,”
      Dr. Teller stated. “I am pretty well convinced that the Russians have
      all our secrets and I am even afraid they have the secrets we are going
      to discover in the next two years. Our industrv and our citizens don’t
      have those secrets.” (NASA LAR III/11; AP, NYT, 1/23/64,9)
 January 23: Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was fired from Wallops Island
      with 82-lb. payload containing grenades, detectors, and absociated equip-
      ment. the grenades eimtina and exdoding at altitudes raneine; from 24-
      to 59-mi. altitudes. This flight was followed 20 min. later by Nike-Cajun
                                                                           23
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

    sounding rocket launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, with identical
    payload, a less successful flight because second-stage motor failed to
    ignite. Grenades were ejected and detonated but at altitudes too low
    to obtain useful data. The close-order firings were first two in current
    MASA series to gather comparative data on winds and atmospheric tem-
    peratures up to 55-mi. altitude at widely separated locations on near-
    simultaneous basis. (Wallops Release 64-7)
January 23: Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) introduced a concurrent
    resolution to change the goal of the manned lunar landing to before
    1975 instead of before 1970 (H. Con. Res. 257). “The change of
            ...   is to allow our scientists greater flexibility in meeting the
    policy
    challenging technological problems of the Apollo project. Especially,
    I have in mind the desirability of eliminating the pressures of meeting
    time schedules, of minimizing perils such as solar radiation, and frankly
    I would stretch out the fantastic cost of the manned space exploration
                                           ..   .
    program over a longer period of time.
       “My new resolution is to invite the opinions of qualified experts and
                                                .. . Congress should provide
    knowledgeable persons on this subject.
    for an overall reappraisal of such a costly manned flight activity which
    accounts for two-thirds of the $5 billion space budget. Certainly, I can-
    not believe there is any valid reason why the Space Administration and
    those engaged in the manned space research venture should not be given
    more latitude in the scheduling of the program. Any slippage in time
    schedules due to reasons of safety and increasing assurance of success
    should not require any apology or excuse. Nor should the program be
    speeded for prestige at the cost of added risk. Congress by adopting my
    resolution would be setting a policy of proceeding at an orderly and
    normal speed and of avoiding undue risks in establishing any deadline.
    Finally this greater latitude should allow for tighter budgeting and
    contribute to reductions in the level of annual appropriations.” (CR,
    1/23/64,932)
e New evidence of possible explosions in Milky Way galactic core, reported
    by Soviet astronomer Dr. Iosif S. Shklovsky, was discussed by British
    astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle at American Physical Society meeting in New
    York. Dr. Shklovsky discovered that spurlike structures above and
    below the galaxy are connected in a single figure-8 configuration, its
    center at the galactic core. It is possible that the loops, which are
    strong sources of radio emissions, are magnetically trapped particles
    which may have been forced from the core by a past eruption. (Sul-
    livan, NYT, 1/24/64,48)
e Rep. John W. Davis, (D.-Ga.) said DOD had turned over the large solid-
    propellant rocket motor project to NASA, the decision made because no
    definite military mission was assigned for the technology. In FY 1965
    NASA will cover cost of the large-motor MD; in FY 1964 USAF carried
    the cost. NASA officials said they planned to request $13 million for the
    project, with about half that going to contractors Thiokol Chemical
    Corp. and Aerojet-General. (Atlanta Const., 1/24/64)
e NASA Administrator James E. Webb stated Boston still appeared to Be the
    most suitable site for NASA electronics research center. NASA’s       Elec-
    tronics Site Selection Committee had reviewed presentations by 50
    groups representing 19 geographical areas, in accordance with P.L. 88-
    113 (NASA Authorization Act for FY 1964). Mr. Webb still had not
24             ASTRONAUTIOS AND A E R O N A W m , 1964

    officially notified Congress of NASA’s selection. (SBD, 1/24/64,
                                             site
    129)
January 23: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $9.2 million increase
    to contract with North American Aviation, Inc., calling for construc-
    tion at Downey, Calif., of seven new buildings and modifications to
    existing structures to permit expansion of NAA’S research and develop-
    ment. NAA is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module
    under contract signed with MSC Aug. 14, 1963. (AP, Tulsa Daily
    Vork-l,1 / 2 4 / a )
* USAF launched Titan I1 ICBM from underground silo at Vandenberg AFB
    in successful flight 5,000-mi. down Pacific Missile Range. (M&R,
    2/3/64, 10)
* Paper on Government’s relationship with universities, by Delphis C. Gold-
    berg, staff member of Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Relations
    of House Committee on Government Operations, inserted in Congres-
    sional Record:
        There is much to be said for disbursing a substantial portion of re-
       ((

    search project funds through universities as a partial substitute for the
    selection of individual grantees at the Federal level. However, I would
    doubt the political feasibility and wisdom of allocating very large sums
    to institutions to be expended at their discretion. Instead, I would pro-
    pose that Federal agencies set standards for university project review
    committees and require approval of the grant management policies and
    procedures of an institution as a condition to its eligibility for ais-
                                       ..
    tributing Federal research funds. .
       “AS the funds available for science and for each of its major com-
    ponents become more scarce relative to demand, Federal agencies will be
    increasingly confronted with the necessity of making hard choices in
    the allocation of money between research fields as well as between com-
    peting projects within each specialized field. The multi-disciplinary
    committee, consequentIy, will likely become a valuable device in helping
    to determine priorities for Federal science expenditures as the pressure
    for efficient resource allocation grows. The university project review
    committee, which included representation from a variety of disciplines
                                                                       .
    and specialties, might serve in this capacity at the local level. . .,’
     (Text, CR, 1/23/64, A286-87)
e Dr. Romney H. Lowry, former head of Boeing Co. bioastronautics orga-
    nization, was named Chief of Research and Education Div. in FAA
    Office of Aviation Medicine by Dr. M. S. White, FAA Federal Air Sur-
    geon. (FAA Release T64-1)
January 23-24: More than 100 representatives of European electronics and
    aeronautical firms met in Brussels where they discussed feasibility of
    development project for manned shuttle service between earth and
    orbiting space stations (US. and Soviet). Recent cancellation of US.
    Dyna Soar project spurred the discussions. German delegation was
    headed by Dr. Eugen Saenger. (M&R, 2/3/&, 9)
January 24: Paul L. Styles, Chief of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s
    Industrial Relations Office, was named Labor Director of NASA. In the
    new position, which he assumed in addition to his present one, Styles
    would advise NASA management officialsat Hq. and all field installations
    on all aspects of labor-management relations, also would serve as NASA
    representative with Dept. of Labor, NLRB, President’s Missile Sites Labor
                                                                            25
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 190 4

    Commission, and Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. (NASA
    Release &14)
January 24: Development of astronaut techniques for egress from Gemini
    spacecraft began this week at NASA Manned spacecraft Center, MSC
    announced. Boilerplate model of Gemini spacecraft floats in water-filled
    tank; two subjects in the closed spacecraft practice egress and the man-
    ner, procedure, and time required are recorded for study. ( MSC Release
    64-19)
* NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced seven floors of the nine-floor
    Project Management building had been accepted for occupancy. The
    structure was expected to be ready for tenancy Feb. 20. To date, 13
    MSC facilities at the Clear Lake site had been certified as ready for
    occupancy. ( MSC Release 64-18)
* NASA Lewis Research Center employees Robert Steinberg and William B.
    Schwab won $700 NASA incentive award for invention of method and
    device for rapidly mapping neutron flux of each section of nuclear
    research reactor. Other LRC awards: John W. Macomber won $500 for
    invention of nuclear reactor control rod assembly with improved driv-
    ing mechanism; Joseph M. Savin0 and Chester D. Lanzo, $200 award for
    developing simulated fuel assembly for nuclear reactor; and John C.
    Sturman, $100 award for transistorized logic circuit to handle data
    accumulated by satellites and transmit it back to earth. (LRC Release
    6d-8)
  Pierre Chatenet, president of Euratom, said in Paris that nuclear energy
    developments and advances in space technology called for revision
    of NATO. “The Atlantic alliance originally was drafted in a certain
     context which has now changed. For one thing, access to space pre-
     sents us with a new battlefield.” He also declared that six-nation
    European Economic Community planned $7 billion nuclear energy de-
    velopment program over the next 15 years, to include construction of
     66
        80 to 90 power stations for the peaceful use of nuclear energy.”
     (O’Toole, NYT,1/26/64,17)
Janmry 25: NASA’s ECHO 11 passive communications satellite was placed in
     near-polar orbit by Thor-Agena B launch vehicle launched from Van-
     denberg AFB, Calif. The second-stage Agena fired shortly after booster
    separation, coasted, then reignited over South Africa, injecting into
    orbit the canister containing the laminated mylar plastic and aluminum
     balloon. Canister opened and released the 535-1b. balloon-satellite
     which inflated to 135-ft. diameter. Initial orbital data: apogee, 816 mi.;
    perigee, 642 mi.; period, 109 min.; inclination to equator, 81.5”.
      (NASA Release 64-11; AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/64; Becker, NYT, 1/26/
    64, 1 )
* NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket w t Univ. of New Hampshire instru-
                                         ih
     mented payload was launched from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India,
    to 102-mi. altitude. Payload instrumentation included densitometer and
     baroswitch, to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems
     in the ionosphere near the magnetic equator. Performance of both
    rocket and instrumentation was considered good; telemetry signal w s      a
     received for 395 sec., and good data were expected. (NASA Rpt, SRL)
* Liquid-hydrogen-powered rocket engines for Saturn 1’s S-IV stage ex-
    ploded during preparations for static-firing at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s
     Sacramento, Cal‘if., facility. Explosion, which demolished the test stand,
    was evaluated by NASA to determine if forthcoming Saturn SA-5
      ra3-588 +&5--*1
26              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    flight test at AMR should be delayed; NASA officials decided the explosion
    was not sufficient reason to interrupt the SA-5 launch prepara-
    tions. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/&; AP, Vash. Post, 1/26/64)
January 25: Britain had expressed interest in joining U S . and European
    countries in financing and use of global communications satellite system,
    John Finney reported in New York Times. After months of favoring
    cables for international communications in the immediate future, British
    Post Office expressed approval of participation in global satellite system
    and urged similar decisions by European nations, at meeting of satellite
    committee of European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications
    Administration in Karlsruhe, Germany. (Finney, NYT, 1/26/6$, 1 )
* DOD announced plan for aiding economic readjustment of contractors per-
    forming work on major projects that are canceled, including Dyna Soar
    and Typhon projects. Plan called for continuing work with a continu-
    ing value to the Government, to identify additional work requiring
    these skills, and to expedite placement of contracts which would nor-
    mally be awarded to these contractors. Military departments must
    submit detailed plans in accordance with this policy as soon as possible
    and no later than 45 days after decision to terminate a major project.
     (SBD, 1/27/64,135; M&R, 2/3/64, 13)
  Army-Navy-Air Force Journal and Register Space Editor James J. Hag-
    gerty, Jr., said: “The major reservation about MOL is the fact that it
                                                          .
    will employ existing or in-development hardware . . rather than ad-
                              ..
    vances in technology. .
       ‘LWiththe Dyna-Soar experience in mind, it could be a big minus
    from the standpoint of developmental continuity in later years. Dyna-
    Soar was killed for a number of reasons, but one of them was the fact
    that it was not a very advanced spacecraft for its day (1965-66 flights).
    Suppose that, along about 1966 when MOL is in ‘tin-bending’ status but
    still a year or two away from flight status, someone takes a long look
    at it and says ‘What have we got?’
       “By that time, NASA will have accumulated close to 1,000 hours of
    manned space flight experience and will have tested a number of new
    and advanced systems; it wl have conducted the all-important rendez-
                                 il
    vous tests with the Gemini spacecraft; the earth-orbiting version of
    Apollo, which can stay aloft for two weeks as a space laboratory, will
    be in or near flight status. In that frame of reference, the sho9-duration,
    non-rendezvousing MOL could go the way of Dyna-Soar, offering ‘insuf-
    ficient technological advancement to justify the cost of completing the
              . . .”   (A-N-AF J&R, 11225/64,21,30)
    project.’
January 26: Potential of the gas-core nuclear rocket was outlined at recent
    press conference by National Aeronautics and Space Council staff-
    member Maxwell W. Hunter, Jr., and Welsey Kuhrt and George Me
    Lafferty of United Aircraft Corp., which is performing research on gas-
    core nuclear rocket under NASA contract. Maximum specific impulse
    for gas-core nuclear rocket would be between 2,000 and 3,000 (con-
    trasted with M for the best chemical propellants and 1,000 for solid-
                    O
    core nuclear rocket). United Aircraft calculated useful payload sent
    to moon and back by gas-core nuclear rocket would be 10-30% of take-
    off weight, compared to a fraction of 1% for chemical rockets. Power
    of gas-core rocket would be so great there would be no need for rocket
                                                                            27
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 04

    staging; single-stage rocket could take off from earth, land on moon,
    take off, return to earth, and land safely. Such a rocket vehicle would
    be reusable. (Witkin, NYT, 1/36/64., 32)
January 26: DOD was reconsidering its tentative plans for a military communi-
    cations satellite system, instead would rely on satellites of Communica-
    tions Satellite Corp., John Finney reported in New York Times. Partly
    in response to Congressional pressure, Finney reported, DOD was propos-
    ing to delay development of ground stations and defer or prolong the
    completion of its military comsats. Final decision would be dependent
    upon outcome of DOD negotiations with ComSatCorp, still underway.
     (Finney, NYT, 1/27/M)
January 27: Soviet Academy of Sciences announced Soviet ground stations
    were tracking ECHO 1 passive communications satellite, in first joint
                             1
    US.-U.S.S.R. space experiment. Academician A. A. Blagonravov said
    Soviet ground stations observed the 135-ft. balloon as it inflated in space
    and three observatories succeeded in photographing the satellite. Ob-
    servation stations reported the satellite appeared very bright, varying
    from magnitude-1 to zero. “Observers in Arkhangelsk report that two
    additional objects are moving in front of and slightly faster than the
    satellite proper, and a third object is moving behind it. The results
    of the first observations are being forwarded to the US. The optical
    stations will continue tracking the ECHO II. The radio communications
    experiment is slated to begin somewhat later.” (NYT, 1/27/64.; N.Y.
    Her. Trib., 1/27/a; Zzvestiu, 1/28/64,6, ATSS-T Trans.)
* NASA Hq. received telegrams from Soviet Academy of Sciences containing
    first data from Soviet optical observations of ECHO 1 passive communi-
                                                            1
    cations satellite. The data were obtained Jan. 25 from Soviet optical
    observation stations at Tashkent, Ashklabad, Erevan, Vologda, Arch-
    angel, Dushanbe, and Vorkuta, were being analyzed along with ob-
    servations made at NASA stations around the world. Soviet Academy
    also indicated photographs of ECHO 11 were obtained at five stations.
     (NASA Release 6 6 2 1)
* President Johnson transmitted to Congress his annual space report, United
    States Aerumtics and Space Activities, 1963 (H. Doc. 207). In his
    accompanying message the President said :
        ..  . Our space program, in both its civilian and military aspects,
       b<


    is peaceful in purpose and practice. Moreover, it combines such Ob        r-
    jective with a policy of international cooperation based upon a mutuality
    of participation and benefits as well as the wide dissemination of
    knowledge.
       “Space progress is essential if this Nation is to lead in technology and
    in the furthering of world peace. Such progress requires the use of
    substantial resources, which must be employed efficiently and effectively
    in order that we obtain the maximum benefits with a minimum of
             . . .”  (Text, CR, 1/27/a, 1045)
    waste.
  Launching of Saturn I SA-5 rocket from AMR was postponed at T - 100
    min. h u s e blind fiange in liquid oxygen line to S-I stage had not
    been removed after recent pressurization check. Launch was resched-
    uled for Jan. 29. (Vctsh. Post, 1/28/64.; Marshdl Star, 1/29/64 1 )
  Performance of its two nuclear-test detection satellites has been excel-
    lent in all respects, DOD announced. The two satellites, launched more
28              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1904

    than two months ago for ARPA by WAF, were performing almost per-
    fectly, and their reliability has been excellent. DOD anticipated the
    satellites would provide data on background radiation and other meas-
    urements in space for useful lifetime of more than six months. Success
    of this initial detection effort “has moved the research program forward
    by more than one year,” DOD said. (DODRelease 30-64)
January 27: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara testified in military
    posture hearings before House Committee on Armed Services, emphasiz-
     ing that US. missile and bomber force was neither too large nor too
    small for today’s “damage limiting” military strategy. He pointed out
    that missiles are more reliable than bombers, being mechanically re-
    liable, capable of surviving enemy attack, and able to penetrate enemy
    defenses in war-time, while the bombers are vulnerable to enemy at-
    tack and less likely to reach target enemy defenses. (Fryklund, Wash.
    Eve. &ar, 1/28/&)
  NASA and Rocketdyne announced Saturn IB launch vehicle would use
    cluster of eight uprated H-1 engines for manned earth-orbital missions,
    each engine developing 200,000 lbs. of thrust for total of 1,600,000 lbs.
     (M&R, 1/27/64,9; Marshall Star, 1/29/64,1)
0 FAA released summary statements on the supersonic transport by the six

    companies that submitted initial design proposals-three airframe com-
    panies (Boeing, Lockheed, and North American) and three engine man-
    ufacturing companies (Curtiss-Wright, General Electric, and Pratt &
    Whitney Div. of United Aircraft). Boeing’s proposed SST.WaS based on
    basic arrow-wing shape, designed to carry 150 passengers, and cruise at
    mach 2.7. Lockheed’s proposed SST was based on advanced “double
    delta” wing shape, designed to carry 218 passengers, and cruise at mach
    3. North American’s proposed SST was based on modified delta shape
    wing, was designed to carry up to 187 passengers, cruise at mach 2.65.
    Curtiss-Wright’s summary said its proposed turbojet engine would pro-
    duce thrust about twice that of current transport jet engines. GE’s
    proposal offered choice between advanced turbojet or turbofan engine
    types suitable for cruising speeds at mach 2.5 to mach 3. Pratt &
    Whitney offered two configurations of turbofan engine for aircraft
    flying up to mach 3. (FAA Release 64-8)
0 DOD announced $6,261,000 contract had been awarded by Army Corps

    of Engineers to Blount Construction Co. for construction of NASA Cen-
    tral Instrumentation Facility at Merritt Island, Fla. (DOD Release 84-
    64)
* Revival of George H. Darwin’s 1879 theory that moon was formed by
    breaking off the earth, by two independent scientists, was reported in
    Newsweek. Geologist Donald U. Wise believes that when earth was mol-
    ten mass, heavy material flowed into core, causing instability in its rota-
    tion and irregular elongation of its form. Then centrifugal forces pulled
    smaller knob away, sending it into orbit to become the moon. Frag-
    ments breaking away at same time fell on moon and caused pock-marked
    surface. Related theory offered by A. G. W. Cameron, Canadian phy-
    sicist at NASA’s  Goddard Institute for Space.Studies, was that earth lost
    at least half its mass, “enough material for ten moons,” in large chunks,
    some of which clumped together to form the moon while others shot out
    to become asteroids. (Newsweek, 1/27/64)
                                                                         29
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

January 27: First flight tests of new 16-in. rocket motor in Project Harp
     (High-Altitude Research Project) were expected in May at Barbados Is.,
    B.W.I., Missiles and Rockets reported. Static tests on the motor were
    now underway. The rocket motor would be used to boost gun-launched
    payloads in the McGill University-US. Army project. The May series
    would include some 30 firings of the rocket vehicle and new versions of
    the Martlet-series missile. Project sources indicated use of multiple
    staging with new rocket motor could make possible the orbiting of 50-70
    lb. payloads into 60-100 mi. earth orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64,22)
* Article advising small business firms on obtaining space contracts and
    subcontracts, by former counsel to House Science and Astronautics
    Committee Spencer Beresford, introduced into Congressional Record
    by Rep. Joe L. Evins (D.-Tenn.) :
       “There are a few simple rules to follow. They can be listed quickly,
    but are often ignored.
       “An even bigger stumbling block is attitude. Paradoxically, many
    businessmen take a political rather than a businesslike view of the Gov-
    ernment, even when doing business with it. What needs to be stressed
    is that they would do better to treat the Government like a prospective
                                             ...   .” (CR, 1/27/64, A304)
    customer-and a demanding one, at that
  DOD announced appointment of new Chairman and four new members
    of Defense Science Board. New Chairman was Dr. Frederick Seitz,
    President of National Academy of Sciences, succeeding Dr. Clifford C.
    Furnas, President of New York State Univ. at Buffalo, whose term ex-
    pired Dec. 31,1963. (DOD Release 82-64)
  Total face value of Titan I11 program increased only 1 3 of 1% during
                                                             /
    first 10 months of the program, according to Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk
     (AFSSD) in Missiles and Rockets. When all present contracts are de-
    finitized, increase will amount to about 1.2% of original values. (M&R,
    1/27/64,9)
January 27-30: About 400 scientists and engineers representing 34 private
    industries and eight Government agencies met at NASA Marshall Space
    Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., for Symposium of Manned Interplanetary
    Missions Studies Performed by Industry for NASA in 1%3/64. (Mar-
    shall Star, 2/5/64, l )
January 28: 100th flight of the X-15 rocket aircraft was conducted near Ed-
    wards ME, Calif., with Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) as pilot. X-15
    No. 1 reached 3,682 mph (mach 5.4) and 107,000-ft. altitude in its
    “fully successful mission.” The X-15 was launched over Delamar
    Lake, Nev., its engine burning 76 sec. and the flight lasting 11 min.
       X-15 program was initiated in December 1954 with signing of for-
    mal memorandum of understanding by NACA, USAF, and USN. Contracts
    were awarded to North American Aviation for construction of three
    X-15 aircraft and to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Reaction Motors Div.
    for manufacture of rocket engines. X-15 was designed to fly at mach 6
    and 250,000-ft. altitude, objectives often exceeded in flight. First pow-
    ered flight of X-15 was made Sept. 17, 1959, by NAA test pilot A. S c m
    Crossfield. X-15 research program has provided information on aero-
    dynamics, structures, flight control, and physiological aspects of high-
    speed, high-altitude flight. Follow-on program, begun in 1962, utilizes
    X-15 as test-bed for scientific experiments beyond earth’s atmosphere.
     (Twx, FRc to NASA Hq. ; FRC Release 2-64)
30                                AND                     19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS            AERONAUTIQS,

January 28: In Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonra-
    vov was interviewed by Tass correspondent regarding the launching of
                  ..
    ECHO 11: “.        in time, international space cooperation will acquire
    decisive significance. Each country will contr?bute its best efforts to
    the peaceful conquest of space. The knowledge obtained will accrue to
    the benefit of all mankind. Certain long-range communication problems
     will be clarified by the joint investigations of the U S . and U.S.S.R. sci-
    entists. There are other equally fruitful points of contact. The CO-
    ordination of the program of space experiments envisages the use of
    satellites for weather service on a world-wide scale. Also the combined
    use of sputniks for compiling charts of the Earth’s magnetic field will be
    a significant contribution to world science. These projects are part of
    the Soviet-American collaboration in the interests o mankind.” (T~ss,
                                                           f
    Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/28/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
  Early telemetry and radar reports indicated ECHO II appeared to be losing
    its spherical shape and high reflectivity, NASA spokesman announced.
    Telemetry showed ECHO II pressure “has decreased more rapidly than
    anticipated.” However, “optical observations tell us we have a beautiful
    balloon.” Analysis of TV photographs taken by camera mounted on
    Agena stage showed sphere had inflated properly; but inflating gas
    apparently leaked out after two hours instead of lasting for 20 hours as
    planned. However, quality of radio si als between Rome, N.Y., and
                                             .H”
    Colun&us, Ohio, and between Dallas, ex., and Stump Neck, Md. was
    reported to be good. Spokesman indicated telemetry reports of pres-
    sure decrease could be false due to possible error in the observations.
     (Wash. Post, 1/28/64; Chic. Trib., 1/28JM; Finney, NYT, 1/29/64,
    12)
* NASA conducted three grenade experiments with Nike-Cajun sounding
    rockets launched from Wallops Island, Va. ; Fort Churchill, Canada;
    and Ascension Island in the South Atlantic, part of current series to
    gather comparative data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric tem-
    peratures at widely separated locations. At Wallops Island, Nike-
    Cajun lifted off at 11:ll p.m. EST, followed by Nike-Cajun at Fort
    Churchill at 11:17 p.m. EST, and Nike-Cajun at Ascension Island, 11:18
    p.m. EST. Grenades were ejected and detonated at altitudes ranging
    from 23 to 56 miles. The series of experiments was under direction of
    NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 6 - 1       41 )
* Aerobee 300A vehicle launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 95-lb.
    instrumented,payload to 192-mi. altitude in experiment to measure simul-
    taneously electron and neutral particle temperatures in the upper
    atmosphere. Secondary objectives were to obtain data on ion and
    neutral particle densities. After 101/2-min. flighq payload impacted 156
    mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fourth in series
    o ionosphere studies, joint project of Univ. of Michigan and NASA
      f
    Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 68-10)
  NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex.,
    sent instrumented payload to 117-mi. altitude in successful test of the
    sounding rocket’s attitude control system with the improved inertial
    reference system. Payload was recovered immediately after impact
    and found to be in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  George M. Low, MSC Deputy Director and NASA Deputy Associate Admin-
    istrator for M n e Space Flight, said in Space Business D i y interview
                                                                  al
                   and
                                                                        31
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

    that crew “aboard the Apollo spacecraft will be more than adequately
    shielded from solar flare radiation.” Low cited National Academy of
    Sciences’ opinion that solar radiation dosages to Apollo astronauts
     would be five to 10 times less than maximum tolerable dosage, and “the
     astronauts would be safe on their trip to the Moon if it is made during
     its presently scheduled time.” He pointed out that special solar-radia-
    tion advisory committee (see Dec. 9,1963) did not take into account the
    NAS information and the GSFC tables which show that solar flares during
    1969-70 would not be as dangerous as heretofore thought. (SBD,
    1/28/64,144)
January 28: NASA and India’s Dept. of Atomic Energy announced they were
    jointly conducting series o four sounding rocket launchings from
                                   f
    Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station to investigate equatorial
    electrojet, electric current flowing along earth’s magnetic equator at
    about 60-mi. altitude. Thumba range is located near southwestern tip
    of India, on the magnetic equator. In the four electrojet experiments,
    India’s Dept. of Atomic Energy provides launching site and supporting
    facilities; personnel for sounding rocket launch operations, acquisition
    of data and data analysis; and supporting ground magnetometer and
    meteorological observations. NASA provides Nike-Apache rockets, loans
    the launcher, telemetry equipment, and supplementary magnetometers.
    Indian launch and telemetry personnel were trained by NASA. Rocket
    magnetometer was built by Univ. of New Hampshire through NASA con-
    tract. (NASA Release 64-19)
* Spain and US. announced agreement to construct and operate space track-
    ing and data acquisition station about 30 mi. west of Madrid. Coop-
    erating agencies were NASA for the US. and Instituto Nacional de Tecnica
    Aeroespacial on behalf of Spain’s National Space Research Commission.
                                      Deep Space Network, the $1.5 million
    To be used primarily in NASA’s
    installation would include 85-ft.-diameter parabolic antenna and equip-
    ment for transmitting, receiving, recording, data handling, and com-
    munications with spacecraft. (GSFC Historian)
  Army Corps of Engineers awarded $5,154,551 contract to Robert E. McKee,
    General Contractor, Inc., for construction of NASA’s   Lunar Excursion
    Module Test Facilities at White Sands Missile Range. (DOD Release
    89-64)
* Discussing U.S. supersonic transport program, Lockheed Aircraft Corp.
    vice president Dudley E. Browne told American Bankers Association’s
    conference in Philadelphia that Lockheed had proposed “increased use
    of Government capability to underwrite both risk and financing, balanc-
    ing this with sufficient risk assumption and financing by the contractor
                                                ...
    to justify returning him a reasonable profit.
        “Whatever final plan is adopted, the banks will be called upon to
    play a significant part.
        “When they are, I think they will find themselves participating in
    a program whose magnitude they have never encountered before, a
    total program cost that may run into something like $8 or $10 billion,
    may involve loan limits for aircraft of as much as 20 years in place
    of the present 10 or 12, and may require supplemental participation of
                                                            ..    .” (Clark,
    other financing organizations like insurance companies.
    NYT, 2/2/M, 90)
32              ASTRONAUTXCS AND AERONAUTIW, 19 6 4
                                                  3

January 28: USAF fired third and last interim Minuteman missile, a Wing 11
    version with Wing VI second stage,, from Cape Kennedy. This was 30th
    success in 45 Minuteman attempts from AMR. (M&R, 2/3/M, 13)
* Distinguished Flying Crosses were presented to 14 members of U S . Army
    and USAF for record mass free-fall parachute jump Dec. 16, 1963, as
    part of Operation Halo. (DOD Release 87-64)
Jc~nua~r NASA launched Saturn I SA-5 from AMR in first successful
         29:
    flight tkst of both stages o the rocket. The 1.5-million-lb.-thrust S-1
                                 f
    stage performed as planned, and the 90,000-lb.-thrust upper stage (S-IV)
    powered by six liquid-hydrogen’&lo engines separated and burned
    properly for eight minutes, attaining orbital speed. The orbited body
     (spent S-IV stage, instrument unit, payload adapter, Jupiter nose cone,
    and 11,500 lbs. of sand ballast) weighed 37,700 lbs., nearly 20,000 lbs.
    of which was payload. As the first of the Block I1 Saturn I’s, SA-5
    was first flight test of both Saturn stages and only the second flight
    test of a liquid-hydrogen powered rocket stage (see Centaur AC-2,
    Nov. 27, 1963). The five Block I1 Saturn 1’s differ from Block I
    predecessors in that they have live upper stages, S-I propellant tanks
    are extended to provide 100,000 lbs. usable propellant, and tail fins
    are added for stability. During the flight eight onboard motion picture
    cameras photographed various operations of the rocket and a TV camera
    provided real-time photographs of separation and ignition of S-IV
    stage. Shortly after S-I burnout, the motion picture cameras were
    ejected, impacting downrange where pararescue men recovered seven
    of them. This test of the world’s largest known rocket proved flight
    capability of Saturn I’s liquid-hydrogen, clustered-engine upper stage
    and demonstrated the vehicle’s capability to orbit 20,000-lb. payload.
     (Marshall Star, 2/5/64, 1; NYT, 1/30/64, 1; M&R, 2/3/64, 17-18)
* Following successful launching of Saturn I two-stage SA-5, President
    Johnson issued statement saying US. had now “proved we have the
                                                       ...
    capability of putting great payloads into space.
        “We have come a long way from the 31 pounds of EXPLORER I on
    January 31,1958, to the some 37,000 pounds which has just been placed
     into orbit by Saturn I.
        “We have demonstrated not only enormous boost capability, but we
     have proved the effectiveness and the practical use of liquid hydrogen
                                              ..  .” (Knighton, Balt. Sun,
    as a rocket fuel for space flight.
    1/30/a)
* At Cape Kennedy press conference following Saturn I SA-5 launch, NASA
    Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans stated, “There is little
    question that it took us ahead of the Russians in our capability.” He
    noted that payload equivalent of SA-5’s orbiting body was between
     19,000 and 20,000 lbs., far exceeding the 14,292 lbs. reported for heaviest
    Soviet satellites. . (M&R, 2/3/64, 18)
* RELAY11 communications satellite transmitted portions of Soviet-American
    championship hockey game of the 1964 Winter Olympics at Innsbruck,
    Austria, to the US., the first public demonstration of RELAY 11. Trans-
    mission of the event was made via French ground station at Pleumeur-
    Bodou and US. ground station at Andover, Me. By this time numerous
    communications tests of the satellite had been made, and NASA scien-
    tists said that all communications experiments were of excellent quality.
    BELAY 1 also was sending back information on radiation collected by
             1
    onboard instrumentation. (GSFC Historian; NASA Release 6 - )     4a
                                                                         33
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

Junuury 29: Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft
    Center, said in speech at Macalester College, St. Paul, Minn.: “Although
    we have not yet equalled the Soviets in the number of hours for manned
    flight, I am convinced we have gained full dollar value for our Mercury
    program. The total project cost was less than one percent of our mili-
    tary budget for one year. The project was successfully completed with
    Gordon Cooper’s flight of 22 orbits and 34 hours length in May 1963.
    Needless to say I am very proud of this team effort and the short time
    that passed from the day we were told to get on with the project until
                      ..   .” (Text)
    it was finished.
e NASA spokesman said ECHO 1 balloon satellite was still operating with
                                   1
    6 6great success” despite preliminary radar reports that it was deflating

    and losing its reflectivity. The 135-ft. balloon was tested in transmis-
    sion between Rome, N.Y., and Ohio State University at Columbus, Ohio.
     (UPI, NYT, 1/30/64,12)
  Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,Chairman of Senate Committee
    on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, noted on Senate floor that 100th
    flight of X-15 was made yesterday. “During the past 4% years the
    program has achieved a very commendable record, providing a wealth
    of research data for the aeronautical and space program of the United
    States. The past accomplishmentsof the X-15 program reflect a superb
    job of management, flight-test operation, and cooperation between the
    National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Air Force, and
                 ..
    the Navy. .
        “The X-15 program not only has contributed to the increased confi-
    dence of designers of current high-performance aircraft but, in doing
    so, has focused attention on a few areas which require additional re-
    search. The planned program will be directed toward these areas.
    This program is providing information for the next logical step in the
    NASA’s research program, the hypersonic.
            flight
                      ..  ., the X-15 program is going to produce information
        “In addition
    of value, I believe, to the development of supersonic commercial air-
    planes. This data will include flight controls, materials and surface
    temperatures.
        “The lesson from the X-15 is that cooperation among agencies having
    an interest in a project pays off.” (CR, 1/29/64,1358-59)
e NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $1,356,000 con-
    tract fo Blaw-Knox Co. for design and fabrication of three 85-ft.-
    diameter dish-shaped antennas to be used in manned space flight track-
    ing network for Project Apollo lunar mission. (GSFC Release G-4-64)
* NASA announced $300,000 contract award to Wayne State University to
    establish program to accelerate industrial application of aerospam
    related technology. Organized under Wayne State’s Center for Appli-
    cations of Science and Technology, the program would receive and would
    process technical information through NASA; evaluate applicability of
    the information to prospective industrial users ; and train applications
    engineers to match needs of specific industries with specific innovations
    or new knowledge. (NASA Release &23)
e Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in press conference in Detroit,
    remarked that the US. since 1955 had obtained “a great deal of de-
                                          ...    I do have confidence that we
    pendability” in ballistic missiles. “
    do have just as good missiles as there are in the world.” (Jones, NYT,
    1/30/% 1)
34              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIiCtS, 19 0 4

lanumy 29: Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aero-
     space Research, addressed National Space Club in Washington:
        ‘‘I am sometimes asked how military space research differs from space
    research conducted by civilian institutions or other government agen-
    cies. The answer, of course, is that there is no difference, except in the
     ultimate purpose for which it is conducted. As a matter of fact, there
     is very close liaison in this field between my Command, the National
     Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Office of Naval Research,
     and the scientific community. We make every effort to keep them
     informed about the work we are doing or sponsoring, and we are con-
     stantly exchanging information with them about our findings on the
    characteristics of space. Our job, however, is specifically t o support
                                      ...
    the Air Force mission in space.
        “I know that you are all familiar with the potential radiation hazards
     to man in space, particularly with the deadly proton showers that ac-
    company certain solar flares. We have made great strides in predicting
     the onset of these showers at our Sacramento Peak Observatory in New
     Mexico.
        bb We can predict safe periods with increasing accuracy-better      than
     most weather predictions here on earth-but there is still a large gray
     area in which we do not know whether conditions will be safe or unsafe.
     It is possible that we could narrow this gray area significantly with that
     which penetrates the atmosphere and can be picked up at the observatory.
        “If we had this knowledge, it would extend the time we could operate
     in space with absolute assurance of safety. It would also give us ad-
     vanced early warning that would enable us if necessary to get our astro-
    nauts out of danger.
        “Even in the present state of the art, our Sacramento Peak predictions
     have been crucial to the safety of the astronauts participating in the
    Mercury program. We have been able to give NASA absolute assur-
     ance of safe conditions, insofar as proton showers are concerned. when
     the astronauts have gone into orbit; and warnings of potential danger,
                        .”
     at other times. . .      (Text)
  U.S.S.R. opened first section of its 21-acre radiotelescope 55 mi. south
     of Moscow, Tass announced. The section, consisting of east-west portion
     of the cross-shaped antenna, was being used to measure with great ac-
    curacy radio waves originating in the outer solar corona, part of an IQSY
     projed. (NYT, 1/30/64,12)
January 30: NASA launched RANGER VI lunar probe with Atlas-Agena B
     launch vehicle from AMR in lunar landing mission to photograph the
    moon’s surface. The Atlas booster fired properly and, after stage sepa-
     ration, the Agena B stage ignited and attained orbital speed. After coast-
     ing in parking orbit of about 110-mi. altitude, the Agena B reignited,
    sending RANGER VI through the “launch window” on a course which would
    pass within 600 mi. of the moon. A midcourse correction maneuver was
    planned so that the spacecraft would impact the lunar surface. The only
    scientific instruments onboard the 804-lb. spacecraft were six TV cam-
    eras, designed to provide more than 3,000 photographs of the lunar sur-
     face during the last 10min. of the 66-hr. flight. This was the first Ranger
    launch since October 1962, when extensive review of the Ranger project
    was undertaken because of previous Ranger failures. For RANGER vr,
    changes were made in subsystems to improve reliability and provide
                                                                         35
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AEXtONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

     redundancy in some areas ; also, sterilization requirements for Ranger
     spacecraft were relaxed, since excessive heat was suspected of causing
     some previous malfunctions. (NASA Release 6416; Witkin, NYT, 1/31/
     a, LRC Release 6 4 1 0 ; Miles, Wash. Post, 1/31/64, 1 )
           1;
January 30: U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of two satellites, ELECTRON I and
     ELECTRON 11, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass
     said the satellites were studying “the internal and external radiation
     belts of the earth and physical phenomena connected with them.”
     ELECTRON I was orbiting at 7,100-km. (4,412-mi.) apogee; 406-km. (252-
     mi.) perigee; 2-hr., 49-min. period; and 61” inclination; ELECTRON 11
     was orbiting at 68,200-km. (42,379-mi.) apogee; 460-km. (286-mi.)
     perigee; 22-hr., 40-min. period; and 61” inclination. (Tass; Wush.
     Post, 1/31/64, A14)
                                                           campus, Lewis D.
0 At American Meteorological Society meeting, ucu

     Kaplan presented paper on current ideas about atmosphere of Mars-
     surface pressure is considerably lower than previously estimated and
     CO, concentration is considerably higher-and discussed significance
     of these findings for Martian-atmosphere entry spacecraft. (AMS Pro-
     gram, 717)
0 NASA submitted to the Congress its report on H.R. 6651, to provide for

     study on establishment of a National Space Museum. NASA position was
     that since the National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution had
     undertaken to preserve and display space objects, enactment of H.R. 6651
     was considered unnecessary. (NASA LAR III/15)
           equal opportunity employment activities were commended on Sen-
0 NASA’s

     ate floor by Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R,-N.Y.). Senator Javits introduced
     in the Congressionul Record letters from NASA indicating specific meas-
     ures taken in broad-based equal opportunity program, especially in
     Huntsville, Ala., and Wallops Station, Va. (CR,1/30/64, 1328-29)
  President Johnson appointed Dr. Herbert F. York, Chancellor of Univ. of
     Calif. at San Diego and La Jolla, to the President’s Science Advisory
     Committee succeeding Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky. (AP, NYT, 1/31/
     6411)
  Interviewed in Houston, where he toured NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
     NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C, Welsh commented that U.S.S.R.
     leads US. in “total manned [space] flying hours, aggregate weight
     lifted into space, and some phases of biomedicine.
        66
           But we are ahead in space navigation, communications, weather
     satellites, and boosters.
        “I doubt that they now can equal the thrust of Saturn I, although
     I think they eventually will do so.” (Houston Chrun., 1/31/&;
     Houston Post, 1/31/64)
  Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and
     Space Council, addressed Texas City Chamber of Commerce, discussing
     these summarized points :
        66
           1. The space program is a sound investment to improve the economic
     health of the country and is not a wasteful expenditure of funds so long
     as the program is handled on a business-likebasis.
        “2. The space program is being carried out as a partnership with
     private enterprise and requires cooperation with communities through-
     out the country.
36             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4
       66
          3. The space program does not and should not drain resources from
    other important projects, such as schools and housing; in fact, it stimu-
    lates both.
       66
         4. The space program is essential to our national security-through
    both its NASA activities and its Department of Defense activities.
       66
          5. The lunar program is a key feature in the space program, as it
    provides a clear objective and it requires the orderly development of
    a wide range of competences, all of which will have value for future
    space performance.
       66
          6. International cooperation in our space program can be mutually
    beneficial and will not impair our national security or inhibit the de-
    velopment of our own space capabilities.
       cc
          7. The space program stimulates the supply of trained scientists and
    engineers, but does not require them in such quantities as to interfere
    w t the constructive employment of the vast majority of them in other
      ih
    lines of endeavor.” (Text)
January 30: NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed World Affairs
    Council of Northern California, in San Francisco, discussed national and
    international aspects of the U S . space program :
       “The competition is tough. The U.S.S.R. has the ability to concentrate
    its efforts without public debate and without the regard for individual
    freedom of choice or living standards which enjoy high priority in our
    own country. But it does not follow that our own space effort should
    be similarly concentrated. The implications of space are broad, broader
    than we can now know, and they do not end on the moon. The necessary
    technologies are enormously demanding and therefore enormously prom-
    ising. And, whatever we do in space, we are critically dependent upon
    a thorough knowledge of the space environment. Moreover, the Soviet
    program, which has appeared to many of us to be so narrow and di-
    rected almost exclusively to prestigious exploits, more recently gives
     signs of broadening to include considerable basic research as well as
    practical investigations, for example, through the use of weather satel-
    lites in which we pioneered.
        66
          Therefore, we must not be trapped into a narrow competition-
     focusing our energies on one mission or even on manned flight alone.
     Our preparations must be broad enough to give us a flexible base suit-
     able for a continuity of effort and ability to move in a direction or di-
     rections perhaps still unknown.
        L<
           The projects and programs, national and international, in which
     we are engaged have unprecedented scope and potential. It is this scope
     and this potential which make space activity a valuable instrument of
     national and international policy. It is a many faceted tool to be used
     for the economic and social advance of this and cooperating nations as
     well as for the preservation of our technological and political leader-
     ship in the world. This tool and its importance should be fully under-
     stood and appreciated. At the same time, as Lord Hailsham has said, we
     should remember that international cooperation is not a substitute for
     national excellence.
        “Europe has not been alone in recognizing these factors. In the
     complex of UN organizations, great interest has been evidenced among
     nations great and small in the problems and benefits of space.
                                                                         37
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 196 4

       “Here again, space has served to bring East, West, and neutrals
    together in a code of legal principles to govern space activity, which
    was unanimously adopted in the last session of the General Assembly.
     In the associated forum of the International Telecommunications Union
    agreements were reached on the assignment of radio frequencies for
    space research and space communications. Without these arrangements
    the future of communications satellite systems would be heavily clouded.
    And in another UN agency, the World Meteorological Organization,
    a start has been made in the evaluation and planning of requirements
    for a world weather satellite system which also promises real economic
    and human benefits.
       “Thus it is clear that our national effort in space research and ex-
    ploration is becoming a powerful force in developing greater interna-
    tional cooperation-cooperation which is not limited to the nations of
    the Free World, but which spans the Iron Curtain, as well. It is in
    this context, as a force which joins all mankind against a common enemy,
    the hostile environment of space, rather than against each other, that
    the space effort may bring the most significant and enduring rewards.”
     (Text)
January 30: In its annual report to the Congress, AEC reported that “substan-
    tial increases” had been made in explosive power of thermonuclear war-
    heads for Polaris, Minuteman, and Titan long-range missiles. AEC also
    said progress had been made in developing nuclear weapons that produce
    less radioactive fallout. The advances were made in 1962 test series
     of atmospheric explosions in the Pacific. (Finney, NYT, 1/31/64, 1)
January 31 : Midcourse maneuver for RANGER VI lunar spacecraft was exe-
    cuted from NASA-JPL Tracking Station, Goldstone, Calif., 16 hrs. after
    the spacecraft was launched from AMR. The radio signal activated
    an onboard motor which fired for 69 sec., aiming the spacecraft on
    collision course with the moon. Target for the lunar spacecraft: Sea
    of Tranquility. (Witkin, NYT, 2/2/64, 1; Houston Chron., 1/31/64)
  Sixth birthday of EXPLORER I, first U.S. satellite, which was launched into
     orbit with a Jupiter C vehicle by JPL-ABMA team. EXPLORER I has
    traveled around the earth 26,315 times covering some 775 million miles.
    With initial orbit of 1,573-mi. apogee, 224-mi. perigee, and 114.8-min.
     period, EXPLORER I now orbits at 1,011.6-mi. apogee, 212.5-mi. perigee,
    and 104.6-min. period. It was originally expected to re-enter atmos-
    phere and disintegrate after five years, was now expected to last until
     1966. Its smaller transmitter relayed information for 105 days; the
    larger transmitter, 31 days. Onboard instrumentation discovered
     radiation belt around the earth, named after Dr. James A. Van Allen
    who provided the experiment. (Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 4; “NASA
    Chronicle of Earth Sat. 81 Space Probes, 195740”)
* In letter to Speaker of the House and President Pro Tempore of the Sen-
    ate, NASA Administrator James E. Webb indicated NASA electronics re-
     search center should be located in the Greater Boston area. “It is our
    carefully considered opinion that to meet the specific requirements of
    the NASA program in respect to time and in respect to existing resources,
    the center should be located in the Greater Boston area.” In accord-
    ance with P.L. 88-113, NASA had reviewed some 50 locations as pos-
    sible sites for the center. (NASA LAR 111/18; UPI, Houston Chron.,
    2/1/64)
38             ASTRONAUTIGS AND AERONAUTICIS, 1964

January 31: Successful testing of design of radar antenna 100 times more
     sensitive than world’s largest radiotelescope (Arecibo, P.R.) was an-
     nounced by USAF Ofc of Aerospace Research. The multiple antenna
                          fie
    was designed by Dr. Allan Schell of OAR Cambridge Research Labora-
     tories, as space surveillance and tracking radar system and for use as a
     radiotelescope. Oneyear evaluation of test section verified predicted
    performance characteristics of full-size antenna. The ‘multiple antenna
     would consist of some 5,000 flat metal plates each 2O-ft.-bydO-ft. ar-
     ranged in four elliptical areas around 1,000-ft.     tower. Studies were
     continuing to determine optimum size from standpoint of economy and
     performance, tower stability, and antenna control system. (OAR Re-
     lease 1-2)
* Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) was quoted as saying: “In view
     of the tremendous success of the Saturn flight, perhaps further savings
     in the cost of the space program might be possible between now and the
     first Saturn V flight by leap-frogging some of the intermediate steps.”
      (SBD, 1/31/64+, 169)
* Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) said in the House: “On Wednesday we
     saw the successful launching of the Saturn rocket carrying into orbit
     around the earth 18 tons. This included the largest payload ever
     placed in orbit by man and exceeds the largest Russian payload by 11
     tons. For several years now this Nation has been plagued with the
     uncomfortable knowledge that the Russians were ahead of us in the
     space effort. This has been based primarily on the fact that they had
     a greater lift capability. The United States is now ahead in lift capa-
                                                                ..   .” (CR,
     bility and in every other phase of the space program.
     1/31/64,1443)
* RELAY I communications satellite continued operating normally and the
     one-year onboard timer had not cut off as of this date. (GSFC Historian)
* Communications Satellite Corp. submitted its annual report to the Presi-
     dent and the Congress on its activities February 1-December 31, 1963.
     ComSatCorp reported it had made plans for development and estab-
    lishment of commercial communications satellite system with global
    capability, calling for launching of one or more synchronous-orbit
     satellites over the Atlantic Ocean in 1965 on an experimental-operational
     basis and initial launching of satellite for the comsat system in 1966.
      (ComSatCorp Rpt., 1/31/64+)
* DOD announced award of $7,112,913 contract to Franchi Construction co.
     for construction of NASA launch operations center headquarters bFilding
     at Merritt Island, Fla. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of En-
     gineers. (DOD Release 96-64)
During January: President Johnson sent letters to all major space/defense
     contractors urging them to achieve significant reductions in expenditures.
     In separate letters from NASA Administrator James E. Webb, contrac-
     tors were told of three areas offering greatest potential for significant
     savings : purchasing at lowest price compat?ble with reliability require-
     ments, placing greater emphasis on incentives, and reducing operating
     costs. (NM S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64?, 1)
  NASA began installation of aerospace ground equipment at Cape Kennedy’s
     Launch Complex 19 for Project Gemini, work beginning ahead of pre-
     viously expected date in effort to expedite first Gemini flight. (M&R,
      1/13/a, 9)
                                                                         39
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 1964

During fanuary: Snap-1OA space nuclear power system completed a record
     90-day continuous test operation, in test conducted for AEC by Atomics
     International. Purpose of the test, conducted with mockup of the
    Snap-lOA, was to check operation of various components as a system
     under conditions closely simulating space environment. (SBD, 1/27/64,
     136)
a NASA awarded Maizin Co.’s Baltimore Div. a $1,499,111 contract for Part I1
     study of post-Saturn launch vehicles, a oneyear study to include overall
    vehicle definition and preliminary design. (Marshall Star, 1/15/6p, 1;
    M&R, 1/13/64,9)
  Ryan Aeronautical Corp. was awarded contract from RCA to design landing
    radar for the Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. RCA, responsible
    for major LEM subsystems, would integrate landing radar with LEM’S
    overall sensor system. (M&R, 1/13/@, 10-11)
e Twelfth session of Mexico-US. Commission for Space Observations held
    in Mexico City to consider report on construction at Guaymas track-
    ing and data acquisition station to modify it for Project Gemini. Guay-
    mas station was one of five being built or updated for Gemini tracking-
    Carnarvon, Australia; Bermuda; Canary Islands; and Cape Kennedy.
     (SBD, 1/13/64,59)
* W. V. Pangborn and Co., Inc., and Lowery Electric, Inc., submitted joint
    bid of $1,443,289.20 for NASA-USAF contract to build frequency con-
    trol and calibration facility at Cape Kennedy’s Merritt Island. Facility
    would become part of AMR tracking network, would be aimed at support-
    ing Titan I11 and Saturn V. (M&R, 1/20/64+, 12)
  NASA released to industry its first technology utilization report, entitled
    “An Improved Precision Height Gage.” NASA Ames Research Center
    developed the report. (NASA SP-5001)
  Seth W. Booth, Group Director, Re-entry Feasibility Group, San Bernardino
    Operations of the Aerospace Corp., was presented AFSC’S Outstanding
    Achievement Award by Maj. Gen. W. Austin Davis, Commander of
    AFSC Ballistic Systems Div. Booth was cited for his exceptional tech-
    nical direction to BSD contractors for various re-entry programs from
    1956-1963. (A-N-AF J&R, 1/18/64,10)
  120-in. solid-propellant rocket motor being developed by United Tech-
    nology Center for USAF was static-fired for nearly two minutes, a “com-
    pletely successful” test. (SBD, 1/30/64,, 163)
  Reviewing the worth of scientific results gained in the first years of US.
                                                 “. .. new knowledge is a
    space exploration, Fortune magazine said:
    dukedom whose great wealth and resources cannot even begin to be
    estimated or exhausted. Already the new knowledge acquired in space
    exceeds by far the value of funds so far spent. For knowledge, more
    than guns and butter, is the true power of modern states.” (NASA FY
    1965Auth. Hearings, Part I, 3)
                           February 1964
February 1 I President Johnson stated in press conference:
        “This past week the United States has demonstrated in at least eight
    different situations this Nation’s determination to insure both peace
    and freedom in the widest possible areas.
        “Progress toward these ends is frequently slow and rarely dramatic,
    but it should be viewed in the perspective of history and not head-
                  ,
                  ,
            ...
    lines.
        The President listed the first seven situations, then
        “And finally, we have witnessed and the whole world has witnessed
    with pleasure the remarkable success of our Saturn rocket, the most
    powerful rocket thrust known to man. This rocket, I am happy to say,
    was first recommended by our committee [Senate Preparedness Subcom-
    mittee, chaired by Johnson] in 1958.” (Transcript, Wash. Post,
    2/2/64, A7)
* Editorial in Christian ScienceMonitor said:
        “‘It is one thing to question the wisdom of spending so much so quickly
    to put an American hopefully on the moon in this decade, a time limit
    that the economy drive in Washington may remove. But it would be
    less than wisdom to cut back sharply on space funding under the false
    assumption that the United States is pulling ahead of the Soviets. It
    is stillcoming up from behind.” (CSM, 2/1/64)
* Roscoe Drummond, in his Washington Post column, said success of
                       .
    Saturn I SA-5 “. . means that the major advantage which the Soviets
    have had so long and which has yielded them their principal space spec-
    taculars-the long Russian lead in rocket power-is now a thing of the
            ...
     past.        ’

        “There should be no minimizing what the Soviets have already
            . ..
    done.
        “But the United States accomplishments have been more diverse.
     We have put almost four times as many spacecraft into orbit as the
     Soviets. We have made far more progress in the application of space
     technology in communications, weather, and navigation. We both have
     compiled a large volume of scientific data about outer space and neither
     is significantly ahead.
        “As Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aero-
     nautics and Space Council, puts it, ‘the space race continues and it will
     be a long one.’ ” (Drummond, Wmh. Post, 2/1/64, in CR, 2/1/64,
     A 4 1)
* Nuclear “breeder” reactor using thorium fuel, pioneered by Vice Adm.
     Hyman G. Rickover, was under consideration by AEC and Calif. Dept.
     of Water Resources for a nuclear power plant, according to recent letter
     from AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg to Sen. John 0. Pastore,
     Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Built
      around the “seed-and-blanket” design developed by the Rickover team,
       40
                                                                          41
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONATJTICS, 1964

    the thorium-fueled reactor appeared to have “unusual
    erating economic nuclear power and for breeding.”
    Seaborg said, the concept would “represent a major
    technology and an important milestone in our national objective of con-
    serving nuclear fuel resources.” (Finney, NYT, 2/2/64, 1,30)
February 1 : At Washington press conference, National Bureau of Standards
    and team of visiting Soviet metrologists announced preliminary agree-
    ment for extended cooperation in measurement and standards data ex-
    change. Agreement provided for exchange of (1) data on observations
    of standard time and frequency signals from radio stations, ( 2 ) calibra-
    tion information to compare measurements of electrical and electronic
    quantities, and (3) publications of National Bureau of Standards and
    Soviet Committee on Standards, Measures, and Measuring Instruments.
     (M&R, 2/10/64,10-11)
e specid A F s c management o f c for the Manned orbiting Laboratory
                                 fie
     (MOL) program was established in AFSC Hq., headed by Col. R. K.Jacob-
    son, Assistant Deputy Commander for Space for MOL. (AFSC Release
    41-R-16)
e According to USAF authorities in Berlin, preliminary examination showed
    that the T-39 jet trainer which crashed in East Germany last Jan, 28,
    killing the three Americans aboard, was shot down by Soviet aircraft.
    Denying charges made by East Germany, USAF spokesman said the air-
    craft carried no arms or photographic equipment, was incapable of re-
    connaissance. (Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A16)
* Soviet Chief Air Marshal Konstantin A. Vershinin said in Red Star that
    Soviet air force can destroy any enemy land, sea, or air target. Soviet
    air power now is based on supersonic, rocket-carrying planes capable
                                                                        A16)
    of operating in all weather conditions. ( UPI, Wash. Post, 2/2/@&,
February 2: RANGER VI crashed onto the moon on target in the Sea of Tran-
    quility, but its onboard camera system failed to return TV photographs
    of the lunar surface. Indications were that the two “V systems re-
    sponded to Central Computer and Sequencer ( C C S ~ S command to warm
                                                           )
    up, but the cameras did not complete the warm-up to picture taking.
    RANGER VI’S cameras (two wide-angle and four narrow-angle) were to
    have made more than 3,000 photographs during its last 10 min. The
    photographs were to have provided scientific data on lunar topography
    and supported the Surveyor unmanned soft-landingspacecraft and Apollo
    manned lunar landing program.
       Dr. Wlim Pickering, Director of JPL which is responsible for
             ila
    Ranger project management as well as its tracking and communications
    through Deep Space Network, said of RANGER VI:
       “It was a sad finish to somethingthat was going so good.
       “Our accuracy was a very significant achievement. The failure of
    the camera system isn’t going to discourage us. I’m quite confident in
    our ability, and we will succeed in exploring the moon on a future shot.”
    NASA planned three more Ranger T flights this year. (Witkin, NYT,
                                         V
    2/3/64; UPI, Wash. Post, 2/3/64; AP, Wash. Post, 2/3/64)
* Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station which
    tracked RANGER VI on its course to the moon, said of the spacecraft’s
    accurate impact of the moon: “I think this represents a very great
    achievement for American rocket engineers.
     7-8-4
42              ASTRONAUTICS AND A E R O N A m U S , 1 9 64,

       “This achievement is underlined by the fact that it is now four and
    a half years since either the Russians or the Americans have made a
    direct hit of this nature on the lunar surface, despite repeated attempts.”
       Kenneth W. Gatland, Director of the British Interplanetary Society,
    referred to the failure of RANGER VI’S cameras to take pictures: “I should
    say this is one of the most bitter disappointments of the space age 90 far
    in having come so near to success in a vital reconnaissance.” He spec-
    ulated that the cameras may have failed to work because the tempera-
    ture caused a relay to stick or a component to fail. (AP, NYT, 2/3/M)
February 2: Tass announced ELECTRON I and ELECTRON 11 scientific satel-
    lites were continuing their elliptical orbits of the earth. By 6:OO
    p.m. Moscow time Feb. 1, ELECTRON I had passed repeatedly through the
    inner radation belt in its 19 orbits and ELECTRON 11 had moved four
    times through the outer radiation belt in its two orbits. Tass said the
    following studies were being made with aid of onboard equipment:
    outer and inner radiation belts; charged particles having low energy;
    concentrations of electrons and positive ions; magnetic fields and radi-
    ation belts of the earth; nuclear component of cosmic radiation; short-
    wave solar radiation; propagation of radio waves; radio-radiation of
    galaxies; and densities of meteoritic material. Tass said the studies,
    being accomplished under a unified program in various areas of outer
    space, were being conducted for the first time. T e e studies were
                                                             hs
    important for conducting the program of the IQSY and for permitting
    collection of data to assure radiation safety of manned space flights.
    Tass said all onboard equipment was functioning normally and ground
    stations were receiving scientific data from the satellites. (Tass, Kras-
    naya Zvezda, 2/2/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
0 300-ft.-high helium-filled balloon with 550-lb. instrumented payload was

    recovered 30 mi. west of Williamsport, N.C., after seven-hour flight
    from Palestine, Tex., where it was launched by the National Center for
    Atmospheric Research. Scientists from Case Institute, which sponsored
    the launching, said the cosmic-ray-studyinginstruments performed per-
    fectly during the flight. (Houston Chron., 2/3/64)
February 3: NASA established RANGER VI Review Board, composed o members
                                                                    f
    from NASA Hq., Langley Research Center, and Goddard Space Flight
    Center, and chaired by Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry
    Affairs Earl D. Hilburn, to review program effect of RANGER VI failure.
    The Board would review resuIts of failure analyses and corrective pro-
    cedures being prepared by JPL, then make recommendations regarding
    remainder of Ranger &ght program.
       At press conference, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C.
    Seamans, Jr., explained that the single aim of the Board was to deter-
    mine when Ranger 7 would be launched. Until the mystery of RANGER
    VI’S failure was solved, NASA was delaying launch of Ranger 7, which
    also would have mission of photographing lunar surface. (NASA Re-
    lease 64-26; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/4/M; Finney, NYT, 2/4,/6d)
  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in
    coordination with Nike-Apache launch at Ascension Island, third set
    in current NASA series to obtain data on high-altitude winds and at-
    mospheric temperatures. A correlated launch from Ft. Churchill, Can-
    ada, was postponed due to sound interference problems. The Wallops ex-
    periment was timed to coincide with the annual east-tewest ‘‘warming
                                                                         43
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 196 4

    trend", was to measure its effects on the upper atmosphere. The expeeri-
    ments were designed to obtain measurements at altitudes ranging up to
    55 mi. The Wallops experiment used grenade payload; for the Ascen-
    sion experiment, the grenade payload was replaced with Pitot-static probe
    to measure densities, pressures, and temperatures. The series was being
    conducted for NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release
    6442; NASA Rpt. s
                            . Dept. of Commerce announced agreement to de-
February 3: NASA and
                                                                           .
    velop National Operational Meteorological satellite system (NOMSS)
    Signed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Com-
    merce Luther H. Hodges, agreement provided for NOMS which would
    be based on NASA-developed Tiros technology and would become oper-
     ational in 1965. Compared with earlier plans, this joint program was
    expected to save Dept. of Commerce some $125,000,000 over five-year
    period. Once NASA orbited the satellites, Weather Bureau would operate
     and control the system and analyze, process, and distribute the meteoro-
    logical data gathered by the satellites. Under reimbursable order from
    Weather Bureau, NASA would design, procure, test, launch, and track the
                                 Release 64-25; Commerce Dept. Release G
     weather satellites. (NASA
    &20; Text, NMI 2-3-30)
* 14 men selected last October for astronaut training reported to NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center to begin training for the Gemini and Apollo
    space flight crew pool. (MSC Release 64-24)
* Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,
    said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project
    Apollo's Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent
    to the moon. He described support gear-like elasticized parachute
                       would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elim-
    harness-which
     ination of chairs and rearrangement of LEM'S gear permitted weight
     reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/M)
* FAAbegan sonic-boom study program at Oklahoma City, Okla., generating
     sonic booms at the levels predicted for supersonic transport operations
     to determine public acceptability of these levels. Data acquired from
    the 26-week program would be used in planning and design of US.
     supersonic transport. FAA conducted the program with cooperation of
     USAF and NASA; USAF provided F-104 aircraft to generate the booms
     and NASA researchers provided ground instrumentation to measure
     booms and boom effect. (FAARelease 68-3)
  Interviewed in Boston Globe, Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics
     and Control Section of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Tech-
     nology, said NASA planned a gradual buildup of personnel for the pro-
     posed electronics research center to a maximum of 2,100 in 1969.
     Year-by-year buildup: 1964, 50; 1965, 250; 1966, 550; 1967, 1,000;
     1968, 1,600; and 1969, 2,100. Nucleus of the center's staff would be
     electronics task force currently operating in Washington. (White,
     Boston Globe, 2/3/64)
* NASA submitted report to Congress on patent legislation: to House Com-
     mittee on the Judiciary on H.R. 4482, to provide administration in the
     public interest of property rights to inventions resulting from R&D
     financed wholly or partially by public funds; to Senate Committee on
     the Judiciary on S. 1290, to establish uniform national policy for pro-
     prietary rights to inventions made through expenditure of public funds;
44              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964,

    and to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on S. 1444,
    to amend National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to waive pro-
    prietary interests of the U.S. in inventions. (NASA LAR III/19)
February 3: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before
    House Committee on Armed Services:
       “In the field of military applications of space, our views as to the
    future remain unchanged. We believe that we must vigorously exploit
    the most likely avenues of interest, though we are not yet able to be defin-
    itive enough to describe man’s military space role adequately to project
                               ..
    specific weapon systems. .
       “The Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program, which replaced
    the Dyna-Soar, is a research program aimed at giving man the oppor-
    tunity to operate in space so that we may determine whether and when
    the manned space vehicle will be militarily significant. The MOL pro-
    gram will provide much of the supporting knowledge for indicated
    future manned space systems. The timing of the program is based
    upon a technical decision that our primary need is to know what
    functions man can perform in orbit, before exploring, as completely
    as Dyna-Soar would have, the problems and techniques of controlled
    reentry. This latter will now be studied on a more limited develop-
    mental basis.” (Text, A F Info. Pol. Ltr., 2 J a )
  Maj. Gen. T. C. Bedwell, Jr., Cdr. of USAF Aerospace Medical Div. at Brooks
    AFB, reported that four airmen spent 30 days in pure oxygen atmosphere
    with no apparent ill effects. The volunteers were confined in special
    chamber at Brooks AFB for six weeks. During the first two weeks they
    were in mixed-gas atmosphere while they were acclimating to the sur-
    roundings and practicing space-related techniques; then the chamber’s
    atmosphere was converted to 100 percent oxygen. With no initial
    harmful effects, the airmen would continue under medical surveillance
    for a long period. “Longer tests of this type are planned,” General
    Bedwell said. “We need many statistics, not just a few samplings, to
    draw any definite conclusions.” (AP, Houston Post, 2/4/@)
* General Curtis E. LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, testified before House
    Committee on Armed Services:
        “The Air Force program of research and development seeks to assure
    that this Nation is first in the development of military capabilities
     in space. We have some cause for optimism in this area. Our Titan
     I11 program is proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, we are under-
    taking the development of a medium altitude communications satellite
               ..
    program. .
        66
          The next major step toward the achievement of future space capa-
     bilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was approved
     for development under Air Force management. The MOL will provide a
     means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire information
     essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the use-
     fulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages
     which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve
     as a platform to support testing of equipment and procedures in the
     environment in which they will be used.
        “Although the Dyna-Soar program has been terminated, a need still
     exists for development of a maneuverable aerospacecraft capable of
     controlled reentry and precision recovery, ferrying missions to and
                                                                         45
               AI3TRONAUTICS AND AEEtONAUTICS, 1964

    from a space laboratory, transfer of men and equipment in space, and
                                   ..    .” (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
     a wide range of other roles.
Februury 3: Rocketdyne engine reliability of 100% in 135 orbital or deep
    space vehicle launchings over the last three years was reported in Space
    Business Daily. (SBD,2/3/64¶ 175)
February 3-5: At aerospace medicine conference held at Brooks AFB, NASA
    Langley Research Center assistant director, Clinton E. Brown, said NASA
    was proposing a large space telescope in earth orbit capable of orbiting
    with manned orbiting research laboratory. “A preliminary step towards
    a very large scale telescope might consist of an enlarged orbiting astro-
    nomical laboratory ( OAO) with a I 0 to 120 in. aperture, but specifically
                                         O
    designed to make use of recoverable fl and the adjustment and opera-
                                            im
                                                              ..        Brown
    tional advantages of a manned space control center.            ¶.
                                                                    ’


    said analysis made by Dr. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., Princeton Univ. astron-
    omer, showed that “the moon is not the place for such an observatory
    but rather a manned earth orbiting system is to be desired.” (Av. Wk.,
    2/24/64,71)
* At space medicine Conference, Brooks AFB, Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, USAF
    DC/S for R&D, said space rendezvous maneuvers of MOL with a winged
    ferry vehicle were under consideration: “We visualize such a ferry craft
    to be a lifting body with some maneuverability in the atmosphere for
    precision landing. Undoubtedly it would be able to carry more than
    two men, as well as be a logistics carrier.” (M&R, 2/10/64, 35)
February 4: US. Committee for International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY) and
    USN announced satellite to monitor solar x-ray emission, instrumented
    by Naval Research Laboratory scientists, was launched recently to
    initiate continuous “watch on the sun” during IQSY (1964-65). First
    signals from the satellite showed the sun now is close to its minimum
    activity, reported NRL scientists Robert W. Kreplin, Talbot A. Chubb, and
    Herbe& Friedman. Any solar activity that occurs this year should be
    isolated and relatively uncomplicated, permitting the satellite to record
    individual stonn centers, in contrast to IGY which was marked by suc-
    cession of overlapping storms. Observatories in 14 countries joined
    US. in preparing to utilize continuous data transmissions from the
    satellite.
       At press conference, the NRL scientists said that astronauts on lunar
    flight would be under no more radiation danger during maximum period
    of solar cycle than during minimum period. Friedman explained: “All
    available evidence indicates that solar minimum is as bad as solar maxi-
    mum for superflare eruption.” T date, superflares occur at random
                                          o
    and cannot be predicted. (NAS-NRC Release; USN Background State-
    ment; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/5/64)
* House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on NASA
    authorization for FY 1965. NASA Administrator James E. Webb testi-
    fied :
       “In the tight budget situation faced by the President for Fiscal Year
     1965 it was necessary to stress with him and the Bureau of the Budget
    that unless the full $5.3 billion authorization requested for FY 1965, and
    the supplemental appropriation of $141 million requested for FY 1964
    are approved, the manned space flight program will encounter further
    delays, It will then not be possible to achieve the national goal of ex-
    ploring the moon with men within this decade.
46              ASTRONATJTECS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
                                                    1

       “There may be some inclination to assume that the adjustment of our
    program to the reductions imposed for N 1964 indicates that this will
    likewise be possible in the event of reductions in the request which is
    before you at this time. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this is
    not the case.
       cc
          In adjusting our program to compensate for the reductions made in
    the appropriation for FY 19@, we have already sacrificed the margins
    and early target dates which were needed, and which in reality are still
    needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been set for us. I n
    fact, Mr. Chairmgn, we are not able to maintain a reasonably balanced
    program, and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assur-
    ance that we can meet the 1970 lunar target date. The best we can say
    is that we have a ‘fightingchance.’
       “To s u m up our situation in a sentence, if we do not receive the funds
    which the President h a requested, there is nothing left to sacrijice except
    the National goal itself.
          ..
          . whether it is agreed or not that international considerations
       6‘


    and national security factors require that we hold to the present pace
    of the space program, the fact is that prudence and economy will be
    served. Even if economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in
    the evaluation of the NASA request for FY 1965, the cost of establishing
    and maintaining superiority in space will be less if we maintain the
    pace, the momentum, which the supplemental appropriation and this
    authorization request will provide.
       “. . .  Despite the difficulties which have been experienced, we can
    still put two American explorers on the moon in this decade, and we
                                        ...     [But] if the program is further
    can do it for less than $20 billion.
    curtailed, if the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into
    the next decade, the cost will not be under $20 billion, it will be several
    billions more. The ultimate cost will increase for each year in which
    achievement of our goal is delayed.
       “. . . [According to a NASA study], the cost of the lunar explora-
    tion would increase by approximately $1 billion for each year that the
    landing is delayed. A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a six year
    delay $6 billion, with no corresponding improvement in the benefits
                .
    obtained. . .” (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64, A545-48)
February 4: NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden testified before
    House Committee on Science and Astronautics:
       ‘‘Because of the initiative and the daring of the Wright Brothers, this
    nation gave man the capacity for powered flight, freeing him forever
    from the bonds which for thousands of years of human existence had
    confined his activities to land and sea. The United States became the
    first country in the world to possess a military airplane when, in 1908,
    the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane.
       “Yet,.prior to World War I this nation was still so pre-occupied with
    conventional weapons systems that it totally neglected the development
    of aeronautics-the force which was to dominate warfare for the next
    quarter century. In 1914, the United States possessed fewer military
    aircraft and of inferior types than the six leading aeronautical nations
    (including Mexico). The United States in 1914 was the only major
    nation in the world not to possess an aeronautical laboratory with an
    up-to-date wind tunnel. By November 1918, not one aircraft of Ameri-
                                                                             47
                                                          19 64
                ASTRONAUTICS AND &80NAUTICS,

     can design and manufacture had entered combat operations during
     World War I.
        “In the 30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of conventional
     piston-driven aeronautical systems that we made little progress in jet
     propulsion. Meanwhile, the Germans set out to build a bigger and
     better NACA and to a large extent, they did, developing jet propelled
     military aircraft and 5 s - t o n V-2 rockets, which almost spelled disaster
    in World War 1 . 1
        “In the late 40’9, despite the fact that Robert Goddard had demon-
     strated the feasibility of a liquid-fueled rocket engine in this country
     in 1926, and despite the memory of V-2’s raining on London during
    the blitz, we were so pre-occupied with mating jet carriers to our ex-
    clusively held atomic bomb capability that we neglected missilry while
    other nations forged ahead. And finally, in the 50’s, our A-bomb ad-
    vantage gone, we were so pre-occupied with the development of our bal-
    listic missile program that we neglected a clear opportunity to become
    first in space.
        “Today, the nation faces, we all face, this question: Have we learned
    enough from the often bitter and always costly experience of the last
    half century not only to carry out with determination this effort to meet
    the requirements of the present in space research and exploration, but
    to exercise the vision which is demanded if we are not, once again, to
     find ourselves lagging in the next phase of this most challenging
             ...
    effort?
        “The present gap in manned flight activity is a direct consequence
    of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury
    from September 1960, until May 1961, when President Kennedy recom-
    mended the present manned lunar landing project as a national goal.
        “The decisions which confront us today are those which will deter-
    mine whether this kind of history will repeat itself a few years hence
    and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the
    fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space
                                 .
    missions of the future. . .” (Testimony; CR, 2/5/64, A548-50)
February 4: Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments were
    launched at Wallops Island, Va., and Ft. Churchill, Canada, in current
    NASA series of comparative upper atmosphere studies. The experiments
    were designed to obtain wind and temperature data and to measure the
    effects of the “warming trend” at altitudes ranging u p to 55 mi. Nike-
    Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi. altitude, with all 12 of its
    grenades exploding; Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 78-mi. al-
    titude, with 1 grenades functioning normally and the twelfth ejecting
                    1
    but not exploding. (Wallops Release 64-14; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of Apollo Spacecraft Office at NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Center, said in Milwaukee speech that the most probable
    date for US. manned lunar landing was late in 1968 or early in 1969.
    He discussed goals of Ranger TV probes, Surveyor lunar lander, and
    Lunar Orbiter probes, which would provide information about the
    moon preparatory to manned lunar landing. If these should fail, he
    said, NASA would plan manned A p l l o reconnaissance flights to orbit
    the moon before the landing flight. “It might set our landing back six
    months to a year, but if the other programs don’t work, we aren’t dead.”
    (Pease, Milwaukee Journal, 2/4/64)
48             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

February 4: Scientists at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks OB, said in paper
    presented by Maj. William B. Clark at space medicine conference that,
    with proper reconnaissance training, astronauts in space could easily
    spot missile bases, encampments, troop movements, and “unsuspected
    targets of opportunity” from outposts 100-mi. high. The scientists’
    report was based on studies of visual reports of six US. astronauts who
    made space flights and relied heavily on accounts by Astronaut Leroy
    Gordon Cooper (Maj., WAF). (AP,         N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/5/64; AP, Phil.
    Eve. Bull. 2/6/64)
  Rep. James C. Cleveland (R.-N.H.), member of House Select Committee
    on Government Research, wrote in Washington World magazine :
       “Fourteen to fifteen billion dollars of the taxpayer’s money is going
    into R&D this year. The figure was only $2 billion 10 years ago.
       “More than 30 different departments, bureaus, and agencies of the
     Federal Government conduct research or have it conducted for them,
                             ...
    ofteninthesamefields.
       “A breakdown of Federal research and development spending shows
    that five organizations account for 90 percent of it. These are the
     Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
    tion, the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, the Atomic
    Energy Commission, ‘and the National Science Foundation. About 70
    percent of these funds support military research and development.
    About 10 percent of the total funds is channeled to colleges and uni-
               ..  .” (CR, 2/4/a, A563)
    versities.
  NASA scientist John M. Eggleston told space medicine conference at Brooks
    AFB that astronauts on lunar flight would face less danger from space
     radiation than was once thought. “If the Apollo spacecraft as it is
     now designed were exposed to the largest solar flare seen in the latest
     solar cycle, the astronaut would be exposed to only one tenth of the
    critical dose designated for space flight.
       “An exposure to the critical dose would probably make an astronaut
                             ...
    sick within a few days.         But it would not prevent him from finish-
    ing the mission and returning to lead a normal life.” (AP, Homton
    Post, 2/5/64)
0 In Washington Evening Star article, William Hines reported Georgetown

     Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess’ conviction that life cannot exist on
    Mars. Dr. Kiess’ spectrographic observations of the planet convinced
    him no oxygen or water vapor existed there. Nitrogen compounds have
    been detected, and Dr. Kiess believed Martian atmosphere is 97-99%
    pure nitrogen gas. He believed density of air at Martian surface is
    greater than is generally believed, meaning that nitrogen tetroxide could
                                                  above ‘ 0 F, solid below
                                                           7’
    exist as gas, liquid, and solid-gaseous
     14O F, and liquid in between. In laboratory experiments Dr. Kiess had
    demonstrated that when various nitrogen compounds are subjected to
    temperature changes they turn color to duplicate “seasonal” color
    changes observed on Mars, even creating artificial “snow storm” and
    simulating waxing and waning of Martian “polar caps.” Dr. Kiess’ view
    was minority opinion, refuted by majority of scientists. Dr. Lewis
    Kaplan of JPL said in interview that Dr. Kiess’ conclusions were based
    on spectrographic analyses which had been refuted by better spectro-
    graphic analyses of Vancouver, B.C., scientists. (Hines, Wash. Eve.
          2/ww
     s-
      9
                                                                        49
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

                                 announced it would join international tele-
                                 on global communications satellites. (AP,
     NYT,2/6/64,6)
*      announced appointment o Thomas F. Rogers, MIT scientist, as Assist-
                                 f
    DOD
     ant Director (Communications and Electronics), Defense Research and
    Engineering. (DOD Release 10144)
  42 FAA flight seMce stations were going to be converted into remote-
    control facilities with expected savings of between $30,000 and $4O,OOO
    per year per station, FAA announced. (FAARelease 64-9)
  DOD and AEC announced first at-sea automatic weather station powered by
    nuclear energy had begun operation in the Gulf of Mexico. The 6O-watt
    Snap-7D nuclear generator was expected to last 10 years as compared
    to conventional batteries requiring recharging every six months. The
    NOMAD (Navy Oceanographic Meteorological Automatic Device) was
    forerunner of worldwide network of unattended weather stations d e
    signed to provide meteorological and oceanographic data. (DOD Re-
    lease 103-64)
February 5: Preliminary evaluation of Saturn I SA-5 flight Jan. 29 indicated
    there was “no significant deviation or malfunction,” according to MSFC
    Saturn Flight Evaluation Group. Because insertion velocity was slightly
    greater than predicted, the 37,700-1b. orbiting body was in an earth orbit
    slightly higher than expected: 470-mi. apogee, 70-mi. higher than ex-
    pected; 167-mi. perigee, 7 mi. higher than expected. ,Timing of all
    significant actions in the launch sequence vaned no more than half a
    second from prediction. First stage cutoff occurred after slightly more
    than 146 sec., S-IV stage ignited at 148 sec., and insertion into orbit
    occurred at 639 sec. (KSC Release 8-64)
* NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before
    House Committee on Science and Astronautics, discussed NASA organi-
    zation, management, procurement, and programing.
                                                     ...
       “The management and programing processes              require continu-
    ing program support, assuming reasonable accomplishment by NASA
    compared with our stated goals. Little that we start in one year is com-
    pleted in that year. On the average, flight projects require three or
    more years prior to launch, while total programs have a life of ten to
    fifteen years. The governmental process for allocating resources can
    lead to a funding pattern at odds with this inherently long-duration
    need. We plan to accomplish major objectives over the period of a
    decade, but we must tailor our actual accomplishment to those resources
    that we receive annually.
       “A budget of $5.445 billion, in our estimation, provides the necessary
                                                            ....       This is
    increment of resources to support the technical program
    divided into $141 million, requested as our FY 1964 supplemental, and
    a $5.304 billion budget for FY 1965. During the preparation of this
    budget, we were asked by the President to make major cost reductions,
    in part by introducing improved management practices. This was done
    prior to submission of the President’s budget, and the estimated cost
                                                             ...
    savings are therefore reflected in our budgetary request.          Within
    these estimates, we propose to carry out this year’s increment of NASA’s
    program of aeronautical research, advanced technological development,
    space hardware development, and space exploration.” (Testimony)
50                               AND                    196 4
                ASTRONAUTICS           AERONAUTICS,

February 5: In House Science and Astronautics Committee hearings, Rep.
    James D. Weaver (R.-Pa.) challenged the 84% figure given by EASA
    Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as NASA’s         1963
    space record-11 successes out of 13 launches. In response to Rep.
    Weaver’s questioning, Dr. Seamans said NASA had planned 42 launches
    for 1963, 8 of which were backups. Rep. Weaver replied that, on this
                   1963 space record could be interpreted as 31% successful.
    basis, NASA’s
     (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,15)
0 Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, NASA

    Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr.
    Homer .E. Newel1 discussed objectives, progress, and future plans
    of NASA’s   programs in the area of space science (space environment,
    sun-earth relationships, geodesy, investigation of moon and planets,
    investigation into nature of the universe, exobiology) and applications
     (meteorological satellites, communications program, and advanced tech-
    nological satellites). Some of the space environment results obtained
    during the past year :
          1. The existence of an appreciable number of protons in the outer
       66


    Van Allen Belts was established.
       “2. The lifetime in the belt of artificially injected electrons was
                 ...
    determined.
       <<
          3. Trapping lifetimes and rates of enhancement of electrons of vary-
    ing energies in the outer radiation zone have been correlated with mag-
    netic storms.
       cc
          4. Large low energy electron fluxes have been found on lines of mag-
    netic force which appear to trail off to immense distances out into deep
    space.
       u
         5. Contours of constant counting rate near the magnetic equator
    were found to draw closer to the Earth on the night side of the Earth
    than on the day side.
       66
         6. Repeated observations were made of simultaneous VLF electro-
    magnetic emission, auroral optical emission, and particle precipitation
    into the atmosphere.
       “7. It was discovered that the Earth’s magnetic tail in the antisolar
    direction extends at least half way to the Moon’s orbit.
       “8. Direct observations were made of the way in which solar plasma
    on the sunward side of the Earth piles up outside the boundary of the
    Earth’s magnetic field, and in so doing appreciably compresses the
    geomagnetic field.
       “9. Direct extended observations were made of the particle density
    and velocity of solar interplanetary plasma. These densities and veloc-
    ities were. found to have direct correlations with magnetic activity on
    the Earth and calcium plage activity regions on the Sun.
       “10. Extended measurements were made of the interplanetary m a g
    netic field and solar and galactic cosmic ray intensities.
       “11. The true energy spectrum possessed by solar cosmic rays at
                                                                         ..
    their source on the Sun was deduced from the observational data. .
       “12. First simultaneous measurements were made of electron temper-
    ature, positive ion density, and neutral atmospheric constituents in the
    Earth’s high atmosphere.
       “13. A new theory was developed to account for the types of ions
    found in the ionosphere, specifically the ratio of helium to hydrogen.
                                                                           51
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

       “14. Sounding rockets furnished important information on the iono-
    spheric D region from 35 miles to 55 miles and the origin of the sporadic
    effects in the E region o the ionosphere at about 75 miles.
                             f
       “15. Diurnal and seasonal variations in the ionosphere were
    established.
       “16. Sounding rockets launched simultaneously with an overhead
    pass of the satellite Alouette reached within a few miles of the satellite,
    thereby connecting up ionospheric measurements in the lower atmos-
    phere with those being made by the satellite.” (Testimony)
February 5: Senator Wayne L. Morse (D.-Ore.) said on Senate floor that
    “the most recent developments in the strike of the Florida East Coast
    Railway by the 1 nonoperating railroad unions, which is now in its
                        1
    second year, point to the strong likelihood that we will have a major shut-
    down of the vital construction work at Cape Kennedy by tomorrow
            ...
    night.
       “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has just an-
    nounced that, contrary to the recommendations of the President’s Board
    of Inquiry last October, it will permit the Florida East Coast, operating
    its trains with strikebreakers, to use the 18-mile spur newly constructed
                                                                          .. .
    by the Federal Government to move freight into Cape Kennedy.
       “This NASA decision, announced just yesterday, will, I fear, lead to new
    labor trouble in the Cape Kennedy area, for the FEC strike still con-
             .
    tinues. . .” (CR, 2/5/64,2035-36)
  Ernest Brackett, Director of NASA Office of Procurement, was’ appointed
    Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Procurement Policy. In
    this position, Mr. Brackett would assist NASA Deputy Associate Admin-
    istrator for Industry Affairs on procurement policy, “particularly with
    respect to relationships with the Congress, the Department of Defense,
    and industry and industrial associations.” George J. Vecchietti, Deputy
    Director of NASA Office of Procurement, was designated Acting Direc-
    tor. (NASA Announcement 64-30)
0 DOD announced it had undertaken comprehensive review of procurement

    policies and practices affecting labor-management relations at missile
    and space sites.“ NASA was cooperating in the study, which in 1964 was
    expected to involve the following sites : Vandenberg AFB, Warren AFB,
    Minot AFB, Whiteman AFB, and NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility. The
    first on-site review was made at Cape Kennedy late last month. (DOD
    Release 110-64)
  Dr. Albert C. Hall, DOD Deputy Director for Space, Directorate of Defense
    Research & Engineering, discussed the objectives of the military space
    program at Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers’ Winter
    Convention on Military Electronics, Los Angeles:
                        ...
       “Our problems          are twofold: First: the United States military
    space program must be one of action, not reaction. We must concern
    ourselves with military space developments-not necessarily to match
    or offset any Soviet development, but to sustain and augment our own
    versatility and strength. The successes we have already obtained
    should encourage us in this drive. Second, mindful that in the past
    we often have been optimistic in the short run and pessimistic in the
    long run, we must expect that some of the new discoveries and develop-
    ments that appear may suggest applications and capabilities in wholly
    unplanned ways. Accordingly, while we pursue efforts where applica-
    tions are clear we must also lay a foundation of technology, knowledge,
52             ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICS, 19 64

     and experience which is sufficiently broad in scope to provide for future
     contingencies as they materialize or are identified.
        “From these considerations, then, are derived the two fundamental
     goals of the Defense space program:
        “First, to continue with the development and exploitation of space
     systems and capabilities which measure up on a cost-effectivenessbasis
     to meet clearly defined high priority national defense requirements.
        “Second, to develop through a program integrated with other govern-
     ment agencies, such as NASA and the AEC, a broad base of technology
     and experience to permit the timely development and exploitation of
     space systems and capabilities which may be needed in the future,
     recognizing that lead times in certain areas, such as manned military
                                                     . . .”
     space operations, may be 10 years or longer.               (Text, DOD Re-
     lease lo-)
February 5: West German government issued denial that any West German
     firm was producing missiles suitable for military application. Denial
     was in response to Soviet diplomatic complaint that missiles capable
     of carrying nuclear warheads were being produced in West Germany,
     recalling rocket test-firings last December by Weapons and Air Equip-
     ment Co. of Hamburg. German government said investigation of the
     Hamburg company established that it possessed no manufacturing
     facilities. Two days later, according to Missiles and Rockets, the com-
     pany halted production of rockets that it “apparently planned to export
     to Middle Eastern Arab nations.” Company officials told M&R the deci-
     sion was made voluntarily to prevent further embarrassment to West
     German government. (NYT, 2/6/64, 5; M&R, 2/17/64, 9)
* Lt. Col. Robert S. Buchanan (USAF) of Aerospace Research Pilots School,
     Edwards AFB, told space medicine conference at Brooks AFB that the
     greatest potential dangers to large scientific space station with crew of
     15 or more men would be fire and collision with a meteoroid or space
     debris. Studies were considering possibility of separating space stations
     into individual compartments that could be sealed off in case of catas-
     trophes such as fire. ( AP, Houston Post, 2/6/M)
a NASA Langley Research Center awarded two contracts for construction on
     Vehicle Antenna Test Facility to aid in solving spacecraft communica-
     tions problems: $1,265,505 contract to Nat Harrison Associates for con-
     struction of the building, and $280,630 contract to B. F. Goodrich
     Sponge Products Div. for design and installation of anechoic chambers
     for the facility. (LaRC Release)
  British sources revealed Britain had contracted to sell 600 guided missiles
     to Saudi Arabia for estimated $1.4 million. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     2/6/6451)
February 6: In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astro-
     nautics, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr.
     George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year
     of transition to hardware-now we can fill the pipeline and move
                                                       ..
     forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. .
        “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving
     forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed;
     the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching
     our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a
      logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up
     is progressing.
                                                                          53
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

                                                     ...
       “The personnel stdhg at the NASA Centers             is increasing from
    11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 19M
    and a forecast total of 14711 at the end of N 1965. I n addition
    to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000
    contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight pro-
    grams. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test
    and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate
    300,000 personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Fligh! Pro-
                ,,
             ..
    gram..
       Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he
    said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘an-up’ testing
    concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program.
    ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space
                                                        ...
    vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft.
       “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit
    us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely
    to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating
    this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on suc-
    cessful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of
    data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed
    information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB
    and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle
    on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony)
February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and
    Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s        program of ad-
    vanced research and technology and proposed activities for N 1965.
    Objectivesin advanced research and technology were summarized:
       “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural
    laws underlying aeronautical and space technology.
       c<
         2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws
    and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles.
       663. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts

    and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future
    operational systems.
       “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant
    scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible
    contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering
    research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also
    conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat
                                                    .
    greater role than in the case of basic research . . .
                                            . ..
       “A program of [advanced] research            which looks beyond today’s
    technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement
    in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.”
     (Testimony)
  John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization.
    KSC Director Dr. K r H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were
                         ut
    to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance
    with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight
    Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA
    Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and
    strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3)
54             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more
    authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment
    there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center
    Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management,
    Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Sup-
    port Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was di-
    vided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo
    Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart orga-
    nization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned)
    space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space
    Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equip-
    ment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five
    staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was at-
    tached to KSC. MSC’S Preflight Operations Div. was renamed MSC
    Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged.
    Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects
    Branch, remained unchanged. (KSC Release.lO-64)
February 6: WashingtonPost editorialized:
       “The failure of the sixth straight Ranger spacecraft hoists aloft the
    question of whether the United States will accomplish its goal of putting
                                                   ..
    an American on the moon by the decade’s end.
       “A delay would not simply be a case of a stretchout in which work
    would continue but at a slower pace. A delay would take much of the
    binding and motivating tension from Apollo. It would increase costs
    by underusing men and facilities brought together for a tighter schedule,
    and it would allow projects and personnel to drift out of the main stream
    into the eddies of lower priority. A delay also would entail loss of
    prestige for NASA, for the Administration and for the Nation as well.
       “No schedule, however, is sacred. If it is determined that the landing
    of a man on the moon by Jan. 1, 1970, is simply not feasible, or cannot
    be done with reasonable assurance of safety for the astronauts, then
    the space agency and the country will have to adjust to this reality, no
    matter how costly and comfortless it may be. A manned flight to the
    moon will be no less exciting or valuable for being somewhat delayed.”
     (Wash.Post, 2/6/64,18)
* Tass announced ELECTRON I and ELECTRON 11 scientific satellites were
    continuing to send back “valuable scientific information.” ELECTRON I
    had made 53 orbits of the earth and ELECTRON 11, 6 orbits. (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 2/6/64,6)
* Soviet Academician Anatoli A. Blagonravov announced in Moscow that
    U.S.S.R. would participate in three-nation experiment of bouncing radio
    signals off US. balloon satellite ECHO 1 beginning Feb. 22. Signals
                                              1
    would be transmitted from Jodrell Bank, England, to ECHO 11, and re-
    flected back by radioastronomy observatory near Gorki. (NYT,
    2/7/64)
* NASA Telephone and Data Distribution Center became first technical
    support element of the John F.Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to become
     operational on Merritt Island, KSC announced. Some buildings were
     being serviced by telephone service through the Center and other build-
     ings would be phased in as required. Fully equipped to handle all types
    of communications, the Center participated in its first technical support
     operation during launch of Saturn I SA-5, when it provided closed-
                                                                          55
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    circuit television service to Washington and other areas. (KSC Release
    11-69!)
February 6: President Johnson spoke at 18th annual dinner of Weizmann
    Institute of Science, held in New York:
                                   ...     is an international scientific insti-
  . “The Weizmann Institute
    tution in every sense of the word. To its buildings come students from
    all over the globe. It has helped to make Israel one of the foremost
                                      ...
    scientificresources of the world.
        “We, like Israel, need to find cheap ways of converting salt water to
                  ...
    fresh water.         This Nation has begun discussions with the repre-
    sentatives of Israel on cooperative research in using nuclear energy to
                                      ..    .” (Text, CR,2/17/a, A703-0d)
    turn salt water into fresh water.
* Rep. E. Ross Adair (R.-Ind.) said on House floor that a fifth transatlantic
    communications cable (TAT) would be unnecessary: “It is expected
                                       ...
    that within the next 6 weeks the           [ComSatCorp] will announce its
    plans for financing a communications satellite system and will tell Con-
    gress and potential investors when it expects to have a system in opera-
    tion. I understand that csc expects to design its first satellites to handle
    traffic between the United States and Europe.
       “. .  . based on information filed with the FCC by the International
                                                   ...     I am convinced that
    Carriers having an interest in these matters
     there is no need for TAT 5. If permission is granted to lay TAT 5 it
                                                    .
    would add at least 128 channels of capacity . ., and this would mean
    that there would be no economic justification for orbiting a satellite
                                      ..   .”
     system in the immediate future
        He recommended adopting Mackay Radio’s proposal to change the
                             “. . .
    route planned for TAT 4:          this route would not only make it possible
    to establish intermediate relay and terminal facilities in the Azores, but
     also to provide for extension to Spain and Portugal and even down to
    the Canary Islands.
        “The US. military might well prefer cable links to the Azores and
    this route could also sefve the interests of the National Aeronautics and
    Space Administration, both in Spain and the Canary Islands, where
                                                                        ..    .”
    NASA tracking stations are either in being or being constructed.
     (CR, 2/6/64r, 2220)
  General Accounting Office made public report to Congress charging NASA’s
     “unrealistic delivery dates” for first two Os0 satellites had cost an un-
    necessary $526,000. GAO was critical of NASA for ordering backup Os0
     eight weeks before scheduled launching of the first satellite, thus spend-
     ing $273,000 that was not needed. The GAO report also said NASA had
     unnecessarily limited competition for Os0 construction. (AP, Wash.
     Eve. Star, 2/6/a, 2 ; Finney, NYT,2/7/64,10)
  Col. Daniel McKee, head of AFSC Field Office at NASA Manned
     Spacecraft Center, said in Houston Post article that USAF would par-
     ticipate in NASA Project Gemini with 20 experiments, beginning with
     the second manned Gemini flight. Some of the areas in which USAF
     would conduct experiments include radiation, photography, cornmuni-
     cations, and extravehicular activities. (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/6/64)
  FAA Adminktrator N. E. Halaby announced formation of Future Flight
     Manpower Study Board to investigate future manpower requirements
     for civil aviation. Board was headed by Dan A. Kmball, Board Chair-
     man of Aerojet-General Corp. and former Secretary of the Navy. (FAA
     Release 64-1 1)
56              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIW, 1964

Februwy 6: Welcoming Dr. S. Dillon Ripley I1 as eighth Secretary of the
     Smithsonian Institution, Senator Claiborne Pel1 (D.-R.I.) quoted Dr.
     Ripley in the Senate:
         “ ‘In the realm of the humanities, in art and the history of our culture,

     as well as in a variety of sciences ranging from the study of the ocean,
     of space and the natural sciences, it is implicit that the Smithsonian
     should assume a commanding position in education as well as leadership
     in the museum world. We cannot afford to overlook any possibility
     of increasing and diffusing knowledge among our people, young and
     old, at all levels-from exhibits and museum lectures and demonstra-
     tions to postgraduate specialized research. Museum and their technical
     resources are important as never before in these days of crisis in educa-
     tion.’ ” (CR, 2/6/64,2161)
  FAA awarded $1.3 million contract to Skidmore, Owings and Merrill for
     improvements at FAA’s      National Aviation Facilities Experimental Cen-
     ter ( NAFEC) in Atlantic City, N.J. (FAA Release T 6 4 4 )
February 7: NASA announced it would join with Norwegian Space Research
     Committee and the Ionospheric Research Laboratory of the Royal Tech-
     nical Univ. of Denmark in three sounding rocket launches from Andoeya,
     Norway, during February and March. The Nike-Apache sounding
     rockets would carry experiments to test theories of how D-region of the
     ionosphere is formed. Norwegian Committee was providing launch
     site and associated facilities; Norwegian Committee and Danish Iono-
     spheric Laboratory together were purchasing sounding rockets and
     contributing scientific payloads. NASA was furnishing certain experi-
     ments for the payload, already had assisted Danish and Norwegian
     scientists by providing training in rocket handling and data acquisition.
      (NASA Release 64-27)
          issued its first exclusive patent license to Satellite Div. of
0 NASA

     Union Carbide Corp. for commercial development of a nickel alloy
     invented by John C. Freche, metallurgist at NASA Lewis Research Center.
     For as long as it develops the alloy for commercial use, Union Carbide
     agreed to spend at least $20,000 a year for not more than three years.
     After fully developing it, Union Carbide would hold exclusive market-
     ing rights for not more than four years, at which time exclusive license
     would expire and product would be made fully available to the public.
      (NASA Release 6 6 3 0 )
* Australian scientist Victor Albert Bailey speculated that moon may possess
    far-reaching electrostatic field, which could have been responsible for
     RANGER VI camera failure by interfering with switches for the cameras.
     (SBD, 2/7/64,207)
* Two balloons with instrumented payloads to make upper-atmosphere
    measurements were released at Palestine, Tex., and recovered. Balloon
     carrying 550 Ibs. of instruments to study cosmic rays, designed by
    Case Institute researchers, was recovered later near Roanoke, Ala.;
    balloon carrying 405 lbs. of instruments to take oxygen specimens at
     varying altitudes, designed by MIT, was recovered near Derry, La.
      (UPI, Phil. Eve. BuU., 2/7/64,)
  Life science researchers in North American Aviation’s Space and Infor-
    mation Systems Div. were studying effects of weightlessness and in-
     creased gravity on boa constrictors, NAA reported. The eyes of the boas
    were of special interest, for they offered easily observable reactions to
                                                                                57
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     the conditions. Normally a slit that remains vertic
     boa’s eye tilted some 15 de
     centrifuge. The snakes were ‘LgrossIydisoriented”
     objects, they missed widely. (NAA S&ID Skywriter, 2/7/64, 2 )
February 7: Sen. J. Howard Edmondson (D.-Okla.), member of Senate
     Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, and Sen. Kenneth
     Keating (R.-N.Y.) were appointed as advisers to US. representatives on
     U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, replacing Senators
     Margaret Chase Smith and Howard Cannon. (Tulsa Daily World,
     2/8/64)
* FAA announced Air France and British Overseas Airways Corp. had re-
     served six delivery positions apiece for the US. supersonic transport
     aircraft, bringing total reserved positions to 63 and number of airlines
     holding positions to 10. (FAARelease W 1 2 )
February 8: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced $133,358 contract
     was awarded to AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. of Garrett Corp.
     for design and produotion of extravehicular pressurization ventilation
     system to be used by astronauts in Project Gemini. (UPI,Sun Diego
     Union, 2/9/64!)
* Major Robert A. Rushworth (USAF),X-15 pilot, said at Texas A&M Univ.
     that “we stand about half-way in the amount of work we want to do” with
     the X-15 aircraft. “In the next four years, we want to get another one
     hundred flights under our belts.” Describing the X-15A-2 plane for
     advanced missions, he said the new aircraft would range up to 80 mi.
     altitude at speed of 5,450 mph, w t help of hydrogen-fueled ramjet
                                          ih
     engine and 13,500 additional pounds of fuel. (UPI, Omaha World
     Her&, 2/9/64)
February 9: NASA announced FAA-NASA Memorandum of Understanding spec-
     ifying NASA’s in development of US. supersonic transport aircraft,
                    role
     under overall responsibility of FAA. NASA would furnish facilities,
     background research, technical advice, and resources to FAAand would
     conduct advanced flight research. In addition, NASA would conduct
     necessary background research to provide supporting tmhnology and
     technical assistance and make available NASA’s      facilities and technical
     resources. In flight testing phase, FAA would be responsible for direc-
     tion and acceptance testing, and certification trials; NASA would be
     responsible for flight research with its own funds, instrumentation, and
     resources. (NASA Release 64-28)
  Balloon with instrumented payload to measure light given off by oxygen at
     high altitudes was launched from Palestine, Tex., landing later that day
     at Roganville, Tex. (Houston Chron., 2 / 1 0 / a )
  Project Amos, ARPA project to develop and operate full-scale infrared astro-
     nomical observatory, was described by Howard Simons in the Washing-
     ton Post. To be installed on lO,OOO-ft.-high Mt. Haleakala on Hawaiian
     Island of Maui, the observatory would be used in twofold program: re-
     search in locating and identifying missile nose cones and satellites; and
     study of infrared characteristics of missiles and satellites as well as earth’s
     atmosphere, the sun, stars, moon, and planets. (Simons, W a h . Post,
     2/9/64, E3)
* Information conditioning unit that converts data for computer use much
     more rapidly than any before had been tested on USN satellite, according
     to Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., inventor of the
     system. System was said to reduce to hours the weeks or months pre-
      t764%-698U
58                               AND   AERONAUTICS, 1964
                ASTRONAUTICS

    viously required for conversion of satellite data into usable scientific
    information. After recent launch of USN satellite with the unit onboard,
    scientists obtained more than 50 types of information-analyzed,
    checked, and printed-from the satellite within 12 hours. (UPI, NYT,
    2/9/64, 91)
February 10: President Johnson submiited to the Congress his 1953 report
    on the activities and accomplishments of the US. program to establish
     and operate a commercial communications satellite system. In his
    transmittal message, the President said :
       “The year 1963 has been a period of major accomplishment toward
    the objectives established by the Congress in the Communications
    Satellite Act. The Communications Satellite Corporation has been
    organized, established, has employed a competent staff, and is imple-
    menting plans for a commercial communications satellite system. All
    agencies of Government concerned have contributed wholeheartedly to
                                                      . . .”   (CR, 2/10/64,
    the furtherance of the objectives of the act.
    2714)
* USAF Athena missile misfired in its first overland test flight from Green
    River, Utah, and pieces of the vehicle and instrumented payload landed
    in sparsely populated southwest Colorado. No person or property
    was damaged, and USAF officials apologized immediately to Colorado
    Governor John A. Love. The &ton, 50-ft. missile was supposed to have
    made 450-mi. flight from Green River to White Sands Missile Range,
    N. Mex. USAF sources later indicated that the missile’s nosecone was re-
    leased when pyrotechnic charges were actuated by a short circuit in
    second-stage junction box. As result of damage to forward wires, sig-
    nals for first-stage jettison were lost and second stage ignited with first
    stage still attached. Pressure forced off the stage fairing as well as
    second-stage fins, but the vehicle continued to travel-20” off course.
     (AP, Balt. Sun.,2/11/64; UPI, NYT, 2/11/64, 26; M&R, 2/24/64,11;
    Av. Wk., 3 12/64?36)
* 120 delegates from 17 European nations met with U.S. and Canadian dele-
    gations in Rome for exploratory talks on European participation in an
    international communications satellite system proposed by the US.
     (NYT, 2/11/64)
  Examining the failure o RANGER VI as well as previous Ranger lunar
                             f
    probes, William Coughlin pointed out in M s i e and Rockets editorial
                                                 isls
    that Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Ranger project manager, is “the only
    NASA facility where NASA owns all the land, owns all the equipment, pays
                                                                          ...
    all the bills and allows a non-profit corporation to run the facility.
       (4
         An academic environment is neither comparable nor conducive to
    the kind of hard-driving industrial atmosphere required to make com-
                                                                ..  . we think
    plex space hardware function in a highly reliable manner
    Congress should reopen the whole question of the JPL-Cal Tech relation-
    ship.” (M&R, 2/10/64,50)
* NASA announced selection of Trans World Airlines for negotiation of
    contract to provide base support services at John F. Kennedy
    Space Center, NASA. Under this contract TWA would provide general
    maintenance, utilities operation, and supply operations on a cost-plus-
    incentive-feebasis ; and janitorial, fire protection and prevention, secu-
    rity, and medical services on fixed-price basis. (NASA Release 64-32;
    KSC Release 13-64)
                                                                               59
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

February 10: Dr. Eugen Saenger, eminent Eur                  ace scientist, died at
                                                            for his World War I1
    58 in West Berlin. Dr. Saenger was best
    study “Rocket Propulsion of Long Range Bombers” and his post-war
    theoretical investigations of photon-powered rockets. He was one of the
    first to investigate use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel and of metal powders
    mixed with rocket fuels. Formerly head of Institute of Jet Propulsion
    Physics in Stuttgart, since last May he held chair of space flight technol-
    ogy at Berlin Technical Univ. Of him, Dr. Walter Dornberger said: “He
    didn’t see the goal of human endeavor as travel just in our planetary sys-
    tem. He wanted to see travel to the outer galaxies. He made very
    extensive studies in this field, which one day-maybe 40, 50 years from
    now-may be looked at very seriously.” (NYT, 2/11/6439)
* Rep. Glen P. Lipscomb (R.-Calif.) discussed on the House floor a document
    titled “Common Action for the Control of Conflict: An Approach to the
    Problem of International Tension and Arms Control,” prepared by
    Vincent P. Rock of Institute for Defense Analysis under contract to U.S.
    Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Rep. Lipscomb said the docu-
                                                                              ..   .
    ment “reportedly has been must reading for administration officials.
     [It] becomes an important document because, since its release [July
     19631, administration policies seem to have coincided to a high degree
    with its recommendations. Although it purports to be nothing more
    than its author’s opinions, it has turned out to be a handy advance
                                               ..  .” Citing examples of Rock
    guidebook to administration actions.
    report’s recommendations, Rep. Lipcomb said report recommended
     US. seek Soviet cooperation in future space efforts and in scientific
     areas; he noted NASA-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement announced
    Aug. 16, 1963, and President Kennedy’s proposal for US.-U.S.S.R.
    negotiations for lunar exploration cooperation presented Sept. 20, 1963.
     (CR,   2/10/64,2720)
* NASA announced it would negotiate one-year cost-plus-incentive-fee      contract
     with General Electric Co., Computer Dept., for continuation of engineer-
    ing services at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s computation
                           Release 64-31)
    laboratory. (NASA
* Florida East Coast Railway moved a freight train into Merritt Island
    with non-union workers, as NASA had formally authorized on
     Feb. 8. Striking railroad workers established picket lines at all en-
    trances to Merritt Island and Cape Kennedy. Army Corps of Engineers
     said apparently all 4,541) construction workers refused to cross the
    picket lines, halting construction on more than 30 projects. (UPI, How-
    ton Chronicle, 2/10/64; AF’,     NYT, 2/11/a, 42)
* Thomas L. McGrath, director of R&D Dept. of Greater Boston Chamber of
     Commerce, said in Christiun Science Monitor interview that NASA’s         elec-
     tronic research center would be a stimulus to Boston area economy.
     When the center is completed in 1969, he said, a “conservative” esti-
     mate would be $250 million contribution to income of the area. “The
     center will pull in a lot of capable people, and it’s impossible to say what
     they’ll add to the income of the area. Also one good research discovery
     coming out of the center might be worth millions to industry.” (Rus-
     sell, CSM, 2/10/64)
* Soviet cosmonaut Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova left London for Mos-
     cow, ending tourof Britain during which she was presented to Queen
     Elizabeth. (AP, Vmh.Post, 2/11/M)
60             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

February 10: Air-India had reserved three delivery positions for U.S. super-
    sonic transport aircraft, FAA announced. (FAA Release f34-13)
February 11: NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at Hq. press
    conference that US.-U.S.S.R. communications experiments with ECHO
    1 balloon satellite would begin after Feb. 21.
      1
        In response to question, Mr. Webb said failure of attempts to acquire
                                                                      “.
    lunar photographs had not adversely affected Apollo schedule: . . up
    to this time we have not had to make any changes in the program due
    to this, nor do I think we will.”
        Asked whether 1969 date for manned lunar landing was a “deadline”
    or a “planning date”, Mr. Webb said:
                                           ...
        “The view President Kennedy had         was that he was setting a dead-
    line by which he wanted this nation to get the job done, and he was pro-
    viding resources for us to plan the flight in 1967, or early 1968, giving
    some leeway for intractable technical problems, for unknown and unfore-
    seeable things, and also to avoid having to put into parallel development
                                                             ...
    systems that would be more expensive if done that way.
        “Now, the 1%7, early 1968 target date that we were setting was to
    mobilize the effort, to press forward with it, but not to do so in such a
    way as to run this cost up from $20 billion to something much higher.
        (‘So we were thinking of it as pretty much of a deadline that it was
     in the interests of this nation to meet.
        “Now, with the cuts last year of $600 million and the reorganiza-
     tion of the effort to all-up systems testing, the cancellation of a number
     of Saturn flights, things of this kind, I think you’ve got to think of it
     somewhat differently. I think the target date for the flights, which is
     a tight date but still attainable, is mighty close to the January 1, 1970
    period.
       “.  . . I believe we can do it within the latter six months of 1969
     if we proceed vigorously under the plan we have presented to the
                                                          ..    . We have lost
    Congress. But again we don’t have any leeway.
     that, and we’ve got no more than what I’d call a fighting chance to do
     this by January 1,1970.”
        Mr. Webb discussed NASA relationship with Cal Tech’s Jet Propul-
     sion Laboratory, manager of NASA’s       lunar and planetary exploration
     programs. The current three-year contract “expires next June and we
     have now for some months been examining together with the Cali-
     fornia Institute of Technology ways and means to make a better relation-
     ship from their standpoint and from NASA’s        standpoint.” Mr. Webb
     said NASA was seeking a reorganization of JPL to achieve a “hard-
     headed type of industrial management.” (Finney, NYT, 2/12/@;
                                                          Post, 2/12/64; M&R,
     Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/12/64; Simons, Wash,
     2/17/64, 16)
  NASA announced that failure of RANGER VI spacecraft to take pictures
     of the moon may have been caused by unscheduled turn-on of cruise
     telemetry from the TV system at about the same time as Atlas booster
     separation. For unexplained reason, telemetry turned on for about
     one minute and relayed measurements in the TV system, including
     battery voltages and temperatures. It was possible that TV system
     could have turned on at the same time; if so, severe electrical arcing
     would have occurred and damaged the system. However, TV telemetry
     turned on 17 min. after separation from Agena stage as scheduled, and
     nothing at that time indicated any abnormalities in the TV system.
                                                                          61
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,            19 6 4

       Tracking data showed that RANGER VI impacted the moon w i d i 20
    mi. of its target and within one third of a second of the predicted a r e
    rival time. (NASA Release W 3 3
February 11: Spokesman for European conference on satellite communica-
    tions, meeting in Rome with US. and Canadian delegations, said con-
    ference had reached agreement on principal points of the U.S. proposal
    to establish a international comsat system. “They are now discussing
                  n
    the details, upon which the accord isn’t so extensive.” (NYT, 2/12/644,
    13)
* Communications Satellite Corp. announced six companies had responded
    to its request for proposals for designing international commercial com-
    munications satellite. AT&T and RCA submitted a joint proposal;
                                    Inc., submitted proposal with ITT as prin-
    Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge,
    cipal subcontractor; Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. submitted in-
    dividual proposals. ComSatCorp was evaluating the proposals. ( WSJ,
    2/12/64)
* Army Corps of Engineers awarded two NASA contracts for work to be
    performed at NASA Mississippi Test Facility: $3,801,146 contract to
    Chaney and James Construction Co., Inc., for construction of booster
    storage building, RP-1 dock, and booster transfer dock; and $2,401,542
    contract to Farrell Construction Co. for construction of main canal.
     (DOD Release 1284%)
  Annual report of NORAD indicated U.S.orbited 60 payloads in 38 launches
    during 1963, compared with 17 by U.S.S.R. (AP, CSM, 2/11/64)
* Construction workers at Cape Kennedy refused for a second day to cross
    picket lines of Railroad Telegraphers Union, and some of the other
    9,000 union members at Cape Kennedy honored the picket lines. Eater,
    at request of National Labor Relations Board, US. District Court issued
    temporary injunction ordering withdrawal of the picket lines against
    Florida East Coast Railway. (UPI, Wush. Post, 2/12]64; AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 2/12/644; UPI, Wmh. Post, 2/13/64)
* None of the supersonic transport bidders was willing to assume the pre-
    scribed share of cost of the joint Government-industry-funded SST
    program, John P. MacKenzie reported in Washington Post. Under
    plan presented by President Kennedy, SST would cost $1 billion, with
    Government paying 75% of the cost and manufacturers paying remain-
    ing 25%. MacKenzie said none of the six bidding manufacturers had
     met the 25% participation challenge, and “some manufacturers said
    the plane could not be developed for $1 billion.” Officials were reported
    to be studying independent report by Eugene R. Black, former president
     of the World Bank, which unnamed sources said recommended Govern-
     ment finance 90% of the development cost. Report also was said to
     have proposed transferring SST program from FAA to an independent
    agency, slowing pace of the SST development and avoiding interna-
     tional “race” with U.K.-France Concorde development. (MacKenzie,
     Wash. Post, 2/11/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/13/64; Newsweek, 2/17/64)
* Experimental hot-electron propulsion system had completed 1,000 hrs. of
     testing at RCA David Sarnoff Research Center without degradation of
     components or performance, RCA announced. (NYT, 2/11/a, 53;
     M&R, 2/17/64,21)
62                               AND                    1964
               ASTRONAUTICS            AERONAUTICS,

February 11: Comparison of amount of earth’s heat resulting from radioac-
     tive breakup of elements uranium, thorium, and potassium was discussed
     in Science. Half of all potassium heat was released in about first quarter
     of earth’s lifetime, while heat from uranium and thorium was released at
     a more even rate. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 2/11/64,28)
0 USAF successfully launched 30th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, a

     routine training launch by SAC crew. (M&R, 2/17/@, 13)
February 12: Continuing the current series of sounding rocket experiments
     to obtain comparative characteristics of the upper atmosphere at widely
     separated locations, NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets
     at Wallops Island, Fort Churchill, and Ascension Island. The rocket
     payloads ejected 12 grenades which detonated at intervals up to 55-mi.
     altitude. (Wallops Release 6 6 1 6 )
* NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va.,
     in test of hinged-fin assembly with modified wedge designed to produce
     about 5 rps at Apache burnout and to obtain temperatures in flight at
     various points on the fin panel. Rocket reached 90-mi. altitude; pFr-
     formance of rocket and instrumentation was considered good, wth
     exception of temperature probes, which were lost shortly after lift-off.
      (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Soviet news agency Tass said ELECTRON I and ELECTRON II scientific satel-

     lites continued to function successfully. By 6:OO p.m. Moscow time
     Feb. 11, ELECTRON I had completed 104 orbits and ELECTRON II more than
     13 orbits. (Tass, Krusnuyu Zvezdu, 2/12/@, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
0 Dr. S. Fred Singer, Director of US. Weather Bureau’s National Weather

      Satellite Center, said that the modified Tiros meteorological satellite
     system, using presently available equipment, would be able to: provide
     daily global coverage of weather; use vertical cameras for more complete
     pictures; aid in prediction of time and location of thundershowers;
     determine if clouds are storm cover; aid in studying hydrology and
      geology, mapping earth’s surface; aid airlines in tracking jet stream,
      especially on transatlantic flights. (SBD, 2/13/64, 239)
* Catalyst for use with monopropellant hydrazine rocket engines has been
      developed by Shell Oil Co.’s General Chemistry Dept. working with
      Jet Propulsion Laboratory in NASA-sponsored project, NASA announced.
      Development of the catalyst permits use of hydrazine for spacecraft
      guidance and control rockets. NASA scientists reported that hydrazine
     compounds produced by the catalytic reaction were 50% more energetic
      than monopropellant hydrogen-peroxide now used. (NASA Release &
     29)
* NASA Lewis Research Center issued requests for proposals for initial con-
      struction of 500-ft. drop tower for producing zero gravity environments.
      The facility would be largest of its kind in the U.S., would be able to
      provide weightlessness for periods up to 10 sec. (LRC Release &12)
            Corps of Engineers awarded $3,207,166 NASA contract to
0 Army

      Peter Kiewit Sons Co. and C. H. Leave11 Co. for construction of two
      Saturn test stand substructures at NASA Mississippi Test Facility. (DOD
      Release 132-64,)
  Construction workers at Cape Kennedy returned to work after Federal judge
      temporarily halted picketing by the Railroad Telegraphers Union against
     the Florida East Coast Railway. (UPI, Wush.Post, 2/12/@)
                                                                         63
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

February 121 Dpnamite bomb planted along Florida East Coast Railway
     tracks near Titusville was disarmkd by four boys.seconds before freight
     train passed by, th6 bomb providing authorities with clues to similar
     bombing incidents involving FEC property. The attempted sabotage
     occurred only two miles north of Cape Kennedy, where striking unions’
     picket lines had halted construction for two days. (UPI, N.Y. .Her.
     Trib.,2/14/64)
  Trans-American Aeronautical Corp. of Washington had reserved a delivery
     position for US. supersonic transport aircraft, FAA announced. Trans-
     American was expected to make the aircraft available to a Latin Ameri-
     can flag carrier through leasing arrangement. (FAA Release 64-14)
* FAA said during first week of sonic boom tests over Oklahoma City 60
     damage claims were reported. Of the 60, only two persons actuany
     signed affidavits, FAA said. (UPI, Vmh. Daily News, 2/13/64)
   USAF successfully launched Atlas F ICBM from Vandenberg AFB in routine
     training mission. (M&R, 2/17/64+ 13)
* USAF successfully launched Minuteman ICBM from Cape Kennedy, first in
     series of tests of Minuteman’s penetration aids. (M&R, 2/17/64, 13)
  Fifth Women’s Space Symposium was held in Los Angeles, with Dr. Orr
     E. Reynolds, Director of NASA BiosciencePrograms, as principal speaker.
      (S. Thomas)
February 13: At conclusion of Rome meeting of European Conference on
     Satellite Communications with representatives from U S . and Canada,
     head of US. delegation Abram Chayes said “the most significant result
     of the conference is that a number of European countries as well as
     Canada have now expressed serious interest in joining as copartners’’ in
     the international comsat system. Discussions would continue, and
     another meeting was scheduled for mid-March in Washington. (Woll-
     emborg, Wmh.Post, 2/14/64)
* NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO) announced that the Los
     Alamos Scientific Laboratory had successfully completed a major cold-
     flow test series on the Kiwi B-4D-CF reactor. The experiments were
     designed to verify design changes incorporated in the basic Kiwi B 4
     reactor to prevent flow-induced vibrations under nonpower producing
     conditions. No vibrations were observed. (SNPO)
  NASA employees Christopher 6. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W.Townsend, Jr.,
     were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service
     awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant
     Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Town-
     send, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications,
     NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)
* Technology from $3 million program to eliminate vibrations in Project
     Gemini’s Titan I1 launch vehicle should be applied to other large
     boosters, according to NASA Chief of Launch Vehicle Systems Integration
     Jerome B. Hammack. (Webb, UPI, Houston Press, 2/14/64; SBD,
     2/13/64,240)
                     contract for construction of JPL Explosive S
                     edy was awarded         yd Construction Corp.
     Corps of Engineers. (DOD Rele
* Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) speaking before the Annual Meeting of
     the Cape Girardeau, Mo., Chamber of Commerce, said:
64             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

        “Our policies are peaceful in nature, and our space program is peaceful
    in purpose and content; but it is also a sound investment for our future
                                                      ...
    national security, economic as well as military.
        “Landings on the moon will add to our knowledge of the origin of
    the universe, and also contribute to our knowledge of the broad spectrum
    of science and technology in such areas as meteorology and communica-
          ...
    tions
        “But the lunar project is not the whole space program; and the
    military significance of the program cannot be judged by examining
    that project alone; nor can anyone today estimate the great wealth
     and resources that will flow from this new knowledge. Knowledge is,
     and will be, the basic power of modern states.
        “Moreover, the Defense Department is now deeply engaged in the
                 ...
     space effort
        “The true defense value of the lunar project rests with the develop-
     ment of our over-all space capabilities; and no one can say today how
     this stockpile of knowledge will be used in the defense of this Nation
                                 .
     or how important it will be. . .” (Text)
February 13: Dr Willy Ley predicted at Texas A&M Univ. that U.S.S.R. would
     attempt manned orbital flight to the moon during 1964. He did not
     believe such a flight would “significantly advance the time of an actual
             ...
     landing          [because] that would take great strides in new rocket
     power.” He believed US. had a “50-50 chance of being the first to
     get there.” (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/14/64)
* New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller, campaigning in New Hampshire Re-
     publican primary for presidential nomination, said there was a “very
     serious question” whether U S . should abandon Project Apollo manned
     lunar project and rely instead on instrumented spacecraft. About 95%
     of information obtainable by men on the moon “for a half an hour”
     could be gathered by instruments, he said. He said the decision for
     Apollo came after the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion, when the Adminis-
     tration decided the US. needed something “dramatic.” Rockefeller
     proposed reconsidering the space plan advocated by President Eisen-
     hower, calling for a slower, less expensive, “scientific” program. (NYT,
      2/14/64,10; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
a Atlas missile caught fire and exploded at silo site east of Roswell, N. Mex.,
      demolishing the $1.5 million missile and the $10 million silo. USAF
      reported no personal injuries. (UPI, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
February 14: NASA postponed indefinitely the launch of Ranger 7 lunar probe.
      New launch date would depend on further study of failure of RANGER VI’S
      TV camera system before impacting the moon Feb. 2. NASA-JPL in-
      vestigators still were concentrating on unscheduled turnon of telemetry
      from TV system which occurred at about same time as separation of
      Atlas booster engines. (NASA Release 64A8)
  NASA-DOD agreement that instrumentation ships required to support NASA
      and DOD space programs would be pooled and operated by DOD on behalf
      of both agencies was announced. By end of 1967 pool would have 20
      operational tracking ships. NASA would participate with DOD in all phases
      of the program, including system engineering and development of the
      plans and specifications. Navy Dept. would have central responsibility
      for design, construction, and modification of the ships. Military Sea
      Transportation Service (MSTS) would be responsible for ship operation,
                                                                          65
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     and DOD Range
     instrumentation
     $83 million of FY 1964 funds, whi
     NASA-DOD agreement. The funds
     from Maritime Reserve Fleet and to modify two ships for Apollo already
     in the joint tracking system. (NASA Release 6 6 3 4 ; DOD Release 137-64;
     Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/64)
Februmy 14: Discussing MOL’S growth potential in testimony before House
     Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on RB~D,Director of DOD Re-
     search and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown said: “I want to make a dis-
                                                                         ...
     tinction between its ultimate capability and what is in the program.
     what is in the program is not a space station in that sense. It is an
                                     ..
     experimental laboratory. But           this could grow to be a space sta-
                                          ..
     tion, if and after . . . we conclude . that a man can have a sub-
     stantial military purpose [in space].” Dr. Brown said DOD should
     <c
        move more aggressively into the manned space flight arena in order to
     explore more fully man’s utility for the performance of military space
                               ...    his full capabilities in any area where
     missions and to develop
     potential exists.” (SBD, 2/17/64, 260; M&R, 2/24/64, 15)
* NASA selected Genisco, Inc., to develop, fabricate, and assemble motion
     generator for research into guidance and psycho-physiological problems
     of manned space flight. The fixed-price contract was expected to be
     valued between $6 million and $6.5 million. Genisco had been selected
     last July for contract negotiations for the motion generator, major com-
     ponent of advanced space navigation simulator at NASA Ames Research
     Center; however, “during the negotiations a better understanding of the
     design preblems was reached and it was determined that numerous
     changes were desirable.” NASA then directed Ames to request revised
     proposals from the five bidders. When the companies submitted new
     proposals in January, Genisco again received highest technical rating and
     proposed the lowest fixed fee. (NASA Release 64-35)
* George Low, recently appointed Deputy Director of NASA Manned Space-
     craft Center, said in Houston that failure of RANGER VI lunar TV probe
     was “a grave disappointment.” Despite Ranger failure, target date
     for manned lunar landing was still 1969, he said, but “we certainly
     can’t guarantee there won’t be technical difficulties that won’t let us
             .
     do it. . . If we have to use the Apollo as an unmanned reconnais-
     sance craft our small margin [of time] will be eaten up.” (Houston
     Post, 2/15/a)
* NASA selected Honeywell Aeronautical Div. for negotiation of contract for
     three suborbital spacecraft to be used in Project Scvner horizon defini-
     tion experiment. Valued at about $1,000,000, the contract called for
     early 1965 delivery of two Scanner payloads plus one backup. Scanners
      would be flown on ballistic trajectories from Wallops Island, Va.
      (NASA Release 64-36; LaRG Release)
* President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission adopted statement calling on
                       aphers Union to refrain from picketing at Cape Kennedy
                     land while the Commission considered the dispute between
     the union and the Florida East Coast Railway. Statement also called
     for the union and the company to maintain “full and continuous opera-
     tions at the sites” while the Commission had the dispute under con-
     sideration. (UPI, NYT, 2/15/64)
66              ASTRONAVMCS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

February 14: Patent for design of space propulsion system using jet of eIec-
     trically charged liquid particles had been awarded to Washington inven-
     tor Dominique M. P. Gignoux, president of Cosmic, Inc. The 500,000
     volts of electricity to charge and accelerate the particles would be pro-
     duced by onboard nuclear reactor. (Jones, NYT, 2/15/64)
February 15: Rebuilt X-15 No. 2 was rolled out of North American Avi-
     ation, Inc.’, facility at Los Angeles. Damaged in landing at Mud Lake,
     Nev., in Nov. 1962, the X-15 had been modified to increase its top speed
     by nearly one third. The rebuilt rocket research aircraft would be
     capable of short bursts of flight at mach O m o r e than 5,300 mph. It
     would resume test flights later this year. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/16/64;
     AP, Wash.Post, 2/16/64; FRC X-Press, 2/20/64,1)
* USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg AFB with nniden-
     tified satellite. (M&R, 2/24/64, 11)
* Two-man crew and backup crew for first manned Gemini space flight would
     be selected in May or June, according to Astronaut Donald K. Slayton
     at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Flight was expected in late 1964.
      (Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
* Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,
     said in press conference preceding address at Texas A&M Univ. that a
     geologist would be in crew of second Apollo lunar landing mission.
     Geologists probably would be sought when NASA recruited astronaut
     trainees for subsequent Apollo lunar flights. In his address, Dr. von
     Braun advised that U.S. must protect itself from any hostile force that
     attempts to “use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against
     u . (Houston Post, 2/15/64; Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
      s”
* Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.) ,Chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space
     Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, visited NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center with members of the subcommittee. Rep.
     Teague said at MSC that the manned space flight budget for FY 1965
     “is a tight budget and we have a good program. No major cuts are
     foreseen.” (HoustonChron., 2/16/64; Houston Post, 2/16/64)
* Question of how US. would use or dispose of 54 Titan I launch silos was
     raised in Christian Science Monitor. $1.5 billion had been spent on
    digging and equipping the silos. First Titan I site became operational
     in April 1962. Now that Titan I1 had become operational augmented
     by Minuteman missiles, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNBmara had
     declared Titan I would be eliminated after June 30, 1966. (Fleming,
     CSM, 2/15/64)
  Formation of six F-105 supersonic fighter-bombers flown by USAF pilots
     from Guam to New Zealand set unofficial nonstop distance record. The
     jets completed the flight of 4,422 mi. in 7 hrs., 45 min. (AP, Wash. Sun.
     Star, 2/16/64)
February 16: USAF’S big Project Forecast, according to Richard Witkin in
     New York Times, anticipated eventual need for four new manned air-
     craft: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (AMPSS) , interconti-
     nental-range attack aircraft; transport capable of 10,OOO-12,OOO mi.
     range; Vtol attack-reconnaissance craft; and limited-range Vtol trans-
     port. Begun almost a year ago at request of Secretary of the Air
     Force Eugene M. Zuckert and Chief of Staff General Curtis E. LeMay,
     Project Forecast was said to be virtually completed. (Witkin, NYT,
     2/16/64,1)
                                                         oid “the unwarranted


     Union in connection with man
    ence to U.N., “since other existing international mechanisms appear
    better suited to bring to bear the technical competence
     bility associated with national requirements necessary t
     operative projects of this type”; and, “the bipartisan
    port given to the civilian space program should be continued on the basis
     of the national benefits accruing from vigorous implementation of this
    program.” Subject to these comments, NASA had no objection to adop-
     tion of the resolution. (NASA LAR IIIJ27)
9 According to breakdown of FY 1965 budget of NASA’s        Office of Advanced
     Research and Technology, NASA would initiate preliminary design study
     of advanced fluorine-hydrogen (flox) rocket engine in FY 1965. The
    new engine would be based on results of experimental fluorine program
    with R G l O engine. (M&R, 2/17/64,18)
* Congressional Joint Atomic Energy Committee had sent letters to NASA
    Administrator James E. Webb, Air Force Secretary Eugene Zuckert,
    AEC Chairman Glenn Seaborg, and Budget Director Kermit Gordon,
    Missiles and Rockets reported, indicating it would authorize funds to
    AEC for flight-testing Snap reactors. DOD had announced it had “no
    stated requirement” for the nuclear auxiliary power systems, and BOB
    had refused AEC request for $15 million to flight-test Snap 1OA, cut $7
    million from Snap 50 development, and cut $5.5 million from systems
     improvement. Committee action would provide funds in excess of AEC’S
    request. (M&R, 2/17;/64?,14)
e House Committee on Science and Astronautics was planning to hold further
    hearings on the NASA proposed electronics research center, although
     Committee Chairman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) had described NASA
    Administrator Webb’s report to the Congress as “very comprehensive.”
      (M&R, 2/17/64,17)
* USAF launched Titan I1 ICBM from Vandenberg AFB on 5,000-mi. flight down
              (UPI, Houston Chron., 2/18/64?)
     PMR.
* Rep. Carl Elliott (D.-Ala.) , Chairman of House Select Committee on Gov-
    ernment Research, submitted to the House the committee’s first progress
     report. At its preliminary information-gathering hearings, the commit-
     tee heard testimony by 75 persons representing Federal departments
     and agencies, private research organizations, institutions of higher learn-
     ing, scientific and professional associations, and private industry. Rep.
                  “. . .
     Elliott said:       while we hope to be able to lay sound guidelines for
    the future, we shall also strive to insure that the incentives for engaging
68              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

Febrmry 17: Fuel cells producing power to operate all electronic equipment
    in Apollo spacecraft would also produce enough drinking water as a
     by-product to supply the three-man crew during 14day journey to the
    moon and back, MSC announced. (MSC Release 64-32)
 New gravity gradient stabilization system utilizing earth‘s gravitational
    field to orient the satellite and earth‘s magnetic field to assist in damping
    was developed by General Electric and recently tested onboard a USN
    satellite, orbited Jan. 11. Within three days the system stabilized the
    satellite to accuracy of 2 5 degrees. (M&R, 2/17/a, 10; Av. Wk.,
    2/24/64,57)
* USN fired Polaris A-2 missile from submerged submarine off the Florida
    coast in successful test. (UPI, Houston Chron., 2/18/64)
February 18: Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted to recommend Sen-
    ate ratification of radio communications treaty, drawn up at 70-nation
    conference in Geneva last fall. Considered a step toward establishment
    of global communications satellite network, treaty revised radio regula-
     tions, Drovided for international allocation of radio frequencies for
     comm&cations, navigational, and meteorological satefiites. (AP,
    NYT, 2/19/64 ,15)
  NASA announced two industry teams had presented to NASA and other agen-
    cies their feasibility studies for nonmilitary navigation satellite system.
    General Electric Co. and Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. made one
    study under $156,000 NASA contract, while Westinghouse Electric Corp.
     studied another approach under $225,000 contract. The proposed
    satellite network would provide worldwide, all-weather coverage for
    ships and aircraft. (NASA Release 64-37)
  Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director for Space, Defense Research and Engi-
    neering, said in address before National Space Club in Washington that
    the Manned Orbiting Laboratory would be the first phase of DOD’S
    National Orbiting Space Station and would provide means of carrying
    out experiments to prove o disprove the military role of man in space.
                                   r
    MOL would carry two astronauts for 30 days, also would carry experi-
    ments of nonmilitary nature, primarily for NASA. Discussing nonmili-
    tary unmanned space program, Dr. Hall disclosed that the Army had
    secretly launched SECOR last month and that it was performing “excep-
    tionally well.” (SBD, 2/19/64, 274; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/19/64)
  NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.
    Mueller said in hearings before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight,
    House committee on Science and Astronautics, that for Project Gemini
    “the year 1963 was, quite frankly, one of development headaches. It
    was the year o development and qualification testing of Gemini’s many
                    f
    equipments. The program is now largely over the development hump,
    however, and all Gemini spacecraft and launch vehicle subsystems will
    be fully qualified in 1964. Significant in 1963 also were a number of
                           ...
    hardware deliveries.
        “In 1964, three vitally important flights will be made-the third one
    manned and orbital. The year will be characterized by production,
                                                           ..    .”
    test, and delivery of spacecraft and launch vehicles.
        Questioned about return to earth and landing in Project Gemini, Dr.
    Mueller and George Low said that plans now called for the two-man
    Gemini spacecraft to land on water rather than dry land. NASA had
    been investigating both procedures, and paraglider for land recoveries
                                                                           69
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 8 4

    was still in development stage. P
    about the time of the last two Gemini
    uled.” D .Mueller added that water landing also would be “character-
               r
    istic” for manned Apollo flights. (Testimony; Finney, NYT, 2/19/a,
    19;M&R, 2/24/a,21)
February 18: NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applica-
    tions Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed Lunar Orbiter in testimony before
     Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee
     on Science and Astronautics: “In 1963, the Lunar Orbiter was defined
     and a contractor selected. This program will move into high gear
     this year and will require $49.3 million in Fiscal Year 1965 to meet
     its targeted first launch in 1966. This will be a tight schedule but
     because of the importance of this mission in support of Apollo, every
     effort will be made to meet that date. . . .”
        Questioned by Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-
     Minn.), Dr. Newell said NASA was thinking about adding five Lunar
     Orbiters to the five already approved. The proposed increase was be-
     cause the Lunar Orbiter “will be a most important spacecraft not only
     for the support of the manned lunar landing effort, but for continuing
     research on the moon, on its geodetic properties, and experiments on
     radioactivity of the lunar surface.”
        Of the recently orbited ECHO 1 passive communications satellite, Dr.
                                         1
     Newell said: “The ECHO II has shown some scintillation in tbe radio wave-
     lengths which might indicate that it has some defect in shape-perhaps
     a tear, maybe a dent, or something of that sort. However, it shows no
     such scintillation on the optical observations, which is puzzling. It
     remains, however, a completely adequate reflector so that whatever dis-
     tortion in shape may have occurred has not interfered with its useful-
     ness.” (Transcript)
* Rep. Carl Vinson (D.-Ga.) , Chairman of House Armed Services Com-
     mittee, commented on Sen. Barry Goldwater’s charges of missile
     unreliability :
       “. .   . I, the Armed Services Committee, the Secretary of Defense, and
     the Secretary and Chief of Staff of the Air Force are all wholly persuaded
                                I am particularly referring to our interconti-
     that our missiles-and
     nental ballistic missiles-are fully capable of doing the job for which
                         .
     theywereintended. . .”
        Rep. Vinson was appearing before the House Rules Committee to
     set forth provisions of proposed $19.6 billion military R&D authorization
     bill, already approved by Armed Services Committee, (This bill, in
     a procedure initiated this year, covered separately the RLW portion of
     overall $50.9 billion proposed defense authorization.) One provision
     of bill would authorize $52 million for development of new manned
     bomber, instead of $5 million requested by the Administration for
     studies. Rep. Vinson emphasized that his Committee favored the USAF
     proposal, explaining, “Solid testimony was given to the Committee by
     General LeMay, clearly indicating the urgency of starting out on a
     follow-on bomber and a new interceptor.” (NYT, 2/19/64t,4)
* Attempt by Assistant Labor Secretary James J. Reynolds to arbitrate 13-
     month-old dispute between 11 striking unions and Florida East Coast
     Railway was unsuccessful. Unions’ representative George W. Leighty
     refused to agree to arbitration, and Reynolds termed talks with FEC
70              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

     Board Chairman Ed Ball “completely futile.” Reynolds recommended
     to Labor Secretary Wirtz that FEC be barred from using Government-
     owned tracks at Cape Kennedy pending settlement. (AP, Balt. Sun,
     2/19/64; M&R, 2/24/64 11)
February 18: Rep. Roland V. Libonati (D.-Ill.) presented to the House a
     group report on AFSC, SAC, TAC, and Air Force Academy, after Congres-
     sional delegation visited various USAF installations. Listing highlights
     of AFSC during 1963, report said:
        “Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted
     from Air Proving Ground Center’s Elgin AFB, Fla., aerospace launch
     facility on Santa ,Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the
     Project Firefly program. The project actually is the intense investiga-
     tion of the earth’s atmosphere and an assault on the secrets of ‘near
             ...
     space’.
        “AMRL [Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson
     AFB] initiated the first lunar gravity research in 1963. Using a zero-
     gravity parabola, aircraft tests were conducted under actual lunar-one-
                                      ..   .” (CR, 2/18/64, 2906-35)
     sixth earth gravity-conditions.
* FAA announced Canadian Pacific Air Lines had reserved three deliver
                                                                             i
     positions for the US. supersonic transport plane, bringing total reserve
     positions to 70 by 12 airlines. (FAA Release 64-16)
  New York State Atomic Research and Development Authority signed con-
     tract with General Electric Co.’s Aerospace and Defense Service Engi-
     neering Dept. for continued operation of Malta Tet Station, which
     New York recently acquired from Federal Government through com-
     petitive bidding. Station has been operated by GE for Federal Govern-
     ment since its establishment in 1945, when facilities were installed there
     to duplicate German V-2 facilities at Peenemunde. New York Authority
     would operate the station’s expanded test and research facilities in con-
     tinued support of industrial contractors of Federal defense, space, and
     atomic energy programs. (CR, 2/19/M, 2011-12)
February 19: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Milton 0. Thompson in third
     of current series designed to study heat transfer rates with sharp-lead-
     ing-edge vertical tail. Launched from B-52 near Hidden Hills, Calif.,
     the X-15 attained maximum speed of 3,504 mph (mach 5.26) and peak
     altitude of 77,500 ft. This was flight 101 for the X-15, 26 for X-15
     No. 3. (FRC Release; NASAX-15 Proj. off.)
0 Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy, where it would

     be orbited by Saturn I S A 4 in April. Three separate USAF aircraft
     transported the boilerplate launch escape system, command module,
     service module, +relatedground service equipment, and adapter. With-
     in a few hours, S-1 stage and instrument unit for S A 4 arrived by
     barge after 13-day trip from Huntsville, Ala. (MSC Release 64-33; MSC
     Roundup,2/19/6p, 1)
* India’s Dept. of Atomic Energy and NASA announced signing memorandum
     of understanding for Indian-US. cooperation in meteorological sound-
     ing rocket program. Data gathered in the program would contribute
     to International Indian Ocean Expedition, a continuation of research
     begun during IGY,concentrating on weather and atmospheric conditions
     related to the Indian Ocean area. Under the agreement, India Dept. of
     Atomic Energy would provide, transport, assemble, and launch Loki-
      Dart sounding rockets and payloads; operate the Thumba Equatorial
                                                                        untries
                                                                         radar
                                                                         (NASA
     Release 64-39)
February 19: NASA announced FRC had issued requests for proposals for
     construction of two low-speed lifting-body gliders. NASA would fur-
     nish the selected contractor with information obtained in research
     with M-2 concept at Ames Research Center and the &lo lifting-body
     at Langley Research Center. Both vehicles would undergo thorough
     testing in Ames wind tunnel, then be tested in flight at FRC. (NASA
     Release 6 4 4 1 )
  NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr.
     Homer E. Newell told Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications,
     House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that Scout space ve-
     hicle had not been performing with desired reliability. Ground tests and
     modifications were conducted, and when a test vehicle was fired the
     fixes were shown to be “adequate.” Subcommittee Chairman, Rep.
     Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), replied that “if NASA spent half as much
     money on solids as it did on liquid vehicles, the solid rocket program
     would have 100 per cent reliability.”
        Discussing Surveyor lunar probe, Dr. Newell said first nine Sur-
     veyors would be reduced from 2,500 lbs. to 2,100 lbs., and it was hoped
     flox upper-stage Atlas-Centaurspace vehicles would be availableto launch
     the subsequent Surveyors. (SBD, 2/20/64,279)
  Edmond C. Buckley, Director of NASA Ofc of Tracking and Data Ac-
                                             fie
     quisition, testified before subcommittee on Advanced Research and
     Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics :
        “We are requesting $274.4 million to support the Tracking and Data
     Acquisition program in fiscal year 1965, as compared to $307.7 mil-
     lion in fiscal year l-,   a decrease of eleven per cent. The reason for
     this decrease is that most of our new station construction requirements
                                                                          ..   .”
     in all three networks, were funded in fiscal years 1963 and 19M.
     Mr. Buckley pointed out that the largest single item in OT&DA budget for
     F 1965 was $106.9 million for equipping the manned space flight net-
       Y
     work for Projects Gemini and Apollo. (Testimony)
* Unnamed NASA spokesman denied Feb. 15 statement by Dr. Wernher von
     Braun that scientist would be included in crew for second lunar land-
     ing flight. NASA said it had not been decided whether a scientist would be
     aboard the flight, and that if fully qualified scientists did make lunar
     expeditions they probably would go “later than the second flight.”
      (HoustonPress, 2/19/64+;Houston Chron., 2/19/641)
  USN request that NASA include four of its experiments in manned Gemini
     flights was revealed in NASA Gemini program review. (Av. Wk.,
     2/%/64,23)
* Discovery of the omega-minus particle in the atomic structure was hailed
     as a significant step toward construction of an ordered table of elements
     for the atom                                            the periodic table
     of elements.                                           a1 College, London,
     and a Fellow                                           0-very in the British
     journal New Scientist. Prof. Y Ohnuki had suggested in 1960 that
                                        .
     the clue to orderly relationship between the SO or more known atomic
     particleg might lie in a type of “spin” which could only be described in
72                                                   19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTI@,

    ma&ematicaI terms and known as “unitary transformations.” Several
    scientists in various parts of the world, including Dr. Murray Gell-Mann
    in the U.S., began working on this theory. Relationsh%pdid begin to
    appear among particles; also it became apparent that one more sub-
    particle was needed. Its characteristics could be deduced from its p h ~
    in the atomic relationship. At this point teams of scientists went to
    work with the 33-billion-voltAlternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brook-
    haven National Laboratory and others with equipment at the Center for
    European Nuclear Research (CERN) at Geneva, Switzerland. Analysis
    of 100,000 photographs of bubble patterns made by accelerated atomic
    particles traveling through “boiling” liquid hydrogen disclosed two
    sightings of particles with the characteristics predicted by the relation-
    ship table. (Hillaby, NYT, 2/20/M, 1;Sullivan, NYT, 2/23/64,67)
February 29: Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Director of Lindheimer Astronomical
    Research Center and head of astronomy dept. of Northwestern Univ.,
    Evanston, Ill., said in an interview that remote control telescope on the
    moon was practical as well as desirable. Heart of lunar telescope would
    be image orthicon, comparable to picture tube in TV camera; signals
     would travel to the telescope and pictures would travel back to earth on
                       ..
    laser beams. “.         If you had a telescope on the moon, you could
    point it where you want to by remote control and the picture would go
    into an image orthicon to be flashed back to earth on the same laser beam
    that controls the moon telescope.” (Hughes, Chic. Trib., 2/19/64)
February 20: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill,
    Canada, carried instrumented payload to 127-mi. altitude, in successful
    flight to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora
    and on those responsible for auroral absorption. Instrumentation in-
    cluded five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an
    accelerometer. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 NASA announced selection of biological specimens to be included in first

    biosatellite in late 1965. Effects of radiation, weightlessness, and ab-
    sence of earth’s rotation would be studied on the 14 specimens, including
    pepper plants, wheat seedlings, amoeba, frog and sea urchin eggs, bread
    mold, fruit flies, and embryonic beetles. The biosatellite payload would
    be launched into orbit by a Delta vehicle from Cape Kennedy and
    recovered three days later in the Pacific. (NASA Release 64-40)
  AEC issued special report on Snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power)
    program, stressing need to flight-test Snap in spacecraft in order to
    develop its full potential: “The Snap program has reached a point in
    technology where its importance to the Nation must be recognized,
    accepted and supported, or the development and performance of ambi-
    tious space missions will be handicapped by a lack of adequate and
    reliable power.” Flight test of Snap-1OA had been canceled earlier this
    year when Bureau of the Budget cut Snap funds requested for N 1965.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/20/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/21/64)
  House passed (336-0) military R&D authorization bill of $16,914,800,000
    for FY 1965. Amendment to delete $52 million for design and develop-
    ment of new jet bomber and $40 million for design and development of
    new interceptor aircraft was defeated (121-29). The programs, recom-
    mended by Air Force Chief of Staff Genera1 Curtis E. LeMay, had not
    been included in Administration budget request; Defense Secretary
    McNamara had requested only $5 million for studies of new bomber.
    (Raymond, NYT, 2/21/M, 1)
                                                                           73
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

February 20: Prime contractors of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were
    assuming additional responsibilities in Saturn launch vehicles program,
    MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun announced. Principal con-
    tractors immediately affected would be Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., IBM
    Corp., and General Electric Co. Dr. von Braun said this was “a con-
    tinuation of the Marshall policy to transfer research and developmental
    work, as well as fabrication, from ‘in house’ to contrtictor plants as soon
    as practical. Not only has this been our philosophy but prime con-
    tracts in most c a m have spelled out the eventual taking over by indus-
    try of full responsibility for major elements and stages of the
                  ..
                  .”
    vehicles.
       MSFC would retain overall systems management responsibility for
    the three Saturn launch vehicles and continue to “maintain a technical
    and managerial competence in our own organization. Without it we
    cannot monitor the work of our contractors to insure that we are getting
                                                                         ..   .”
    the quality and reliability that a manned space program demands.
     (Marshall Star, 2 2 / , 10)
                      /6@
0 Edward Z. Gray, NASA Director of Advanced Manned Missions, described

    manned lunar bases under study for post-Apollo missions, in testimony
    before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee
    on Manned Space Flight. “The earliest system we can see for extend-
    ing the capability of Apollo would be the Apollo logistic support system
              .
     (ALSS)
        “It consists of the launching on the Saturn V of an Apollo spacecraft
     with an unmanned LEM, wherein we have replaced the ascent stage of
     the LEM with a cargo compartment. The Apollo spacecraft and un-
     manned LEM, or LEM truck are launched to the Moon. The LEM truck
     is disengaged from the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit and lands in an
     unmanned mode on the surface of the Moon.
        “The payload capability with the present Apollo launch vehicles and
     spacecraft would be approximately 7,000 pounds. There would be a
     payload volume of about 2,000 cubic feet. This would provide a shelter
     with occupancy capability for two men for about 14 days on the lunar
     surface. An alternate payload that could be carried by the LEM truck
                                           .. .,which would have a capability
     would be a two-man roving vehicle
                                                                           . ..
     to cover about 200 to 300 miles on the lunar surface in the 1 days.
                                                                  4
        “Then looking beyond to the time when much greater staytime on the
     lunar surface would be desired, we show a lunar exploration system
     for Apollo (EESA) which weighs about 25,000 pounds on the surface of
     the Moon. These are Earth pounds.
        “It would be launched with a Saturn V without an Apollo spacecraft
     and would be delivered in an unmanned mode directly onto the surface
     of the Moon. It has a volume of over 3,000 cubic feet, and could pro-
     vide satisfactory shelter and life support for 3 men to stay 90 days on
     the surface of the Moon.
        “The mode of operation would be to launch this unmanned vehicle
      to the surface of the Moon, and follow it up with an Apollo launch
      so that the LEM would land in the near vicinity of the LESA payload,
                                      ..   .”
      probably using a homing radar.
        He described the LESA concept as expandable through addition of
      modules; for instance, three modules could form a base for 18 men,
      X months occupancy time. (1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 2,597-
      99)
      %364980-%8--B
74             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

February 20: USAF announced             ion of Douglas Aircraft Co., Martin
     Marietta C o w , and General Electric Co. for orbital space station study-
     contracts. The studies would aid in defining tests and experiments for
     USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory f MOL f . (DOD Release 148-64)
* Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev had replaced Col. Yuri A. Gagarin as head
     of Soviet cosmonauts, Krasnaya Zvezda reported. (UPI, NYT, 2/22/@,
      10)
*Dr. Herman J. Sander, Behavioral Scientist in USAF OSR Life Sciences
      Directorate, was presented Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal
     by Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, OAR Commander. (OAR Release
      2-644)
  Martin Marietta C o p received $1,748,450 increment to USAF contract for
     R&D for Titan I1 ICBM, DOD announced. (DOD Release 1 4 W )
* NASA Manned Spacecraft Center began the first increment of its mass move
     to the new facilities at Clear Lake from leased temporary facilities in
     Houston and Ellington AFB. (MSC Release 64-35; Houston Chron.,
      2/20/64)
February 21: DOD announced Army Corps of Engineers’ SECOR (Sequential
      Collation of Range) geodetic satellite was performing “exceptionally
      well,” confirming Dr. Albert Hall’s disclosure of Feb. 18. The 40-b.
     satellite was orbiting at about 600-mi. altitude in periods of about 100
     min. SECOR system tests were being conducted by Army’s Geodesy,
      Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development Agency
      (GIMRADA) ,which had contracted for the satellite from ITT Federal Lab-
     oratories. GIMRADA ground stations were measuring distances by send-
      ing and receiving signals through satellite’s onboard transponder, then
      acquiring ranging data for use in automatic data reduction process by
     Army Map Service to determine station positions. AFSC/SSD had lofted
     the satellite into orbit for GIMRADA; NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
     was providing orbital data and telemetry support. (DOD Release
      156-64)
* Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Wash-
     ington that when NASA had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool,
     it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before
     completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured
     on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure
     was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess.
     NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have
     no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.”
      (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/&)
* aOO-ft.-diameter balloon was launched by AF Cambridge Research Lab-
     atories personnel from Holloman AFB, N. Mex., with special telescope
     to make spectroscopic records of the planet Venus. The telescope was
     carried to dtitude of 87,500 ft., above all but an insignificant amount
     of terrestrial water vapor. (USAF OAR Release 4-64-2)
* D . George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
   r
     Flight, said in speech at Engineers’ Week dinner, Los Angeles:
        66
          At present, we estimate that more than 35,000 engineers and scien-
     tists are at work in the Gemini and Apollo programs and the studies of
     possible advanced manned missions. This number will reach a level
     of 45,000, about 2.8 percent of the national employment of scientists
     and engineers, when our currently approved programs reach their peak
                        ...
     ofeffortnextyear.
                                                                          75
               ASTRONATJTICS AND AERONAUTICB, 1 9 6 4

        “In recent months, we have reviewed thoroughly the status of program
                ..    . the pace of the program for its impact on total
                       ,
     technology
         ..    ., and the possible effects on the program of the hazards of
     cost
                          .. .
     interplanetary space.
                                            ...
        “First, with respect to technology          we have found all of the
     knotty questions involved in advancing the state of the art are yielding
     to hard work. We know of no technological problems that would pre-
                                                                 ...
     vent our accomplishing the Apollo program in this decade.
                    ..   . starting with the level of funding planned for the
        “[Second],
     current fiscal year there is sound economic justification for maintaining
     the program on its present schedule. To stretch out the program at this
     time would add to the cost and unnecessarily delay this first major step
     in space exploration.
        “The final area of examination of the program has been with respect
                                               ..     Estimates based on pres-
     to the hazards of interplanetary space.
     ent information indicate that meteoroids will not constitute a major
                                                                      ...
     problem in the planning of the first manned lunar exploration.
        “Altogether, the present evidence indicates that radiation does not
     present a hazard that would prevent ,accomplishment of manned lunar
     exploration in this decade. Indeed, there is no serious evidence that
     the radiation factor would inhibit us in selecting the time of a lunar
                .
     mission. . .” (Text)
February 21: ccAstrometric”telescope of the US. Naval Observatory went
     into operation at Flagstaff, Ariz. The telescope featured world’s largest
     known telescopic mirror, 61 inches in diameter, ground from huge block
     of synthetic quartz. New telescope would be used chiefly to measure
     distances to nearby stars that are too faint for such study by other
     existing telescopes, thus exploring previously unknown regions of the
     universe. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/25/64,14)
* Sen. George McGovern (D.-S. Dak.) referred on Senate floor to article in
     recent Business Week which reported sharp drop in engineering and
     scientific jobs due to defense cutbacks. Employment cutbacks “tend to
     be concentrated in certain industries-aerospace, defense installations,
     and atomic energy-and in certain parts of the country-the Boston
     area, New York, Pennsylvania, parts o the Midwest, the Pacific North-
                                             f
     west, and California.” (CR, 2/21/64,3205)
  Public sale of stock in Communications Satellite Gorp. would be offered in
     April, New York sources revealed. (NYTNS,Denver Post, 2/21/64)
  Board of Directors of US.Chamber of Commerce recommended that Con-
                                           requested F‘Y 1%5 budget and that
     gress cut $119 million from NASA’s
     the $141 million FY 1964 supplemental request be denied. (Hornston
    Post, 2/22/64)
*Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former astronaut, was presented the George
    Washington Award for 1%3 by the Freedom Foundation, in V d e y
     Forge, Pa., ceremony. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/M)
February 22: First Soviet-American space communications experiment, with
     British cooperation, was conducted successfully at 2:OO a.m. Moscow
     time, Tass reported. Radio signal sent from Jodrell Bank Experimental
     Station bounced off ECHO n balloon satellite and was received by Zimenki
     Observatory near Gorki. Tass said, “This marks a success of the first
     experiment in super-long distance international cosmic radio communi-
     cations on ultra short waves.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64)
76              ASTRONAUTICS BND AERONAUTICS, 1964

February 22: Published reports about the SST study prepared for the White
    House by Eugene Black and Stanley deJ. Osborne had failed to men-
    tion the report’s strong endorsement of SST development, Evert Clark
    reported in New York Times. According to Clark, letter transmitting
    the report, still not o5cially released, said development of SST was “of
                                                  ...
    great economic importance to the nation.               FaiIure to do so might
    well leave our important airline and aircraft industries in potentially
     dangerous competitive situations.” (Clark, NYT, 2/22/a, 1)
  Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Sta-
    tion, advocated international controls on space experiments. In Satur-
     day Evening Post article, he said: “It is now time for concern about the
     ethical standards which man must apply to embryonic dangers which are
     not obvious. We cannot afford to wait until the dangers become prac-
     tically apparent, since some experiments may create an irretrievable
                 .
     condition. . .”
                                                                        “. . .
        As an example, he described the ozone layer, and continued:             it
     happens that zone is rather easy to destroy. And if it is intentionally or
     accidentally removed, then the ultraviolet radiation would penetrate to
     earth. If this happened for a su5ciently long period, then human beings
     migh suffer severe sunburn and possible sterilization. Further, the
     temperature distribution in the atmosphere could be radically altered
     and, in the state of our present knowledge, no one could predict what
     climatic changes might occur.
         “It is not difficult to estimate that a few tons of suitable contaminant,
     deposited in the atmosphere 25 miles above the earth, would destroy
                                                      .
     the ozone over several miles for a few hours. . . a rocket launched from
     earth to land a man on the moon might burn up 2,000 tons of fuel in its
                                                 ..
     passage through the earth’s atmosphere . [and] the launching of one
     such rocket a week might well lead to a permanent transformation of the
     conditions in ,the high atmosphere,” according to recent study by the
     Advanced Research Projects Agency.
         “. . . when one turns from the contamination as an accidental by-
     product to an intentional act, an ugly array of possibilities is revealed.
     To begin with, specially selected substances could be deposited in great
                                      .
     quantities at precise altitudes. . . The American [ARPA] report states
     that 25 tons of fluorine would be sufficient to depopulate the ionosphere
     of electrons and so blot out all long-distance radiotelephony. The deposi-
     tion of large quantities of gases like carbon monoxide at an altitude of
     25 miles might radically alter the temperature distribution and the
     climatic conditions by absorbing some of the sun’s infrared radiation. ...
         ‘‘The human race therefore faces a critical situation in the next few
     decades, because there is at the moment little evidence of the moral and
     legal controls which must be enforced if man’s continued life on earth
      is not to be jeopardized by the accidental or intentional results of space
     research. There are large areas of uncertainty, so that it is not yet
      possible to assess whether various other space activities may affect man
      more directly than in the inhibition of his study of the cosmos. It is a
      vital necessity of our age that the political decisions on these problems
      should be based on the judgment of the international scientific commu-
      nity, and that this judgment should govern the future space launchings
      of the world.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/22/64,10,14)
                                                                         77
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

February 24: H u e Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting in
                  os
    executive session, approved the NASA Electronics Research Center report
     selecting the Boston area for the center. (NASA LAR III/32)
* NASA’s  Group Achievement Award was presented to Paul F. Bikle, Flight
     Research Center Director, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch, AFFTC Com-
     mander, on behalf of all Government personnel connected with the X-15
     program. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, made the
     presentation at FRC ceremony, and said in his remarks:
         “Earlier this month the Research Airplane Committee approved nine
     additional test-bed experiments for the X-15 Program. With the 19
    experiments approved before and the flights required to complete the
    original research program, these additional experiments will require
     X-15 flight tests until the end of 1968.
         “The X-15 flight-test program has been eminently successful during
     the last four years. The Research Airplane Committee, by its action
    this month in approving these new experiments for the program, has
                                                               . . .”
     given concrete evidence of its faith in the future program.         (FRC
     X-Press; SpeechText)
*NASA announced the nine new experiments for X-15 aircraft would be:
     ramjet propulsion, structures research, advanced flight data system,
     star tracker, horizon scanner, ionization gage, and other missions in-
     volving evaluation of advanced vehicle systems and structural mater-
     ials. (NASA Release 69-42)
*NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.
     Mueller said in Space Business Daily interview that the “major prob-
     lem” in Project Apollo “is not technical or environmental,” but, rather,
     66
       proper funding.” Attainment of lunar landing goal before 1970 de-
     pended “more on funding than anything else,” he said. The hiring
     freeze imposed on Apollo contractors had been eased on a “selected
     basis,” with the only companies not receiving the easement being Pram
     81Whitney and General Dynamics. (SBD, 2/24/64,289)
* Col. Clarence J. George was sworn in as NASA Executive Secretary, newly
     established position in Office of the Administrator. A former executive
     officer for the late General George C. Marshall, Col. George had more
     than 28 years of military service including eight years as aide to three
     former Secretaries of the Army, as well as General Marshall’s tours as
     Secretary of Defense and Secretary of State. (NASA Photo)
* Atlas engine using flox (30% fluorine, 70% liquid oxygen) oxidizer with
     its normal RP-1 kerosene fuel was static-fired last month by General
     Dynamics, Associated Press reported, and successful results of the test
     had prompted NASA to request N 1965 funds to accelerate development.
     NASA requested $17.5 million in N 1%5 for flox development, which
     preliminary experiments indicated would increase Atlas payload ca-
     pability from 30 to 90%. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/24/64)
  Analysis of NASA N 1965 budget request revealed that NASA construction
     had passed its peak. I 3 1964 funding for construction was $637.5 mil-
      lion, and N 1965 request was for $281 million. Accentuating the
      trend was the fact that funding of major new facilities for Project
      Apollo-at Cape Kennedy, MSC, MSFC, and Mississippi Test Facility-
      would be completed in N 1965. (M&R, 2/24/64, 18)
78              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

February 24: Sen. Mike Monroney (D.-Okla. ) told American Fight@ Aces
      Association, Washington chapter, that aviation was “short-changed’’ in
      research and development. He urged that more NASA effort go into aero-
      nautical RW, particularly on the supersonic transport. “NASA means
      National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I’m worried about
      what’s happening to the A-for-Aeronautics.” (Wash. Eve. Star,
      2/25/64)
                                                                     $3,117,387
0 Lewis Research Center announced awarding of three contracts:

      contract for continued development of Centaur launch vehicle stage
      and $1,800,000 contract for Oao shroud system a’nd Pt. Loma test
      program, both to General Dynamics/Astronautic; and $2,110,000 con-
      tract to Aerojet-General Corp. for continued development of M-1 rocket
      engine. ( WSJ, 2/24/64)
0 NASA signed contract with Reaction Motors Div. of Thiokol Chemical Corp.

      for research on oxygen difluoride propellants. (SBD, 2/26/64,304)
~ U S A Fplanned 71 Atlas-Agena firings during 1964-66 period and NASA
      planned 26 Atlas-Agena and five Atlas launches, Aviation Week re-
      ported. Initial launch rate planned for Titan 1 1 with unmanned pay-
                                                         1
      loads would be less than 10 a year. (Av. Vk.,     2/24/64,23)
0 USAF predicted reddish spots on the moon-observed            last October and
      November-would reappear June 4 and 5. USAF astronomers at Lowell
      Observatory planned to take color photographs of the recurrence as well
      as scan Aristarchus area of moon with sensitive photoelectric spectro-
      graph to determine nature of the “spots.” (Finney, NYT, 2/25/64,
      14)
0 Missiles and Rockets published interview made last summer with Dr.

      Eugen Saenger, who died earlier this month. Dr. Saenger, whose
      World War I1 concept of rocket sled-launched orbital bomber was later
      influential in design of X-20 (Dyna Soar), had said: “I am assisting a
      German group within Eurospace in looking into the economics of space
      transportation. We are considering reusable vehicles. Dyna-Soar is
                                                .
      assumed to be the necessary first step. . . We consider it essential to
      develop an aerospace plane able to lift off from Earth, go up to orbit in
      the form of an airplane with wings, return like the Dyna-Soar along a
      glide path to Earth and land like an airplane so it can be re-used.” He
      said he had modified his chemical rocket-sled idea into steam-rocketsled
      and had developed such a rocket. “1t.develops 30 tons of thrust. We
      ran hundreds of tests on it. We would use it to accelerate a stage to
      subsonic or perhaps supersonic velocity.”
         Dr. Saenger described Egyptian rocket development, which he had
      assisted until late 1961 when West German government asked hi:m to
      stop: “I was asked in the spring of 1960 by the Egyptian government to
      give lectures at Cairo University and help the country by doing consult-
                                                          .
      ing work on meteorological sounding rockets. . .
         “It’s a rocket only for vertical launching and liquid fuel. There is no
      guidance. Although in principle the rocket could be launched into an
      inclined flight, there is no way of knowing with accuracy where it wl  il
      impact. So I can’t imagine how it would be used for military purposes?
      (M&R, 2/24/64,35-38)
  Minuteman ICBM fired from Vandenberg AFB after sundown left spectacu-
      lar trail across the sky seen from San Francisco to San Bernardino ana
      caused Redding and Chico areas to call civil defense alerts. Cross winds
                                                                           79
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

      distorted the exhaust trail and it was lighted by rays from the sun below
      the horizon. (AP, NYT, 2/27/68,17)
February 25: USAF launched Atlas-Agena D combination from Vandenberg
     AFB with undisclosed payload. (M&R, 3/2/64,12)
                                      for Space Science and Applications Dr.
0 NASA Associate Administrator

      Homer E. Newel1 said in testimony before House Committee on Science
     and Astronauties’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications
     that some of the byproducts of space research included cure for some
      types of stuttering, diet that can sustain a man for a month on one cubfc
      foot of synthetic chemicals mixed with water, and “fail-safe” method of
     producing oxygen and food for orbiting space stations through electro-
     lytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. (AP, Howton
     Chron. 2/26/64)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.-Ill.) noted in the House that House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics had approved NASA’s          report providing for
     electronics research center in the Boston area. “There is, in my mind,
      still considerable question as to the need for this center. Furthermore,
     there is considerable question in my mind as to whether, if such a center
     is needed, as opposed to developing additional electronics capability at
     existing centers, the criteria used for selecting Boston as the site were
              .
     sound. . .” (CR, 2/25/64, A878)
   Senate Armed Services Committee approved $17,040,140,000 military R&D
     authorization bill for FY 1965. Like the House, the Senate Committee
     voted $52 million for development of new manned bomber. But Senate
     Committee did not support House on $40 million for new manned inter-
     ceptor aircraft. Committee made other reductions, restored several
     House cuts. (Raymond, NYT, 2/26/64,13)
  Sen. Russell B. Long (D.-La.) said on Senate floor that AT&T, “the world’s
     largest protected monopoly,” had a “100-percent monopoly in inter-
     national’ voice communications,” and that “steps should be taken to
     require the divestment by AT&T of its international operations.” He
     recommended that RCA, ITT, and Western Union be allowed to compete
     in international communications and that the Communications Satellite
     Corp. become a competitor in this area. (CR, 2/25/64, 3389-91)
  USAF fired Atlas E ICBM on successful 5,000-mi. flight down the Atlantic
     Missile Range, testing advanced nose cone design. Same day, USAF
     also fired Minuteman ICBM from Cape Kennedy and two Minuteman
     ICBM’s Vandenberg AFB, Calif., within 45 min. of each other. ( UPI,
              from
     NYT, 2/27/64,17; M&R, 3/2/64,12)
* Maurice Farman, aviation pioneer, died at 96 in Paris. With his brother
     Henry he made the first flight of more than a kilometer in a heavier-
     than-air machine, in 1908. The Farmans manufactured biplanes for
     France, Britain, and US. during World War I, in 1917 constructed the
     Goliath, forerunner of passenger airliner. (AP, NYT, 2/28/64, 29)
February 26: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with Johns Hopkins Univ.
     instrumented payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 100-
     mi. altitude. Rocket carried spectrophotometric instrumentation which
     measured absolute intensity of certain spectral features in the far ultra-
     violet region of the airglow during an aurora. Although rocket did not
     reach predicted 157-mi. altitude, the experiment provided general con-
     firmation of the only previous experiment in that region, and with much
     higher resolut?on. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
80              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,            1 9 64

February 26: NASA ann
     more Delta launch
     mented Delta (TAD
     orbit as compared to 800 lbs. for standard Delta. (NASA    Release M 6 )
0 A. 0. Tischler, NASA Director of Chemical Propulsion, Office of Advanced

     Research and Technology, discussed 1.5-million-lb.-thrust hydrogen-
     oxygen M-1 engine and the large solid-propulsion rocket motor before
     Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee
     on Science and Astronautics:
        “Last year this engine project [M-11, which was originally planned
     for completion in the late ~O’S,was slowed down to a minimum level of
     effort consistent with such a development program. It is our intent to
     maintain the low level of funding during the present critical years of the
     manned lunar landing program and then to accelerate this development
     for Completion in the early 70’s. . . .
        “The M-1 can be a team-mate of the large solid propellant motors.
     Potentially these two, if used in vehicle systems together, can provide
     the United States with increased payload capability at reduced cost dur-
     ing the 1970’s. . . .
        “. . . the large solid motor demonstrations have heretofore been
     funded by the Department of Defense and have been carried out by the
     Air Force in compliance with NASA-defined requirements. . . . This
     year NASA is requesting funds for the continuation of the contracted
     work on the 260” diameter solid propellant motors. . .
        “Each contractor [Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Aerojet-General
     Corp.] will fire a half-length solid motor during the fiscal year. . . .
     each half-length motor will produce three million pounds of thrust,
     about double the thrust of the Saturn I booster. The full-length motor,
     for which we would intend to contract if the half-length motor firines
     are successful, will produce about six million pounds of thrust.” (Testi-
     mony 1
0 Dr. George M. Knauf, NASA Acting Director of Space Medicine, described

     before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee
     on Science and Astronautics the procedures which NASA had followed
     for coordinating with USAF in bioastronautics-space medicine programs.
     Upon suggestions of this Subcommittee, NASA had “made a determined
     effort to coordinate our program with that of the Department of Defense
     so that all unwarranted duplication of effort would be eliminated.”
     Further, to assure that the coordination would be on a continuing basis,
     NASA estahlished Space Medicine Liaison Office at Aerospace Medical
     Div., Brooks AFB. NASA also obtained assurances from Army, USN, FAA,
     and US. Public Health Service that NASA was not duplicating work being
     carried out by those agencies. (Testimony)
* Lwkheed-California Co. released details of its recommendations to NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center on a scientific space station program. Lock-
     heed study concluded manned station with crew of 24 could be orbiting
     the earth in 1968. Total cost of program-including logistics space-
     craft and ground support-for five years’ operation was estimated at
     $2.6 billion. Study recommended launching the unmanned station into
     orbit with a Saturn V launch vehicle, then launching manned logistics
     vehicle to rendezvous and dock at the station. (Maloney, Houston Post,
     2/27/64; MSC Roundup, 3/4/64,8)
                                                                             81
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

February 26: MSC announced issuin          quests for proposals for six-month
     study of how astronaut on the          could conduct selenodetic measure-
     ments (lunar surface surveys), making maximum use of scientific equip-
     ment already planned for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module and Com-
     mand Module. Proposals for the study were due March 5. (MSC
     Release 64-37)
e Sonny Liston-Cassius Clay heavyweight title match was first championship
     fight to be telecast via communications satellite; video tape of the .match
     was transmitted to 11 European countries shortly after 1:00 a.m. EST
                  RELAY 11 communications satellite. (NASA Release 64-44)
     via NASA’s
  Amendment to $17 billion military procurement and R&D authorization bill
     to cut $52 million for development of new manned bomber was offered
     by Senators George McGovern ( D . 4 Dak.) ,Gaylord Nelson (D. Wis.) ,
                                         .
     and William Proxmire (D.-Wis.)          Senator McGovern quoted minor-
     ity report by the dissenting members of the House Armed Services Com-
     mittee which pointed out that “the $52 million is just the beginning of
     a program which will cost close to $5 billion before it is completed,”
     said his amendment would “reduce the bomber funds to the $5 million
     level requested by the President and the Secretary of Defense.” (CR,
     2/26/64,3602-04)
0 FAA disclosed it was requesting Coordinating Research Council of New

     York City to study comparative safety features of the two most com-
                                                 and JP4. (Hudson, NYT,
     monly used aircraft fuels-kerosene
     2/26/64,21)
  John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced 14,760 visitors to the
     facility during 1963. (KSC Release 16-64)
0 FAA announced Irish International Airlines had reserved two delivery posi-

     tions for U.S. supersonic transport aircraft. (FAA Release 64-18)
  Jack Anderson, writing in Drew Pearson’s “The Washington Merry-Go-
     Round” column in the Washington Post, charged that two documents
     existed “revealing how Texas’s lanky, laconic Congressman Albert
     Thomas used his influence to get the telephone contract at the Houston
     Space Center for Southwestern Bell.” The documents, Anderson
     charged, were: (1) a confidential memo to NASA Administrator James
     E. Webb from his executive assistant recounting a telephone call from
     Rep. Thomas, in which Thomas recommended Southwestern Bell over
     the other bidder, General Telephone, stating that General Telephone
     had a reputation in the Houston area for poor service; and (2) a
     Southwestern Bell memo to employees acknowledging Rep. Thomas as
     LC
        extremely helpful to our company-providing necessary information
     and other assistance-during the negotiations for the space lab com-
     munications contract.” ( Wush. Post, 2/26/64, D13)
* Party of scientists led by Nikolai Yerpylev, scientific secretary of Soviet
     Academy of Sciences, left Moscow for Cuba to “start the preliminary
     stage of the work’’ to establish Soviet satellite observation station on the
     island. Tass said equipment for the station already had been sent to
     Cuba. (UPI, NYT, 2/27/64,12)
  USAF fired Titan I1 ICBM from Cape Kennedy on successful flight down the
     Atlantic Missile Range. (M&R, 3/2/64,12)
0 Douglas Aircraft Co. made public its company-funded evaluation of its
     LC
        Icarus” concept (intercontinental aerospacecraft, range unlimited sys-
     tem) that could transport 132 tons of cargo or 1,200 fully-equipped troops
82             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

     at speeds of 17,000 mph. Concept featured liquid-hydrogen propellant
     tanks that could be jettisoned after takeoff boost and recovered intact.
     Douglas spokesmen said Icarus could be operational in little more than
     a decade. (SBD, 2/26/64,305)
February 2 : U.S.S.R. orbited COSMOS xxv scientific earth satellite from un-
            7
     identified site in Soviet Union. Initial orbital data, according to Tass:
     526-km. (320.6-mi.) apogee, 272-km. (169-mi.) perigee, 92.27-min. pe-
     riod, and 49O angle of inclination to equator. Scientific equipment and
     communication systems onboard the satellite were said to be function-
     ing normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/28/6rE, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
* Senate passed H.R. 9637, authorizing $17,040,141),000 FY 1965 funds for
     DOD procurement of aircraft, missiles, and naval vessels, and R&D. The
     McGovern amendment to reduce by $52 million the funds for develop
     ment of new manned bomber was defeated. Bill would go to Senate-
     House conference committee for compromise with $16,914,800,000
     House-passed bill. (NASA LAR III/35; Raymond, NYT, 2/28/64, 1)
9 At NASA’s  request, DOD had declassified two of its experiments for Project
     Gemini, New York Herald Tribune reported. The previously classified
     experiments involved “visual definition of objects in near proximity in
     space” and ‘‘radiometric observations of objects in space.” (Loory,
     N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/27/@)
0 In NASA Hq. ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden

     presented cash awards to 10 inventors in recognition of their outstanding
     contributions to space science technoIogy.
        Awards under the Space Act: $1,000 to Conrad Josias of JPL for in-
     vention of “bipolar logarithmic current-to-voltage transducer” which
     made possible the discovery of interplanetary plasma; $1,000 to James
     D. Acord and Howard C. Vivian of JPL for invention of “space ve-
     hicle attitude control” employed in Ranger and Mariner spacecraft;
     $2,000 to Robert C. Baumann and Leopold Winkler of GSFC for inven-
     tion of “spin adjusting mechanism” used on os0 I, SYNCOM 11, and
     Aerobee soupding rockets; and $4,000 to Harold R. Kaufman of LRC
     for invention o “ion rocket engine,” representing great step forward
                      f
     in ion propulsion R&D-the engine will be used in first Space Electric
     Rocket Test flight (Sert I ) .
        Awards under the Incentive Awards Act: $1,000 to Pleasant T. Cole,
     GSFC, for invention of “system for recording and reproducing pulse code
     modulated data,” capable of achieving significantly larger packing den-
     sity on magnetic tape to reduce weight requirements; and $1,NO to
     William C. Morgan, Jack B. Esgar, and Richard H. Kemp of LRC for in-
     vention of “thin-walled pressure vessel” for use in testing materials sub-
     jeoted to cryogenic temperatures. (Hootman Memo, 2/18/64; NASA
     Release M 5 ; LRC Release 64-16)
* Senator Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) said in interview that aircraft manu-
     facturers must bear the 25% share of supersonic transport development
     cost, rejecting the 10% formula advocated by Eugene R. Black in re-
     cently reported study. Senator Monroney said USAF should be assigned
     task of developing SST’S engine and the airframe manufacturers should
     join together to build the SST body. He said the builder of the aircraft
     would “have the greatest property ever owned in aviation, a superplane
     good for at least 20 years. They’ve got to take some risk.” (Steif,
     Wash. Daily News,2 / 2 7 / a )
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERO




  major effort is in the reactor area. It includes analysis and experi-
  mental work on all of the components and subsystems of our reactors with
  sufficient evaluation and testing to give the greatest possible confidence
  in the successful operation of the graphite reactors that will form the
  basis for the first nuclear rocket engines to be developed in the world.
  We are, however, not overlooking the potential
  the metallic tungsten reactors. We are, th
  gram to evaluate the feasibility and advantages of these systems,
     ‘‘Our NERVA engine and non-nuclear component technology work
  has made substantial progress in those difficult areas of engine tech-
  nology that require extension of presently available information so that
  system development can eventually be undertaken rapidly and with a
  high degree of confidence.
     “Sufficient facilities are available or are being constructed for the
  conduct of our presently planned program. Tests to be conducted in
  our reactor facilities during this year should clearly demonstrate the
  success of the solutions we have designed to avoid the mechanical prob-
  lems that have been encountered in the past and should demonstrate the
  operating capabilities of graphite reactors. Our advanced concept work
  is fundamental in nature; it is long term; but it is being pursued because
  of the high, theoretical performance potential of these advanced ideas
  for nuclear rocketry.
     ‘< Out of this over-all nuclear rocket program, I am convinced, will
  come a new family of rockets that will open the way to more extensive
  space travel than is possible with the chemical combustion rocket sys-
  tems upon which we are now completely dependent. Although new in
  capability, the nuclear rockets we are now developing are logical follow-
  ons to the chemical rocket systems and, therefore, do not involve
  basically new test, development, and system technology or scientific
  breakthroughs. These nuclear rocket developments must be actively
  pursued to ensure that this country is not prevented from undertaking
  missions involving higher velocities, energies, and payloads than are
  required for the early Apollo manned lunar landing mission.”
   (Testimony)
Harlan Cleveland, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organiza-
  tion Affairs, addressed the Conference of US. National Organizations of
  the U.N. :
     “The technological i m p e r a t i v d e impulse to build worldwide tech-
  nical agencies-comes of course from the headlong pace of scientific
  discovery. A world technical community is in the making because
  international communications, international transport, and international
  economics demand international organizations-and hcause you can’t
  deal with world health or world weather or radio frequencies and a lot
                                           ...
  of other things except on a world basis.
     “Taken together, three new kinds of technology-weather satellites,
  communications satellites, and computer technology-now make it tech-
  nically possible to work out a global weather reporting and forecasting
  system, a prospect too valuable to all nations to leave unexploited. The
84                                                         19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIC%,

    United States is now engaged in a very large program of research and
    development in this field that will involve the cooperation of more than
    100 other countries. This, together with what other countries are doing,
    will fit into an overall plan for a World Weather Watch being worked
    out by the World Meteorological Organization, a specialized agency of
    the U.N.
        “In jqst 2 years our first Tiros satellites discovered 20 hurricanes,
    typhoons, and tropical storms and observed the behavior of 62 others.
    And world data centers to process these and other reports and issue
                                                                     .
    warnings have been established in Washington and Moscow.. .’9 (Text,
    CR, 3/18/64,5462-64)
February 27: USAF fired Minuteman ICBM from Cape Kennedy on successful
    routine 5,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range. (M&R, 3/9/64,
    8)
  Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) inserted in Congressional Record a
    Wall Street Journal article on the “declining demand” for engineers,
    and said :
        “According to the Wall Street Journal article, the current slump in de-
    mand for engineers results primarily from uncertainty about future
    spending on defense and space programs. Although the defense budget
    for the next fiscal year calls for a reduction of only $1.3 billion, the space
    budget is $200 million above last year’s appropriation. If this minute
    shift in defense spending is sufficient to bring about a severe curtailment
    in the demand for engineers and other skilled technicians, it makes one
    wonder what will happen to our economy when there is more than a
                                       ..
    token cutback in defense outlays. .” (CR, 2/27/64,3666-67)
  USN disclosed it was developing seagoing tracking system for its ships and
    submarines to “avoid those areas of the oceans covered at intervals by
    spy satellites. Submarines would stay submerged, surfacing only when
    the sky above is clear.” (Wash.Post, 2/28/64)
  Visiting Oklahoma City, where FAA sonic-boom study was being conducted,
    FAA Administrator Najeeb Halaby was placed under police guard after
    anonymous telephone caller threatened his life. ( AP, Balt. Sun,
    2/28/64)
February 28: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with instrumentation to
    obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on
    charged particles re&on&le for auroral absorptions was launched from
      t. Churchill, Canada, to 127-mi. altitude. Instrumented ’payload in-
    cluded five charged-particle detectors, aspect magnetometer, and accel-
    erometer. All flight objectives were met. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  NASA and Australian Ministry of Supply announced installation to com-
    mand flight of Syncom C synchronous-orbit communications satellite
    would be installed at Salisbury, Australia. Installation would have two
    functions: monitor the Syncom’s attitude and command its apogee-
    motor firing, and command the satellite’s control system to make any
    necessary adjustments to maintain synchronous position. (NASA Release
    64‘47)
  NASA announced Saturn contract modifications totaling $16,448,169 had
    been awarded to Chrysler Corp. Space Div., which was assembling two
    Saturn I first stages and 12 Saturn IB first stages at NASA Michoud
    Operations. One award was for expansion of Chrysler’s Saturn booster
    reliability testing program at Michoud, Other two awards were for
                                                                         85
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    increased engineering support at Marshall Space Flight Center and
    John F. Kennedy S ace Center, NASA. (NASA Release 64-48)
February 28: Dr. Hugh%. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in letter
    to NASA Center Directors and Heads of Headquarters Program and Staff
                                       ..
    Offices: “I call upon each of you . to demonstrate full equality of
    opportunity without regard to sex, and that personal attitudes must not
    be allowed to operate adversely against women, or men, in recruitment,
                                       ..
    selection, training, or promotion. . I now ask your full cooperation
    in meeting these stated objectives.” (NASA Hq. PB 64-14)
 USAF launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Vandenberg AFB, Calif .,
    with unidentified satellite payload. (UPI, Wash. Post, 2/28/64; HHN-
    48)
* With no FY 1965 funds authorized for Snap-1OA flight test,            would
                                                                 AEC
    LC
     quietly continue to press for authority to conduct flight tests of Snap-
    lOA, even without the cooperation of a potential customer,” Jonathan
    Spivak predicted in the WaW Street Journal. Estimated cost of flight
    test of the 500-watt nuclear power system was $12 million. (Spivak,
    W S ,2/28/@)
 Thomas Jefferson Wong, 40, internationally known research scientist and
    head of manned Mars mission studies at NASA Ames Research Center,
    died after apparent heart attack. Mr. Wong had been with Ames for 13
    years. (Pal0 Alto Times, 3/2/64)
February 29: ECHO II passive communications satellite was used for trans-
    mission of two radiophotos between Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experi-
    mental Station at Manchester and Gorki University’s radioastronomy
    observatory at Zimenki. A third space telegram was sent from Jodrell
    Bank to Zimenki via the moon, and its quality was comparable to those
    received via ECHO n. The US. satellite was termed by Tass commen-
    tator “the Friendship Sputnik.” (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/1/64; NYT, 3/2/64,
    9; Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
  At White House news conference, President Johnson announced:
       “The United States has successfully developed an advance experi-
    mental jet aircraft, now the A-11, which has been tested in sustained
    flight at more than 2,000 miles an hour and at altitudes in excess of
    70,000 feet.
       “The performance of the A-11 far exceeds that of any other aircraft
    in the world today. The development of this aircraft has been made
    possible by major advances in aircraft technology of great significance
    to both military and commercial application. Several A-ll aircraft are
                                                                            .
    now being flight-tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. . .
       “The development of supersonic commercial transport aircraft will
    also be greatly assisted by the lessons learned from this A-11 program.
    For example, one of the most important technological achievements in
    this project has been the mastery of the metallurgy and fabrication of
    titanium metal which is required for the high temperatures experienced
    by aircraft traveling at more than three times the speed of sound.
       “Arrangements are being made to make this and ather important
    technical developments available under appropriate safeguards to those
    directly engaged in the supersonic transport program.
       “This program was first started in 1959. Appropriate members of the
    Senate and the House have been kept fully informed on the program
    since the day of its inception. The Lockheed Aircraft Corporation at
86             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

                         is the manufacturer of the aircraft. The aircraft
                       , was designed and built by the Pratt &- Whitney Divi-
    sion, United Aircraft Corporation. The experimental fire control and
    air-to-air missile system for the A-ll was developed by the Hughes Air-
    craft Company.
        U
          In view of the continuing importance of these developments to our
    national security, the detailed performance of the A-11 will remain
    strictly classified and all individuals have been directed to refrain from
                                                                 . . .”
    making any further disclosure concerning this program.
        The President also announced he would release on March 2 Eugene
    Black’s supersonic transport study. (Transcript, Wash. Post, 3/1/64,
    A20)
February 29: Distribution of space and military contracts was of growing
    concern for the Administration, John Finney reported in New York Times
    article. “Space contracts have tended to accentuate the existing research
     concentration on the East and West Coasts.” 90% of space contracts
     and 83% of defense research contracts were awarded to only 10 states,
     and in FY 1963 50% of space contracts and 41.4% of military R&D con-
    tracts were awarded in California. Finney pointed out that NASA was
     “attempting to broaden the economic and industrial impact of its rap-
                                 .
     idly expanding program. . . Working through universities, the
     agency is attempting to enlist new regions in its program and to apply
    the technological developments of its research to the civilian econ-
           .
     omy. . . In fact, James E. Webb, the agency head, has become a
                .
    salesman . . to enlist new regions, new universities, new indus-
           . .”
     tries. .       (Finney, NYT, 3/1/64,1)
* In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post,
     President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which
     space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on
    earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian
     Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson
     said :
          .
        “. . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily,
     a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-
     campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smokefilled
     room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and
     sometimes obscured values.
        “The fate of the free society-and the human values it upholds-
     is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind‘s
     ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important,
     no less important is the response and the role of our political institu-
     tions-both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities
     of the future.
        “The vital role of politics in the space age has been evident since
     October 4,1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbit-
     ing of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But
     the worldwide impact and importance were essentiallypolitical. Sputnik
     I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies
     about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have
                              ...
     been proved prematuTe
        “Why did this occur? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect,
     the answers s e to be these:
                    em
                                                                             87
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

            Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed
    to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and
    the political community-to the blanie of each and the disservice of
    both.
        “2. Inherent in the itical miscalculation toward space exploration
                            %“’
    was the influence of e unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early
             ..  . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was
    1950’s.
    greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration
    of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a
    free and open society.
        “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first-
    and the hardest-responsibility of elected representatives of the people
                                               ...
    in our system: the responsibility to lead.
        “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its poli-
    ticians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly
    program of space exploration has been devised and financed without
                                                  ..
    unbalancing the values of our free society. .
        “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has
    been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political
    values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of
    our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for
    the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . .
        “Thus far the space age has been characterized as a period of com-
    petition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact
    that the competitiveness is between political systems, not between national
    scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is
    toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This im-
    pulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for
    the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected
    by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than
    to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space.
     If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will
    someday be known-and blessed by all people on earth-as the Golden
    Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/@, 22, 24)
February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. USMC) , hospi-
    talized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he
    would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement
    date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination
    in Ohio. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2)
During February: Second 30-day test of effectsof 100% oxygen on men began
    at USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects
     would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmos-
    phere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia.
     (Av. Vk.,  2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
0 “Universal” upper stage space vehicle powered by restartable liquid-hydro-

     genfiiquid-fluorine engine was proposed by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Mis-
     sile and Space System Div. to NASA. Douglas proposed the concept as
     upper stage for Thor boosters, said it also could be used with Atlas,
     Titan, and Saturn first stages. Douglas said the high-energy upper
     stage could be ready for use in three years, would have the advantages
     of heavy payload capability and adaptability to either earth-orbit or
     space-probe missions. (SBD, 2/25/64, 300; A-N-AF J&R, 2/29/6/1,
     14)
88             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

During Febizsary: Severely criticizing NASA’s    Industrial Applications Pro-
    gram, Arthur Kranish claimed in Western Aerospace article: “Years of
    work and millions of dollars have resulted, to date, in a handful of
    dreary pamphlets and a few sheafs of mimeograph paper. . . .” Com-
    panies writing for details of “NASA ‘innovations’ ” had “an unpleasant
    shock awaiting them. . . . Their requests sat for months on someone’s
    desk. Finally, a brief mimeographed description of the innovation was
    forwarded-along with an unsubtle letter from a leading research insti-
    tution offering to perform full followup and interpretive work for the
    interested company-at a fee.” (Kranish, Western Aerospace, 2/64)
* Kennedy Space Center, NASA, awarded $3,061,826 contract to Ling-Temco-
    Vought’s Range Systems Div. for services at Merritt Island Launch
    Area: automatic data processing, technical information, photographic
    support, and printing plant operation. The one-year contract would
    be renewable for two more years through annual options. (SBD,
    2/25/a, 2%)
  Impact of global communications satellite systems was predicted by Arthur
    C. Clarke in Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine. During the corn-
    ing decade, comsat systems would bring about “orbital post office,”
    (6 orbital newspapers,” and “orbital telephony.”     And eventually global
    comsat. system would underscore requirement for universal language,
    which Clarke predicted would be met with English; would educate mil-
    lions with TV visual aids; and would end barriers to free flow of infor-
    mation (such as censorship and jamming)
        “The inexorable force of astronomical facts will destroy the political
    fantasies which so long fragmented our planet. For when all major
    artistic productions, entertainments, political and news events (not to
    mention disasters) can be observed and experienced simultaneously by
    the whole world, the parochialism and xenophobia of the past will not
    be able to survive.
        “. . . another [influence], perhaps even more fundamental, may be
    reversal of an historic trend which has proceeded with scarce1y.a break
    for 5000 years. The traditional role of the city as a meeting-place is
    coming to an end; Megapolis may soon go the way of the dinosaurs it
    now resembIes in so many respeots. This century may see the begin-
    nings of a slow but irresistible dispersion and decentralization of man-
    kind-a physical dispersion which will take place, paradoxically enough,
    at the same time as cultural unification.” (Clarke, A/A, 2 / a , 45-48)
* Eastern Airlines announced its research on wind-shear turbulence, or clear
    air turbulence (CAT), had yielded. the significant finding that CAT is
    preceded by changes in temperatures too slight to be read on present
    cockpit instruments. Eastern found that temperature change of as little
    as one degree Centigrade over two-min. period can indicate aircraft is
     approaching area of turbulence, either in clear air or in clouds. Eastern
     developed and is flight-testing “Cat-Spy,” special instrument which re-
    cords outside temperatures in fractional degrees, activates warning
     lights when temperature changes indicate approach to area o possible
                                                                      f
    turbulence. (Eastern Release)
  Frank Gifford of US. Weather Bureau, Oak Ridge, Tenn., postulated that
     “canals” on Mars are actually sand dunes 2,500 to 3,000 mi. long. Size
     of the dunes would indicate surface pressure of about 30 millibars, close
     to the 25 millibars calculated by JPL from spectrographic measurements.
                                                                          89
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

     In Martian gravity and air density, wind speeds would have to be five
     to ten times those on earth to form dunes, and such winds have been
     observed in Martian dust storms. (M&R, 2/17/64,21)
During February: NASA Hq. contracted with RAND Corp. for evaluation of
     alternate approaches to conducting Project Apollo and attaining its goal.
     (SBD, 2/14/64,248)
0 USAF Space Systems Div. reinitiated its program to develop Astronaut

     Maneuvering Unit (AMU) for extravehicular space activity. Earlier
     this year SSD had requested bids for “remote space maneuvering sys-
     tem,’ but canceled this in favor of the AMU, to be used in Moboriented
     program. AMU would consist of five subsystemwhydrogen peroxide
     propulsion, environment control, attitude stabilization, manual control,
     and telemetry and voice communications. (SBD, 2/17/64, 255)
* General Dynamics/Convair shipped Little Joe I1 booster to White Sands
     Missile Range, where it would be used later this year to launch Apollo
     boilerplate spacecraft in test of the launch escape system. (MSC Round-
     up7 2/19/64,1)
* North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. was
     studying the planaria to help understand human healing process under
     conditions of weightlessness. Planaria was capable of regeneration even
     under extremes of temperature, vibration, and shock. (M&R, 2/17/64,
     21)
0 AFSC awarded $100,000 study contract to Sylvania Co. for feasibility study

     of balloon-satellite communications network. System would relay rela-
     tively interference-free signals over microwave radio beams by bouncing
     them off balloons orbiting earth at about 2,000-mi. altitudes. (SBD,
     2/24/64,290)
0 Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity, AF Deputy Chief of Staff/Systems 81 Logistics,

     described the purpose of the military cost reduction program : “Cost re-
     duction will enhance military capability. We’ll save money and thus
     afford better weapon systems. We are being challenged as never before
     to perform our mission with less money; this is a way of life we can
     expect in the future.” (AF Mag., 2/64,21-23)
  Aerospace Industries Association of America created Aerospace Technical
     Council to serve as technical advisory board, technical policy planning
     group, and overall supervisory agent for AIA’S Technical Service and
     the AIA technical committees. (M&R7 2/24/64,49)
  Indonesian air force launched Soviet-built surface-to-air missile in con-
     nection with military alert exercises, according to official Antara news
     agency. (M&R,2/24/64,11)
* Tory 11 C series of reactors expected to lead to low-altitude supersonic
     vehicle nuclear propulsion system was scheduled to undergo initial
     tests at AEC Nevada Test Site early this year. (M&R, 2/17/64,9)
  In 70-sec. firing, modified Minuteman first stage was used to test prototype
     gimbaling nozzle half as big as one needed for 156-in. solid motor and
     four times as big as any gimbaled nozzle built or tested to date. (M&R,
     2/17/64, 21)
      7@6-5980--65---7
                            March 1964
March 1: Sen. Richard B. Russell (D.-Ga.), Chairman of Senate Armed
    Services Committee, said in CBS network interview that the U.S. had d e
    veloped 1 or 12 of the A-11 2,000-mph experimental jet. He said the
                    1
    A-11 had been “put through all kinds of tests,” and tests were contin-
    uing. The prototype was nearly ready for USAF acceptance. President
   Johnson had disclosed the A-11’s existence at press conference the
    previous day. (Raymond, NYT, 3/2/64, 1; AP, Wash. Post, 3/2/64
   Al)
 At Oklahoma City, where FAA was conducting sonic boom tests in prepara-
    tion for future supersonic transport flights, complaints about the booms
    were outnumbered by supporters of the program. After one month of
    tests, Mayor Jack S. Wikes said his mail was 540-1 in favor of testing.
    Some 2,100 claims for damages had been filed with FAA, but an FAA
    spokesman said there had “been no proof yet of damage directly attributa-
    ble to the sonic booms.’’ Testing would continue five more months.
     (Janson, NYT, 3/2/64,12)
 Frederic A. Louden, 66, former aeronautical engineer at Navy Bureau of
    Aeronautics until retirement in 1957, died after long illness. Louden
    was former head of the Bureau’s special research liaison office for NACA
                                          Committee on Aerodynamics. (Wash.
    and a former member of NASA’s
   Post, 3/3/64)
March 2: NASA and DOD established the National Space Station Planning Sub-
    Panel of the NASA-DOD Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board
     ( A A C B ) , charged with studying and then making recommendations to
    AACB on the best configuration for follow-on manned space station to
    the MOL. Go-chairmen were Dr. Michael I. Yarymovych of NASA Ad-
   vanced Manned Missions Office and Col. Kenneth Schultz, Deputy Di-
    rector of Development Planning for Space, Hq. USAF. (M&R, 3/9/64,
    13; SBD, 3/11/64,383)
 Apollo spacecraft boilerplate command module and related equipment for
    first full-scale test flight of Apollo launch escape system arrived at White
    Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., where it would be flight-testedwith Little
    Joe I1 booster. (MSC Release 64-39)
 NASA announced Hughes Aircraft Co. had been awarded contract to develop
   and build five Advanced Technological Satellites (ATS) based on Ad-
    vanced Syncom design study. The 650-lb. satellites would be used to
   test several spacecraft techniques, particularly spacecraft stabilization
    and orientation in higher altitudes. (NASA Release 64-50; Goddard
   News, 3/9/64,8)
 White House released report by Eugene R. Black and Stanley deJ.
    Osborne recommending revision of US. program to develop supersonic
   transport. As previously disclosed (Feb. 11, 22), the report urged
    Government financing be increased from ’75% to 90% and the program
    be administered by a new, independent agency. (MacKenzie, Wash.
   Post, 3/3/64, A24)
      90
                                                                         91
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

March 2: Dr. Charles A. Berry (M.D.) was named Chief of Medical Programs
    for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, MSC Director Dr. Robert H. Gilruth
    announced. In this new position Dr. Berry would be in charge of all
    medical and physiological matters in the MSC mission. Promoted to
    Dr. Berry’s vacated position, Chief of Medical Operations, was Dr. D.
                                                                Release 69-40)
    Owen Coons (M.D.), formerly Deputy Chief. ( ~ S C
  AEC released report from its Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards
    concerning NASA Plumb Brook Reactor Facility. After reviewing NASA’s
    application to convert its provisional Operating license to 10-year oper-
    ating license, the Committee concluded that “with careful planning and
    operation, the NASA PBRF organization can continue to operate this
    facility without undue hazard to the health and safety of the public.”
    (AEC Release (2-46)
  Sen. Stephen M. Young (D.-Ohio) spoke in Senate of NASA’s             selecting
    Boston as site for new electronics research center, charging that “there
    is little to indicate that thorough evaluation was given to potential loca-
    tions distant from the Boston area” and pointing out that “in all
    respects, Cleveland eminently qualifies for this important new facility.
       “. . . Each time a new facility is proposed, we hear the same well-
    worn argument that it should go to an area which already has institu-
    tions with experience in this field. As a result a vicious cycle has formed,
    and it can almost be predicted that any new important space facility will
    go to Boston, Houston, or to California. . . .
       “Frankly, I a m tired of the argument. I rise today to speak briefly
    in protest of what has been going on. . . .” (CR,     3/2/64,3943-44)
* Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles in NASA Office of Advanced
    Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science
    and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking:
       “. . . space vehicle research, first of all, produces knowledge that
    permits the accomplishment of new missions. When the knowledge
    resulting from research is obtained well in advance of the planning of
    new missions, we may proceed with confidence that the missions are
    feasible. For this reason, the generation of new knowledge through
    research should, when possible, precede developments that are beyond
    the current state of the art. Only when the pressures for immediate
    development are extremely great, as has been the case in these first years
    of our national space program, are we justified in violating the principle
    of order in favor of expediency. When we possess adequate research
    data, we not only are confident of the feasibility of any new miss:ons for
                                                .
    which we may wish to plan, but we also . . lay the basis for improved
    reliability and efficiency and for reductions in the weight and cost of the
    space vehicles required for these missions. The truth of these princi-
    ples has been demonstrated many times in the past by costly develop-
    ments which either had to be abandoned for lack of the necessary tech-
    nical capability to complete them -or which could only be salvaged by
    crash research programs.
       “We must, therefore, strive through research to develop new knowl-
    edge that will make new space missions possible, if and when national
    policy should dictate that any one of these missions must be accomplished.
    At the same time we must conduct the research required to ensure the
    success of on-going projects, and we must also strive through research
92                                                        19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTTCS,

     to pave the way for increased reliability and efficiency of space vehicles
                           ..   .” (Testimony)
    of proven feasibility.
March 2: In interview with Aviation Week and Space Technology, Air Force
    Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert replied to question about MOL:
        “I am sure that the MOL must go forward. I am in sympathy with
     Mr. McNamara’s pressing us to try to define what we hope to do with it.
     This can have a lot to do with the subsystems that you plan to put in it.
     Also, the definition effort has to do with the cost, and with the time it is
     going to take us to do the job. We haven’t suffered at any time in the last
     three years that I have been here by taking a few months to try and work
     out with reasonable precision what we are planning to do. I am con-
     vinced, for one, that the studies and program definition that we went
     through in the Titan 3 materially improved our chances of getting a fine
     booster at lower cost. I know, as Secretary McNamara knows, that
     there is a limit to the precision with which you can define what you are
     going to do with something you haven’t got. But the effort should be
     made to set out the parameters. It has-the merit, at least, of excleding
     some of the things you know you are not going to try. I’m convinced
     Mr. McNamara means exactly what he says-that we have to get this
     MOL capability, and I’m not disturbed by the efforts that are being made
                                                              . . .”  (Av. Wk.,
     to attempt to define what we mean by a capability.
     3/2/64, 73)
0 Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis E. LeMay said in testimony

     before House Armed Services Committee that the Titan I11 launch ve-
     hicle program was “proceeding satisfactorily” and that USAF was “un-
     dertaking the development of a medium altitude communications satel-
     lite program.
       “. . .  the next major step toward the achievement of future space
     capabilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was a p
     proved for development under Air Force management. The MOL will
     provide a means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire infor-
      mation essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the use-
      fulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages
      which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve
      as a platform to suppoa testing of equipment and procedures in the
      environment in which they will be used.” (AF Info. Pol. Ltr.)
  N e w York Times editorialized that the A-11 experimental aircraft “repre-
      sents an engineering breakthrough on several fronts and a tribute to
      Lockheed, but it will not satisfy the need for an advanced manned inter-
      ceptor, a long-range bomber or a new high-speed commercial craft.”
      (NYT, 3/2/64,26)
  Col. John C. Nickerson (USA), 47, a key- figure in USA-USAF Thor-Jupiter
      controversy, died in automobile accident in Alamagordo, N. Mex. (UPI,
      Wash. Post, 3/3/64, A2)
March 3: Albert J. Evans, NASA Acting Director of Aeronautics, said before
      Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee
      on Science and Astronautics :
         “The Aeronautical Research effort of the National Aeronautics and
      Space Administration has one specific goal: to provide technical infor-
      mation for use by the aircraft manufacturers of the United States, in-
      formation which is sufficiently far advanced to permit the design and
      production of military and civil air vehicles which are superior to those
      of any other nation.
                                                                        93
               ASTRONAUTICS ANI, AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

        “Our aeronautical program is classified in four broad disciplinary
               ..
    categories . : Aerodynamics, Structures, Air-Breathing Propulsion,
     [and] Operating Problems.
        “The resources utilized in accomplishing the NASA Aeronautical Re-
    search program are found primarily in the highly-competent technical
    staffs of the four Research Centers of the NASA. The in-house effort is .
    supported, as required, by a certain amount of out-of-house contract re-
    search performed by universities, non-profit organizations, and private
    industry. The funds requested for the NASA Aeronautics program sup-
    port these in-house and out-of-house research efforts. The program,
    however, is predominantly an in-house effort, conducted in the estab-
    lished framework of the theoretical and experimental research activity
                                   ..    .” (Testimony)
    of the NASA Research Centers.
March 3: AEC announced plans to explode two experimental nuclear reac-
    tors-one a SnaplOA for spacecraft use and the other a ground-based
    reactor for civilian power-during forthcoming two weeks. The tests,
    to be made at AEC’S National Reactor Testing Station, Arco, Idaho, were
    intended to provide “vital safety information.” (AP, NYT, 3/4/64,5;
    AP, Wash. Pust, 3/4/64)
a Dr. Evelyn Anderson, research scientist at NASA Ames Research Center,
    was among the six distinguished’ career women to receive Federal
    Women’s Award at banquet in Washington. (NASA Notice)
a Douglas Aircraft Co. was awarded follow-on study contract for Manned
    Orbital Research Laboratory by NASA Langley Research Center, to refine
    the NASA concept and examine the feas2bility of cylindrical six-man space
    station using equipment providing intermittent artificial gravity. Selec-
    tion of Douglas for contract negotiation was announced last December.
     ( LARC Release)
  Sen. Gordon Allott (R.-Colo.) said on Senate floor:
          ..
        “. how is it that this country develops a plane which costs a vast
     sum . . . and now it is declared that we have fully and successfully
     developed an advanced experimental jet aircraft, but the very committee
    which has to approve the appropriation required for the development
     of that aircraft knows nothing about it?
       “. .  . having sat on the Defense Subcommittee of the Appropriations
     Committee, beginning in 1959, and having attended at least 98 percent
     of all the meetings all the time that subcommittee has met, the first time
     I ever heard a word mentioned about the A-11 was when I turned on
    the television, over the weekend, and saw the President make the an-
                  .
     nouncement. . . Unfortunately, I have not been able to ask the dis-
                                                .
     tinguished chairman of the subcommittee. . about this matter; but all
     the rest of my colleagues on the subcommittee have told me they know
                             . .” . (CR, 3/3/64,400647)
     nothing about the A-11.
  Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) inserted into the Congressional Record
     an editorial from the Fall Street Journal concerning Government par-
     ticipation in financing the supersonic transport :
       “. .. The question, as we see it, is not whether there will eventually
     be operational supersonic airlines, or even whether the Government has
     any business in that business. Rather, it is a question whether the
     Government is trying to rush the thing before its economic time, with
     too few charts and too little knowledge.
94             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

      “A more cautious ffight into the unknown couid well make for speedier
   progress in the end-not to mention sounder investments.’9 (CR,     3/3/
    64,4067)
March 3: Spokesman for Maser Optics, Inc., said “laser rifle” had been
    delivered to Army’s Frankford ArsenaL “Laser rifle,” producing in-
    tense bursts of light, could be used for such tasks as igniting objects or
    detonating explosives. (UPI, NYT, 3/4/64, 23)
March 3-6: British aviation officials met with FAA representatives in Wash-
    ington for technical policy discussions of civil aviation matters. Meth-
    ods for exchanging information on environmental aspects of supersonic
   transport were among the matters discussed. (FAA Release &19)
March 4: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, appearing before Senate Com-
    mittee on Askonautical and Space Sciences., said:
       “It is apparent to most persons who are concerned with the national
    space effort that we have reached what you described recently, Mr. Chair-
    man, as a ‘critical mid-point’ in our effort to achieve space pre-eminence
    for the United States. We have moved from a circumstance in Which
    the Soviet Union held clear superiority in space to one in which, as a
    result of the driving effort put forth in the past five years, we have
    achieved a degree of parity with the Russians in our ability to penetrate
    and operate in the space environment.
       “As a consequence of this significant progress, the nation is in a
    position to consider not merely what it is able to do in space, but also
    what it is wise to do in view of our greatly increased scientific and
    technical ability. we have, in short, moved from a period in which we
    did everything we could in space, and regretted our inability to do more,
    to one in which we have a very large capability and are increasingly
    confronted with hard decisions in the selection of the programs which
    we will undertake.
       “This is the position in which NASA found itself in preparing the
    program which is the basis for the FY 1965 authorization request. We
    have deferred or eliminated many projects which were worthy con-
    tenders for a place in the program and which, I believe, when ;budgetary
    limitations are less restrictive, the nation will decide to undertake. The
    activities which are proposed for FY 1965 will, in my judgment and that
    of my associates, produce the greatest benefits for the country within
    the limitations of the national resources which the President has decided
                                                                         . .”
    are available and can prudently be spent for the NASA program. .
       Mr. Webb cited mounting evidence that NASA’s for scientists and
                                                         need
    engineers was not adversely affecting other areas:
       “At the beginning of this calendar year, approximately 74,000 scien-
    tists and engineers were employed in the NASA program-about 12,000
    within NASA, and 62,000 under NASA contracts and grants. This
     amounted to approximately 4.9 percent of the 1.5 million scientists and
    engineers in the nation’s work force.
       “By next January, it is estimated that about 82,000 scientists and
    engineers will be working on the NASA program; about 5.2 percent of the
    available national supply. If the space effort were to continue at the
    present level of funding for the remainder of the decade, NASA’s   program
    is not expected to require more than 5.5 percent of the national supply
    of scientists and engineers.
                                                                          95
                                 AND                    19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS            AERONAUTICS,

       “Of particular interest, however, is the fact that NASA’s
                                                              requirement
    for additional engineers has peaked at an earlier period than had been
    anticipated. Current statistics indicate that the number employed on
    NASA work increased by about 30,000 during the last calendar year,
    rather than 20,000 as had been anticipated. As a consequence, our
    requirement for the current year will be only about 8,000 instead of
    18,000 as had been projected. We will thus require a much smaller
    share than had been anticipated of the 45,000 engineers who will com-
                                    . . .”
    plete their education this year.        (Testimony)
March 4: NASA and French National Center for Space Studies ( CNES) agreed
    to proceed with cooperative space project of launching satellite to inves-
    tigate characteristics of VLF electromagnetic wave propagation in the
    ionosphere. The French satellite would be launched from PMR using
    a Scout vehicle provided by NASA. This would be Phase I1 of two-phase
    CNES-NASA program for VLF investigations, pursuant to Memorandum
    of Understanding dated Feb. 18, 1963. Phase I consisted of two sub-
    orbital launches of French experiments with US. Aerobee sounding
    rockets, to demonstrate the feasibility of scientific experiments to be
    performed by the satellite. (NASA Release 64-61)
0 NASA announced signing preliminary $800,000 contract with Ball Brothers

    Research Corp. for construction of five additional Os0 (Qrbiting Solar
    Observatory) satellites. Ball Brothers already had built two Oso’s-
    one of which was orbited in 1962 and the other scheduled for orbit this
    year-and was in the process of building a third. The five additional
    Qso’s would study solar cycle through periods of increased activity dur-
    ing the late l%O’s. (NASA Release 64-51)
* NASA Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space
    exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub-
    committee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that
    “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, deci-
    sions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require seri-
    ous attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space explora-
    tion-including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned
    and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said
    that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth
    orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations
    in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for
    manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4,2729-
    2804)
  NASA announced granting 28 waivers of US. commercial rights to inven-
    tions resulting from work performed under NASA contracts, bringing total
                patent waivers to 74. Under policy “designed to encourage
    of NASA’s
    prompt public and industrial benefit from the scientific byproducts of
    its research and development activities,” NASA granted the patent rights
    to 12 companies, one university, one research organization, and two
    individuals (jointly). NASA retained royalty-free license for any gov-
    ernmental use of the inventions. (NASA Release fX-52)
  Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) said in the House:
       “Atlas has more scheduled launches during the 1960’s than ever before
    for missions o the Air Force Systems Command and NASA, a demand 50
                   f
    great that a new standardized Atlas space launch vehicle called SLV-3
    or Atlas-3 has been designed. This standardized vehicle wl produce
                                                                 il
96              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 190 4

    lower long-term costs while increasing flexibility and flight reliability.
    Development o this standardized vehicle is an excellent example of how
                    f
    existing space systems can be improved to satisfy new requirements.
    Improvement of a flight proven system such as Atlas is inherently more
    efficient and economical than designing new vehicles for new missions.
    Research and development costs are already expended and Atlas has cer-
                                 ..   .” (CR, 3/4/64, A1115)
    tainly proven its reliability.
March 4: ComSatCorp applied to FCC for authority to construct and orbit
    over the mid-Atlantic a synchronous-orbit communications satellite to
    provide commercial service on an “experimental-operational” basis
    between North America and Europe. The satellite was described by
    ComSatCorp as an “initial step in the development of a global com-
    munications system.” It would provide 24-hour communications service
    capable of relaying TV broadcasts or up to 240 telephone calls. Plans
    called for the satellite to be orbited in spring of 1965 with a TAT-Delta
    booster supplied by NASA on a reimbursable basis. (ComSatCorp
    Release)
* USAF planned to launch six manned orbiting laboratories (MOL) over an
    18-month period, beginning in late 1967 or early 1968, unnamed sources
    revealed in Washington. (UPI, Omaha Eve. World-Herald, 3/4/64)
  FAA announced Lufthansa-German Airlines had reserved three delivery
    positions for US. supersonic transport aircraft, bringing total of reserved
    positions to 75 by 14 airlines. (FAA Release 64-20)
0 DOD announced establishing fundamental policies for application and con-

                                            .
    duct of Project Definition Phase (PDP) The technique would be applied
    to all proposed engineering or operational system development projects
    with development, test, and evaluation costs amounting to $25 million
    or more or with production costs amounting to $100 million or more.
    Major benefits were expected to include reduction of technical changes
    during development-production cycle, decreased cost, improved opera-
    tional effectiveness or early cancellation of projects. (DOD Release
    186-64)
  Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, touring Copenhagen, predicted that
    U.S.S.R. would conduct another manned space flight sometime this
    year. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3 / 4 / a )
March 5: 1,300-lb. instrumented payload was carried to 97,000 ft. by balloon
    in Coronoscope I1 project, sponsored jointly by om, NSF, and NASA. Re-
    leased from National Center for Atmospheric Research near Palestine,
    Tex., the balloon traveled about 105 mi. eastward, then doubled back to
    travel another 100 mi. before dropping its instrument payload on radio
    command signal, 50 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Gordon Newkirk of
    High Altitude Observatory at Boulder, Colo., said photographs made by
    the instruments were expected to aid in study of effects of sun’s corona
    upon earth’s magnetic field and upper atmosphere. (Houston Chron.,
    3/6/64; Houston Post, 3/6/64)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, appearing before Senate
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, reported on NASA’s        ac-
    tivities in international cooperation during 1963:
       “Six new international satellites, to be built and financed by three
    other nations, were programmed as contributions to the NASA scientific
    satellite efFort over the next six years, bringing to ten the number of
    such cooperative satellite projects completed, in process, or agreed. . . .
                                                                           97
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    Seven foreign experiments were selected in competition with domestic
    proposals for flight principally on NASA observatory satellites during the
                      ...
   nextthree years.
       “Nineteen sounding rockets carrying scientific payloads were launched
    here or abroad in joint projects with nine countries, raising to forty-six
   the total of such launchings to date.
       “New agreements were concluded with India and Pakistan under
    which both countries will join the UK and Australia in a year-long test
                                                  . . .”
    of meteorological sounding rocket systems.
       After listing NASA activities in the categories of international ground-
   based experiments and relationships with European agencies (ELDO and
    ESRO) , D . Dryden discussed implementation of the US.-U.S.S.R. bi-
              r
   lateral agreement for space cooperation :
          ..
       “. Correspondence has been maintained [with the Soviet Acad-
   emy of Sciences], although the Soviet side has not met time schedules
    on most agreed action items. However, the Soviet Academy of Sciences
    has just conducted optical observations of the ECHO 1 satellite during
                                                               1
    its early orbits and we were able to begin the telecommunicationsexperi-
    ments with ECHO 11 between the Jodrell Bank Observatory in Great Brit-
    ain and the U.S.S.R. on February 21. While we have not yet received
    detailed data of the optical observations and have still to evaluate the
    results of the telecommunications tests, which we have received, I think
   the real significance is that we are taking advantage of existing programs,
   approved and executed on their own merits, to provide an opportunity
    for scientists and engineers of both countries to gain experience in work-
    ing together for their mutual benefit. This is obviously a pioneer ven-
   ture and it has purposefully been designed as a coordinated rather than
    a joint effort. There is no provision for exchange of funds between the
   two countries, no exchange of equipment is involved and all exchanges
    of data are to be on a reciprocal basis and made available to all other
                          . .”
   interested countries. .          (Testimony)
March 5: In testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space
    Sciences, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., dis-
   cussed NASA’s    relationship with JPL :
       “. .
          . [A] major contracting advance is taking place in our operat-
                                                                          .
   ing relationships with the California Institute of Technology . .
    [which] manages the NASA’s Propulsion Laboratory under contract.
                                    Jet
   Originally, the Laboratory and the contract for its operation were trans-
   ferred to NASA from the Army in 1959. As the functions of the Lab-
   oratory have expanded and changed, we have modified the NASA/CIT
    relationships to meet the current needs of the program. The present
    contract expires at the end of this year, and we have carefully nego-
   tiated its extension under terms more applicable to current agency re-
    quirements. A comprehensive review has been made of the operating
   experience gained since the inception of the NASA/CIT/JPL relationship.
   As a result of this study, improved operating procedures in both the
   technical and administrative aspects have been developed and imple-
    mented. In addition to reflecting clauses which implement the above
    improvements in management, the new arrangements include three ma-
   jor departures from earlier agreements:
       “First, the earlier contracts were based on a principle of mutually re-
    quiring CIT/JPL concurrence before NASA directions would be carried
98              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

     out. Thia often resulted in lengthy ‘negotiations’ of assigned tasks.
     The new contract restricts the principle of mutuality to the broad terms
     of the operating relationship, but clearly gives NASA the unilateral right
     to issue task orders, require reports, and take other administrative ac-
     tions as desired.
        “Second, a separate facilities contract is also being negotiated which
     will provide the government a more direct control over the planning,
     construction, and utilization of the facilities at JPL.
        “Third, a new principle is provided for determining CIT’s fee for the
     operation of the Laboratory. The new contract contains a schedule
     which sets the upper and lower limits of the fee on the basis of the dollar
     volume o work which NASA places with CIT/JPL. The exact fee within
                f
     these limits, will be determined by how well CIT/JPL performs in the
     management of the Laboratory.” (Testimony)
March 5: First of series of background briefings on scientific and technical
     aspects of NASA programs was held at NASA Hq., with Dr. John E. Naugle,
     Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, reviewing the broad
     scientific objectives of the space program. Dr. Naugle revealed NASA
     planned to ask three separate companies for independent design studies
     of Advanced Ogo’s and Oao’s (Orbiting Geophysical Observatories and
     Orbiting Astronomical Observatories). The Advanced Os0 (Orbiting
     Solar Observatory) design work by contractor Republic Aviation was
     progressing, and Aoso should be in operation in 1969. (NASA Memo;
     SBD, 3/6/64,360)
* In press conference, Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced
     reduction of B-70 development program from three aircraft to two.
                    ..    . is a result of a very comprehensive review of the
     “This action
     project we have just completed, and it reflects our concern over the
                                              .
     continued delays in the program . . brought about by severe tech-
     nical difficulties.
       “. .   . the first flight [originally] was scheduled for December 1962.
     The program is already some 18 months behind that schedule and the
                                                             .
     first aircraft has not yet been completely assembled. . .
                                                       ..
        “We have been plagued with fuel leaks in .          [the Number Three]
               .                    ...
      airplane. . . I am told               that the first plane, if it flies this
              ..
     spring .       or certainly before mid-year, will probably fly with one
     tank not usable because of continued leak problems.
         “Secondly, we have had serious problems in mating the wing to the
     fuselage. It is a very, very complex form of construction. We are using
     what amounts to a steel sandwich in the B-70 to solve the high tempera-
     ture problems associated with supersonic speed, and the welding pmb-
     lems associated with mating this steel sandwich wing and fuselage con-
                                            ..   .” (Transcript, NYT, 2/6/64,
     struction have been severe, indeed.
     12; DOD Release 19444)
* Senate passed compromise $16,976,620,000 military authorization bill for
     FY 1965 procurement and R&D. The Senate-House conferees retained
     $50 million for initiating development of new manned bomber, dropped
     $40 million approved in House bill for improved manned interceptor
     aircraft. (NYT, 2/6/64, 3)
  AEX issued annual report of its 1963 highlights and accomplishments. In
     preface summarizing and evaluating significant activities, AFSC Com-
     mander General B. A. Schriever said:
                                                                          99
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

          ..
       “. In 1963 AFSC made major contributions to the nation’s defense
    and space exploration programs. These included delivery of ballistic
    missiles at an average of one per day, completion of vital early warning
    and air defense systems, first flight of the transport aircraft which will
    make world wide airlift a reality, and delivery of the launch vehicles
    which made possible the orbital flights of Commander Schirra and
                    ...
    Major Cooper.
       “Cancellation of the X-20 DynaSoar program in late 1963 and assign-
    ment to the Air Force of responsibility for development of a near-earth
    Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) represent a shift in emphasis
    from reentry technology to on-orbit experiments. MOL, which is d e
    signed to provide a means of obtaining hard, factual data concerning
    man’s capabilities in operational space vehicles, is among AFSC’S most
                      . . .”
    urgent projects.          (AFSC Release 42-R-24; AFSC 1963 Ann. Rpt.)
March 6: “Boosted Arcas” sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops
    Station to 59.5-mi. altitude with sodium-lithium payload designed and
    built by Sweden’s Uppsala Ionospheric Observatory on contract to
    Swedish Space Committee. The wide and reddish sodium-lithium cloud
    ejected in the atmosphere was visible for many miles and was photo-
    graphed from several locations. The test was in preparation for series
    of such launchings in the auroral zone in northern Scandinavia later
    this year, to study cawes of aurora and airglow. This first launch of
    Boosted Arcas from Wallops was quite successful. Small booster in-
    cluded in the Arcas increased its altitude from normal 225,000 ft. to
    314,000 ft. (Wallops Release 64-24)
0 Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops Station to

    71-mi. altitude with payload of 12 explosive charges to provide data
    on atmospheric winds and temperatures and effects of the “warming
    trend” in the upper atmosphere. Previous measurements had been made
    during February “warming trend,” which moved in westerly direction
    across the northern hemisphere. This second and unexpected warming
    trend appeared to be moving in easterly direction. (Wallops Release
    64-25; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Chamber of Commerce
    dinner in Oxford, N.C., clarified the cost of a US. manned lunar landing
    in this decade:
       “This $20 billion outlay for manned space flight for the period 1961
                                                                  ..   .
    through 1970 is for Projects Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo.
       “Of the $20 billion marked for manned space flight in the present
    decade, $18 billion will be expended for the launch vehicles and space-
    craft, the ground facilities, the astronaut training, and the management
    skills and other human factors that are an integral part of our nation’s
    capital investment. These are all things we must have-in any event-
    to achieve the across-the-board competence in every major area of
    manned space flight that security, well-being, and progress of the nation
    may demand.
       “The portion of this total effort devoted to landing on the moon will
    cost only about $2 billion-that is, sending three Americans on a round-
    trip voyage of lunar exploration, along with everything in the way of
                                                                           ..
    spacecraft and special equipment that the expedition will require. .
       “I hope that this brief and somewhat simplified explanation will put
    the correct price tag on the extra cost of the lunar mission. Let us all
100                              AND   AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS

    endeavor to put the emphasis where it really belongs: on the rapid
    growth of American competence in all areas of manned space flight
    particularly in the area near earth which is the prime importance for
    national security.” (Text)
March 6: Before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences,
    NASA Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy
    Planning Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., said that, on the basis of the
    Aerospace Research Application center (ARAC) pdot program, NASA
    “judged the first year of the Indiana University experimental program
    promising enough to warrant support for a second year.” ARAC re-
    ceives all NASA reports, sends pertinent abstracts to subscribing com-
    panies based on their “interest profiles.” This ‘‘model of a regional
    technology transfer program” was being observed by other organiza-
    tions in other regions. Another such program was underway at Wayne
    State Univ. and two others were beginning. (Testimony)
March 6-7: NASA astronauts made trip to the bottom of Grand Canyon and
    back up, in field exercise to train the astronauts as “competent observers”
    of rock and mineral formations. Geologists from NASA Manned Space-
    craft Center and US. Geological Survey served as field instructors.
     (UPI, Houston Press, 3/7/64)
March 7 : TIROS v n ~  meteorological satellite, launched December 21, 1963,
    was performing highly successfully in automatic transmission of cloud
    pictures to ground stations around the world, NASA announced. “Reports
    from 47 ground stations around the world, including five foreign sta-
    tions, show that with one exception results have been satisfactory. TV
    signal strength has been good, tracking of the spacecraft based on data
    furnished daily by NASA has been easy for the ground stations, and
    picture contrast of the cloud cover photos generally has been excellent.”
     (NASA Release 64-53)
* Beckman Instruments, Inc., of Fullerton, Calif., said it received a contract
    for more than $1 million from Grumman Aircraft to produce a data
    acquisition system to be used in development and test of LEM at White
    Sands Missile Range. ( UPI, Houston Chon., 3/7/a)
* Univ. of Miami President Henry King Stanford announced the university’s
    School of Environmental and Planetary Sciences, to open next autumn,
    would be the first of its kind in the nation. With Dr. S. Fred Singer as
    dean, the school would be composed of the Institute of Marine Sciences
    and three new institutes-planetary bioscience, atmospheric science, and
    space physics. The institutes would offer courses leading to both mas-
    ters’ degrees and doctorates. (Mann, Miami Herald, 3/8/64)
  Patent for system of space communications using x-rays has been granted
    to Henry R. Chope, executive vice president of Industrial Nucleonics
    Corp., Columbus, Ohio. The ly2-lb. transmitter employed radioisotope
    as source of energy. (NYTS, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 3/7/64)
March 8: At meeting in Geneva, US. delegation to the U.N. Committee on
    the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Legal Subcommittee submitted to the
     Subcommittee drafts of two treaties. One draft treaty dealt with aid to
     astronauts in distress, calling for nations to take “all possible steps to
     assist or rescue promptly the personnel o spacecraft” having difficulty
                                                  f
     or making emergency landings. Astronauts making emergency landings
     would be returned to their own country “promptly and safely,” and any
     spaceship or its parts falling to earth would be returned to country of
                                                                          101
                                 AND   AERONAUTICS, 19 64
                ASTRONAUTICS

    ownership at the country’s request. The second treaty, dealing with lia-
    bility for damage caused by spacecraft, would establish a “simple and
    expeditious procedure to provide financial protection against damage.”
    (NYT, 3/10/64?, 8 )
March 8: Plans for two-acre US.Space Park at New York World’s Fair were
    announced by DOD and NASA. The Space Park would feature largest
    exhibit of full-scale USAF and NASA rockets and spacecraft ever assembled
    outside Cape Kennedy. (NASA Release &54; DOD Release 197-64)
March 9: Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking of the House
    Committee on Science and Astronautics voted (5-3) to not authorize
    the $10 million NASA requested for N 1964 for beginning construction
    of electronics research center. (AP, NYT, 3/10/64,26; SBD, 3/11/64,
    385)
* House passed H.R. 9637, FY 1965 authorization for military procurement
    of aircraft, missiles, and naval vessels, and for research, development,
    test, and evaluation. Of the $16,976,620,000 total authorization,
    $6,363,320,000 was for R&D. (NASA LAR III/42)
0 Atlas ICBM exploded in its underground silo near Roswell, N. Mex., as it

    was being fueled. USAF said there were no casualties. (UPI, NYT,
    3/11/64,14)
* USAF conducted briefing on the technologies associated with A-11 advanced
    experimental aircraft for officials of airlines and aviation manufacturing
    companies involved in US. supersonic transport development. (FAA
    Release 64-21 )
  Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the A-11 advanced
    experimental aircraft had “already flown long-range reconnaissance
    missions over communist territory.” Government officials flatly denied
    the report, maintaining that the mach 3.5 aircraft had never been on
    any mission outside US. territory. (Av. Wk., 3/9/64, 16; UPI, Wash.
    Post, 3/10/64)
0 Federation of Italian-American Democratic Organizations of New York

    presented to NASA a plaque honoring the late President Kennedy and
    Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci. The plaque, which commemorated
    Vespucci’s sighting the area now called Cape Kennedy, was accepted
    by NASA Administrator Webb in ceremonies at NASA Hq. (NASA An-
    nouncement 6 M 7 . It was subsequently hung in the Hq. building of
    Kennedy Spme Center, NASA; KSC Release 61-64)
* Appointment of David S. Johnson as Director of National Weather Satel-
    lite Center, effective April 1, was announced by Chief of US. Weather
    Bureau Dr. Robert M. White. ML Johnson succeeded Dr. S. Fred
     Singer, resigning to become Dean of new School of Environmental and
    Planetary Sciences, Univ. of Miami. Deputy Director of the Center
    since its formation in 1%2, Mr. Johnson had been engaged in research,
     development, and technical management of meteorological satellites and
     sounding rockets since 1958. (Commerce Release WB 64-6)
Murch 10: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences voted
     (10-4) to approve NASA’s      report on the elwtronics research center.
     (House Science and Astronautics Committee had approved the report
     Feb. 24.) (NASA LAB III/43)
  Soviet draft treaty for aid to astronauts in distress and for return of space-
     cra& was submitted to Legal Subcommittee of U.S. Committee on the
     Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva. Draft. treaty dif-
102            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

    fered from US. draft by providing that country of origin reserve “ex-
    clusive right” to search unassisted for the downed spacecraft on the high
    seas. Soviet draft also specified two conditions for returning space-
    craft: (1) the spacecraft must have been launched “for the purposes of
    peaceful exploration and use of outer space” and (2) the purpose and
    launching of the spacecraft must have been “officially announced.”
    (NYT, 3/11/64,5)
March IO: Search for fragments from the moon would be conducted this
    spring in six western Iowa counties by NASA and US. Dept. of Agricul-
    ture, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe an-
    nounced. Western Iowa was chosen after Dr. O’Keefe had found some
      66
      promising” specimens there on an exploratory trip last summer. Resi-
    dents of select counties were requested to turn over any unusual stones
    found during spring plowing of loess soil areas to local USDA offices.
    Stones seeming most likely to have nonterrestrial origins would be for-
    warded to GSFC for further scientific examination and study. (GSFC
    Release 6-6-64)
* Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell Jr., and Maj.
    Thomas P. Stafford practiced in the Gulf of Mexico developing a train-
    ing technique for escaping from Gemini spacecraft, both with and with-
    out flotation collar. (MSC Release)
  Dr. George G. Manov, Director of Exhibits, NASA Office of Public Affairs,
    died in Washington after a heart attack. (NASA Announcement 64-55)
0 Army Corps of Engineers awarded $1,860,884 NASA contract to C. H.

    Leave11 Co. and Morrison Knudsen for construction of vibration test
    laboratory at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston. (DOD Release
    207-64)
* Patent grant to USN space surveillance system, which detects and catalogs
    silent and “lost” satellites from its stations stretched across the Southern
    US., was announced. (NYTNS, Louisville Courier-Journ., 3/10/64)
March 11 :House Committee on Science and Astronautics, considering NASA’s
    N 1965 authorization bill, cut the $3.54 billion manned space flight
    request by $41.6 million. “Not one single penny was cut from the
    Gemini and Apollo programs,” Rep. Olin Teague pointed out. The
    cuts included $3.9 million for advanced planning; 10% of $224.9 mil-
    lion requested for construction; and 5% of $304.9 million requested for
    administration and operating expenses. Of $777 million requested for
    space sciences, $742 million was approved by the Committee, cutting
             request by 4yZ%. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 3/12/&; WSJ,
    NASA’s
    3/12/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/12/&)
* USAF announced Atlas-Agena D launch from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with
    undisclosed satellite payload. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/12/64)
0 NASA announced selection of Lear Siegler, Inc., Electronics Instrumentation

     Div. for negotiation o contract to install new electronic systems and
                             f
    modify present systems at East Test Area of Marshall Space Flight
     Center, Huntsville, Ala. Contract value was estimated to exceed
    $4,,,000,000. (NASA Release 64-59)
* Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) proposed on the House floor that NASA
     establish a Midwest office, similar to its North Eastern Office and West-
                              “. .  . The benefits of such an office to NASA
    ern Operations Office.
     would be great and certainly it would be a step in establishing a work
     ing relationship between NASA and the Midwest. It would also assist
                                                    ...
     NASA in exploiting the potential of the Midwest.
                                                                         103
                                 AND   AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS

        “I cannot stress enough the need for a more equitable geographic
    distribution of our defense and space activities. It is in the national
    interest that steps be taken to spread these activities throughout the
    country. My proposal for a NASA Midwest office would be a step in that
    direction.” (CR, 3/11/64,4725)
March 11 :Soviet news agency Tass said Soviet scientists had concluded the
    moon’s surface was a “loose porous substance” and the interior was
    solid rock. Conclusion was said to be based on study of radio waves
    from the moon. (AP,        Wash Post, 3/12/64)
March 12: Scientific results from the EXPLORER XVIII satellite-Interplinetary
    Monitoring Platform (IMP)-W=        topic of discussion at GSFC symposium.
    The NASA satellite was orbited in November 1963, with onboard instru-
    mentation including two magnetometers, three plasma probes, and five
    sets of low and medium energy particle detectors. IMP data revealed a
    shock wave existed 53,600 mi. above earth’s sunlit surface, formed by
    interaction of interplanetary magnetic field and high-speed constant
    wind of particles from the sun. Between shock wave and upper edge
    of Van Allen belts, a region ranging in depth from 12,000 to 20,000 mi.,
    there is great turbulence; moderately energetic particles constantly flow
     into the region and drain away. (Simons, Wash. Post, 3/13/64; NYT,
    3/13/64; Goddard News, 3/23/64,1-2)
* NASA announced establishment of new research program with Lockheed
    Missiles and Space Co. to develop advanced technology for large nuclear
    and chemical rockets. The program would continue certain research
    begun under Project Rift (Reactor-In-FlightTest), principally insulation
     development, cryogenic testing, structural development, application of
     Rift technology to Saturn stages, and documentation of pertinent tech-
    nology for future use. NASA had committed an initial $500,000 letter
    contract to the program; cost of seven-month period was expected to be
     about $1.5 mlllion. (NASA Release 64-57)
* House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved $7644 million for
    advanced research and technology in NASA’s FY 1965 budget authoriza-
    tion, a cut of nearly $30 million from NASA’s    request. The Committee
     restored $10 million for initiating construction of electronics research
    center, which the Advanced Research and Tracking Subcommittee had
    cut. (Wash. Post, 3/13/64)
  NASA and Australian Ministry for Supply announced agreement for estab-
     lishment of space tracking and data acquisition station in the Orroral
     Valley near Canberra, Australia, for ground support of NASA’s     Orbiting
     Observatory satellites. The facility would be a sister facility to NASA
    stations near Fairbanks, Alaska, and Rosman, N.C., which monitor,
     control, and command the Orbiting Observatories, as well as receive,
     record and forward to the control center information transmitted from
     the satellite to the ground. (NASA Release 6655)
* Army Missile Command’s new R&D center at Redstone Arsenal was dedi-
    cated. The facility was named for Maj. Gen. Francis J. McMorrow,
    AMC commander at the time of his death last year. (M&R,3/9/64,9)
March 13: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot John B. McKay near Edwards
     AFB with a microphone embedded in the X-15’s side to record noise of
     turbulent air sweeping over the surface, to help in prediction of metal
     fatigue. The X-15 reached maximum speed of 3,239 mph (mach 4.91)
     and peak altitude of 76,000 ft. This was 102nd flight of the X-15. (NASA
    X-15 Proj. Of; UPI, Wash. Post, 3/14/641; UPI, NYT, 3/14/64, 39)
                     f.
104             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

March 13: Fourth stage of four-stage Blue Scout rocket failed to ignite after
     USAF launch from Cape Kennedy. The booster was to have sent a
     USAF scientific probe 23,000 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic
     field. Preliminary estimates indicated the 33-lb. payload reached alti-
     tude of several hundred miles before it fell back into the Atlantic Ocean.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/13/64)
  S-I booster for Saturn I SA-9 was test-fired for 30 sec. in its initial firing
     at NASA jVarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. This S-I was
     the last Saturn I booster built by MSFC; future stages were being built
     by Chrysler Corp., and would be shipped to Huntsville for static firings.
     Since the first Saturn I booster firing March 28, 1960, MSFC had con-
     ducted more than 50 firings on eight flight S I ’ S and one ground-test
     booster, all of which were assembled at MSFC. (Marshall Star,
     3/18/64 1)
0 Publication of Advanced Bearing Technology (SP-38) by Lewis Research

     Center engineers Edmond E. Bisson and William J. Anderson, was
     announced by NASA. The ‘book was described as “an important step in
             Technology Utilization Program aimed at making new space
     NASA’s
     technology available to all branches of industry.” (NASA Release 64-
     58; LRC Release 64-22)
  USAF fired Titan I1 ICBM from Vandenberg AFB more than 5,000 mi. down
     the Pacific Missile Range in 10th and last of series of R&D tests at PMR.
      (AP, Wash. Pust, 3/14/64)
0 AEC conducted low-yield underground nuclear explosion at its Nevada Test

     Site. (UPI, NYT, 3/14/64,38)
March 14: Soviet Air Marshal Madimir Aleksandrovich Sudets, Commander-
     in-Chief of Soviet antiaircraft defenses, said in Izvestia interview that air-
     craft of the A-11 type were “perfectly attainable targets” for Soviet
     antiaircraft weapons. (NYT, 3/15/64,21)
  National Science Foundation plans for initiating its Science Development
     Program this spring were reported. The program would make avail-
     able grants to colleges and universities “that could be given a shot in
     the arm that would have appreciable results and get them started toward
     becoming a center of excellence,” as NSF Director Dr. Leland J. Haworth
     said. (Finney, NYT, 3/15/6d, 39)
March 15: Aerospace Corp. confirmed rumors that Walter C. Williams, NASA
     Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and veteran
     of 24 years’ service with NASA and NACA, had resigned to become vice
     president of Aerospace Corp. and general manager of its Manned Space
     Systems Div. Williams’ resignation was effective March 16. (Houston
     Chron., 3/15/64; Houston Post, 3/17/64; NYT, 3/16/64, 34; MSC
     Roundup, 4/1/64,11
March 16: 38th anniversary of first liquid-fuel rocket flight-that of Dr. Rob-
     ert H. Goddard whose rocket flew 184 ft. in Zyz sec. at Auburn, Mass.,
     in 1926. (A&A/19IS-60,21)
  NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E.
     Mueller, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space
     Sciences to present FY 1965 funding requirements for the manned
     space flight program and to discuss Project Apollo schedule considera-
     tions in detail. Dr. Mueller observed:
                                                                        105
                                 AND                     19 6 4
                  ASTRONAUTICS         AERONAUTICS,

       “The funds thus far appropriated by the Congress represent about one-
    third of the cost of the manned space flight program-up to and includ-
    ing the first manned lunar exploration. We now approach the period
    of maximum effort. The measure before you will bring us about half
    way to the moon.” (Testimony)
March 16: NASA announced requesting from industry proposals for feasibility
    and design study of possible payloads for manned lunar exploration
                                                     .
    with an Apollo Logistic Support System (ALSS) One of the payloads
    was a mobile laboratory capable of supporting and transporting two
    Apollo astronauts for about 14 days; the other payload concept included
    both a stationary base and a smaller vehicle. The ALSS concept, making
    maximum use of Apollo-developedsystems, provided for Saturn V launch
    vehicle to launch into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command
    module, service module, and lunar excursion module modified for land-
    ing equipment rather than men on the.moon and called the LEM Truck.
    Following ALSS landing, astronauts would land nearby in unmodified
    Apollo LEM. MSFC would manage the nine-month study. (NASA
    Release 64-62)
0 Boeing study of post-Apollo manned lunar bases for NASA was basis for

                                                             .
    LESA concept (lunar exploration system for Apollo)          LESA provided
    that a 25,000-lb. module would be soft-landed on the moon by a Saturn
    V launch vehicle. Three crewmen would follow by means of Saturn
    V/Apollo. The module would have 3,000 cu. ft. volume and could
    support three men for 90 days on the moon. Boeing’s lunar Base was
    expandable simply by adding more of the basic shelter modules, and
    longer visits by larger crews could be made with larger lunar bases.
     (M&R, 3/16/@, 26-27)
  Article in Pravda described Soviet radar observations of the planets Venus,
    Mercury, and Mars as “an outstanding achievement in Soviet science and
    technology.” The value of the astronomical unit was computed, as a
    result of radarastronomy measurements, to be equal to 149,599,300km.,
    with an error of +2,000 km. Radar fixes on planets Mercury and Mars
    in June 1962 and February 1963 confirmed their reliability in determin-
    ing the astronomical unit. First radio communications via Venus, trans-
    mitted in November 1962, also were described. Article was signed by
    M. Subbotin, Director, Institute of Theoretical Astronomy, and Member
    of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. (Prauda, 3/16/64, 4, ATSS-T Trans.)
* FCC announced Communications Satellite Corp. planned negotiation of $8
    million contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for development, fabrication,
    assembly, test, maintenance, and service for “Early Bird” communica-
    tions satellite-the   proposed experimental-operational comsat system.
    The proposed contract would be subject to FCC approval. (UPI, Hous-
     ton Chron., 3/17\64; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/64; M&R, 3/23/64,8)
Murch 17: Radio command signal to SYNCOM 1 communications satellite
                                                    1
    pulsed onboard gas jets to increase the satellite’s 6,800-mph speed. The
    satellite began drifting westward at rate of about 1.3 degree per day,
    was expected to reach vicinity of the International Date Line in mid-May.
    There SYNCOM 1 would serve as backup for a third Syncom, kheduled
                       1
    for synchronous orbit over the Pacific in May and transpacific commu-
    nications experiments during the summer. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/a,
     14)
      766-598-8
106            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 190 4

March 17: Launch of NASA’s ionosphere explorer satellite (“Topsi”) was
                               -8
    postponed when malfunction was discovered in Scout vehicle’s wiring
    system during prelaunch checkout at Pt. Arguello. The Scout was
    returned to manufacturer Ling-Temco-Vought in Dallas for repair.
    “Topsi” was to have continued NASA’s        program to gather information
    on structure of ithe upper ionosphere pioneered by three satellites-
    EXPLORER VIII, ARIEL I and ALOUETTE I-and            a number of sounding
                              ,
    rocket flights. (NASA Release 69-49; Au. Wk.,         3/23/64, 23)
* House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved H.R. 10456,NASA’s
    FY 1965 authorization bill, for $5,193,810,500,     which was $110 million
    less than the $5.304 billion NASA had requested. Of this amount,
    $4,327,950,000was for R&D; $248,335,000was for CofF; and $617,-
    525,500 was for Administrative Operations. (H.R. 10456; NASA LAR
    III/48 and III/49)
* Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science
    and Applications, reviewed 1963 highlights in testimony before Senate
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences:
        “Although direct measurements of the physical properties of the
    Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued
    with some exciting results. Lowell Observatory scientists deteoted evi-
    dence of gas escaping from three different spots in the area of the lunar
    crater Aristarchus. This obmvation suggests that the Moon may be
    far from inert, and it has an important bearing on how we may conduct
    our lunar investigation. For example, if the Moon is seismically ac-
    tive, the seismograph may play an important role in the investigation
                          ...
    ofthelunarsurface.
        ‘“Also, much effort was applied to clarifying the data from Earth-
    based or balloon observations of Mars. One important subject of con-
    troversy developed. Whereas it had been believed previously that the
    pressure at the surface of Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 milli-
    bars is roughly one atmosphere of pressure, it is now believed by many
    that the surface pressure on Mars may be as low as 10 or 11 millibars.
    This has serious implications with regard to landing a capsule on Mars.
     If the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas
    with the higher pressure atmospheric drag could be used to slow down
    the incoming capsule.
        “Significant new knowledge on the fundamental physical nature of
    the universe may have to await the launching of the first OAO. In
    the meantime, sounding rocket experiments continue to provide data in
                                      ...
    ultraviolet and radio astronomy.
        “Although the formal development of Scout had been completed, ad-
    ditional work was required to improve its reliability. The primary
     objective of the December 1963 Scout firing was to determine the effi-
    cacy of the measures taken to correct observed deficiencies. The vir-
    tually perfect vehicle performance during this firing encourages one to
                                                          ...
    look for a high success rate in future Scout firings.
        “Performance of all Atlas-boosted launch vehicles would be consid-
    erably improved by introducing a mixture of fluorine and oxygen
     (FLOX) as the oxidizer. Careful study shows this can be done with
    admixtures of up to 30% fluorine without major redesign of the pro-
    pulsion system. We are, therefore, planning to FLOX the Atlas.
    A primary objective of this program is to provide for additional pay-
                                          ..     .’, (Testimony)
    load in the Surveyor investigations.
                                                                         107
                                                        19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONATJl’ICS,

March 17: Sixth anniversary of VANGUARD I satellite, launched into orbit
    Mar. 17, 1958. The satellite’s stability of orbit had provided geodetic
    observations, including the determination that the ea& is slightly pear-
    shaped. VANGUARD I was the only satellite orbited before 1959 that was
    still transmitting. (A&A/I915-60)
0 Dr. Eugene Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director,

    DDR&E), told Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Govern-
    ment Operations Committee that DOD was “very close to an agreement”
    w t the Communications Satellite Corp. on working out a system for
      ih
    military satellite communications. Although decision had not been
    reached as to whether DOD would develop its own comsat system or
    lease channels from ComSatCorp satellites, Fubini said leasing chan-
    nels “has proved to be more feasible than our fondest hopes.” He
    emphasized that there would be “no compromise on security” if the
    commercial system were chosen. (Finney, NYT, 3/18/64, 15; Av.
     Wk.,   3/23/64,19)
March 18: COSMOS XXVI scientific earth satellite was launched into orbit.
     Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite’s initial orbital parameters
     were: apogee, 403 km. (250 mi.) ; perigee, 271 km. (168 mi.) ; period,
     91 min.; angle of inclination to the equatorial plane, 49”. Onboard
     scientific equipment, radio system, and instrumentation were said to be
    functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/19/64, 1, ATSS-T
    Trans.)
  First in series of 16 Judi-Dart meteorological sounding rockets was
     launched by Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commit-
     tee ( SUPARCO) under cooperative agreement with NASA, from Pakistan’s
     Sonmiani Range near Karachi. This was first launching planned as a
     direct contribution to the International Indian Ocean Expedition (IIOE) ,
     a multinational effort by scientific groups to obtain and correlate infor-
     mation on the Indian Ocean area’s oceanic and atmospheric conditions.
     The NASA-SUPARCO project was designed to gather data on the dynamics
     of air circulation at 100,000 to 200,000 ft. above West Pakistan’s coast
     during the coming year. Pakistan purchased the Judi-Dart rockets and
     chaff payloads from the U.S. for assembly and launch from Sonmiani
     Range; NASA loaned to Pakistan for one year the radar needed for track-
     ing the chaff-thousands of tiny metallic threads released at peak alti-
     tude-and was training Pakistani personnel in radar equipment opera-
     tion. (NASA Release &64; Wallops Release 6 6 2 8 )
  NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada,
     with Rice Univ. instrumented payload reached 94mi. altitude in suc-
     cessful experiment to measure light intensities and particle fluxes.
     Rocket performed excellently and instrumentation-two photometers,
     two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetotneters-func-
     tioned properly except for one scintillator, which failed at nose cone
     ejection. The Sammy I1 instrument package was designed and devel-
     oped by Rice University’s Satellite Techniques Laboratory. (NASA Rpt.
     SRL)
  Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on NASA Over-
    sight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, held special
    hearings “to emphasize our interest in seeing that there is progress” in
    advanced propulsion systems. At opening session, representatives
    of four industrial firms recommended development of nuclear rocket
108             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIC%, 1 9 6 4

                                               Officials testifying were George
                                             am C. House, Aerojet-General; Dr.
     Woodrow E. Johnson, Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory; and Dr.
     Theodore B. Taylor, General Dynamics. (SBD, 3/19/64, 433; M&R,
     3/23/@, 12)
March 18: House passed and sent to the Senate $1.6 billion military construc-
     tion authorization bill for FY 1%5 (H.R. 10300). Discussing the bill
     on the floor, Rep. William H. Bates @.-Mass.) observed:
        66This year, research, development, testing, and engineering for our

     Federal Government projects will approximate $15 billion. This repre-
     sents about 17 percent of our entire Federal budget and a much larger
     percent of those funds over which we actually have control.
        “In the various military services in fiscal year 1%5, we will spend
     approximately $7.6 billion on research, development, testing and
     engineering. Izi the bill before you today about $90 million is set aside
                                                 .
     for research and development facilities. . .” (NASA LAR III/50; CR,
     3/18/64,5356)
* Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advan ed
     Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aelo-
     nautical and Space Sciences. He mentioned that NASA’s         Advanced Re-
     search and Technology program encompassed more than 2,000 separate
     tasks and projects, and highlighted a few areas for illustration.
      “. . . Considerable effort is concentrated on commercial supersonic
     transports, a subject of NASA research for many years. Various aircraft
     configurations embodying widely differing design features have resulted
     from this research. All of these designs appear promising, particu-
     larly with regard to supersonic performance. In September 1963, at the
     Langley Research Center, the results of preliminary design studies and
     of related NASA in-house research programs were presented to all inter-
     ested government agencies and major aircraft manufacturers. In gen-
     eral, it was concluded that a supersonic transport for airline use is
     technically feasibly. It was stressed, however, that additional research
     will be required in order to raise the level of technology to the point
     where a supersonic transport can be designed which is economically
                               . . .”
     attractive to the airlines.         (Testimony)
* In testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences,
     Director of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition Edmond C.
    Buckley said :
        “We assure a thorough coordination between NASA and DOD in the
    planning, implementation, and use of ground instrumentation facilities
                                                     .
     through several mechanisms and procedures. . .
        “I feel that the planning within NASA and the cooperation between
     NASA and DOD is such that both NASA and DOD are achieving an optimum
     utilization of the existing ground facilities and of the currently planned
     augmentations to these facilities. I can assure you that this type of
     coordination will continue.
        “I would like to emphasize one point, however. The planning for the
     support of a mission involves so many trade-offs and compromises in
     launch vehicles, trajectories, weight, complexity, and cost that the funda-
     mental responsibility must lie in the hands of the agency responsible
     for the program. This is not only true in the case of NASA projects, but
     it is equally true that DOD has to have full responsibility for the planning
                                                                         109
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    and trade-offs on such projects as Discoverer, Dyna-Soar, and the up-
    coming Manned Orbiting Laboratory. These projects are so complex
    and the things we are trying to do are so new that divided responsibility
                                                                      . . .”
    would most seriously jeopardize the possibility of mission SUCC~SUFI.
     (Testimony)
March 18: Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy
    Director, DDR&E), disclosed in testimony before €Iouse Committee on
    Government Operations, Subcommittee on Military Operations, that DOD
    planned to use one of the Syncom communications satellites for experi-
    mental communications, probably between Hawaii and the Philippines.
     (Finney, NYT, 3/19/6d,14)
* Dr. William A. Mrazek, Director of MSFC Propulsion and Vehicle Engineer-
    ing Laboratory since 1956, was appointed chief engineer of Saturn
    launch vehicle project in MSFC Industrial Operations. (Marshall Star,
    3/18/64, 1)
  Eleanor Pressly, head of Vehicle Section, Spacecraft Integration, Sounding
    Rocket Div. at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and winner o a 1963
                                                                     f
    Federal Women’s Award, was guest speaker at Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson’s
    White House luncheon for “women-doers.” (Wash. Post, 3/17/a)
  Dr. K r H. Debus, Director of John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA,
        ut
    announced US. Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife would admin-
    ister for NASA the entire buffer zone Merritt Island lowlands, nearly
    40,000 acres. (KSC Release 34-64)
  Dr. Norbert Wiener, 69, died in Stockholm. Considered the “father of
    automation” and one of the world’s ranking mathematicians, Dr. Wiener
    was prof. of math at MIT from 1932 to 1960. (AP, NYT, 3/19/64,1)
  In the US. for speaking tour, Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s
                                                                “. . .  I am
    Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, told the Boston Globe:
    terribly impressed by the dynamic effort this country is making to be
    first in space. It appears to me the signs are extremely favorable so
    far as the West is concerned in the stake it has in America’s space
               ..
    program. .
       ‘This is the greatest challenge man has ever faced. If you’re going
    to be the leading power in the world, you simply can’t afford to come
               ..   .”
    insecond.
       Sir Bernard said press reports quoting him as saying the U.S.S.R. had
    given up going to the moon were “completely erroneous.
        “I have every reason to believe the Russians are trying to get to the
    moon every bit as fast as the Americans are.” (Leland, Boston Globe,
    3/19/64)
March 19: Attempt to orbit NASA Explorer Beacon satellite ( 4 6 ) failed
                                                                5-6
     when third stage of Delta launch vehicle burned for only 22 sec. instead
     of normal 40. This was only the second Delta failure and followed 22
    consecutive successes. The 120-lb. satellite was designed to transmit
    data on the ionosphere directly to worldwide network of ground sta-
    tions. In addition to making major ionosphere studies, the satellite
    was to have served as test bed for two geodesic experiments-reflection
     of a laser beam directed from Wallops Island, Va., and transmission on
    two frequencies permitting ground stations to study Doppler method of
    satellite tracking and influence of ionosphere on Doppler tracking.
     (UPI, Wah. Post, 3/20/64; Av. Wk.,   2/23/64 25; NASA Release 64-60)
110             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

Murch 19: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Rice Univ. payload was
    launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 94-mi. altitude. Two pho-
    tometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers
    made coordinated measurements of light intensity and particle fluxes.
    (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Two U.S. commercial airline pilots reported seeing unidentified object
    explode in a “spectacular flash” as it entered earth‘s atmosphere over the
    Atlantic Ocean, about 200 mi. west of Land’s End, England. Press
    sources reported speculation that explosion was part of jettisoned rocket
    used the previous day in Soviet launch of Cosmos satellite. (UPI, NYT,
    3/20/64,2)
* Report by Committee on Science and Public Policy of the National Acad-
    emy of Sciences, Federal Support of Basic Research in Institutions of
    Higher Learning, was issued by NAS. Prepared in response to requests
    from American Society of Biological Chemists and other scientific socie-
    ties, the report attributed success of Federal scientific support program
    “in no small measure to enlightened’policies of several federal agen-
            .
    cies . . specifically to the current emphasis on support by research
                                                               ..
    projects grants and by fixed-price research contracts. .
        r.c
            The record shows a continuous regard for the government’s responsi-
    bility for the money entrusted to it by the people. And the overwhelm-
    ing majority of the scientific community has throughout the record
    respected that responsibility. . : .” (NAS-NRC Release)
  AFCRLscientist Sheldon B. Herskovitz had created a theoretical model and
    operation of an all-plasma radar system. The hypothetical radar system
    was based on some devices already developed, some representing tech-
    niques presently available but not applied, and some that simply were
    theoretically promising. (OAR Release 3-64-3)
* DF.  Robert L. Barre, former NASA Scientist for Social, Economic, and Polit-
    ical Studies, said in address before American Orthopsychiatric Associa-
    tion in Chicago: “Space activities may be viewed either as a cause or as
     a consequence of social and cultural change. From either point of view,
    freedom to engage in scientific activity entails significant social
                     ...
    responsibility.
         <L
            It is ironic that a consequence of the extension of definite verifia-
    ble knowledge, the primary product of science, should be to extend
    confusion. To increase knowledge, not only adds knowledge where it
     did not previously exist, but corrects previously held mistaken knowledge
     and belief. In so doing, it alters the conditions of existence; hence
    man’s relationship, not only to his physical environment, but to other
    men.
         “Scientists produce the conditions from which these alterations de-
    velop. The inescapable responsibility of scientists is to continuously
     inform society of the knowledge they have, or are trying to create, and
    to explain its scientific significance.
          “The institutional locus and the social role of the scientist has tradi-
    tionally fulfilled this .responsibility. The scientist in the past was, not
     only a creator o knowledge, but an integrator, a teacher-a transmitter
                         f
     of knowledge. New knowledge could be incorporated in its appropriate
     context and transmitted more rapidly than it could be produced. Today
    we have altered these arrangements. . . .
                                                                             111
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

       “While slowing down the system for the transmittal of new knowledge
    and reducing the proportion of the educated ppulace who have access
    to the existing system, we are simultaneously speeding up the production
    of new knowledge. While ignoring the processes of evaluation, i n t s
    gration, interpretation, and assimilation of new knowledge, we have
    fixedly accelerated the processes of specialized acquisition of new
   knowledge.
       “We have upset the equilibrium between invention and innovation.
    I submit that the social responsibility of the scientist is obvious: to assist
    society restore the balance.” (Text)
March 20: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was presented
    the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1 9 a , at National Space
   Club’s annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington. Other Space
    Club awards: Dr. Harold A. Rosen and Donald D. Williams of Hughes
    Aircraft Co. received the astronautics engineer award for contributions
    to conception and development of Syncom satellite. Tulane Univ. re-
    ceived a $1,500 grant to further advanced education in the field of science
   and astronautics; McDonneU Aircraft Corp. and General Dynamics/
    Astronautics received Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for perform-
    ance on Mercury spacecraft and Atlas booster of Astronaut L. Gordon
    Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; editors and staff of Fortune magazine received
    the Space Club‘s press award for series of articles ‘‘which provided pro-
    vocative insights into the motivations and accomplishments of the na-
    tion’s space-exploration programs”; Robert P. Walker, mathematics and
    physics student at Univ. of Maryland, received $1,500 Goddard Scholar-
   ship; and Robert Cargill Hall, historian of Lockheed Missiles and
    Space Co., received $200 Goddard Historical Essay award for second
    straight year. ( NSC Release)
 Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address
    at the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner. He compared U.S. and
    Soviet space accomplishments:
       “1. As regards that key feature of booster power, the Soviets are
    ahead on an operational basis, although we are moving up rapidly,
    having attained the current weight-lifting record on a test shot by the
    Saturn I.
       “2. We have placed almost four times as many payloads into earth
    orbit, while they continue each year to increase their absolute lead in
    total weight of net payloads orbited.
       “3. Our numerical progress in orbiting payloads is impressive. Last
    year alone, the U.S. put more payloads into earth orbit than the USSR
    has since Sputnik I in 1957.
       “4. The increasing reliability of our launchings is also impressive.
                      three years, we placed successfully into earth orbit 82%
    During the
    of all the payloads which we attempted to put there. The Soviet record,
    while not identical, is comparable.
       “5. The Soviet heavy Vostok class of vehicle has accumulated some
                                                                      . ..
     1600 orbits, as compared with 37 for our smaller Mercury.
       “6. The Soviets have devoted more of their attention to far-out space
   than we have. As a percentage of total space launching attempts, they
    have devoted five times as much effort to escape-missions to the moon
    and planets as we have. The opposite is true as to near-earth orbits,
     in which the US. emphasis has been much greater than theirs.
I12             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964
       66
         7. Both countries have made impressive strides in accumulating sci-
    entific data about space. We may even be ahead in this regard, but it
    is not safe to assume so.
       ‘‘8- The US. is clearly ahead in world-wide sharing of space research
    in cooperative programs, and in direct application of space technology
    to practical use in communications, weather reporting, geodesy, and
    navigation.
       “In summary, we have made enormous gains in the past few years in
    the race with our able and aggressive competitor.
            .
           . . I want to emphasize that the Soviets have a strong orderly pro-
       61


    gram, with every indication that it is continuing vigorously, apparently
    unaffected by adverse economic factors in their country. Wishful
    thinking to the contrary, we dare not slow down unless we are willing
    to pay the terrific price of second place. . . .” (Text)
March 20: General B. A. Schriever ( USAF) addressed an Air Force Association
    squadron in New York City on the subject of “The Air Force in the
    Years Ahead” :
       “A major consideration in long-range planning today is the rapid
    pace of technical progress. Since the early days of World War I1 we
    have been caught up in a massive technological explosion. One of the
    most important military products of this explosion is the intercontinental
    ballistic missile, which today forms an increasingly important part of
                                  ..  .
    our nation’s strategic forces.
       “In addition to its direct contribution to our national security the
    Air Force ICBM development program has created much of the tech-
    nology, hardware and facilities that have been utilized in the nation’s
    space program. Most of the nation’s space shots to date have been
    launched by military boosters from Air Force facilities. The Titan I11
    Standard Launch Vehicle, which is currently under development by the
    Air Force Systems Command, is based on the technology and experience
    gained in ICBM development.
       “The Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program is the
    logical next step in military space development. The MOL is required
    to help us answer basic questions about man’s role in space, such as
    the length o a time a man can safely remain in orbit, his ability to
                  f
    make full use of his faculties in space, and his ability to perform a
                                       .. .” (Text, AFSC Release 43-R-32)
    useful military function there.
0 Dr. John Peter Minton of the National Cancer Institute confirmed that

    infrared laser rays had killed certain malignant tumors in mice. Dr.
    Minton had conducted several months of experiments in conjunction
    with engineers of the US. Army Missile Command engaged in laser
    research. (DOD Release 237-64)
0 U.S. and Japanese meteorologists ended week-long conference in Miami

    where they formulated informal recommendations for increased inter-
    national cooperation in problems of hurricanes and typhoons. Satel-
    lites and rockets were expected to play key role in the program, ad-
    ministered by Japanese Research Council and the National Science
    Foundation. (M&R, 3/23/@, 8)
March 21 :In experiment to test reactions of astronauts under environmental
    conditions they would encounter outside their spacecraft, three out of
    four subjects suffered the bends. Capt. Eugene A. Degner, ex ert in
    body metabolism conducting tests planned on 50 volunteers at brooks
                                                                         113
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

                                                 ne [least severe] bends had
                                                  chamber pressure dropped
    below that of 30,000 feet.
       “I was surprised at the results, and a little worried because the three
    men complained of the bends and m$d discomforts early in the experi-
    ment period.
       “I was afraid they would keep g&ng worse, but the trouble was
    intermittent and not severe enough to abort the [lo-hour] test.” (UPI,
    Houston Chron., 3/21/646)
March 22: New laser radar system using three lasers operating in tandem
    was under development in Sperry Rand Corp. Electro-optics labora-
    tories, according to S e announcement. Using the three lasers in
                             pw
    tandem to build up to peak power, the device would be the first to in-
    corporate the full potential of laser radar, Sperry said. (N.Y. Her.
    Trib., 3/22/64)
March 23: USAF launched Titan I1 on successful test flight from Cape Ken-
    nedy. The nose cone, carrying malfunction detection instrumentation
    to be used in Project Gemini manned space flights, impacted 5,000 mi.
    down the Atlantic Missile Range. (AP, NYT, 3/24/64; M&R, 3/30/641,
    16)
  Two NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill,
    Canada, and returned good data. The first attained 95-mi. altitude, its
    instrumented payload measuring light intensity and particle fluxes. Rice
    Univ. payload included two photometers, one scintillator, three Geiger
    counters, one Geiger tube, and two magnetometers. The second rocket
    reached 117-mi. altitude with instrumented payload to obtain data on
    charged particles responsible for the visual aurora and on those respon-
    sible for auroral absorption. ( M S A Rpts. SRL)
0 NASA Electronics Research Center Site Evaluation Committee was formal-

    ized by Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. First task of the
    six-man committee would be to draft proposed plan for criteria and
    procedures to be used in the site evaluation; after doing this, the Com-
    mittee would begin evaluating proposed sites in the Greater Boston
    area. Col. Robert P. Young, NASA Executive Officer, was appointed
     Chairman of the Committee. (NASA Release 6 M 7 ; NASA Circular 311)
  European Space Research Organization (ESRO) announced in Paris its
     plans for satellite development program. First two ESRO satellites would
    be launched into orbit from the US. with Scout boosters; launch vehicles
    for later satellites would be supplied by member nations. ESRO set
    budget of $300 million for eight years. (NYT, 3/25/64, 31; A h A ,
     5 & 9)
      /,
  Michael L. Garbacz was appointed Program Manager, Meteorological
     Flight Projects, in NASA Hq. Office of Space Science and Applications.
     Garbacz had served as Acting Program Manager since Sept. 1963. (NASA
    Announcement 64-59)
0 By midnight deadline, 197 communications carriers had filed applications

     with FCC to invest in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP,NYT,
     3/25/64,53)
* Ekonomic analysis of short-haul transport by Systems Analysis and Re-
     search Corp. (SABC) was presented to FAA. SARC concluded modern
     20-passenger, twin-engine aircraft would provide U.S. airlines the most
     favorable operating results for short-haul requirements. Study was
114                                                      19 64
               ASTRONAUTIOS AND AERONAUTIOS,

     part of FAA’s   program to promote development of economic, short-haul
     transport to replace the DC-3.     (FAA Release 64-25)
March 24: Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Cen-
     ter, where she toured the facilities, witnessed a Saturn I and an F-1
     static firing, presented awards to MSFC employees, and was honored at
     luncheon and tea with her Alabama relatives.
        At awards ceremony, Mrs. Johnson presented 30-year service pin to
     Michael J. Rabatin, program coordination officer, and a 20-year pin to
     Mrs. Mary Derryberry, engineering designer. She presented five in-
     vention awards: $300 to Robert J. Carmody for invention of highly
     flexible cellular structure; $400 to Klaus Juergensen for invention of
     bilateral energy transfer system; W O to Lester Katz and Jack J. Nichols
                                          O
     for farce measuring instrument; and $300 to Benjamin M. Saunders for
     self-latching handle. Group achievement award of $500 went to Walter
     F. Gillespie and Alonza J. Davis for contributions to recoverable motion
     picture camera system developed for the Saturn I SA-5, SA-6, and SA-7
     launch vehicles. Mrs. Johnson also presented a $250 Sustained Superior
     Performance award to Mrs. Hazel T. Atchley, contracts assistant.
        In letter to MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, the First Lady
                                                                     ...
     described her visit as “stimulating, exhilarating, informative.        The
     significance o the Saturn has come home to me.” (Marshal2 Star,
                     f
     3/25/64, 1, 4 ; Robertson, NYT, 3/25/64; Marshall Star, 4/1/64, 1)
* NASA launched NikeApache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to
     111-mi. altitude, but telemetry transmitter failed. Five charged-particle
     detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer were included
     in the instrumentation, which was to have obtained data on charged
     particles responsible for visual aurora and those responsible for auroral
     absorption. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* USAF launched Thor-Agena booster combination from Pt. Arguello with
     unidentified payload. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/25/64)
  USAF conducted second flight test of Asset re-entry vehicle at AMR. The
     second stage Qf the Thor-Delta launch vehicle failed to ignite, so the
     1,100-lb.research vehicle fell back into the Atlantic only 500 mi. away
     from the launch site. USAF said the Asset payload had reached 33 mi.
     altitude and was traveling at 10,000 mph at the time of stage sepera-
     tion, but it was supposed to have reached 12,000 mph at separation time.
      (AP, Houston Ckron., 3/24/64; UPI, Wash.Post, 3/25/64)
  Chief engineer of Air Transport Association’s Supersonic Advisory Com-
     mittee, John T. Dyment, estimated it would cost half-again as much as
     the $1 billion estimated by the Government to develop the U.S. super-
     sonic transport and test it adequately. He criticized plans to take steps
     toward manufacturing before prototype testing was completed : “We
     must have supersonic transports built and flying for a year or so to
     gain the experience and the reliability before we even start a production
                               . .”
     line. This is essential. .       Detailed findings of the committee’s two-
     day meeting in New York would be reported to IATA Technical Commit-
     tee May 5. (Clark, NYT, 3/25/6d, 65)
   Export of U.S. aerospace products in 1963 totaled $1.3 billion, according
                                                  .    (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     to ‘Aerospace Industries Association (AIA)
     3/24/64)
                                                                             115
                                                           1964
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

March 25: First TV transmission from Japan to                US. was made, using
    NASA’s   RELAY 1 communications satellite. Q               of the live pictures
                      1
    as well as the sound was excellent. In the telecast Prime Minister
    Hayato Ikeda offered his country’s apologies directly to the U.S. for
     the “unfortunate coincidence” of the stabbing of US. Ambassador Edwin
    Reischauer by a deranged Japanese youth the previous day. The eight-
    minute telecast was seen simultaneously on the three national networks.
     (NASA Release 64-63; UPI, NYT, 3/26/64,3; AP, Wmh.Post, 3/26/64?)
  NASA launched NibApache from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 120-mi. alti-
     tude, its instrumented payload studying particle intensities and energy
     distribution of electrons with energies greater than 50 kev. Instrumenta-
     tion performance was good, but there was some question as to validity
     of data from the plastic scintillator and further study of the data was
    planned. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  House of Representatives v o a (283-73) to approve NASA FY 1965 budget
     authorization of $5,193,810,500. It defeated the only two amendments
     offered: one proposed by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.-Ill.) to delete the
     $14 million for the new Electronics Research Center in the Boston
     area; and one proposed by Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D.-Wis.) to eliminate
     the $24.7 million for aeronautic R&D on supersonic transport aircraft.
     (CR, 3/25/64,6071-6123)
  Rep. Melvin Laird (R.-Wis.) ,speaking in favor of the amendment to elim-
    inate SST funds from the NASA FY 1965 authorization, discussed his rea-
     sons for sup orting the amendment:
        “Within %e next 3 or 4 weeks I predict there will be announced
     a new single manager program by the administration as far as super-
     sonic transport craft is concerned. It will not be a responsibility of
     NASA, Defense or FAA to carry out this program. A new authorization
     to transfer appropriations will be submitted to the Congress to carry out
    this program under single management.
        “As long as we are going to have a new program submitted for a
     Polatis-type single manager concept it is not necessary to include this
     authorization in the NASA authorization bill. I for one heartily endorse
     the plans of the administration to combine the management of this new
     aircraft development program in the hands of a single manager responsi-
     ble to the President. This is in accordance with the Black report. . . .”
      (CR,  3/25/64,6121)
* NASA Lewis Research Center granted $900,000 authorization to AEC Hanford
     Atomic Products Operation for R&D in connection with advanced nuclear
     rocket e n g i n e s f zibrication, test, and evaluation of tungsten uranium
     oxide fuel elements for advanced nuclear rocket engine now under study
     at Lewis. The agreement brought value of work being performed at
     Hanford for NASA to more than $1.5 million. (LRC Release 6 4 4 1 )
  NASA awarded two contracts to Aerojet-General Corp. for development of
     M-1 1.5-million-lb.-thrust rocket engine. One contract was for
     $190,075,635 and provided for R&D work; the other contract was for
     $48,550,074 and provided for necessary test facilities. Development of
     the liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen engine was under technical direction
     of NASA Lewis Research Center. (NASA Release 6446; LRC Release
     64-31]
116                                                     19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIC%,

March 25: With the move of the Advanced Spacecraft Technology Div.,,NASA
    Manned Spacecraft Center had located 2,000 persons at the new Clear
    Lake site. One third of the 60 facilities at the site had been certified by
    the US. Corps of Engineers as operational or ready for occupancy.
     (MSC Release 6 6 5 9 )
 Senators Albert Gore (D.-Tenn.) and Ralph Yarborough (D.-Tex.) said
    DOD negotiations to lease channels from ComSatCorp were grounds for
    repeal of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Laheling the law a
    “giveaway” of a national resource, Senator Gore said it would be
    “remarkable and bizarre” for the Government to lease the system. “We
    will be paying for using what we have given away.” (Wmh. Post,
    3/26/64)
 Minuteman ICBM exploded shortly after launch from silo at Vandenberg
    AFB, and USAF was investigating cause of the explosion. This came five
    days after USAF conducted 50th launch in its Minuteman development
    program, a successful AMR flight. (M&R, 3/30/64,16)
March 25-26: Government and airline technical officials met in Washington to
    review findings in their independent evaluations of designs proposed for
    the US. supersonic transport aircraft. On the basis of further, detailed
    consideration of airline and Government evaluation findings, a decision
    would be made on the future course of the SST program: (1) selection
    of an airframe and an engine proposal for development, (2) selection
    of two airframe and two engine proposals for one-year detailed design
    competition, or (3) determination that the program should be termi-
    nated or redirected if it is decided that none of the proposals meets
                                Release 64-26)
    established criteria. (FAA
March 26: Mockup of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module ( LEM ) was shown
    to the press at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. after three days of
    design inspection by officials of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Ob-
    jective of review was to establish design freeze on most areas of LEM
    design. Under NASA contract, Grumman would build 9 LEMS for ground
    testing and 11for flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/27/64,7; M&R, 4/6/64, 26)
 Soviet satellite COSMOS XXIII burned up in the atmosphere between the
    Great Lakes and the northeastern Canadian coast, according to NORAD.
    Observers in Pendleton, Ore., and Duluth, Minn., reported seeing fiery
    streak in the sky, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory officials
    at Cambridge, Mass., said they assumed the streak was the reentering
                      (AP, Balt. Sun. 3/28/64; AP, NYT, 3/29/64,31)
    COSMOS XXIII.
 At close of 18-day session of U.N. Outer Space Committee’s legal subcom-
    mittee in Geneva, US.delegate Leonard C. Meeker praised the “business
    like” manner in which the subcommittee had studied the draft treaties
    presented by the US. and the U.S.S.R. The subcommittee would meet
    again later this year. (NYT, 3/27/64, 9)
 Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences concluded that Proj-
    ect West Ford dipoles placed in orbit last year had not interfered with
    either optical or radioastronomy observations. Board Chairman Dr.
     H. H. Hess said in report that the board’s conclusion “should not be
    taken either as an endorsement of the experiment or as tacit agreement
    to the launching of another similar belt without further discussion.”
     Consideration of the West Ford dipoles would continue under Space
     Science Board’s newly established Committee on Potentia1 Contam-
                                                                         117
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

   ination and Interference from Space Experiments. ( A- R            Release)
                                                             NS C
                                                               N
March 26: Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy voted $14
   million in AEC’S FY 1965 budget for flight test of SnaplOA reactor.
   This action followed Budget Bureau letter to the Committee acknowledg-
    ing that “reasonable and well informed men can differ” on such issues
    as the Snap flight test and stating that the Administration would con-
    duct flight test if. Congress authorized the funds, as long as the Admin-
   istration’s $2,651,542,000 request for AEC was not exceeded. Late last
   year the Administration had canceled orbital flight-test because of lack of
    specific mission for the Snap; leaders of the Joint Congressional Com-
   mittee, Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.-R.I.) and Rep. Chet Holifield (D.-
    Calif.), had protested the decision, urging President Johnson to approve
    the flight test. (NYT, 3/26,/64+ 24)
 Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in NASA Office
   of Advanced Research and Technology, said in address before Aero
                                         ..
    Club of New England, in Boston : ‘‘ .the NASA effort is not confined to
    a single objective such as landing men on the moon. Rather, it is a broad-
   based research and development effort which is designed to meet the
    needs of any agency of the government having work to do in space.
   And the vigor with which we pursue this activity will determine how
    effectively those agencies can meet their responsibilities, and cope with
                                                ..     .
   their problems in space, in the years ahead.
       “With respect to such a large, complex, and unknown environment
   as space, and the still not precisely defined characteristics of the earth’s
    atmosphere, this nation would be be oblivious to the lessons of history
   if it, in every case, required that exploratory research and development
                                                   .
   be matched to a completely defined mission. . .” (Text)
 Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.-Ill.) spoke on House floor urging passage
    of H.R 8104, his bill to prohibit flight of civil supersonic aircraft gen-
   erating sonic boom overpressures above 1.5 lbs. per sq. ft. Rep. Pu-
    cinski cited FAA’s   current sonic boom experiment in which flights pro-
   ducing overpressure of 1to 1.5 lbs. per sq. ft. had prompted some 2,000
   complaints. ‘(The tests in Oklahoma City can indeed be a big help in
   this whole subject, but only if the FAA has the courage to increase the
    booms to the overpressures which we know the supersonic jets will have
                                                                   .
   to produce to be efficiently and economically operational. . . I am
                                                       ..
    firmly convinced that the 2,000 complaints .            would skyrocket if
    the FAA produced sonic booms approaching 3 pounds or more over-
                              ..
    pressure per square foot. .
       “Mr. Speaker, I submit that this whole [SST] project must be held in
    a state of abeyance until after the FAA has had the courage to generate
                                                                        ..   .”
    sonic boom overpressures in excess of 2 pounds per square foot.
       He then cited FAA and NASA statements to House Interstate and For-
    eign Commerce Committee: “The FAA admits that sonic booms from
    2 to 3 pounds overpressure per square foot will do damage to glass and
    plaster in isolated cases and that sonic booms creating overpressure of
    3 to 5 pounds per square foot will cause widespread window and plaster
                    ..    . [NASA] states that tests carried out by NASA in co-
    damage. But
    operation wilth the US. Air Force show that the lowest overpressure at
    which house windows were broken was 23 pounds per square foot, and
    most of the windows tested survived pressures exceeding 56 pounds per
    square foot.”
118              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

       He said          was “way off the pad in its analysis” and added:
                 NASA
        ..
     “. here we have so vital an issue as the health and welfare of mil-
     lions of Americans and the safety of property throughout the country
     involved and yet these two agencies cannot agree on standards for
                                   ..   .” (CR, 3/26/64,6193-97)
     damage due to sonic booms.
March 26: U.S. manned space flight plans were outlined in Krasnaya Zvezda
      (Red Star) article with Col. G. Terent’yev byline. Saying that the U.S.
     was “not leaving a stone unturned in trying to out&rip the Soviets in
     the conquest of space with manned space vehicles,” the writer gave
     particular attention to Gemini and Apollo plans, then went on to claim
     that U.S. policy “in the conquest of space is far from a peaceful one;
     it has a clearly evident military (more accurately, aggressive) nature.”
      (Krasnaya Zvezda,3/26/64,3, ATSS-T Trans.)
0 Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director of ComSat Systems, Aerospace Corp.,

      before Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee
      on Government Operations, was first witness to speak out against
     military usage of commercial comsat system. Speaking both for him-
     self and for Aerospace Corp., Pritchard said military requirements
     would be 50 different from commercial requirements that either the
     national security would be sacrificed or ComSatCorp would have to
      charge such high rates that there would be no savings to the Govern-
      ment. He proposed alternative system based on simple spin-stabilized
      satellite, capable of growth and expansion to accommodate increased
      needs of military satellite communications. (Av. Wk.,3/30/64, 15;
     SBD, 3/27/64,479)
March 27: ARIEL 11 (UK-C) scientific earth satellite, the second in series of
      three U.S.-U.K. satellites, was orbited by NASA Scout booster launched
      from Wallops Island, Va. Initial orbital data: 843-mi. apogee, 180-mi.
      perigee, 101-min. period, and 52” inclination to the equator. Under
      overall administrative responsibility of the British Office of the Minister
      for Science, the three onboard experiments were designed and built by
      the U.K. to measure vertical distribution of ozone in the upper atmos-
      phere, measure galactic radio noise, and detect micrometeoroids en-
      countered by the satellite. The experiments were chosen by the British
      National Committee on Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey,
      in consultation with NASA. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and
      tested the spacecraft and contracted with Westinghouse Electric Corp.
      for subsystems. (Wallops Release 64-30; NASA Release 64-56)
   COSMOS XXVII satellite was launched into orbit by U.S.S.R.         Announced
      orbital data were: 237-km. (147-mi.) apogee; 192-km. (119-mi.) peri-
       gee; 88.7-min. period; and M.8” inclination to the equator. Soviet news
      agency Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation intended
      for the “further study of outer space in accordance with the program
       announced by Tass” March 16, 1962, as well as radio transmitter and
      telemetering systems. All onboard equipment was functioning nor-
       mally. (Tass, Pruvda, 3/28/641,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
 0 X-15 No. 1flown by USAF pilot Maj. Robert Rushworrth to maximum speed

       of 3,920 mph (mach 5.76) and altitude of 1 1O O ft., in flight near
                                                       0, O
       Edwards AFB, Calif. For the flight a special camera was installed in
       the plane’s fuselage to test optical degradation caused by temperatures
       of up to 1,200” F. This was the 103rd flight of the rocket research
       aircraft. (NASA X-15 Proj. O f ; UPI, Chic. Trib.,3/28/64)
                                       f.
                                                                           119
                                        AERO




    with experimental data obtained from spacecraft on solar winds near
    the earth. Hs theory agreed, in order of magnitude, with experimental
                  i
    data and gave estimate of interp             electron density beyond ob-
    served range out from the snn.              critical altitude for escape at
                                                 .
    about four solar radii, about 1,3             d o v e the visible solar disc.
     (OAR Release 3-64t-5)
  World Book Encyclopedia announced 14 new NASA astronauts had been
    added to the 16 astronauts with four-year contracts for newspaper dis-
    tribution rights to their life stories. World Book-a unit of Field En-
    terprises Educational Corp.--also said the astronauts had signed sep-
    arate contram with Lije magazine. (AP, NYT, 3/28/64,20)
* Severe earthquake caused major damage in southern Alaska, and Presi-
    dent Johnson declared a major disaster area in Alaska. There was no
    apparent damage at NASA tracking station near Fairbanks, although
    tremors were felt. Cape Kennedy rose and fell about 2y4 in. because
    of seismic wave from Alaskan earthquake, US. Coast and Geodetic
    Survey said. Earth movement at Cape Kennedy was greatest in US.
     (NYT, 3/29/6d, 1;AP, Kmsm C t Star, 5/10/a)
                                        iy
* NASA Lewis Research Center announced award of $797,200 contract for
    construction of concretelined shaft for the 500-ft. gravity facility, to
    Patrick Harrison, Inc. The underground shaft would be first phase of
    construction of largest zero-gravity facility in the US. Completion of
    the facility was expected this year. (LRC Release 64r30)
March 28: In conjunction with dedication of the Center of Science and Indus-
    try in Columbus, O., NASA Lewis Research Center sponsored a compre-
    hensive exhibit of US.space program. The new center was designed as
    a museum of science, industry, health, and history. (LRC Release 64-
    25)
March 29: President Johnson told a Texas news conference that he would
    establish a Seven-man advisory board for the US. supersonic transport
     (SST) development. Members of the board would be: Defense Secretary
    McNamara, Treasury Secretary Dillon, Commerce Secretary Hodges,
    CIA Director John McCane, NASA Administrator Webb, FAAAdministra-
    tor Halaby, and New York banker Eugene Black. Asked whether he
    had given the Supersonic Transport Advisory Board a specific assign-
    ment, the President replied :
       “The executive order will do that. It is being drawn. I wanted you
    to know that we are doing that. It has not been finalized yet. It may
    be changed in the details. But we want to have the broad spectrum of
    the Government interested in it, to get the best judgments o all of our
                                                                    f
    people in an advisory capacity.”
       Asked if we were setting a deadline on the Board’s report back to him,
    the President answered:
       “No. This will be advisory. I am not asking for a report. I am
            them to advise in connection with the contracts and all the mat-
                       the Black report and by the report that I made in
120            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

    connection with the testimony before the Congress. The Congress has
    already appropriated $60 million. We have already had an evaluation
    of the various proposals. But we just want to get this senior group
    of officialsto sit in and counsel with us.” (Transcript, NYT, 3/30/64;
    WSI, 3/30/64)
March 29: Discovery by two astronomers of what they believed to be the
    most distant object identified to date was announced. Thought to be
    several billion light-years away, the object-named 36147-was con-
    sidered to be from 10 to 20 per cent farther away than 3C-295, pre-
    viously considered the most distant object. Both objects were “quasi-
    stellar radio sources,” which produce 100times the brightness and energy
    of an entire galaxy of 100 billion stars. Dr. Thomas A. Matthews lo-
    cated the new object by observing its radio emissions with cal Tech’s
    twin antennas. Then Dr. Maertin Schmidt photographed the object
    from Mt. Palomar Observatory. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/30/64, 27)
  Educator Robert M. Hutchins, writing in the Omaha World-Herald,said
    of U S . project to land a man on the moon: “I think it will not be argued
    that the primary objact of this venture is to advance knowledge. It
    seems rather to be designed as a huge public relations stunt. The
    ‘knowledge industry’ wl restore the prestige we lost when the Russians
                             il
                               ..   .
    outdistanced u5 in space.
        “If we were dedicated to advancing knowledge, we would have had
    some serious debate about the best way to do it. Is it to improve our
    colleges and universities or to put on scientific spectaculars?” (Omaha
    Sun. World-Herald,3/29/64)
March 3 : Czechoslovakian news agency Ceteka reported Czechoslovakia
         0
     would issue series of eight postage stamps in April bearing faces of 10
     Soviet cosmonauts and American astronauts. (Reuters, Houston Post,
    3/30/64)
0 NASA awarded $158,466,800 contract to North American Aviation’s Rock-

     etdyne Div. for production of 76 F-1 rocket engines for the Saturn V
     launch vehicle. The action defined and detailed the procurement action
     initiated with letter contract in June 1962. Delivery of static-test en-
     gines to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had already begun, and the
     first flight F-1 would arrive at MSFC in November. (NASA Release 64-
     48; Marshall Star, 4/1/64,1)
           newIy created Science and Technology Advisory Committee for
  NASA’s
    Manned Space Flight convened for first time at John F. Kennedy Space
     Center, NASA. Formed to advise Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate
     Administrator for Manned §pace Flight, the committee met for briefings
     by NASA officials and tours of NASA facilities at Cape Kennedy and Merritt
     Island. (NASA Release 64-72)
  MSC operations at Cape Kennedy, renamed Msc-Florida Operations, was
@




     reorganized as “part of a broad NASA organizational realignment aimed
     at strengthening Gemini and Apollo management structures at Wash-
     ington, Houston, and Florida.” The organization was headed by G.
     Merritt Preston, responsible for MSC operations a the Cape since 1961.
                                                          t
      (KSC Release 43-64; MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
               unsuccessful attempts to send payloads to Venus Feb. 26 and
0 U.S.S.R.’s

     Mar. 4 were reported in the US. press. Failures were attributed by
     US. military officials to difliculties with upp-stage rocket supposed to
     send the spacecraft out of parking orbit and onto its interplanetary
     course. (Av. Wk.,    3/30/64!, 15; Finney, NYT, 4/1/64,1,10)
                                                                        121
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

March 30: USAF announced the nine major modifications to Titan I1 changing
    it from ICBM to a man-rated launch vehicle for NASA’s    two-man Gemini
    spacecraft : addition of malfunction detection system; backup flight con-
    trol system; redundant electrical system with changes for additional
    launch vehicle equipment; substitution o radio guidance for inertial
                                                f
    guidance; elimination of retrorockets and verniers; new structure on
    second stage to hold new flight guidance and control equipment; new
    second-stage skirt assembly to join spacecraft; simplification of tra-
    jectory tracking; and redundancy in hydraulic systems. (AP, Balt.
    Sun, 3/31/64t)
  MSC announced first meteorite ever b u n d in Fisher County, Texas, was
    turned over to MSC for analysis by Mr. and Mrs. Bernard W. Neeper
    who found the four-pound meteorite two years ago on their farm.
    Meteorite investigations were made at MSC in cooperation with the U S .
    National Museum. ( MSC Release 64-61)
e George A. Fuller and Warrior Constructors, Inc., jointly received a
    $1,967,868 contract for construction of electronics, instrumentation,
    and materials laboratory at NASA Mississippi Test Facility. The Army
    Corps of Engineers awarded the fixed-price contract. (DOD Release
    257-64)
* Former astronaut Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC) announced his deci-
    sion to withdraw from the Democratic primary campaign for Senate
    candidacy in Ohio. Colonel Glenn was still convalescing from severe
     injury to his vestibular system in the inner ear sustained when he acci-
    dentally slipped and struck his head on a bathtub Feb. 26. In Houston,
    NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said:
    “The news of John Glenn’s continued illness is upsetting. Our first
    concern is for his recovery. . . . We will be happy to discuss with
    John and the-commandant of the Marine Corps his future if John so
    desires. . . . We wish him a speedy recovery.” (AP, NYT, 3/31/64,
    1,18,19; Burkett, Houston Chron., 3/30/64)
* Dr. V. A. Bailey, prof. emeritus of physics at Univ. of Sydney, Australia,
    stated in the British journal Nature his theory that the sun has a large
    negative electric charge. He proposed that two satellites be launched
    around the sun, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise, to learn
    whether or not the sun had electrical charge and whether such a charge
    was negative or positive. Most physicists believed sun had no electrical
    charge. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 3/31/64t, 21)
* Possibility that lasers might someday be used in preventing dental cavities
    and in repairing existing ones was reported by researchers Dr. Ralph
    H. Stern and Dr. Reidar F. Sognnaes of UCLA School of Dentistry at
    International Association for Dental Research meeting in Los Angeles.
    The investigators emphasized that their preliminary study dealt with
    effects of lasers on dental tissue and standard dental repair material.
     (Sci. Serv., NYT, 3/31/64,24)
e Nicolai P. Erpilev, scientific secretary of the Astronomical Council of the
    Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced in Havana that the first Soviet
    satellite tracking station in Cuba would be installed in Havana in a spe-
    cial observatory and another one would probably be established later at
    Santa Clara. (NYT,3/31/a, 26)
      766-598 O--S--@
122             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4.

March 3.2:Unnamed “high State Department official” told New York Her&
    Tribune that talks between the US. and U.S.S.R. regarding Soviet co-
    operation in worldwide comsat network had been mheduled for June
    in Geneva. The official said the talks came in response to Soviet gov-
    ernment’s recent expression of interest in such negotiations to the US.
    Embassy in Moscow. Other sources indicated Soviet representatives
    had visited Communications Satellite Corp. in Washington and FCC in-
    quiring about procedural arrangements. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib.,
    4/1/64; Av. Wk.,    4/6/64,15)
* USAF fired advanced Minuteman ICBM down the Atlantic Missile Range and
    30 seconds later followed it with a Nike-Javelin sounding rocket to study
    the Minuteman’s exhaust. This was first in 16-test series. (UPI,NYT,
    4/1/64,60; M&R, 4/6/64,10)
During March: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center rmeived design recommen-
    dations for 24-man Large Orbital Research Laboratory (LORL) that
    could be operational by 1968-the six-month study conducted by Doug-
    las Aircraft’s Missile & Space Div. and IBM’S Federal Systems Div.
    The cylindrical space station would operate under zero gravity conditions
    in a 26O-mi.-high orbit. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/21/64)
  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center accepted the first of three new F-1
    rocket engine test stands at NASA’s engine test site at Edwards AFB, Calif.
     (M&R, 3/30/64,17)
* Article in Fortune magazine said:
        “The U.S. is spending a lot of money-but it is also getting a lot of
    results in technological breakthroughs, any one of which would have
    been regarded as wondrous only a few years ago. The milestones passed
    since last summer indicate how fast the space program is now mov-
          ...
    ing.
        “The Soviet Union isn’t going to collapse if it loses the race. If the
    US. loses, it isn’t going to collapse either. For both countries, there
    are other goals in space that may yield rich rewards in both prestige
                                                                          ..
     and scientific advance. Meanwhile, NASA has much to be proud of.
        “The superiority of liquid hydrogen as a rocket fuel has been proved
     and the US. has dehitely overcome the Soviet lead in big boosters.”
     (Fortune, 3/64)
  Results and new research of X-15 project were detailed in Astronautics &
    Aeronautics article by Thomas A. Toll, Chief of Research Div., NASA
     Flight Research Center, and Jack Fischel, head of FRC Manned Flight
     Control Branch.
       “. . .  In the area of aerodynamics, problems resulting from the heat
     generated by high-speed flight were of most concern to designers at the
                                         ...
    time of the X-15 feasibilitystudies.
        “At the time thermodynamic design of the X-15 was first contem-
     plated, it was thought liiely that fairly extensive regions of laminar
     flow might be achieved in flight, thereby alleviating the problem of heat
     proteation as it would exist for an all-turbulentcondition. This reason-
     ing was based largely on rocket-model and wind-tunnel results available
     at the time. These results indicated a stabilizing effect on the boundaq
     layer at hypersonic speeds for low ratios of the surface temperature to
     the stagnation temperature. As the design of the airplane progressed,
     it became evident that the probabilii o obtaining laminar flow would
                                               f
     be greatly reduced by the presence of unavoidable surface irregularities.
                                                                         123
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    As a basis for the aerodynamic heating design, a relatively low value of
    the transition Reynolds number (R,= lO0,OOO)was therefore stipulated.
    Flight results have generally confirmed this design approach, inasmuch
    as it has been found that at the lower altitudes, where the heating rates
    are highest, the boundary layer is largely turbulent, due primarily to the
    surface irregularities. Regions of laminar flow generally are limited
    to the immediate vicinity of the leading edges and are quite small. The
    conditions found to exist on the X-15 are consistent with results of
                                                     ...
    refined w i n d m e 1 techniques now being used.
       “Maximum structural temperatures have been experienced during
    X-15 operation at high speeds and comparatively low altitudes, with
    accompanying normal-acceleration values much lower than those ex-
                                                       ..
    perienced during recovery from high altitudes. .
       “By way of assessing the [structural] failures experienced, there ap-
    pear to have been no cases in which the structure deteriorated to such a
    degree as to seriously endanger the integrity of the airplane. It is
    entirely probable, however, that had a less-conservative design been fol-
    lowed the problems noted might have resulted in greater deterioration
                                        . .”
    with more serious consequences. .           (A&A, 3/64, 20-28)
During March: Martin-Denver revealed design concept of its Astrorocket,
    a proposed reusable aerospacecraft. Launched vertically, the vehicle
    would have two stages-both manned--equipped with auxiliary fan
    jets as well as rocket engines. After stage separation, first stage would
    re-enter atmosphere and land on airstrip like conventional airplane.
    Second stage, carrying payload, would also land at air base after
    completing mission. Astrorocket concept employed parallel staging
    rather than conventional bottom-to-topstaging. Martin said advantages
    of the Astrorocket were its reusability and its capability to operate with
    existing air bases for space operations. (A-N-AF J&R, 3/7/64, 38)
a FCC ruled AT&T must confine its use of channels in undersea cables to voice
    and related service, and leave the services of non-voice and combined
    voice/non-voice to smaller message companies. Although the decision
    applied to undersea cables, there was speculation that it could affect fu-
    ture commercial communications satellites. As one FCC aide said, “The
    rationale of the decision would seem to extend to any type of facility.”
     (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/20/64,)
  Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (USAF) was appointed to newly established
    position o Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, AFSC Space Sys-
              f
    tems Div. In this capacity he would be responsible for all aspects of
    the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (SBD, 3/13/64,3#; M&R,
    3/23/64,9)
                                AprU 1984
Aprid I : Fourth anniversary of       TIROS I, first meteorological satellite, orbited
      with a Thor-Able booster from AMR. The spectacular accomplishments
       by the experimental TIROS weather satellites were to develop into a global
      cloud-cover reporting system.
    NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. M a . ,
      with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nebulosites
       of certain star fields. Rocket attained 118-mi. altitude and instrumenta-
       tion performed properly, but failure of the attitude control system pre-
       vented the rocket from pointing at the targets and there were no experi-
      mental results. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
    Five men emerged from 30 days of isolation in sealed chamber where
0

      they conducted first US. experiment integrating all systems for self-
       contained life support in space. The test was made in Seattle by the
       Boeing Co. for NASA. NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human
       Research Dr. Eugene B. Konecci called the successful experiment a
      “major breakthrough” in research on life support systems for extended
       space flights.
          “The basic principles and techniques of life-support systems have been
       proved workable and sound. Now we refine and advance them. We
                                                                   (AP, Balt. Sun,
       are already looking and preparing far beyond.”
      4/2/64; AP, Houston Chron., 4/2/64)
    NASA Lewis Research Center was investigating several techniques for pro-
       ducing flexible, thin-film solar cells. One of the techniques being inves-
       tigated was sputtering, which required absolutely clean atmosphere and
       a low pressure of inert gas. Sputtering apparatus in which controls
      were fully automated-rigidly controlling pressure, temperature, and
       voltage in relation to each other-had been built at Lewis. With this
       equipment, researchers were attempting to increase efficiency of thin-
       film cells to that of silicon cells. (LRC Release 64-28)
    Vice Adm. Rufus E. Rose (USN, Ret.) was sworn in as Director of Policy
       Planning Div., NASA 05ce of Technology Utilization and Policy Plan-
       ning, by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. The most
       recent assignment during Admiral Rose’s M y e a r career was as Com-
       mandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces. (NASA Release
       64-73)
    Picket linea were set up at the entrances to Cape Kennedy and the Merritt
       Island Launch Area (MILA) by United Plant Guards Workers of Amer-
       ica. The union charged that Wackenhut Corp., subcontractor to TWA
       at the Saturn/Apollo site, was employing nonunion guards. 1,886 of
       2,5M construction workers at the Saturn V complex refused to cross
       the picket lines, and abouk 700 of 2,500 workers at the USAF Titan I11
        site were absent. William Simkin, vice chairman o the President’s
                                                                  f
        Missile Sites Labor Commission, requested that the building trades
        unions return to work. (UPI, Wash. Post, 4/2/a; AP, Balt. Sun,
       4/2/64; UPI, NYT, 4/3/M)
         124
AP



    air, due either to sudden heat increase in the “runaway” or the contact
    of water with the reactor’s liquid metal coolant (sodium potassium).
    AEC spokesman said core of the reactor was damaged as expected, and
    test was completed with no           to            r the public. Another
    test would be made to inv                           of a ground landing.
                                          C
    (AP, Balt. Sun,4/2/a)
* NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Stu-
    dent Conference at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs:
        . ..
       bG
              in assessing the future one can always learn from the past,
    and if the thoughtful student of history learns anything from a review of
    the march of human progress, it is that the ultimate potential of contem-
    porary undertaking is almost never perceived.
                                                                    ..
       “So, I believe, it is with research and exploration in space. .
       “Today, 500 years after Prince Henry and his use of the caravel to
    initiate the Oceanic Age, 400 years after Copernicus presented his
    theolies about the solar system, 300 years after Newton worked out the
    formula for space flight, but less than 40 years afiter Goddard devised
    the vehicle to make it possible, man has left the earth, and widened
    his horizons to include the entire solar system.
       “Science today has at its disposal a modern caravel, the chemical
    rocket, which has already traveled to the moon and Venus. And, as
    with Henry and his explorations, we have improved navigation systems
    to guide them out and bring them back to make steadily more accurate
    measurements of the environment of space-that environment through
    which Gargarin and Glenn and others traveled, and through which our
    own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun at the relative
    speed of 67,000 miles per hour.
       “And to complete the parallel, just as Prince Henry inaugurated an
    Age of Discovery which led man to all the seas and continents of the
    earth, and into the atmosphere up to twice the height of his tallest
    mountains, so have we today embarked on a new Age of Discovery in
                                           ..   .” (Text; CR, 4/6/64,6686)
     which there is no foreseeable horizon.
* Atlas ICBM launched by USAF from Cape Kennedy sent new deceptive war-
    head 5,000 mi. downrange and carried two piggyback rockets which
     were fired from a 7-ft. pod attached to the Atlas. The small rockets
    carried radiometers to measure radiation in the Atlas engine exhaust.
     Another attached pod contained scientific experiments to study the ionos-
     phere, magnetosphere, and radio frequency noises. (AP, Wush. Post,
    4/2/64; M&R, 4/6/64, 10)
  According to Hebrew Univ. sources, Dr. Menahem Steinberg o Hebrew f
     Univ. in Jerusalem had developed new oxidizer for use in solid-fuel
     rocket engines, said to be superior to those in general use because the
                                                  a low molecular weight and
                                                  ource9 said two years would
                                                   discovery. (Reuters, Balt.
126             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

                                             in 10 nations, including the U.S.,
April 1:At zero hour GMT, ast
     turned back their atomic                nth of a second to adjust them to
    time measured optically by the passage of the stars. (Plumb, NYT,
    4/v64, 33)
April 2: U.S.S.R. launched ZOND I space probe “for the purppose of developing
     a space system for distant interplanetary flights.” Final stage of “im-
     proved booster rocket’’ placed earth satellite into parking orbit; then a
     rocket took o f from the satellite and propelled the ZOND I to escape
                    f
     velocity, sending it into flight trajectory “close to the computed one.”
     There was no indication as to what the computed course was, and no
     details of the prybe’s weight, size, or destination were given. (Tass,
     Krasnaya Zvezdo, 4/3/64, 1 ATSS-T Trans.; CSFC SSR, 4/15/64)
                                     ,
e In letter to chairmen of Senate and House space committees-Sen.         Clinton
     P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.)-
     NASA Administrator James E. Webb detailed findings of committees in-
     vestigating failure of RANGER VI lunar probe. Although the committees
     had not yet identified any specific cause for failure, Mr. Webb’s letter out-
     lined five major faults in the spacecraft:
         1. The two oaboard TV systems “were more complex than required
      and were not completely redundant. They included a number of com-
     mon components in which a single failure would lead to disablement of
     both television systems.”
                                      ..
         2. “Possibilities of failure . increased as a result of practices
                                                                   .
     employed in the design and construction of the spacecraft. . .”
         3. Preflight ground testing “may have obscured potentially danger-
      ous situations which could have enhanced accidental triggering of criti-
     cal control circuits.”
         4. The antenna for transmitting the lunar photographs had never been
     tested with the TV transmitters.
         5. “Because of reluctance to risk possible damage to the space vehicle,
                                                                  .
      pre-launch systems verification was not complete. . .” (Loory,
      HTNS, Wash. Post, 4/3/64,8)
e Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft was mated to Saturn I S A 4 at Cape Kennedy
      in preparation for flight later this spring. (Marshall Star, 4/8/64, 1)
  Labor dispute continued at Cape Kennedy, with 1,973 of 4,068 con-
      struction workers at the Cape and MILA refusing to cross picket lines of
      the United Plant Guards Workers Union. National Labor Relations
      Board began investigating the situation, which was further complicated
      by failure of Iron Workers Union and Patrick AFB Contractors Asso-
      ciation to work out a new contract, causing about 400 ironworkers to
      walk off the job, (UPI, NYT, 4/3/64)
  With the publication of the name change from Cape Canaveral to Cape
      Kennedy in the official decision list of the US. Board on Geographic
      Names, the legal procedure involved in renaming the Cape was com-
      pleted. (AP, NYT, 4/3/64)
   Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr. (USN, Ret.), told industry delegates to
      conference at Georgia Tech that primary purpose of nuclear and space
      exploration was “the maintenance of national defense to guarantee a
       continuation of our way of life.” Technology assures “not so much a
       better texture for our bread but the fact that we will have that bread t  o
      eat,” he maintained. Conference was sponsored by Southern Interstate
      Nuclear Board and Georgia Tech’s School of Nuclear Engineering in
       cooperation with AEC and NASA. (Rutherford, Atlanta Const., 4/3/64)
APr



      and on the continued operation of the powered guidance system were
     transmitted to the probe by radio from earth when it reached 560,000 km.
      (347,967 mi.). The probe was said to be in a flight trajectory corre-
      sponding “with a high degree of accuracy” to the predetermined pro-
     gram. (Tam, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/5/64,1)
  NASA awarded $5,944,000 supplemental contract to the Boeing Co. for addi-
     tional R&D and planning in the manufacture of Saturn V first-stagerocket
     at Michoud Operations, La. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 4/4/64;
     Marshall Star, 4/8/64,10)
0 DOD announced Army Corps of Engineers had awarded $4,397,000 fixed

      price contract for construction of propellant facilities at NASA Missis-
      sippi Test Facility to Broadway Maintenance Corp. and Glantz Contract-
      ing Corp.; and $3,573,025 fixed price contract for construction of high-
      pressure water heating facility at MTF to Leslie Miller, Inc., Power Engi-
     neering Co., and Donover Construction Co. (DOD Release 278-64)
0 Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received honorary de-

      gree in mechanical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of the
      University of Milan. (NASA Release 64-74)
  Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., left the hospital and returned home to Seabrook,
      Tex., where he would convalesce from inflammation o his inner ear.
                                                                  f
      (AP, Wash. Post, 4/4/64)
0 Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in address at sixth Air

      Force Academy Assembly :
         “It is not possible to predict the course of events, but there are certain
      points I want to make tonight that might serve as benchmarks.
         “First, the nation has no choice but to pursue the almost limitless possi-
      bilities of space with energy and imagination.
         64 Second, we must do everything poss?ble to prevent exploitation of

      space for aggressive purposes, and be prepared to defend freedom in
      space.
         “Third, the emerging defense responsibilities in space exemplify and
      extend the requirements for professionalism in the military, focusing
      sharply on the mutual responsibility of the military and civilian pro-
      fessionals in science, industry, and government.
         “Fourth, despite the appeal of space exploration, we must continue
      to increase our investment of brains and money in the effort to build a
      a decent life on earth i€this nation is to continue as leader of an expand-
      ing free world on the earth.” ( e tTx)
0 Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.)         said GAO study showed that USAF could
      save more than $1 million a year in administrative costs at AMR through
      consolidation of supply management functions. (AP, Houston Chon.,
      4/3/64)
  Atlas F ICBM          ded on launch pad at Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R,
      4/13/64,1
128            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19649

ApriZ 4: U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of COSMOS XXVIII. Initial
     orbital data: apogee, 395 km. (245 mi.) ; perigee, 209 km. (130 mi.) ;
     period, 90.38 min.; and inclination, 65” to the equator. Scientific
     equipment onboard the satellite was “intended for the further exploration
     of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass March
     16, 1962.” In addition, the satellite contained radio transmitter and
     telemetering system. All instrumentation was functioning n o d l y .
      (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/5/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
  At 18 hours Moscow time ZOND I reached 837,000 km. (520,097 mi.) from
     the earth, Tass announced. At that time the probe was in the following
     position: right ascension, 5 hrs. and 56 min.; inclination, minus 4     O
     22 min. Experimentation with ZOND I continued. (Tass, Krasnaya
     Zvezda, 4/5/64,1; ATSS-T Trans.)
0 Temporary     injunction forbidding United Plant Guards Workers of
     America to picket at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island was issued by
     US. District Judge George C. Young at request of the National Labor
     Relations Board. (UPI, Wash.Past, 4/5;/64.)
  Reporting its findings after series of hearings, Senate Subcommitte on Em-
     ployment and Manpower forecast “a leveling off or actual decline” in
     the present $55 billion annual expenditure for weapons and space pro-
     grams. Among the report’s predictions: thousands of scientists and
     engineers may have to seek jobs outside the aerospace industry; thou-
      sands of skilled workers may have to learn now trades; at least 10 states
     should plan now for converting to non-government markets. Sen.
     Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.) , subcommittee chairman, said studies
     showed that “nearly one-tenth of the Nation’s work forces is employed in
     defense-related enterprise.” (Haakinson, AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/64)
* Industry sources revealed only one more Ranger lunar probe could be
      launched before NASA’s   contract with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ex-
      pired in December. If Ranger 7 failed, the soulrces said NASA might re-
      move JPL from Cal Tech’s management, might remove Director William
      H. Pickering from his post, and might hire a “hard-headed businessman”
     to manage the facility. (AP, Boston Globe, 4/6/64)
April 6: English-Russian astronautical dictionary was issued in MOSCOW,
      Taw reported. (AP, NYT, 4/6/64)
April 6: NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands,
      N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of
      nebulosities of certain star fields. Abnormal coning motion of the
      rocket and subsequent pitch-roll coupling caused the rocket to reach only
      46-mi. altitude; and the attitude control system had no chance to point at
      the programed targets, so no experimental data were obtained. (NASA
      Rpt. SRL)
   First large batch of unusual stones arrived from Iowa at NASA Goddard
      Space Flight Center for analysis in Project Moon Harvest. Residents
      of six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists
      were analyzing to determine if they were of lunar origin. Dr. John A.
      O’Keefe, project scientist, theorized that pieces of the moon’s surface
      were chipped o f the moon by meteorite impapt and attracted by gravity
                      f
      to the earth. (Goddard News, 4/20/64, 4;GSFC Release 6 1 3 - 6 4 )
 9 About 450 iron workers stayed of the jab at Cape Kennedy because union
                                     f
       and management negotiators had failed to work out a new contract.
       M s of the other 3,500 construction workers returned to their jobs after
        ot
                                                                         129
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    picket lines kept workers away the previous week, (UPI, Chic. Trib.,
    4/7/64)
April 6: By this date USAF had made 21 manned drop-tests of the ballute at
     El Centro, Calif., from C-130 flying at altitudes up to 35,000 ft. Basi-
    cally a drag balloon, the ballute was under development by Goodyear
     Aerospace Gorp. with NASA funds. To be installed in the ejection seat
    system o Gemini spacecraft, the self-inflatingballute would stabilize the
             f
     astronaut during free fall down to l , O ft., where final recovery para-
                                         0O O
     chute would deploy. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 4/6/64,4&45; MSC Roundup,
    4/15/64L 8 )
* Researchers at Lankeneau Hospital in Philadelphia had concluded that
    orthostatic hypotension such as occurred in Astronauts Schirra and
     Cooper after orbital space flights could be caused as much by dehydra-
    tion as by weightlessness, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/6/64,
    5)
  Glide parachute achieved glide ratio of up to 2:l in wind-tunnel tests at
           Ames Research Center, it was reported. Northrop Ventura, the
    NASA
    parachute developer, was proposing it to NASA for later phases of Project
    Gemini. (ARC; M&R, 4/6/64, 25)
0 Of the formerly operational Thor missiles that were being converted to

    space missions, NSAF spokesman said: “This program has proved that it
    is possible to take a complex vehicle that was designed as a weapon and
    convert it to peaceful uses at a substantial saving and without sacrificing
    reliability. We can expect that there will be more than this.” AFSSD esti-
    mated converted booster cost up to $150,000 less than new Thor booster.
     (M&R, 4/6/@, 31)
  USAF was considering developing new 40,000-lb. thrust third stage for Titan
    I11 launch vehicle, Aviation Week reported. Burning high-energy fuels,
    the new stage would replace the 16,00&17,000-lb.-thrust transtage.
    Meanwhile USAF asked six firms for proposals for a back-up and/or
    replacement rocket engine system for the transtage, said to be experienc-
    ing development difficulties. But USAF was not asking for upgrading of
    the 16,000-lb.-thrust system at this time. ( A v . Wk., 4/6/64, 13; SBD,
    4/10/64,59)
April 6-8: US.officials met in London with representatives of six European
    countries for further talks on investing in the global communications
    satellite network. Spokesman said there was “substantial progress” but
    no concrete agreements were reached, and another meeting would take
    place in about a month. (Kohlmeier, WSJ, 4/6/64; NYT, 4/9/64)
April 7 : President Johnson ordered prompt removal of NASA tracking station
    from Zanzibar shortly after President Abeid Karume requested that the
    US. remove it before the end of this month. President Karume made
    the request to Frank Carlucci, US. Charge d’affaires in Zanzibar, and
    reportedly told Carlucci that the action was a result of statement by US.
    Ambassador-to-Kenya William Atwood at New York prass conference
    that Red China and East Germany were trying to turn Zanziibar “into a
    kind o non-African state to be used as a staging base for political ma-
           f
    neuver~’~ the African continent. NASA announced in Washington
               on
    that the loss of the station would have no adverse effect on the US.
    manned space program. The station had been on a stand-by basis since
    end of Project Mercury, would have been of “minimum use” in Project
    Gemini and not used at all in Project Apollo. (Simons, Wash. Post,
    4/8/64; Smith, NYT, 4/8/64,11; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 4/8/64)
130                                                      19 6 4
                A S T R O N A V M C S AND AERONAUTICS,

April 7: NASA anounced closing the command and control station for Relay
     communications satellites at Nutley, N.J., and movin the operation to the
                                                          5
     Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network ( tadan) at Blossom
     Point, Md. The move was made to consolidate personnel and equip-
     ment and save operation costs. (NASA Release 64-77)
0 Soviet news agency Tass announced that a human being had stayed €or 25

     days in pressurized czbin, breathing a combination of oxygen and
     helium. Test results were said to be good, although a test subject with
     a bass voice became a tenor and scientists were still testing for the right
     proportion of helium to use. Reason for using the mixture was to
     enable future space travelers to “better endure pressure fluctuations and
     high temperatures in a space ship cdbin,” T s said. (AP, NYT,
                                                         as
     4f 8/64?)
0 House Committee on Government Operations’ Military Operations Sub-

     committee heard testimony from NASA witnesses regarding military oom-
     munications satellites. In response to questioning, Leonard Jaffe,
     Director of Communications and Navigation Programs in NASA Office of
     Space Science and Applications (OSSA) and Robert F. Garbarini, Direc-
     tor of Applications in OSSA, said NASA had not participated in current DOD-
     ConzSatCorp negotiations for possible DOD use of commercial comsat
     channels. ComSat Act of 1962 designated NASA as technical advisor to
     ComSatCorp. “We are aware of the negotiations and we expect to be
     informed so that we can respond under the act,” Jaffe said. (Av. Wk.,
     4/13/64,32)
0 Striking United Iron Workers forced contractors to lay off 500 other workers

     at Cape Kennedy. Army Corps of Engineers spokesman said the walk-
     out was “definitely crippling some of the most crucial of our projects
     and three good size jobs are completely shut down.” (UPI, NYT,
     4/8/(54)
0 Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin said in Moscow press conference that he and

     other Soviet cosmonauts were training for new space flights. “When
     we go and who will go-that we do not know. We will wait and see.’’
      (AP, NYT, 4/8/64, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/64, C6)
ApZlil8: Titan I1 launched unmanned Gemini spacecraft into orbit in first
     Project Gemini flight (GT-1) , a test of Titan I1 launch vehicle system,
     Gemini spacecraft structural integrity, and spacecraft-launch vehicle
     compatibility. After an uninterrupted countdown at Cape Kennedy, the
     Titan I1 lifted off and placed the spacecraft in orbit of 204-mi. apogee,
     99.6-mi. perigee, and 89.27-min. period. Walter C. Willianis said all
     systems functioned “well within manned tolerances.” Only imperfection
     in the flight was Titan 11’s 14-mphexcess speed (17,534 instead of 17,520
     mph), sending spacecraft 21 mi. higher than planned. However, this
     was within tolerance and, on manned flight, crewmen could easily correct
     the extra height. The 7,000-lb. spacecraft was not separated from the
     spent rocket casing, and NASA officials estimated the orbiting assembly
     would reenter the atmosphere and disintegrate in alhut 3% days. (NASA
     Release 64-70; MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,1,3)
* X-15 No. 1 flown by Capt. Joe H. Engle (USAF) to maximum speed of
      3,477 mph (mach 4.8) and altitude of more than 33 mi. in test to prepare
      the pilot for future flights at higher altitudes. The flight also conducted
      optical degradation studies. (FRC Release; UPI, Wash. Post, 4/9/64)
                                                                          131
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 04

April 8: Test of parasail for space craft landings was conducted by MSC
     officials in Galveston Bay. The test was termed only a partial success.
     A model Gemini spacecraft was dropped from C-119 flying at 10,200 f.     t,
     and the drogue parachute opened perfectly. But parasail failed to
     deploy properly after its nylon lines snapped, and engineers had to
     trigger the reserve ringsail parachute to lower the vehicle safely to the
     water’s surface. (Houston Post, 4/9/64; MSC Roundup, 4/15/64, 8 )
* Soviet scientist Sergei Vernon said at Moscow press conference that the
     ZOND I space probe was launched to study radiation hazards in space.
     The probe would “provide information about more remote areas of space
     we know little about.” (Balt. Sun, 4 / 8 / a )
  NASA Technology Utilization Division and the Food and Drug Administra-
     tion reported that preliminary experiments by FDA% Dr. Jacqueline Ver-
     rett indicated that a piezo-electrictransducer invented at NASA Ames Re-
     search Center could, for the first time, monitor the heartbeat of a chick
     embryo quickly, continuously, quantitatively, and without egg damage.
     Instrument was invented to measure impact of micrometeoroid dust in
     space by A m ’ Vernon L. Rogallo, who suggested its potential in chick
     embryo research. Through its Technology Utilization program, NASA
     informed FDA of the innovation. FDA had been conducting research dur-
     ing past four years using chick embryo technique, correlated with animal
     tests, to study effects of drugs, pesticides, and food additives. (NASA
     Release 64-76)
a Ironworkers who had walked off the job at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island
     Launch Area (MILA) when their contract expired March 31 began
     returning to work at the request o the Missile Sites Labor Commission.
                                            f
     Contract negotiations continued in Washington. Construction projects
     that had been delayed by the walkout included three MILA buildings of
     the Kennedy Space Center, NASA, the Saturn Vertical Assembly Building,
     as well as facilities for USAF Titan 111, Army Corps of Engineers said.
      (UPI, Wash. Post, 4/9/64; M&R, 4/13/64, 10-11)
* Gov. Nelson Rockefeller said in speech at Johns Hopkins Univ.:
        “I believe strongly that it is time for the American people to take a
     long, hard look at the political, military and scientific merit of the ‘one
     shot,’ crash program to place a man on the moon by 1970.
        ‘‘I think we ought to put a man on the moon. But we must make sure
     that our program is sound, that our priorities are proper-that we are,
     in short, taking maximum advantage of the virtually unlimited oppor-
     tunities which the scientific and technological revolution of our times
     presents us-that we are not warping our entire scientific effort for this
     one purpose.
        “I fear that the present moon-shot program of the Democratic admin-
     istration in Washington does not meet the criteria for a soundly con-
     ceived program of scientific research and development in the national
                  .”
     interest. . .      (Text)
* Soviet military newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) announced that
     Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin had been assigned head of its new “Cosmonauts’
     Desk” (AP,      Wash. Post, 4 / 9 / a )
April 9: EXPLORER IX re-entered the earth‘s atmosphere and disintegrated
     after more than three years in space. The lightweight, 12-ft.-diameter
     balloon was NASA’s    most effective satellite for measuring atmospheric
      density and temperature. Placed in orbit Feb. 16, 1961, EXPLORER IX
132             ASTRONATJTECS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    traveled more than 340 million mi. during its 14,000 orbits of the earth.
    It provided a better understanding o upper atmosphere characteristics,
                                             f
    determining more precisely the relationships between air density and
    solar radiations. Measurements o the satellite’s atmospheric drag
                                            f
    effects were correlated with those o a similar inflated sphere, EXPLORER
                                           f
    XIX, orbited Dec. 19,1%3. EXPLORER IX was the first satellite orbited by
    a solid-fuel launch vehicle (Scout) and the first satellite launched at
    Wallops. (NASA Release 64-81 ; Wallops Release 64-35)
April 9: NASA E I I I I I Q U it ~would negotiate with RCA Data Systems Div. for
                              ~
    purchase of 19 additional ground computer systems for checkout, static
    tests, and launch of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. This would
    complete the required 26 computers for the Saturn/Apollo program;
     seven systems were ordered last year. Total cost was expected to exceed
    $47 million. (NASA Release fX-79)
0 Titan I1 ICBM was launched on successful USAF test flight dmvn the Atlantic

     Missile Range. This was the 33rd and final R&D firing of the Titan 11.
     (UPI, Wash.  Post, 4/10/a; Witkin, NYT, 4/12/64,31)
0 French Foreign Ministry announced France would establish observation

     station in the Azores under an agreement with Portugal. The installation
     would give France a clear Atlantic firing range of 1550-mi. for its mis-
     siles and rockets launched near Biscarrosse on the coast of southwest
     France. (Reuters, Vmh.Post, 4/10/@)
0 Dr. Jeanette Piccard, widow of balloonist and atmospheric scientist Dr.

     Jean Felix Piccard, was appointed a consultant to NASA Manned Space-
     craft Center in formulation of effective program to provide information
     to US.scientific community. (MSC Release 64-66)
0 Tass reported monument to mark man’s first space flight would be erected

     in Moscow. The monument would consist of bust of Maj. Yuri A.
     Gagarin and a meteorite o white metal, both the work of Lev Kerbel, at-
                                   f
     tached to metal pylon about 80 ft. high. (Reuters, NYT, 4/10/64)
April 10: NASA launched 250-lb. instrumented Ram (Radio Attenuation Meas-
     urement) spacecraft on a ballistic trajectory from Wallops Island, Va.,
     on a three-stage rocket system. Experiment was one of series to inves-
     tigate the problem o communications through the ionized plasmas
                               f
     created when a spacecraft re-enters earth‘s atmosphere at high velocities.
     Spacecraft was to attain top s ed of 18,400 fps. Preliminary data in-
     dicated the vehicle and p a y k d performed satisfactorily; the flight
     lasted about 10 min. and impact occurred approximately 650 mi. east of
     Bermuda. Flight measurements, telemetered to ground receiving sta-
     tions would be reduced and analyzed at Langley Research Center, which
     designed and built the spacecraft. Ram series was under LaRc direction
                 Office of Advanced Research and Technology. (NASA Release
     for NASA’s
     64-65; Wallops Releases 64-29 and 64-34)
  Dr. John Strong, Director of Johns Hopkins Astrophysics and Physical
     Meteorology Lahoratory, announced definite evidence of water vapor
     around and on the planet Venus. His determination was made as
     the result of a Feb. 21 daytime balloon flight to study Venus by means
     of a unique robot telescope system. The study was made under research
     grant for USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories. “Since it is known
     that cal“bon dioxide exists on Venus, proof of water vapor forces us to
     re-examine every previous calculation made concerning the possibiity
      of some sort of life existing on the planet,” Dr. Strong said. Amount
                                                                           133
                                                          19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAU!C’ICS,




April 10: Iron meteorite landed in two pieces in MuzzafFarpur, India. One
     piece was later sent to US. for analysis by E. P. Henderson, curator of
     meteorites for the Smithsonian Institution, and by the Brookhaven
     National Laboratories. ( Wash. Post, 5/22jM)
* United Plant Guards Workers of America members who had picketed Cape
     Kennedy and Merritt Island Launch Area agreed to six-monthsuspension
     of picketing while negotiators continued trying to settle the dispute.
     Informed of the agreement, District Judge George C. Young dismissed
     the temporary anti-picketing injunction against the guards which had
     been abtained by the National Labor Relations Board on behalf of NASA.
      (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/12/64)
*Airpo.rt towers at 277 airports reported record 31 million takeoffs and
     landings during 1963, FAA statistics showed. This was almost double
     the 16.8 million operations 10 years ago and was a 10% gain over the
     28.2 million operations in 1962. (FAA Release 64-33)
April 11 : President Johnson announced at White House press conference:
        “The world record for aircraft speed, currently held by the Soviets,
     has been repeatedly broken in secrecy by the United States aircraft A-11.
     The President has instructed the Department of Defense to demonstrate
     this capability with the procedure whidh, according to international rules,
     will permit the result of the test to be entered as a new world record.
        “The Soviet record is 1,665 miles an hour. The A-11 has already
     flown in excess of 2,000 miles an hour.” (Transcript, NYT,
     4/Wf% 64)
  NASA NikeApache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada,
     with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 107-mi. altitude and
     obtained data on the visible aurora and on vacuum ultraviolet emissions.
     This information was supplemented by data from two electron particle
     detectors. Three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors also
     were included in the payload. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said in Saturday Evening Post
     article :
        “AS a Republican I believe in what has been called the ‘conquest of
     space,’ but which I prefer to think of as a thorough exploration of a new
     scientiiic frontier to improve our living here on earth. This is an ex-
     ploration we should pursue vigorously with a step-by-step program in
     line with our means and our needs. That was the aim of the space pro-
     gram as initially undertaken during my Administration: On the advice
     of eminent scientists we conceived a long-range effort, not a stunt, with
     costs to be stabilized around two billion dollars a year. That hardly
     could be called picayune by any reasonable standards.
        “But now, under the Democrats, this program has been blown up out
     of all proportion. With hysterical fanfare our &paceresearch has been
     presented as a crash effort, as a ‘race to the moon’ between the United
     States and Russia which we must win at all costs. And the costs are
     tremendous: They now are running well over five billion dollars a year.
     The Government now has more than 73,000 engineers and scientists
     working on the xionmilitary space program, either on the federal pay-
134             ASTRONATJTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    roll or employed under contract. This swollen program, costing laore
    than the development of the atomic bomb, not only is contributing to an
    unbalanced budget; it also has diverted a disproportionate share of our
    brainpower and research facilities from other equally significant prdb-
    lems, including education and automation.
        “We are breezily assured that the cost and dislocation brought &out
    by this moon race are worthwhile for the new ‘prestige’ they will bring
    us. There is no way o telling how true that may be, but we can be sure
                             f
    of one thing: The voyage to the moon will set a new record for a trip
    taken on borrowed money.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 4/11/64,17-19)
April 12: Comonautics Day in the Soviet Union, commemorating the day
    when Yuri Gagarin made the first space flight in 1961.
        U.S.S.R. announced steerable spacecraft POLET n had been placed in
    orbit. Purposes of the launching were said to be to “further improve
    space vehicles capable of maneuvering extensively in all directions, and
    to work out questions concerning the problem of space rendezvous.”
    After being placed in initial orbit, POLET 1 was maneuvered in various
                                                    1
    directions by means of special engine system. “As a result of one of these
    maneuvers in the area of the equator, the space vehicle substantially
    changed the angle of inclination of its orbital plane.” After the pro-
     gramed space maneuvers, POLET n was in the following orbit: apogee,
    500 km. (311mi.) ; perigee, 310 km. (193 mi.) ; period, 92.4 min.; and
    inclination to the equator, 58.06 degrees. (Tass; Shabad, NYT,
    4/13/64,4)
 Gemini spacecraft launched into orbit in unmanned test April 8 (GT-1)
    re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated midway between
     South America and Africa. Attached to the 11-ft.-long spacecraft was
    2O-ft.-long cylindrical rocket stage. They had been orbiting the earth
     at altitudes from between 100 and 190 mi. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/14/M;
    AP, Houston Post, 4/14/6p)
April 13: At Manned Spacecraft Center press conference, MSC Director Dr.
     Robert R. Gilruth announced Astronauts Gus Grissom and John Young
     would be prime pilots for the first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3),
     with Astronauts Walter Schirra and Tom Stafford as backup pilots.
     Also at the press conference it was disclosed that Astronaut Alan B.
     Shepard, Jr., was suffering from labyrinthitis. MSC’S Dr. Charles Berry
     emphasized that Shepard’s inner ear inflammation was not caused by
     space flight but by infection that spread into his inner left ear. (MSC
     Press Conf., MSC Historian)
  NASA announced it would negotiate contract with Space Technology Labora-
     nones, Inc., for two additional Orbiting Geophysical Observatories
            .
      (Ogo) Under existing contract, STL was designing, developing, fabri-
     cating, and testing three Ogo’s, the first of which was scheduled for launch
     this year. Contract for additional two Ogo’s was expected to total about
     $17 million. (NASA Release 6443)
  RCA announced it had received $22 million subcontract from Grumman
     Aircraft Engineering C o p . for communications system to be used in
     Project Apllo lvnar landing. The system would transmit continuous
     voice and telemetry data to earth, provide communications between the
     astronauts on the moon and Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) and Apollo
     command module. (Phil. Eve. BUZZ.. U1416p)
                                                                          135
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

           President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport, under
          rmanship of Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, held its first
                                                    .
    meeting. The Committee reviewed status of US. supersonic transport
    program and began discussing major issues involved in the program.
     (DOD Releases 295-64,3034&)
* Lmkheed-California Co. announced it had developed concept for space
    shuttle vehicle that could be available in 1966. The “space tug” was
    designed p r i d y as spacecraft-to-spacecraftcargo transportation sys-
                                                                 4/14/64, 75;
    tem and was result of study sponsored by AFSC. (S3l3,
    Av. Wh.,4/20/64,59)
 Invention of pocket-size x-ray unit, smallest in the world, was announced
    by IIT Research Institute. Device was invented by Dr. Leonard Reiffel,
    vice president of the Institute, and developed by James J. Ezop, Institute
    physicist. Besides uses by doctors for home calls, Dr. Reiffel said the
     instrument would be useful in testing mechanical parts in aerospace hard-
                   Trib.,4/14/64)
    ware. (Chic.
April 14: Atlas D launch vehicle sent NASA’s    200-lb. Project Fire spacecraft
    more than 500 mi. into space from Cape Kennedy in test to provide data
    on re-entry beating of spacecraft returning from the moon. As the space-
    craft fell back to earth, a solid-fuel Antares I1 motor ignited for 30 sec.
    to hurl it through the atmosphere at the speed of 37,800 fps (about
    26,000 mph). With exterior heating at estimated 20,000 degrees, in-
    struments in spacecraft interior relayed data back to earth while cameras
    and other instruments recorded the “flaming meteor” descent. About
    32 min. after launch the Project Fire craft impacted in the Atlantic
    more than 5,200 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Raymond L. Bispling
    hoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Tech-
    nology, commented that the experiment, conducted by NASA Langley
    Research Center, “recorded the highest speed ever reached by a manmade
    object in free flight.” In conjunction with the Project Fire test, NASA
    Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched to 97-mi. altitude from As-
    cension Island. Its instrumented payload, provided by Univ. of Michi-
    gan, measured pressure, temperature, and density in the equatorial
    atmosphere using Pitot-static probe technique. {NASA Release 64-69;
     AP, Wash.. Post, 4/15/64; Cinc. Enqr. 4/16/fj4, NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N.
    Mex., with JPL payload to measure ultraviolet light and fluctuations in
    earth‘s magnetic field. Rocket started large yaw maneuvers soon after
    30 sec. and reached only 18.2-mi. altitude; no new scientific data were
     obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  A Delta rocket’s third-stage motor (X-248) inexplicably ignited in check-
    out building at Cape Kennedy, burning 11 engineers and technicians,
    three critically. The rocket stage had just been mated with Orbiting
     Solar Observatcry (oso) in reparation for prelaunch spin testing, when
    the motor suddenly ignittxf rose from the alignment stand, hit the
     ceiling knocking off the 090,and landed in a far corner. NASA and WAF
    inmediately began investigating the cause of the ignition. USAF said
    this was the “first serious incident of its kind in 14 years of operations
     and over 1,400 missile launchings” at the Cape. (AP, Wash. Eue. Star
     4/14/64; AP, Wash. Post, 4/15/64; Goddard News, 4/20/64, 3;
    Marshall Star, 4/29/64+, 1,3)
136             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

April 14: NASA had developed lightweight and inexpensive shock absorber
    that had no recoil. Built for space use, the shock absorber would break
    on impact rather than bounce back. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/14/64)
  British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins said in House of Commons
    that, under the right conditions, “the United Kingdom will be willing
    to provide up to 315 million of the capital cost of a world system” fur
    satellite communications. He said U.K. would share in design of comsat
     system, share in its ownership, and play full part in providing satellite
    launch vehicles and other equipment. He reported that in recent meeting
     of representatives of European, US., and Canadian governments on prob-
     lems of establishing a global comsat system, “good progress” was made.
     (UPI, NYT, 4/16/@ 9)
* Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of NASA Am- Research Center, was one
     o 10 recipients of the 1% Career Service Award of the National Civil
       f
     Service League. Director of Ames since 1940, Dr. DeFrance was recom-
     mended for the award on the basis of his 43-year career as an outstand-
     ing administrator and leader o aeronautical and space research. (NASA
                                    f
     Belease 64-75)
  Brig. Gen. Thomas J. Hayes, 1 1 Assistant to the Chief of Army Engineers
                                  1,
      for NASA Support for the past two years, received certificate of apprecia-
     tion from NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Hayes super-
     vised such Engineer Corps activities as design and construction of NASA
      facilities, lunar mapping, and advance engineering related to future
     programs. He was cited by NASA particularly for his “skillful direction”
      in the “planning, design and construction of the massive and complex
      structures required for the manned space flight system.” (NASA Release
      -1
* House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative
      US. and U.S.S.R.   space programs by National Aeronautics and Space
    *CouncilExecutive Secretary D .Edward C. Welsh and NASC staff mem-
                                      r
    bers. Committee Chairman Rep. George P. Miller (DXalif.) said the
    executive session gave the committee a better appreciation of Soviet sci-
    entific space exploration and reaffirmed his belief that the US. “must
    keep up its effort to stay in the space race.” (Av. Wk.,       4/20/64,30)
* Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (USA, Ret.) was presented a special Medal
    of Recognition for his more than 50 years of dedication and service to
    the development of aviation, in ceremony at the Pentagon. He had been
    a member of the NACA while Chief of the Army Air Corps (1932-
    1936). (DOD Release 309-64)
* FAA announced Braniff Airways had reserved two delivery positions for U.S.
    supersonic transport aircraft and TransAmerican Aeronautical Corp.
    of Washington had increased its delivery reservations for SST from one to
    two. (FAA Release 64t-35)
                                        , candidate for Republican Presidential
0 Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.)

    nomination, released a campaign paper regarding missile reliability :
       “I have raised, and w i l l continue to raise until all the facts are in, fun-
    damental questions about the reliability of our intercontinental ballistic
    missiles. It is not a question of theoretical accuracy. The fact is that not
    one of our advanced ICBM’s ever been subjected to a full test under
                                    has
    simulated battle conditions.”
       Later in the day, DOD issued listing of US. missiles, bombers, and
    missile-,bearing nuclear submarines and compared them with Soviet
                                                                          137
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    strength in each category. MID said it was acting to prevent another
     “missile-gap myth” from circulating. (NYT,       4/15/64,1,6)
April 15: NASA launched modified four-stage solid-propellant Javelin (Argo
    D4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., carrying 120-lb. in-
    strumented payload to 4 2 mi. Approximately 15 min. of data were
    telemetered to ground stations before fourth stage and payload impacted
    in the Atlantic Ocean 6p2 mi. from launch site. Primary purpose of
    flight was to test X-258 solid-propellant rocket motor, and secondary
    purpose was to conduct scientific investigations in the ionosphere. Test
    was part of GSFC’S development of the X-258 for NASA use in satellite
    launch vehicles and possibly in sounding rockets. (Wallops Release
    64-36)
a NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada,
     with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained %-mi. altitude. Ex-
    periment objective was to dbtain data on visible aurora in three wave-
    lengths and data on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information
    was to be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors.
     Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet de-
    tectors. Good telemetry signal was received for 383 sec., but door cover-
     ing instrumentation apparently came off at about 2 , 0 - taltitude and
                                                           000f.
    most of the sensors were damaged by the severe environment. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
* NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ascension Island car-
     ried Univ. of Michigan instrumented payload to %-mi. altitude to meas-
     ure atmospheric pressure, temperature, density, and winds using the
    pitot-static probe. All objectives appeared to have been met. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
* NASA announced selection of 23 scientific and technological experi-
     ments to be flown aboard Gemini spacecraft, selected by NASA Manned
     Space Flight Experiments Board from almost 100 proposals made by
    scientists and engineers in NASA, DOD, and the scientific community at
     large. 13 of the experiments-eight scientific and five technological-
     were sponsored by NASA; ten experiments, all technological, were spon-
     sored by DOD. (NASA Release 64178)
  At NASA Hq. news conference, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said new
     contract with Jet Propulsion Laboratory would specify changes to im-
     prove JPL’S organization and management. “NASA is not going to try
     to impose rigid methods of organization and management on the Jet
     Propulsion laboratory. We believe they know a great deal about how
    to succeed at this business. But neither are we going to abdicate our
     own responsibility for this expenditure of public funds and for the suc-
     cess of the missions.
        “We are in a process by which we are both working to solve the prob-
     lem. If this process produces the kind of organizational changes and
                                                                  . ..
     the kind of ability to fix organizational responsibility that      [is de-
     sired], then we will go forward. If they don’t both we and JPL will be
                                           ...
     looking for some other arrangement.
        “I think all of us see the total picture better. Each o us tended to
                                                                 f
     see one part of the picture rather than the total picture.” Under the new
                                                                    “. . .
     contract, JPL would be organized more like the NASA Centers.           the
     United States government cannot find any arrangement under which the
     high quality of work which JPL has done and is capable of doing in the
      m6-508 -
             1
             0
138


      full meeting of the minds.”
       Mr. Webb stressed that he was not singling out anyone for blame for
    Ranger lunar spacecraft failures. “Our objective is success on the next
    flight and not to find a scapegoat for this kind of thing.” Of the next
    Ranger lunar probe, he said, “We are still striving to get it of about
                                                                      f
    June, but there are lots of problems that have to be settled. Some of US
    feel quite strongly that we must have a very strong assurance of success
    before we would be ready to launch. But we also run into the problem
    if we don’t launch then we may have di%iculty fitting into the schedule
    later.”
       Asked about &ect o the delay in Congressional appropriation o $141
                            f                                           f
    million supplemental requested for F I964 manned space flight, he
                                              Y
            “. . .
    said:         this delay is at least reducing what the President gave us-
    a fighting chance. I mean, with each passing chance we have a little
                                                                      .
    bit less of a fighting chance to do the job within this decade. . . I
    would say that costs are going to increase for the same amount of work
    with each passing month, and that each month roughly delays one month
    on the other end, or maybe more, and that this does certainly reduce the
    fighting chance.” (Transcript)
April 15: NASA Flight Research Center formally accepted from Bell Aero-
    systems Co. the first of two Lunar Landing Research Vehicles (LLRV),
    to be used in extensive flight research program conducted by FRC in
    support of Project Apollo. The program would investigate possible
    operational and piloting problems that might occur during final phase
    of manned lunar landing and initial phase of lunar takeoff. ( F~RCRe-
    lease 5-644
* Soviet news agency Tass said 25 communication sessions had been held
    with ZOND I space probe since April 2, and a great deal of “interesting
    experimental data” on the operation of onboard systems and individual
    units had been obtained. By 6:OO pm., Moscow time, ZOND I had
                                           mi.) from earth. (Tass, Komscrmol-
    reached 4,250,000km. (2,640,823
    skaya Pravda, 4/16/&, 1,ATSS-T Trans.)
  Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
    Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that use of Centaur as a
    third stage for Saturn IB launch vehicle was now a “matter of study with
     a serious approach to the various alternatives” it could serve. He men-
    tioned one such use might be as a booster for logistics support vehicle
    called Stay Time Excursion Module (STEM) for establishment of lunar
     bases. Dr. Mueller also disclosed that payload for Saturn SA-10 flight
    had been changed from an Apollo boilerplate to a micrometeoroid detec-
    tion satellite (MW),supplementing those for Saturns S A 4 and SA-9.
     Added MDS was to further confirm that skin thicknesses on boosters and
     spacecraft can be reduced, thus trimming weight requirements for Proj-
     ect Apollo. (SBD, 4/15/@, 83)
* Based on spectrographic studies of about 100 stars comparable to the
     sun, Carnegie Institution of Washington astronomers concluded the
    sun, like these stars, was radiating less heat than it used to. Dr. Olin
             of Carnegie staff found that the sun must have completed its pe-
             greatest radiation activity long before life on earth began. The
              d other planets must have experienced much stronger radiation.
                                                                           139
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERO                CS, 1964

     Report said this                               passing interest for hypo-
                                     “of m
                                    nd 0th          features which ultimately
                         of life.” (Henry, Wash. Eve.
April 15: Thomas E. Dolan, NASC stag member, prop0
    on Space Stations and Their Logistics Support in Pasadena that “saddle-
    bags” be attached to LEM to increase its carrying capacity for use in
    equipping a lunar base. 3,000-S,000 Ibs. of supplies would be attached
    to manned Lunar Excursion Module. The system would make it pos-
    sible to set up a lunar base with a 7- to 10-day staytime. He said sad-
    dlebags mode would increase total Apollo spacecraft weight by 15,000
    Ibs., but Saturn V/Apollo system theoretically had growth option of
    100% and 15-20% growth was entirely possible. “The LEM saddle-
    bag concept would avoid multiple launches, hardware development pro-
    grams for unmanned landing systems, dependence on successful un-
    manned landing system performance prior to manned landings, and de-
    pendence on surface rendezvous. As such, the p o s t - A l l o exploration
    phase could be carried on with higher mission success and with less
    total investment than that estimated for the other systems.” (M&R,
    4/20/64,15; SBD, 4/17/64,98)
* FCC approved application of ComSatCorp to build communications satel-
    lite far its planned experimental-operational synchronous-orbit network.
    The authorization was for construction only; further authorization
    would be required for placing the satellite in orbit and using it in experi-
    mental or operational service. (AP, NYT, 4/16/64)
e NASA announced appointment of Ray Hooker, Chief of Research Models
    and Facilities Div. at Langley Research Center, as NASA’s    Senior Scien-
    tific Representative in Australia. Hooker would replace Edwin P. Hart-
    man, first NASA Senior Scientific Representative in Australia, now com-
    pleting his second two-year term. Hooker would leave in June for Mel-
    bourne, where his primary function would be liaison with the Ministry
    of Supply af the Commonwealth of Australia, the cooperating agency
    which builds, staffs, and operates NASA facilities there. (NASA Release
    -5)
* Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced
    Research and Technology, said at University of Cincinnati: “We have
     reached a state where we can do a lot more things [in space exploration]
                                    . ..
     thanwemaybeallowedtodo.
        “The work of my office is to develop the concepts, I can only say what
                                               ...
     can be done. It may never be approved.
        66
          The scientist and engineer cannot answer what is next. He can only
     answer by outlining the options which science will permit as the next

    ’%khat is in fact done next must be determined by an assessment of the
     scientific, social, economical and political implications of these op-
            . . .”
    tions.           (Text)
  Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (USAF) ,USAF Space Systems Div. Deputy
    Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA space station symposium
    in Pasadena that USAF planned to assign to a single contractor the task
     of integrating the Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory
     (MOL). He said astronaut transfer from the Gemini to the MOL was a
    major problem and described several alternative methods of transfer
     being studied. (Av. Wh.,   4/20/64, 39)
140            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICPI, 1964

                           space station design was described before Orange
                          on of u u * b yEdward H. Olling, head of MSC Space
    Station Program Office. The %man station would be 150 ft. in diameter
    with three radial modules, rotate at maximum speed of 4 rpm. Lifetime
    would be from one to five years. Saturn V could launch it into orbit and
    Saturn IB would launch logistics vehicles. (M&R, 4/20/64, 22)
  The planet Jupiter, more than 10 times the size of the earth, has density
    about that o the sun and major elements probably consisting of hydro-
                  f
    gen and helium, according to Office of Naval Research. The analysis
     was based on observations made with a balloon-carried telescope
     launched into the stratosphere last November from Palestine, Tex.
     (NANA, Houston Chron., 4/15/64)
* Prof. Colin 0. Hines of Univ. of Chicago told national committee of the
     International Scientific Radio Union meeting in Washington that an
    unexpected high “jet stream” was to be blamed for disruption of long-
    distance radio communications. The layer of strong winds occurred at
    50-mi. altitude, where shearing disturbed the ionospheric layers which
     in turn disrupted radio communications, he said. (Wash. Eve. Star,
    4/ 15/64 1
* NASA Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Plan-
     ning Dr. George L. Simpmn, Jr., said in Space Business Daily interview
     that “we are beginning to feel that progress is really being made in this
     [technology utilization] program.” In many instances, he said, use of
    technology gained through various projects had “advanced the state-
     of-theart” when the various data were ‘$ulIed together”-for example,
     the advancements in fuel cell prograniis, to be made available to industry
     shortly. (SED, 4/15/64,86)
April 16: NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket with ionosphere ex-
    periment payload from Wallops Island, Va., to peak altitude of 105 mi.
     The payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density
     and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere; it impacted
     114 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Provided by Univ. of Illinois
     and the Geophysics Corp. of America, the experiment was an investiga-
     tion of the International Year of the Quiet Sun (1!%4-65) (IQSY).
     (Wallops Release 64-37)
* Japan’s first television transmission to Europe by communications satellite
     was received in Pleumeur-Bodou, France, and fed into France’s television
     network for European viewing. Reception was excellent. The relay was
     made by TELSTARII communications satellite. (AP,     Balt. Sun,4/17/64)
* NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Ofc announced successful completion
                                         fie
     of cold-flow experiments on a Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle
     application) experimental reactor, designated the NRX-AI, by the Aero-
     jet-General and We&inghouse Electric Corporations. The experiments
     were designed to check the structural stability and flow dynamics of the
     NRX-A reactor under nonpower conditions. All test objectives were met.
      (SNPO)
* Asked for his opinion about developing a new manned bomber, President
    Johnson said at White House news conference that USAF Chief of St&
    General LeMay had requested funds be reprograzned to study plans for
    a new bomber: “I told him I would give consideration to his proposal.
    I understand that proposal has been formulated and is now going through
    channels, and will shortly come to the President. When it gets to me, I
                                                                           141
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     will study it as best I can and make the decision that I think is in the
     national interest.” (Transcript, Wush. Post, 4/17/64, A18)
April 16: New three-year labor stabilization agreement, including no-strike
     clause, was signed in Washington by representatives of AFL-CIO and
     Patrick AFB Contractors’ Association. Agreement covered MILA and
     Cape Kennedy as well as Patrick, was retroactive to April 1when pre-
     vious two-year agreement had expired. (AP, NYT, 4/17/64)
  D. Brainerd H l e ,vice president of Raytheon Corp. and former director
                  oms
     of NASA manned space flight program, was interviewed in the Boston
     Globe. Asked if he still thought the 1970 manned lunar landing goal was
     realistic, he replied, “The timetable now is tougher than it was, but still
    possMe.” (White, Boston Globe, 4/16/64, CR, 4/21/64, A200243)
April 17: NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Ft.
     Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., two with grenade payloads
    to investigate winds, temperature, density, and pressure in the upper
     atmosphere. The first, a Nike-Cajun was launched from Wallops; it sent
    payload to about 57-mi. altitude, where aluminum-coated mylar plastic
    sphere was ejected and inflated to 26-in. diameter. The sphere con-
    tinued up to about 78.4mi. altitude before floating down to earth. Radar
    tracking of ascent, descent, and drift provided data for calculating
     densities at various altitudes. Less than two hours later the Ft. Churchill
    rocket was launched, sending 82-lb. payload which ejected grenades det-
    onating at intervals in region of 23 to 58 mi. 20 min. later the final
     rocket-the second carrying grenades-was launched from Wallops Is-
    land, with grenades exploding in about the same altitude range. NASA
    Goddard Space Flight Center conducted the f i h s to observe charac-
                                                     lgt
    teristics of the upper atmosphere and to measure variations occurring
    through the period of increased heating. The grenade experiments were
    an extension of series conducted from Jan. 23 to M r 6 involving 13
                                                           a.
    Nike-Cajun flights which “yielded excellent data on the characteristics
    in the upper atmosphere during winter conditions,” according to project
    scientist Wendell S. Smith. Follow-up experiments were planned for
    late summer when solar heating would be near maximum, for compara-
    tive data. (WallopsRelease 6 6 3 8 )
  Sidney J. Dagle, 29, Ball Brothers technician, died of injuries caused by
    ignition o X-248 rocket motor three days earlier at Cape Kennedy.
                f
    This was the first death among the 1 injured personnel. Next day, John
                                          1
    W.Fassett, 30, succumbed to burns sustained in the accident. An engi-
    neer in GSFC Field Projects Branch, Fassett was the only NASA employee
    among the 11; the others were employees of Douglas (booster contrm
    tor) and Ball Brothers (Os0 satellite contractor). One other man re-
    mained in critical condition. (AP, NYT, 4/18/64, 12; UPI, NYT,
    4/19/64,80; GorEdard News, 4/20/64, 3 ; GSFC PIO, 5/13/64)
* House Appropriations Committee reported $46,785,867,000 military ap-
    propriations.bill for FY 1965. Report said : “The committee explored
                                                       ...
    in detail the question, of missile dependability.        [The committtw]
    i s inclined to conclude with the Secretary [of Defense] that the missile
    force we have programmed can be depended upon to carry out its mili-
    tary mission under all of the conditions we can foresee.” The commit-
    tee also proposed appropriation of $47 million for initiating develop
    ment of a new manned bomber. (Raymond, NYT, 4/18/64,1)
14.2           ASTRONAUllCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964:

April 17: usu communications exhibition to be &own in U.S.S.R. this sum'
    mer was previewed by Government, industry, and p r e s representatives
     in New York. Exhibition covered US. communications in space satel-
     lites, TV and radio, telephone, and business and industry. The space
    portion featured models of nine satellites and live TV images of visi-
    tors bounced off working model of Telstar satellite. (Shanley, NYT,
    4/19/a, 47)
0 NASA Lewis Research Center announced seven researchers had won awards

    for four inventions, the awards totaling $l,MO under provisions of the
    Government Employees Incentive Awards Act. Winners were : S. Ste-
    phen Papell, $500 for low viscosity magnetic fluid obtained by collodial
    suspension of magnetic particles; Paul D. Reader and Harold R. Kauf-
    man, $500 for electrostatic ion engine with permanent magnetic circuit;
     Robert J. Branstetter and Allen J. Metzler, $300 for black-body furnace;
     John R. Jack and Paul F. Brinich, $100 for improved heat exchangers
    for electrothermal rockets. (WRC Release 64-38)
* Geraldine Mock, Columbus, O., housewife, became the first woman to fly
     around the world when she landed at Port Colurabus Airport, 0. Mrs,
     Mock completed her 23,103-mi. solo flight in 29 days, 1 hours, 59 min.
                                                              1
     The flight was monitored by National Aeronautic Association. (NU
     Release)
April 18: Second meeting of the President's Advisory Committee on Super-
     sonic Transport was held in the Pentagon. The committee heard views
     of airline representatives regarding economic aspects of SST, then con-
     tinued its discussion of major issues involved in the SST program. (DOD
     Release 320-64)
* His Majesty Hussein I, King of Jordan, visited NASA Kennedy Space Center
     and toured facilities at the Cape. (NASA O f Int. Aff.)
                                                 f.
April 19.- NASA Technology Utilization Report (SP-5005) on the retrometer,
     a new system of voice communications transmitted on a beam of light,
     was published. Invented at NASA Langley Research Center *byNuma E.
     Thomas, the retrometer differed from previous light beam-communica-
     tions systems in that the originating station required no power other
     than the human voice. The T-U Report described the system, gave in-
     structions for building experimental retrometers, and suggested many
     possible applications of the system. (NASA T-U Rpt. SP-5005; NASA
     Release 64-82)
  Soviet V-8 helicopter, a %-passenger single-rotor vehicle, covered 1,530
      mi. in 12 hrs. 3 min. 34 sec., to claim new world nonstop records for
     distance and speed, Pravda reported. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/20/64;
     NYT, 4/22/@, 77)
April 20: NASA announced it had selected IBM as lead contractor for develop-
     ment and fabrication of instrument units for Saturn IB and Saturn V
     launch vehicles. IBM was selected last October to design and manufac-
     ture the data adapters and digital guidance computers and be respon-
     sible for integration and checkout of the units. Now, as lead contractor,
     IBM would assume additional responsibility for structural and environ-
     mental control systems and integration of all systems. NASA would sup-
     ply telemetry system and ST-124M stabilized platforms. (NASA Release
      64-89; KSC Release 5 M )
                                                                             143




     in convincing his supervisors and work force that what’s good enough for
     the public just isn’t good enough for the national space program.
        “NASA has set hi& standards of reliability                 control for the
    boosters that send manned and unmanned                        into space, the
     spacecraft themselves, and for their relate                  support equip-
            . . .”  (Text)
     ment.
* NASA and DOD signed agreement concerning DOD contract administration
     services for NASA within the Philadelphia contract administrative services
    region, the pilot test intended ‘‘to avoid duplication of effort and to
     achieve the most effective and economical utilization” of DOD and NASA
     resources in contract administration services for NASA. (Agreement,
    NMI 2-3-31)
* Western Union announced it had completed a microwave system for the
    next lunar spacecraft’s communications with earth. The system was i          n
    test operation, linking Goldstone Tracking Station with Jet Propulsion
    Laboratory, l mi. away. For the next lunar probe, 9s well as sub-
                    a
    sequent lunar and planetary probes, data obtained by the spacecraft
    would be sent through Goldstone to JPL for computer analysis; cam-
    mands to the spacecraft would be sent from JPL through Goldstone to the
    probe. (Wash. Post, 4/21/64)
  Brig. Gen. T. J. Hayes, Assistant to Chief of Army Engineers, told Space
    Congress at Cape Kennedy that U.S. should begin immediately to plan
    building a lunar base. A lunar base would be the next logical step after
    Project Apollo, he said, and such an installation would “require soh-
    ing unprecedented engineering problems imposed by delivery-systFm
    limitations and the harsh environment about which there is little in-
    formation.
       “A significant program is needed t develop the equipment, techniques,
                                           o
    and reliability necessary for this di6cult task.” (AP, Balt. Sun,
    4/21/a)
* President Johnson announced U.S. would reduce production of enriched
    uranium over a four-year period. Addressing AP in New York, he said:
    “When added to previous reductions, this will mean an overall decrease
    in the production of plutonium by 20 per cent, and of enriched uranium
    by 41)per cent.” Soviet Premier Khrushchev simultaneously announced
    in Moscow that U.S.S.R. would discontinue construction af two atomic
    reactors for production of plutonium; reduce production of aranium-235
    in the next several years; and allocate more fissionable materials for
    peaceful uses of atomic energy. (Texts; NYT,4/21/64,14)
  At White House ceremony, with President Johnson participating, Dr. W.
                      ace I1 was sworn in as Director of Space Medicine, NASA.
                              /64)
                              of a steerable entry vehicle or steerable parachute
    system for 1969 M r probe, M s i e and Rockets reported, JPL wanted
                                     isls
                        as
    to land the complete vehicle and achieve telemetry from the Martian
144            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4.

    surface, notably on whether or not signs of life existed. Chief area of
    interest was Syrtis Major, prominent green area on Martian equator
    that might be one of the mor. likely spots to support life. (M&R,
    4/20/64,11)
April 20: Interviewed in M s i e and Rockets, Presidential Science Adviser
                            isls
              F. Hornig replied to question about U.S. space goals after
    Donald
    Project Apollo :
       u
         There are clearly a series of successively more difficult scientific
    objectives which we will pursue with unmanned spacecraft. It’s very
    difficult, though, ,to document a convincing case for a national commit-
    ment on major space goals that are far in the future. In any case, I
    can’t believe that athe momentum gained by our space program is going
    to be allowed to be lost when we achieve the first major objective.”
     (M&R, 4/20/64,35)
  Problem of nylon parachutes’ deteriorating in space was suggested by tests
    conducted by Northrop Ventura. Strength of nylon, after two weeks in
    vacuum chamber, reduced up to 20% ; after seven minutes exposure to
    normal atmosphere the nylon returned to within 2.3% original strength.
     (M&R, 4/20/64,21)
April 21: NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands,
    N. Mex., with instrumental payload to obtain evidence of hypervelocity
    micrometeoroid impacts, samples of low-velocity cosmic dust, and meas-
    urements of electron densities. Flight failed when, rocket’s propulsion
    system malfunctioned and the rocket attained only 6.25-mi. altitude.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA announced Walter L. Lingle, Jr., Deputy Associate Administrator,
    was leaving NASA May 15 to return to private industry. Lingle would
    be succeeded by Earl D. Hilburn, Deputy Associate Administrator for
     Industry Affairs. (NASA Release 6 6 9 0 )
* Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) addressed the National Space Club in
    Washington:
       “The great promise for the future of the space and defense industry
    is to turn some of the tremendous imagination, some of the talents and
    energies of your management, your scientists and engineers, to the
    major social and economic problems of our country.
       “Your industries, I submit, are eminently qualified to cooperate in
    this entirely different kind of takeoff because of your unique experience
    in solving inter-disciplinary problems through the technique of systems
                .
    analysis. . .,’
       Emphasizingbthat “space is not a WPA program,” he said he would
    not support accelerated space expenditures merely to stimulate the econ-
    omy depressed by reduction in defense spending because of disarmament.
     (NSC Release)
* Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.-Ill.) , Chairman of House Subcommittee on
    National Research Data Processing and Information Retrieval Center,
     wrote in Washington Daily News article:
        “The greatest challenge in this changing world is the solution of the
     problem of handling scientificand technical information.
       “I am deeply concerned with the staggering acceleration of scientific
    and technical information which is the life-blood in the heart of our
                                      ...
     research and development effort.
                                                                           145
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 8 4

       “I am convinced somewhere in the mountainous scientific literature
     there is a cure for cancer, a solution for harnessing limitless energy from
     nuclear fusion and a way to solve the food requirement of a growing
     world population.” (Wash. M y News,4/21/&)
April21: Rep. John Brademas (D.-Ind.) inserted in CongressionalRecord an
    editorial on Rep. J. Edward Roush‘s proposal that NASA establish a
                                                       “. . . .  We agree with
     Midwestern office, broadcast by station wowo:
     Congressman Roush that if it is in the best interests of NASA to operate
    liaison offim to aid potential contractors in securing NASA business,
                                                                          ..   .“
     then every area of the United States should qualify for this aid.
     (CR, 4/21/641, A19W99)
April 22: NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill,
     Canada, with Univ. of Alaska payload to obtain data on the visible aurora
     and on the vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to be
    supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload
     also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors.
     The rocket attained peak altitude of 103 mi., and the flight appeared sat-
     isfactory. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Michael I. Yarymovych, Director of NASA Manned Earth Orbital Mis-
    sion Studies, said before Canaveral Council of Technical Studies, Cape
     Kennedy, that NASA was coordinating fully with DOD in exploring
     four different types of orbital systems: Extended Apollo, Apollo Orbital
     Research Laboratory (AORL), Medium Orbital Research Laboratory
      (MORL), and Large Orbital Research Laboratory (LORL). The first
     three concepts were designed to be orbited by Saturn IB; LORL, by Saturn
     V. Yarymovych said that it was “becoming increasingly clear that the
     Extended Apollo is an essential element of an expanding Earth orbital
                ...
     program.
        “In the initial stages, it would be used as a laboratory and latm it
     could be converted to a logistics system.” AORL, MORL, and LORL were
     in oompetition with each other, he said, and a decision would have to be
     made among them. USAF’S Gemini B/Manned Orbiting Laboratory was
     being studied as possible integral element of Orbital Research Labora-
     tory program. (M&R,4/27/64,16)
  NASA announced Flight Research Center’s selection of Norair Div., Northrop
     Corp., for design and fsbrication of two “lifting body” research gliders.
     The fixed-price contract was expected to amount to about $1 million.
     The research gliders would be used by FRC in studying problems of pilot-
                                                                        NASA Re-
     ing advanced spacecraft during landing. (FRC Release 745%;
     lease 64-93)
  World’s Fair opened in New York, its U.S. Space Park featuring such ex-
     hibits as full-scale mockup o Saturn V’s first stage boattail, Gemini-
                                     f
     Titan, Mercury-Atlas, Delta, and the X-15. (Goddwd News, 5 4 @       //,
     3)
                    office was quoted by Stuart H. Loory in New York Herald
  USAF information
     Tribune as saying that since 1959, 12 SAC operational training missions
     of Atlas ICBM had been failures. USAF had called in General Dynamics
     Corp. engineers to help solve the problems. (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib.,
     4/22/64)
            commander Maj. Gen. W.A. Davis, asked at Cape Kennedy press
  AFSC/BSD
     conference to comment on the recently reported Atlas ICBM failures at
     Vandenberg AFB, said:
146             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,             1964
                                                             3

        There are several possible reasons for the failures. The Atlas is a
    complex piece of machinery that has a habit of using up some of its reli-
    ability with age. SAC has been taking Atlases off of operational sites,
    where they have been for a year or more, placing them on the stand
    at Vandenberg and firing them.
        “I feel that this type of test is not operational realism as SAC calls it.
    You take the missile out of its environment, load it on a plane, fly it 1 O
                                                                             ,O
                                                                             O
    or more miles, load it on another stand and fire it. T i requires dis-
                                                                hs
    connecting and reconnecting wires and fuel lines and installing destruct
    packages and some instrumentation for the training launches.” (AP,
    Vmh. Post, 4/23/64)
April 23: NASA and NBC conducted one-hour test of the SYNCOM 1 communica-
                                                                    1
    tion satellite hovering in synchronous orbit near the West Coast, testing
    the satellite’s capability to relay video coverage from Tokyo’s Olympic
    Games next fall. In the test, signals were transmitted from an antenna
    at Fort Dix, N.J.; signals returned from the satellite were received at
    Andover, Me., and relayed to NBC studios by land lines. Quality of the
    pictures was considered below standard commercial quality but adequate
    for brief broadcasts of select events. NBC, which had purchased ex-
     clusive rights to TV coverage of the 1964 Summer Olympics in the US.
    and Central and South America, would now decide whether to attempt
    live coverage with satellites or to rely on ;tapes. (Witkin, NYT, 4/24/64,
    55)
0 USAF launched Atlas-Agena D booster combination from Point Arguello,

     Calif., with unidentified satellite payload. (AP, Howton Post, 4/2%/64;
    M&R, 5 4 @ 8 )
               //,
* AFSC announced that 36 projects initiated undm the canceled X-20 pro-
    gram would be continued in support of USAF manned orbiting laboratory
     (MOL) and other programs. Examples of projects to be continued: X-20
    full pressure suit, search and rescue receiver/transmitter, studies of pilot
    control of %ooster trajectories, nose cap concept, X-20 heat protection
    system, coated molybdenum panels, high temperature bearings, sensors/
    transducers, test instrumentation subsystem ground station, flight simu-
    lation instruments and controls. (AFSC Release 43-1O-M)
0 Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of US. Weather Bureau, said in address before

    joint American Meteorological Society-American Geophysical Union
     banquet in Washington:
        “Man has always had to contend with hurricanes, tornadoes, seismic
     sea waves, floods, earthquakes, and the like. Hs scientific, technological,
                                                      i
     and social advances have now brought him face to face with new en-
     vironmental hazards. I am thinking of communications blackouts, the
     effects of atmospheric turbulence on high-speed aircraft, radioactive fall-
                                  ..
     out, and radiation in space. .
        “We are now developing revolutionary new methods of acquiring
     global information about our environment. The space satellite, although
     still in ks embryonic state, offers a potential for acquiring environmental
     information over the entire globe in a manner hitherto unimaginable.
     However, satellites are extremely costly, and their cost will require that
  ‘
     a system be devised for multiple uses. A satellite observational system
     for environmental purposes will have to serve navigational and geodetic
     functions, make observations of the weather, pr&e the oceans, and sound
     the ionosphere.
                                                                           147
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

       “Any observational platform should be put t mulciple uses if it is
                                                       o
     expensive to build and operate. I am thinking not only of space satellites,
     but also of ships and aircraft. We can no longer ignore the necessity
     of using expensive platforms to collect data for many geophysical pur-
    poses. The concept of an oceanographic survey without a simultaneous
     atmospheric survey must be abandoned by force of economics
            .
    alone. . .” (Text)
April 24: NASA investigative committee recommended series of tests to de-
    termine whether static electricity caused accidental ignition of Delta
    rocket motor in the Spin Test Facility at Cape Kennedy last April 1 .    4
    In its preliminary report, the fact-finding committee said there were four
    possible causes for the ignition: heat, shock, outside radio signals, and
    electrical impulse. The first three possMities seemed unlikely, but they
    would be studied further. Committee considered it “possible, hopwever,
    that static electricity could have built up in such a way as to cause
    ignition.” Until the committee completed its study and made its final
    report, NASA would not fly the X-248 motor. (NASA Release 64-98; KSC
    Release 55-64?)
  USAF OAR announced determination by Cambridge Research Laboratories
    scientists R. k Skrivaneb R. K. Soberman, and Tom Ryan that nocti-
    lucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or of residue of burned
    out meteors. The determination was made after extensive examinations
    of noctilucent cloud particles gathered by specially designed rocket nose
    cones sent aloft on Nike-Cajun rockets in joint AFCRL-NASA-U~~V.         of
    Stockholm program. The researchers expected that another series of
    noctilucent cloud experiments to be conducted in Sweden this summer
                                                              -
    would confirm these results. (OAR Release M 4 - 3 )
* Douglas D G 7 aircraft crashed at airport near Phoenix, Ariz., in con-
    trolled test conducted by Flight Safety Foundation under FAA contract.
    Damage was worse @en expected, and researchers were delighted with
    the “perfect crash.’’ Main purpose of test was to obtain data on fracture
    affecting passenger survival, evacuation, and fire following impact. A
    NACA/NASA developed system to protect passengers was tested in the
    crash: plastic bag which can be inflated rapidly to hold the person in
    his seat and thus provide cushion against vibration, buff&ng, hi h ac-
                                                                       f
    celeration and deceleration forces, hard landings, and crash s ocks.
     (NASA Release 64-88; FAA Release 64-30; NYT, 4/25/64,1)
0 NASA announced Georgia Institute of Technology would receive $1 million

    grant for construction of research facilities for projected Space Science
    Technology Center. Grant would build two-story building containing
    about 51,000 sq. ft. to accommodate laboratory research in atmospheric
    sciences, materials and structures, transport phenomena, and systems
    engineering. To complete the Center, Georgia Tech would build a
    matching structure with funds from other sources. (NASA Release &%)
’ NASA Flight Research Center’s selection of Cornell Aeronautical Lab-
    oratories, Inc., for contract negotiations on general purpose jet air-
    borne simulator system was announced. The cost-plus-fixed-fee con-
    tract was expected to amount to about $1million. The new system would
    be installed in Lockheed Jetstar aircraft (C-lMA), purchased last year
    for use in extensive flight research directed toward problems of a variety
    of aircraft types, including supersonic transport. (NASA Release 6 6 9 7 )
148             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

April 24: NASA selected six firms for c                          leading to con-
                                                                 er, NASA: Aero-
    tract for launch support services
    jet General Corp., American Machine and Foundry Co., Bendix Corp.,
    Chrysler Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and Westinghouse Hectric
    Corp. The contract would be cost-reimbursement type with incentive-
    award fee provisions, and would be awarded for one year with renewal
    options for two more years. Total cost of three-year contract was ex-
    pected to be more than $20 million. Most of the work wouId be per-
    formed at new facilities now under construction on NASA Merritt Island
    Launch Area. (NASA Release 64-95)
* Dr. Gerard P. Kuipr, head of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the
    Univ. of Arizona, said at meeting of American Geophysical Union in
    Washington that Mars did not have enough water to support any but
    microscopic life forms. He described recent &sewations from McDon-
    ald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex., that showed Mars to be enveloped
    in sheath of atmospheric ice crystals. Dr. Kuiper said in Martian spring
    the frost covering its pole during the wintertime evaporates directly into
     the air rather than melting. He estimated Martian air to be two parts
    nitrogen to one part carbon dioxide, with small amount of argon and
     even less water vapor and oxygen. Dr. Hyron Spinrad of Univ. of Calif.
     (Berkeley) described recent observations of Mars from Mt. Wilson Qb-
    servatory. He said Mars was so cold that water melted only in the
     afternoon and when Mars was nearest the sun; amount of water in the
     Martian air was a thousandth of that in sea-level air in the arid south-
     western US. The speakers rejected the idea that Martian air contained
     nitrogen-oxygen compounds, proposed last December by Georgetown
     Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess and chemist Dr. Sebastian Karrer.
      (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/€4, 8 )
April 25: President Johnson said in Washington press conference:
        “I have sent. a memorandum to Mr. Halaby of the Federal Aviation
     Agency that states:
        “ ‘I realize that you had hoped to select the contractors to proceed with

     the development of supersonic transport by May 1of this year, as a result
     ‘of the preliminary design competition conducted over the past several
     months among a number of airframe and engine manufacturers.
        “ ‘As you have reported to me, however, the 2l0-member Government
     evaluation group, after analyzing the proposals in depth, found that none
      of the proposed airframe designs met the minimum range-payload re-
      quirements of the F.A.A. request for proposals of carrying a 30,000-
     pound payload for a distance of 4,000statute miles.
        “ ‘Moreover, none of these designs met what you properly emphasized

      as a basic requirement, namely that the aircraft be capable of economic
     operation.
        “ ‘As you have also emphasized, it has been the objective that the
      development stage of the supersonic transport be financed 75 per cent
     by manufacturers. The F.A.A. request for proposals pointed out that
     “the Government’s decision to proceed with the supersonic transport
      program is based on manufacturers’ participation in an amount equiva-
      lent to 25 per cent of the total cost of the development through certifica-
     tion of the tra11sp01-t.”
         “ ‘I remain convinced that it will be possible to develop an American
      supersonic transport which w i l l be economic to operate, will find a swb
                                                                          149
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

     stantial market among the airlines of the worId and will help to main-
    tain American leadership in the air.
         “ ‘In view of the current situation, however, I recognize that it i no
                                                                            s
     longer appropriate for me to hope for a recommendation by May 1           .
     Difficult and complex issues are now presented for resolution so that I
    can determine how best to proceed.
         ‘‘‘I have asked the members of the President’s Advisory Committee on
     Supersonic Transport, of which you are a member, to study this program
     thoroughly, after which I w i l l expect recommendations from the com-
     mittee and from you.’
         “So the call for bids on May 1 is of and we cannot expect a recom-
                                              f
     mendation by then.” (Transcript, NYT, 4/26/64,6p)
April 25: U.S.S.R launched COSMOS XXIX into orbit from unspecified site.
     Soviet press agency Tass said the satellite was in the following initial
     orbit: 309-km.   apogee (192mi.) ;204-km.   perigee (127mi.) ;89.52min.
     period; and 65”4‘angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said scientific
     equipment, radio systems, and onboard instrumentation were function-
     h g normally, and ground station was processing incoming information.
      (Tass, Komsomolshxya Pravda, 4/26/W 1,ATSS-T Trans.)
  First industry-produced Saturn booster (S-I) arrived at NASA Marshall
     Space Flight Center after nine-day barge journey from Michoud Op-
     erations. To be used on SA-8, the booster was undergoing static fir-
     ings and other tests at MSFC befoFe being sent to Cape Kennedy where it
     would be launched. (MmsM Star, 4/29/64,1)
* Harold Goldstein, Assistant Commissioner of US. Bureau of Labor Statis-
     tics, discussed changes in the labor force at symposium in New York.
     “We now have &out 1 2 million engineers and scientists. Their num-
                              .
     bers may rise to somewhere in the neighborhood of 2 million by 1970.
         “There productivity is also rising rapidly. New inventions can be
     made faster, because as science and technology have progressed the tech-
     niques availahle for analyzing a problem, the knowledge of scientific
     principles that can be brought to bear, the di&rent types o hardware
                                                                     f
     that are readily available to be adapted in a new invention are increasing
     at a geometric rate.” [Lissner, NYT, 4/26/64,85)
April 26: NASA Associate Administrator Dr. R c h r t C. Seamans said Soviet
     spacecraft ZOND I apparently was traveling on a Venus trajectory. Dr.
     Seamans was speaking on Mutual Broadcasting Systems, Inc., radio pro-
     gram “Reporters Roundup.” Asked why he thought ZOND I was a Venus
      probe, he said that he understood US.          d identified it as such and
     that “this payload is traveling in that         on.” Also, he added, the
      firing occurred “at the right time for a Venus launch.” (AP, Wash.
     Eve. Star, 4/27/64;AP, Wah.Post, 4/27/a)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in address before Na-
     tional University Extension Association in Washington:
         “The exploration of space is a continuation of the geographical ex-
      ploration by man of unknown areas of the earth from the days of the
     Phoenician mariners three thousand years ago. The New World, the
      polar regions, the depths of the ocean, the limits of the atmosphere-
     have each in turn been the temporary god. Space is the new fron-
          ...
     tier.
         “We have as a nation accepted the challenge of the new frontier, and
      this year are spending a little more than five ‘billion dollars on the ex-
150             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    ploration of space for peaceful purposes. This represents an expenditure
    of approximately 50 cents per week by each of the 200 million inhabit-
                          ..    .” ( T a t )
    antsofourcountry.
April 26: NASA announced 1964-65 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships in executive
    development were awarded to three NASA employees: Walter C. Scott,
    Chief of Chemical and Solar Power Generation Branch in Office of Ad-
    vanced Research and Technology; Edward J. Lievens, Jr., member of
    Technical Staff, Plans and Analysis, in Office of Manned Space Flight;
    and Neal A. Holmberg, Aerospace Technology Program Manager at
    NASA Western Operations Office. (NASA Release 64-94)
April 27: NASA announced Langley Research Center would conduct tests with
    Boeing 707 air transport prototype to find ways to lower landing and
    takeoff distances required for large jet transports. NASA pilots and engi-
    neers would study performance and handling characteristics of the air-
    craft in three-month program. (NASA Release 66100)
  House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA
    Oversight began hearings on Project Ranger. Subcommittee Chairman
     Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that “the action that pre-
    cipitated these hearings are letters which Mr. Webb addressed to the
    chairman of the two space committees” (March 31 letters to Senator
    Anderson and Representative Miller outlining problems with Ranger
    spacecraft). (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64t)
* Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and
    Applications, said before House Subcommittee on NASA Oversight about
    Project Ranger:
        ..    . From the outset, the concept was advanced. It was conceived
        (6


    to seize the initiative in space exploration from the Soviet as well as to
    obtain important information about the moon. Had it succeeded, it
    certainly would have been a major first for this country, and it may still
                                                                         ...
    obtain that objective. The spacecraft itself is quite complex.             It
     is comparable to the most sophisticated launch vehicles in terms of elec-
    tromechanical system complexity. Launch vehicles developed in this
    country have typically taken 20 or more flights to achieve 50% reliabil-
    ity. Some have not done much better than this after many more firings.
     Indeed, we have read recently that last year there were 13 consecutive
    failures of the Atlas. In addition, the Discoverer project took 13 at-
    tempts to recover its first payload from orbit. Polaris experienced 5
     initial failures before its first success. Skybolt experienced 5 flights
     without achieving complete mission success. In each of these projects,
    partial success in early flights helped improve later flights. Although I
     believe Skybolt was dropped for other reasons, Atlas, Discoverer, and
     Polaris all went on to become vital elements in the defense posture of
     this country.
        “Ranger is going through this same process. We have solved some
     of our launch vehicle problems to the point where the reliability is im-
    proving appreciably. The basic spacecraft bus has been retained and
     has now demonstrated its capabiIity to deliver a payload to a precise spot
     on the lunar surface. We now must make the payload work. The pay-
     load also is pushing the state of the art in high power television telem-
                                                                           ..
     etry. This was necessary to obtain high resolution photographs.
         LL
            Our reviews of the Ranger system continue to convince us of its capa-
     bility of performing the mission. While we h o w we cannot have
                                                                         151
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

    100% reliability with launch vehicle, spacecraft, or payload, we ex-
    pect to achieve at least one complete success with the remaining three
            . ..
    flights.
       “Ranger is a tough job. Although success has eluded us, it is within
    our grasp. We must have the fortitude to proceed. Space will only be
    conquered by those who do have such fortitude. It might be well to
    point out that our competitors in this area of exploration are not lacking
    in this respect. It is reported that the Soviet Union has failed in from
     15 to 20 consecutive lunar and planetary mission attempts since Lunik
    I11photographed the back side of the moon in 1959.
       “Even should subsequent Rangers fail through unforeseen causes, we
    must move ahead. We must look at the totality of the space pro-
            ...    The over-all picture is very good and is most convincing
    gram.
    of this country’s capability to successfully complete these undertakings.
                                    ..    .” (Testimony)
    The trends are all in our favor.
April 27: Oran W. Nicks, Director of NASA Lunar and Planetary Programs,
    presented history and status of the Ranger project to the Subcommitteeon
    NASA Oversight, detailing in particular the recommendations of NASA
     Board o Inquiry (Kelley Board) prior to RANGER VI and the Hilburn
             f
    Board following RANGER VI. Hilburn report outlined: (1)design changes
    effected after analyses of RANGER VI flight data; (2) changes agreed to
    be desirable “if properly evaluated and qualified”; and (3) board rec-
    ommendations “not entirely resolved by OSSA and JPL.” Notable change
    in the first category: NASA would closely monitor Ranger test program
    at JPL, would have to concur in spacecraft’s flightworthiness before it
    could be shipped. (Testimony)
e USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster combination from Vandenberg AFB,
    Calif., with unidentified satellite payload. (UPI, Wush. Post, 4/28/64)
* Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems,
    sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of
    Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, ma., w t some 200
                                                                 ih
    engineers and scientists attending.
       In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator
    b r Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff
     said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we
    strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion
     and control o energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the
                   f
     one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There
     are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one
    hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other.
       “The state o man’s technology in every age has depended on his abil-
                    f
    ity to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought
    on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge
                                                    ...
    of the equivalence of different forms of energy.
       “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy
    conversion and control axe breathtaking. New methods of energy con-
    version from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be
                                                                         ...
    useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program.
    Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in ithe NASA pro-
    gram are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy
    to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to
    kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite re-
152              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

      actor at 6000O R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will
      convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a
                                                        . .”
      device about the size of an American motor car. .            (Text)
          D .Charles S. Sheldon of NASC staff said in address at the Conference:
           r
           ..
          “. As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and
      the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite dif-
      ferent. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we
      have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the
      lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for
                            ...
      the year before.
          “My ‘best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to
      the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very com-
      plex missions. Let us look at just the main outlines.
                                                    ...
          “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit:             The Soviet Union is
      clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In,theEarth-orbital regime.
      it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites
      with a minimu,m of fanfare, and these have included a range of experi-
      ments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing
      synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles.
          “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of un-
      manned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accom-
                       ..
      plishments. .       But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet
                   .
      capabilities. . .
          “Lunar and Planetary Probes: . . . In absoIute number of Iaunchings
      the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we
      have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that
      purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles
      by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of
      our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner I1 carried about
      40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are
      rightfully proud of this accomplishment.
          “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from
      which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be
      launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962,
      ten such Iaunchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a diffi-
      cult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner 11. Not one
       of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . .
          “While neither country should be overly proud of its lunar prdbe
      record, the pictures taken by Lunik I11 back in 1959 are still a high-
      water mark.
                                      .. . Through the 1963 season each country
          “Manned Space Flight:
       had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astro-
                                                                     ..
       naut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. .
                                  .
          “Hurntwt Safety: . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika,
       four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits
      of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs,
                                       ...
       beforethefirstmanwassent.
                                        ..    . To the best of our knowledge, the
          “Future Manned Missions:
       Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of con-
       venient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then,
       if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and
       factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that
                                                               ..
       the United S a e is building a lunar capability either. .
                     tts
                                                                           153
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

         “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to
     do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements
                                                                 .
     that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . With all
     this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even prob-
     able that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant
                     ...
     mannedflights.
         “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the
     facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is
     worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a
     race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize
     the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reac-
                                                    .
     tions, but with sound, consistent planning. . .’, (Text)
April 27: At American Physical Society M e i g the planet Jupiter was re-
                                               etn,
      ported to be rotating slower. Prof. Alex G. Smith said in 1961 radio
      sources showed an abrupt change in rotational rate; observations made
      by radio observatories in Florida and Chile showed that the rotation had
      slowed by 1.3 see. Dr. Smith said this w s “almost as surprising as if
                                                  a
      the city o Washington had begun to drift across the surface of the earth
                f
      at a rate of 10 degrees longitude a year.” Studies were continuing to
      determine whether Jupiter itself had changed its rotation or whether the
      change was limited to radio sources. (Finney, NYT, 4/28/64, 19)
* The “complete success” of Project Vela high-altitude nuclear-detectionsatel-
      l t s led DOD’S Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) to expand
       ie
      and revise the project. Future launchings had been rescheduled farther
      apart so that sabsequent satellites could incorporate any major improve-
      ments between launchings, according to ARPA Director Dr. R. L. Sproull.
      (M&R, 4/27/64,11)
* Neutron star, detected by x-ray instruments aboard sounding rocket
      launched last year from White Sands Missile Range, was discussed in
      paper delivered to National Academy of Sciences by NRL astrophysicist
       Dr. Herbert Friedman. The invisible star, located in constellation
      Scorpio, emits about 10 billion times more x-ray intensity than visible
      light, he said, and density of the star was probably about one billion tons
      to the cubic inch. Star’s surface was “so hot that practically all its
      luminosity is in the form of X-ray.” Another experiment to detect a
      suspected neutron star in the Crab Nebula was being planned for July 7.
       (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64; Haseltine, Wash. Post, 4/28/64;
      Sullivan, NYT, 4/28/64,19)
 9 AFSC announced new graphite refractory coatings for use in aerospace

      vehicles had been developed by Research and Technology Division’s Air
      Force $Materials  Laboratory. Materials research engineer Khodabakhsh
       S. Mazdiyasni applied for patent on the process of coating graphite with
      zirconium oxide. (AFSC Release 43-13-64)
 * Nine-member Republican study group on space and aeronautics, chaired by
       Rep. Charles S. Gubser (Calif.), said President Johnson had shown a
       “shocking lack of confidence in United States aircraft manufacturers’’
      with his decision to re-examine the U.S. supersonic transport program.
      Rep. Gubser charged the decision would “doom the United States to
       second place in the high-performance transport field.” (AP, NYT,
      5 / 3 / w 68)
      76%5980--85---11
154            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

April 27: Remarks of Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., president of MIT, to an MIT
    alumni group, appeared in Aviation Week:
        “The growth o our innovation industry-shorthand for ‘research, de-
                       f
     velopment, test and evaluation’-is a measure of the progress of the US.
    toward becoming a research-based society. From the very earliest days
    of the Republic, it has ,been recognized that knowledge is power and
     that the nation grew stronger by taming nature than it could by fram-
    ing ideologies. So today we have the research society, afiauent in. the
    production of knowledge as well as dollars, with planned discovery, in-
    novation, and experiment constantly renewing its vitality and harness-
    ing the future for the benefit of the present. . . .” (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,
    211
  Prospect that U S supersonic transport development program management
                    ..
     would be transferred from FAAto DOD reported in Aviutwn Week. “It
     naw appears that Defense Dept. will be assigned over-all manage-
     ment responsibility for development, with FAA acting as a oontracting
     agency. . . .” (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,3%)
0 Plans for formation of National Academy of Engineering were drawn up

    by committee of 25 leading engineers appointed by NAS president Dr.
    Frederick Seitz. The committee, which would seek Congressional char-
    ter for the proposed academy, elected Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel, Union
    Carbide Corp.’s Vice President for Research, as chairman. (NAS-NRC
    Release)
0 Ray Romatowski, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Af-

    fairs, was among the 12 Federal employees selected by Woodrow Wilson
    School of Public and International Affairs to study at Princeton Univ.
    during 1%&5 academic year. (Wash. Post, 4/27/fA)
* Astronomer Dr. Willem J. Luyten of the Univ. of Minnesota received the
    James Craig Watson Medal of the National Academy of Sciences at NAS
    Annual Meeting in Washington. The medal, the Academy’s oldest, rec-
    ognized Dr. Luyten’s contributions to understanding of white-dwarf
    stars. (NAS-NRC Release)
* DOD renamed the A-11 supersonic aircraft the YF12A. A-11 had been the
    code-designationby manufacturer Lockheed Aircraft Corp., while YFl2A
    would be a military designation. DOD called it an “interceptor aircraft.”
     (UPI, Wash.Post, 4/28/64)
April 28: Aerojet General Corp. successfully test fired ApoIlo service moduIe
    engine in long duration test at Sacramento, Calif. The multiple-restart,
    22,000-lb.-thrust engine was activated four times for total of 421 sec.
     (upr, Houston Chron., 4/29/fj4)
  Use of lasers to measure craters on the moon was reported by J. S.
    Courtney-Pratt, of Bell Telephone Laboratories, to Society of Photo-
    graphic Scientists and Engineers in New York. Based on computations
    made w i t h Iaser beams sent to crater lips and then to crater bottoms,
    lunar craters were found to be as deep as 20,000 ft. (Devlin, NYT,
    4 / 2 9 / a , 15)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, addressing Texas Technological Col-
    lege, said that the role of NASA was “essentially the same as that of its
    predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Both
    were created in an atmosphere- of chagrin and deep concern because
    prior to World War I and following World War I1 the nation had for-
    feited early leadership in a new field of technological opportunity-aero-
                                                                          155
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

     nautics in 1915 and space in 1957. In recommending the creation of
     NACA in 1915, a committee of the Smithsonian Institution presented a
     Memorial to the Congress which began: ‘This country led in the early
     development of heavier-than-air machines. Today it is far behind, . . .’
         “This was at the outset of a war in which, despite the fact that the
     Wright Brothers had first demonstrated powered flight at Kity Hawk
    in 1903, the United States had no aircraft design or manufacturing
     capability of its own. No aircraft of American design or manufacture
     flew in Europe during World War I, and it remained for NACA, in the
     years which ensued, to provide the basic research and development upon
    which achievement of ultimate US. air supremacy, civil and military,
                 ...
     wasbased.
        “The advent of Sputnik I in 1957 revealed that once again, this time
     in space, the United States had neglected a clear opportunity for tech-
    nological leadership and to overcome the deficiency, the President and
    the Congress turned once again to the formula which had proven so
     effective in aeronautics for more than 40 years. It created the National
    Aeronautics and Space Administration as a research and development
     agency charged with restoring the nation’s leadership in space by de-
    veloping the rockets, the spacecraft, the facilities, the scientific knowl-
    edge, and the operational skill required. And like NACA, NASA has ful-
     filled its mission to the extent that we have now reached a point of
                                           ..   .” (Text)
    parity in space with the Soviet Union.
April 28: At annual meeting of National Academy of Sciences, in Washington,
    Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the
    Southwest, was elected to a second four-year term as Treasurer.
        Also at the meeting, NAS elected 35 new members on the basis of d i 5
    tinpished and continuing achievements in original research, among
    them: George Howard Herbig, astronomer and assistant director of Lick
    Observatory; and Clark Blanchard Millikan, professor of aeronautics
     and director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laihratory.
        Election of six distinguished foreign scientists also was announced,
    among them: Marcel Gilles Josef Minnaert, Professor Emeritus at the
    Univ. of Utrecht and co-inventer of the stellar curve of growth, one of
    the most significant developments in modern astronomy; and Maurice
    Roy, Directeur General de l’O5ce National #Etudes et de Recherches
    Aerospatiales and currently President of the International Committee on
                              .
    Space Research ( COSPAR) (NAS-NRS Releases)
 Quasars (quasi-stellar objects) were subject of discussion at American
    Physical Society meeting in Washington. Too large to be stars, too small
    to be galaxies, quasars emanate tremendously strong radio waves even
    though they are billions o light-years away.
                               f
        Dr. Peter Bergmann of Yeshiva Univ. said pulsing quasar 3G273
    must have been shining for at least a million years, because it must have
    taken at least that long for the jet o luminous gas protruding from one
                                          f
    side to reach its presently observed length. Dr. Bergmann presented
    his theory that quasars shine because of gravitational collapse-trans-
    formation of mass to energy by gravitation rather than stellar fusion.
        Dr. Louis Gold and Dr. John W. Moffatt of Martin CO.%Research In-
    stitute for Advanced Studies rejected theories that quasars operate on
    stellar fusion principle, theorized that “ordered oscillation” was operat-
    ing inside the vast gaseous envelopes rimming quasars. Laser effect, or
156            ASTRONATJTICB AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4,

    coherence of particles, occurred in the gaseous envelope, which was
     about 1 to 10 light years thick. Dense core of quasar must act a fusion
                                                                        s
     furnace, providing particles which acquire coherence on their wa to the
     outside. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/29/64,15;       Haseltine, Wash.Post, 4,&9/64;
     Hmes, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/29/64)
A p d 29: X-15 No. 1 was flown by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) to alti-
     tude of 102,000 ft. and speed of 3,903 mph (mach 5.72) in test to de-
     termine effect of shock waves on photography. Both the test and the
     105th flight of the X-15 were successful. (UPI, Wash. Post, 4/30/64;
     NASA X 1 Proj. O f ) f.
              -5
* First succesful, full-scale controlled test of parasail was conducted by NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center. “It could not have been more successful,”
     Lee Noman, parasail project engineer said. Model of two-man Gemini
     spacecraft was dropped from C-119 aircraft from 11,OOO-ft. altitude.
     Small drogue parachute immediately deployed, and then the parasail
     quickly deployed and stabilized the spacecraft’s fall. After 7 8 min. the
                                                                     .
     spacecraft hit the water of Trinity Bay. Previous attempt to drop-test
     the parasail was unsuccessful because of deployment problems.
      (Maloney, Houston Post, 4/30/6$)
* Unnamed NASA officials were quoted as saying US. had detected Soviet
     failure within the last week .in an attempt to launch a probe to the
      moon, by John Finney in New York Times. Failure was said to have
      occurred within minutes after rocket booster rose from launch pad near
      the Aral Sea. (Fmney, NYT, 4/30/641,9)
* NASA announced $1 million facilities grant to Texas A&M Univ., which
      would build an activation analysis laboratory for use in its space-related
      research program for remote analysis of materials through nuclar
      activation. (NASA Release 6102)
0 Philip Donely, Chief of Flight Mechanics and Technology Div.,            NASA
      Langley Research Center, received 1964 Laura Taber Barbour Air
      Safety Award of the Flight Safety Foundation. Citation said that
      Donely’s “diverse and unique contributions to air safety during his serv-
      ice of over 30 years with the NACA and NASA have made him an inter-
      nationally recognized authority in the areas of aircraft loads, operating
                                                    ...
      problems, and airwerthiness requirements.             The counsel he has
      given to industry, operators, and government agencies on matters such
      as airworthiness aspects of new aircraft, assessment of design criteria,
      and airworthiness problems related to aircraft accidents has contributed
      significantly to the development and operation of safe aircraft.” (NASA
      Release &92)
 0 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in keynote address

      at Fourth National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space:
          “We have chosen to go to the moon because manned exploration of the
       moon involves every facet of overall space capability this nation must
       develop if we are to become a leading spacefaring nation. Also, the
       moon’s pockmarked surface, untouched by water or wind erosion since
       it has no atmosphere, bears the traces o everything which ever occurred
                                                f
            ...
      ithere.
          <c
            We are carrying forward an active national space program, not lim-
       ited to the moon, encompassing science, advanced engineering, practical
       applications, including manned space flight.
                                                                          157
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

       “We are building toward pre-eminence in every phase of space activ-
    ity-all the way from microscopic electronic components to skyscraper-
    tall rockets.
       “We are building a network of large-scaleengineering facilities, space-
    yards, proving grounds, and space ports to a m b l e , test, and launch the
    space vehicles we need now and in the future.
       L6
          We are creating new national resources of lasting value in these
    facilities; in the industrial and managerial capabilities we are develop
    ing ;and in the growing number of scientistsand engineers who are learn-
    ing about space and space technology.
       “We are filling the pipelines of hardware and knowledge, and as meas-
    ured by the financial resources required, will be halfway toward our first
    manned lunar mission by mid-1965.
       “We are accumulating, in space, the basic scientific knowledge about
    the earth, the solar system, the universe, and about man himself.
       “We are bringing benefits not only to the United States but to all the
    world through the use of space and space technology, employing such
    new tools as weather, communications, and navigational satellites, and
    applying spacebased techniques, equipment, and materials to improve
    industrial products, processes and services.
       “We are providing a much-needed stimulus to the energies and crea-
    tivity of people everywhere, particularly to the minds and aspirations of
    young people.
       <c
         We are bringing about increased economic activity at a time when the
    effects o automation on our society are beginning to be felt.
             f
       “And we are making certain, through our sustained &orb, that the
    realm of space now opening up to us shall be a domain of freedom.
       “It is for these reasons that we have mounted the greatest peacetime
                                             ..    .” (Text)
    undertaking in the history of mankind.
April 29: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
    §pace Flight, discussed Project Apollo before the Conference on the
    Peaceful U e of §pace:
               ss
                                      .
       “The overall time phasing . . is quite conservative. The Apollo
    spacecraft is being developed on a schedule four years longer than was
    needed for the Mercury spacecraft, and two years longer than was taken
    to produce the B-58 bomber. The Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehi-
    cles are being developed on a schedule two yea? longer than that of the
    Atlas missile, and a year longer than was required for the Titan. The
    total duration scheduled for the Apollo program is longer than that of
    any previous United States research and development effort.
       “The Apollo jo%, of course, is a big one and we will need all o thef
                   ...              ...     that if the remaining six years of
    time allotted.        We found
    work [in Project Apallo] were stretched out over 12 years the total cost
    of the presently approved manned space flight program would increase
    by about 30 percent, or about six billion dollars. The economic con-
    siderations, therefore, support the maintenance of the present schedule.
    It is six billion dollars cheaper to continue on the course we axe now
                                                                 .
    following than to set out on a new course at this late date. . .
       Among the benefits from Project Apollo is “the rapid advancement of
    United States capability in spa-the          ability to undertake whatever
    space activities the national interest may require.
158                              AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

        “There are seven major elements in this capability-people, indus-
     trial base, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational
     know-how, and the ability to manage research and development. To-
     gether, they add up to space power, which provides this country with
                                            ..    .” (Text)
     freedom of action in this new medium.
April 29: Delta Air Lines had reserved three delivery positions for US.super-
     sonic transport, FAAannounced. (FAARelease 64-37)
* Britain’s VC-10 long-range jet aircraft made its first commercial passen-
     ger flight-a BOAC flighffrom London to Lagos, Nigeria. The aircraft
     featured rapid lift, allowing it to use shorter runways than its US.coun-
     terparts, the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8. (Farnsworth, NYT,
     4/30/64, 57)
April 29-May 1 : Air Transport and Space Meeting and Production Forum
     held in New York, sponsored by Society of Automotive Engineers and
     American Society of Mechanical Engineers. At the meeting, NASA
     Ames Research Center scientists reported results of a study of a manned
     Mars mission : Nova-class launch vehicles and nuclear-propelled space-
     craft, combined with extensive aerodynamic braking techniques at Mars
     and Earth, would allow manned Mars mission to be made with a single,
     direct launch from Earth. Use of aerodynamic braking at Mars and
     Earth would reduce total velocity requirements 50 per cent. (M&R,
     5/4/64 17)
* Forum on Developments and Techniques for Air Traffic System of the
     Future, sponsored by Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics,
     held in Washington. At the forum, details of Westinghouse Electric’s
     concept of navigation satellite system were disclosed by E. S. Keats,
     Westinghouse project manager for navigation and surveying systems.
     The single, synchronous-orbit satellite could provide navigation, com-
     munication, and trafEc service to aircraft over North Atlantic or Pacific.
     The satellite would interrogate each aircraft periodically, measuring
     time to determine navigational position. ( A v . Wk.,   5/4/64, 69)
ApriZ 30: Full-scale paraglider was successfully deployed at Edwards AFB
     in test conducted by North American Aviation’s Space and Information
     Systems Div. for NASA to demonstrate the method of maneuverable re-
     covery of manned spacecraft. After an air drop from USAF C-130
     transport at 33,000 k , the 31-ft.40ng inflatable wing deployed and
                              .
     assumed the programed trimmed glide. (NU S&ID Skywriter, 5/1/64,
     1;Av. Wk.,    5/4/64,27)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Astronaut L. Gordon
     Cooper revealed at luncheon meeting with newsmen in Washington* that
     scientists would be invited to volunteer for training for luna
     Plans had been finalized at meeting between NASA officials an
     of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board.
     scientists would be selected to train with the Gemini/Apollo astronauts
     at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during the summer months. Then,
     perhaps two years before a lunar landing, NASA would select some per-
     sons from the reserve to begin full-time training as crew members for
     later lunar flights. (AP, 4/30/64)
  Harold Gold, head of Spacecraft Branch of NASA Lewis Research Cen-
     ter, discussed Sert I[ project at the Air Transport and Space meeting
     in New York. Scheduled for launch on a ballistic flight this summer,
     Sert (Space Electric Rocket Test) would be NASA’s electric engines
                                                           first
                                                                          159
                                                         19 64
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    in space. The two electric engines aboard Sert I would differ : (1) built
    by Lewis was electron-bombardment ion engine using mercury propel-
     lant; (2) built by Hughes Aircraft’s Hughes Research Laboratory was
     contact-ionization thrustor using cesium propellant. Hughes engine
     would operate for first half of flight, then Lewis engine would take over.
     “If Sert I data indicate that beam neutralization is completely effective
     the development of ion thrustors for space missions can continue in
     vacuum chambers. However, if beam neutralization is of limited ef-
     fectiveness a new program of vacuum chamber and flight tests may be
     undertaken,” Gold said. (NASA Release 64-101 ; LRC Release 6 4 3 9 )
Apri2 30: Development of highly precise laser plasma diagnostic probe by
     General Electric under contract to Cambridge Research Laboratories was
     announced by USAF OAR. The probe showed promise as an in-flight in-
     strument to measure electron density distribution in the flow field of a
     re-entering hypersonic vehicle and simultaneously measure electron
     temperature of the plasma. (OAR Release 4 6 4 5 )
0 FAA announced Spain’s Iberia Air Lines had reserved three delivery posi-

     tions for the US. supersonic transport aircraft. This brought total
     reserved positions to 84 by 17 airlines. (FAA Release 64-40)
e USAF annual report of unidentified flying objects said there were 382 sight-
     ings in 1963 compared with 469 in 1962 and 1004 in record year of
     1957. During past 16 years, report said, USAF had investigated more
     than 8,000 sightings, all but 7.7 percent of which had been explained
     by natural phenomena. (UPI, Houston Chron., 5/1/64)
During April: Aluminum pressure suit designed for astronaut use on the
     moon was undergoing evaluation at MSC. Officially called a “constant
     volume, rigid articulated, anthropomorphic protectic suit,” it featured
     increased mobility and constancy of pressure. Rigid suit concept was
     first introduced by Litton Industries in 1956 for use in pressure cham-
     bers. Advanced version for space use, with adaptations and improve-
     ments, was proposed to NASA by Litton last Gar. (MSC Roindup,
     4/15/64.8)
           , I   ,


  DOD tracking station was established and began operating in the Seychelles
     Islands in the western Indian Ocean, some 1,000 mi. northeast of Zanzi-
     bar, where NASA tracking station had been closed. (M&R, 4/13/64, 9)
* NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Operations Control Center
     established that Soviet LUNIK IV spacecraft, launched April 21, 1963,
     was in a barycentric orbit-i.e., orbiting around the center of gravity
      (4,600 km. from earth’s center) of the earth-moon system. This unusual
     orbit was apparently a coincidence, because final Tass announcement
     about the probe had said it would become a satellite of the sun. (GSFC,
     and MSFC SIN, 4/64,15-16)
  First production 5-2 rocket engine was accepted by NASA Marshall Space
     Flight Center from NAA’S Rocketdyne Div., then turned over to Douglas
     Aircraft Co. for use in ground captive tests associated with Saturn
     S-IVB stage work. (MarshallStar, 5/6/64,1)
* Shipments of nearly six million pounds of large components for NASA
     Langley Research Center’s $12.5 million Space Radiation Effects Labo-
     ratory began arriving. Beginning in mid-1965, the new facility would
     be operated by Virginia Associated Research Center (VARC) ,comprised
     of representatives of the College of William and Mary, U. Va., and VPI.
      (URC Release)
160             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

During April: NASA awarded contract modification exceeding $12 million to
    North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for
    further work on Saturn V’s S-I1 stage. (Murshall Star, 4/22/64, 4)
* Postmaster General John A. Gronouski revealed plans for issuance of
     Robert Hi Goddard air mail commemorative stamp this year. The stamp
    would honor 50th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s first patent registrations
    in 1914 for solid/liquid fuel methods and multi-stage rocket designs.
     (NSC Ltr. 4/1/64; Guddard News, 4/20/64,3)
  Test firing of Bell Aerosystems Co. 40,00O-lb.-thrust fluorine-hydrogen
    rocket engine showed combustion efficiency exceeded 95 per cent of
    theoretically obtainable maximum. (Aw. Wk.,        4/27/64, 69)
* Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced
    Research and Technology and AIAA Technical Director, said in Astro-
    nwtics & Aeronautics editorial on research exploitation :
       “Those of us who seek specific scientific or technological goals in
    our free-enterprise system too often lose sight of the fact that the
    resources made available for this purpose cannot continue to increase
    indefinitely. In the years to come, it will be increasingly incumbent
    upon the individual to improve the effectiveness of his RQD activities,
    and so conserve the nation’s resources. This is not just a matter to be
    dealt with at the national level, but one which will require understanding
    and discipline at all levels of our profession.” (A&A, 4/64, 18-19)
  Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) said in Air Force and Space Digest
    article on technological goals:
       “A creative idea may be born in the mind of one man. Of primary
    importance is the basic and fundamental research necessary to spell out
    this idea. Here the financial investment is probably the smallest, lim-
    ited to the man, his instruments, and the time. The amounts of money
    are relatively modest, except for capital facilities. Indeed, sometimes
    this money is used and reused, for basic research is often done in the
    university climate where its effects nourish graduate students as well.
       66
          The planning, the adaptation, and the oversight of applied research
    and development is a more resource-consuming operation. By skilled
    and thoughtful planning project managers can avoid difficulties which
    tend to drag on important programs. Here the important resource is
    people, for the decisions are difficult. The history of many important
    programs in the United States in recent decades affords case studies of
    matters where waste might have been avoided if top-level people could
    have anticipated and eliminated specific problems.
       “One of the most difficult problems facing the United States is to
    determine the standards by which we can exercise the necessary judg-
    ment to avoid moving into the most expensive areas of technology-
    development, testing, and production-at an appropriate time to ensure
    that we do not become prisoners of high costs and unnecessary use of
    resources. We need to exercise more rigorous standards, more decisive
    judgment, and action.” (AF Mag., 4/64, 53-56)
* Space Technology Laboratories, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge,          selected by
    JPL to provide throttleable vernier engines for Surveyor lunar spacecraft
    being developed by Hughes Aircraft Co. under JPL supervision. (Aw.
    Wk.,4/27/64,30)
                                                                         161
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

During April: European Space Research Organization (ESRO) was planning
    to orbit its first two satellites by late 1967 or early 1968, from US.
    Pacific Missile Range. Using purchased Scout booster, ESRO would
    launch the 200-lb. satellites into polar orbits. (Aw. Wk., 4/27/64, 31)
  Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy voted unrequested funds
     for flight-testing SnaplOA reactor in the AEC authorization bill for F Y
     1965. In voting to include the requested amount for Rover nuclear
    propulsion, the Committee called for review of the program after data
    from certain critical tests were obtained. “The committee believes that
                                                                         .
    the Rover project is of great importance to the s p c e program . .
     [and] the committee therefore intends to follow very closely the develop
    ments of the coming year with the hope that this program will lead to
    successful reactor design and operation.” (M&R, 4/20/64, 9; M&R,
    4/27/64,18)
0 National Science Foundation issued study of scientist and engineer man-

    power. According to the study, “fewer than 765,000 newly trained
    scientists and engineers will become available to fill more than 1 million
    openings for them between 1960 and 1970.” (Newsweek, 4/13/64)
* President Charles de Gaulle approved France’s plan to establish satellite
    launching center on east coast of French Guiana as an alternative to
    the Hammaguir complex in Algerian desert. Hammaguir site would
    come under Algerian control in July 1967 unless new treaty could be
    concluded.
       Later on, Gen. Robert Aubiniere, director-general of France’s cNES,
    said in London that by 1966 France’s space program would stabilize at
    $100 million per year. By 1966 France annually would launch two
    Diamant-boosted satellites, about 100 sounding rockets, and 300 bal-
    loons. (Av. Wh., 4/27/64,30)
  Col. Francis X. Kane (USAF) said in Fortune article that too much em-
     phasis was placed on “computerized planning,” thus handicapping our
     ability to prepare for the unpredictable. “. . . discovery nearly always
    comes by chance,” he said. He proposed “meta-planning,” an approach
    to “bring the whole of experience and of the human personality to bear
                  . . .”
     on planning.           (Fortune, 4/64,147ff)
  United Aircraft Corp. Chairman H. M. Horner told New York Society of
    Security Analysts that development problems of supersonic transport
    engine were being underestimated. U.A.’s Pratt & Whitney estimated
    costs of $1billion in its proposal to FAA, the figure based on estimated
    development costs of $500 million and another $500 million to bring the
    engine up to airline standards of reliability. (Aw. Wk., 4/27/64, 47)
* DOD accelerated construction of two Thor launch sites and ground suppolrt
    equipment at Johnston Island, part of DOD’S commitment to maintain
    adequate safeguards against U.S.S.R.’s sudden resumption of nuclear
    testing. (M&R, 4/20/64,16)
  Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Tests (Start) established
    in Advanced Planning Directorate of the Deputy for Technology, Air
    Force Space Systems Div. Start included two activities: Asset re-entry
    vehicle program and unnamed glide re-entry vehicle, still under study.
     (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30)
                             May 1964
May 1 :NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans said in speech
    before Fourth National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space:
       “We are searching for a type of contract that will motivate the con-
   tractor to become more deeply involved in performing work of high
    quality with maximum speed and minimum cost.
       “In this way we hope to reduce the number of persons presently re-
    quired to carry out what are essentially policing actions. These would
    be largely unnecessary if we could place more of the responsibility for
    basic decisions of performance, time, and cost in the hands of industry
    management. Only through such an approach can we hope to reverse
    the constant escalation of costs that stems from adding persons on both
    sides of the equation. That is, as the government adds people, the
    contractor has to add people to respond to our people, and the result is
                                    ..
    not satisfactory to either side. .
                            .
       “Let me emphasize . , that there are three factors we want the
    contractor to be involved in-cost, time, and performance. We want
    contracts to be written in such a way that industry management will
    carefully weigh and consider what any change in his operation will do
    to all three items. Obviously, there cannot be an alteration in any one
    of them without a concomitant effect on the other two. We feel that
    only in this way can the present performance be improved at the
                     . .”
    contractorlevel. .          (Text)
 President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport held its third
    meeting in the Pentagon, where it heard executives of the three aircraft
    and three engine manufacturers that had submitted preliminary designs.
     (Clark, NYT, 5/2/64)
 NASA announced it would award grants to Maryland Univ. and Rice Univ.
    for construction of aeronautical and space science research facilities.
    Maryland’s $lS-million grant would be used for a building to provide
    additional space for research in such areas as chemistry, physics, fluid
    dynamics, astronomy, computer sciences, and mathematics. Rice’s
    $1.6-million grant would be used for a space science building to accom-
    modate further research in space-related scientific areas. (NASA Release
    64/104)
May 2: Five-segment 120-in. rocket motor for Titan III exploded after 55
    sec. during static firing at Edwards AFB, Calif. Explosion caused exten-
    sive damage to new $10-million solid-motor test facility, dedicated
    just three hours earlied by SSD commanding officer Maj. Gen. Ben I.
    Funk, who had called the new stand “the most sophisticated and highIy
   instrumented facility in the world.” Stand was operated for USAF by
    United Technology Center (UTC), and further tests were shifted to
    UTC’S test facility at Coyote, Calif. Cause of explosion was thought
    to be failure of casing weld when a “booty’in the bottom of the motor
    was removed. (M&R, 5/11/64,16)
      162
                                                                         163
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 4

May 2: More than 2,000 high school juniors and seniors attended Student
     Space Conference at Northeastern Univ., Boston, where they heard
     remarks by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Bruce T. L
     John D. Nicolaides of NASA, Nancy G. Roman of NASA, an
    writer and biochemist. (Boston Sun. Globe, 5/3/6L1)
0 150th anniversary of U.S. weather observation network, now composed of

     more than 13,000 stations providing records of US. climate. (Com-
     merce Release WB 6 4 4 )
May 2-3: Lewis Research Center conducted drop tests down a main elevator
    shaft at Cleveland’s Terminal Tower, dropping model experimental
     packages from heights of up to 400 ft. to gather data for design of
     decelerator for LRC’S new zero-gravity facility. ( LRC Release 6440)
 May 4: Appearing at Project Ranger hearings before Subcommittee on NASA
     Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, NASA Admin-
     istrator James E. Webb cited recent management changes by Cal Tech
    and JPL in the continuing evolutionary process of management relations
    with NASA: “These changes and continuing improvements are the result
     of management cooperation and responsiveness over a wide range of
    complex problems; the new contract we hope to sign soon is a further
    example of this effort. In this contract, NASA will endeavor to add to
    the existing system an incentive fee approach, a separate facilities man-
    agement contract, a joint semi-annual review with cm of progress and
    problems, and a revised overhead determination method. We will
    discard the concept of mutual agreement at the level of every task and
    replace it with a contractual statement of our current practice, i.e.,
    laboratory acceptance of NASA program direction, after, of course, a
    full presentation of its views.
        C<
           This represents the position we have achieved in our negotiations
    looking toward the new contract for the period beginning January 1,
     1965. However, NASA has made it clear that it wishes to see the agreed
    upon relationship put into action prior to final execution of the con-
    tractual document. This is a prudent way to avoid overlooking some
    aspect or approach which might yield better results than those we have
    reduced to contract language in our negotiations. . . .”
        Mr. Webb discussed the report on RANGER VI he had sent to Chairman
    Miller and Chairman Anderson : “This was an important flight; the
    entire country desired its success. When it did not meet its mission
    objectives, I felt it was our responsibility to examine the reasons there-
    fore and to report these to the Chairmen of the House and Senate Com-
    mittees. The report made was the assessment of Dr. Dryden, Dr.
    Seamans and myself of the technical problems we have encountered
    and of the possible causes of failure. The Ranger 6 failed because
    something did not work, not because someone did not work. There
    had been unstinting effort dedicated to its success; this effort will be
    combined with lessons learned from the Ranger 6 failure to provide
    the best assurance of Ranger 7 success. We have invested the energy
    of some of the best minds of the country in Project Ranger and we-expect
    to capitalize on that investment in both the near and the far future.’’
     (Testimony)
e At conclusion of Ranger management hearings by Subcommittee on
    NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Sub-
    committee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that
164             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    testimony “indicated to me that there was a serious loss of NASA liaison
    or NASA management. This, I think, is primarily the question that is
                                                                 ...
    before ,the subcommittee, having arrived at the conclusion          that the
    professional, technical people at Cal Tech are extremely able peo-
         . . .”
     ple.          (M&R,5/11/64,15)
May 4: General B. A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, announced organization
    for National Range Division (NRD) ,commanded by Maj. Gen. Leighton
    I. Davis. Air Force Missile Test Center, Patrick AFB, Fla., was redesig-
    nated Air Force Eastern Test Range ( ETR) , and Air Force Space Test
    Center (Provisional) at Vandenberg AFB was redesignated the Air Force
                                  .
    Western Test Range ( WTR) Both ranges would be assigned to NRD.
     General Davis also was assigned responsibility for Satellite Control
    Facility (SCF) , Sunnyvale, Calif., which has operated DOD R&D satellite
    tracking and control facilities. With Hq. at Andrews AFB, General
    Davis would function as both NRD Commander and AFSC Deputy Com-
    mander for Global Range. (AFSC Release 45-R-50)
  Inserting in Congressional Record a Saturday Evening Post article entitled
     “The Great A-11 Deception,” Sen. Gordon L. Allott (R.-Colo.) re-
                                                                          ..
    marked that the A-11 had “caused me a great deal of concern. .             I
     still believe it is an outrageous imposition on our system when $?OO
    million or more is spent on an airplane which may be an interceptor
     or may not be, but which very few-and only a few-of the people in
     the Government knew about, including even some of the highest ranking
    military people.” (CR, 5/4/64,9579-81)
* President Johnson announced formation of 32-member FAA Women’s Ad-
     visory Committee on Aviation, following ceremony at the White House
     in which he presented FAADecoration for Exceptional Service to Mrs.
     Jerrie Mock for her recent 22,858-mi. global solo flight. Mrs. Philip A.
     Hart was named committee chairman and Mrs. Mock, vice chairman.
      (FAA Release 6441)
  H. J. High Construction Co. received $1,012,800 NASA contract for con-
     struction of third-floor addition to Operations and Checkout Building,
     John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA (Merritt Island). Army Corps of
     Engineers awarded the fixed-price contract. (DOD Release 35764)
* Unique cost-plus-incentive-fee (CPIF) contract used by USAF for Titan
     I11 launch vehicle imposed “strict penalties on the prime contractor
      [Martin Co.] for deviating from the target cost, schedule, or flight-
     performance objectives,” Missiles and Rockets reported. DOD officials
     said Titan I11 was “on schedule and within the planned funding.”
      (M&R, 5/4/64,13)
May 4-7: Tenth annual meeting of American Astronautical Society held in
     New York. ,Honored by AAS were: Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (USAF),
     the AAS Flight Achievement Award; Dr. Hubertus 0.       Strughold, the Mel-
     bourne W.Boynton Award; Col. Charles Yeager (USAF) , the Victor A.
     Prather Award. (Av. Wk., 5/18/64,21)
  At AAS meeting in New York, Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornel1 Univ. Director of
     the Center for Radio Physics and Space Research, said the porous, crush-
     able material of the lunar surface extended “to a depth of tens of centi-
     meters or meters,” according to radio thermaI measurements.
        66
          It seems very probable that a few per cent of the lunar surface is
     hard and rough, probably in the form of many young craters, while the
                                                                            .
     rest is covered with material considerably less dense than solid rock. . .
                                                                          165
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,            19 64

      [We must be prepared] to find a crushable surface material many meters
     deep and smoothly deposited, covering most of the moon, and a few per
     cent of rough hard rock regions covered only with a thin layer of the
          . . .”     (Av.Wk.,5/18/64,83)
     fluff.
May 4 7 At same meeting, Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman of JPL criticized “fairy
       -:
     castle” theory of lunar surface composition. Dr. Muhleman said the
     concept was consistent with lunar measurements, but that “a clever man
     in the laboratory could build other models of surfaces that would be
     equally consistent.” (M&R, 5/18/64,23)
May 5: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, meeting in
     executive session, favorably reported with amendment S. 2446, author-
     izing $5.246 billion for NASA in FY 1965. This amount restored $52
     million of the $110 million cut by the House in its authorization bill in
     March. (NASA LAR II1/89; Av. Wk., 5/11/64, 24)
* Soviet “automatic interplanetary station” ZOND I was 10,137,000 km.
      (6,298,838 mi.) from the Earth, according to Tass, and more than 60
     radio communication sessions had been held with the spacecraft since
     its launch more than a month ago. The spacecraft had sent scientific
     information, data on systems operation, and “information relating to
     the assigned program of investigations.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya
     Pravda, 5/6/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
  House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space
     Sciences and Applications, held hearing on geographical distribution
     and indirect costs of Federal research and development. NASA Deputy
     Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Earl D. Hilburn, said it
     was NASA’s    policy to “locate and fully utilize the best technical com-
     petence available wherever it might be.” It was not NASA policy to
     award contracts on a geographical basis, Hilburn said, but NASA tried
     to “provide opportunities for and encourage all qualified industrial
     firms, universities and non-profit organizations to participate in our
     program.” He added: “NASA makes every effort to award negotiated
     procurements to contractors who will perform a substantial proportion
     of their work within labor surplus areas.” (NASA LAR III/89; SBD,
     5/6/64,30-31)
* Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, House Committee
     on Science and Astronautics, opened hearings on problems of the Gov-
     ernment-Science relationship. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) ,
     Subcommittee Chairman, said the Subcommittee would inquire into (1)
     geographical distribution of Federal R&D contracts and grants, and (2)
     allowance of indirect costs by those performing basic research for the
     Government. (NASA LAR III/85)
* Lt. Gen. William J. Ely (USA), Deputy Director of Defense Research and
     Engineering (Administration and Management), said in testimony be-
     fore House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Research and Devel-
     opment Subcommittee :
        <<
           For the past six years, over 80% of the net value of RDT&E contracts
     of the Department of Defense has been to companies concerned with
     aerospace and electronics. Actually, 11 states received 88.3% of the
     awards in FY 1962; 18 states received 95.376 of the total. Five major
     Defense RDT&E complexes, centered around Los Angeles, the San Fran-
     cisco Bay area, the New York City-northern New Jersey area, Boston,
     and the Washington, D.C., area accounted for about 58% of the total
     net value of RDT&E awards.
166            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

        ...    we recognize that Defense R B ~ D concentrated geographically
                                                is
        6C

     and that this concentration will continue for the foreseeable future.
     The Department of Defense, of all the agencies of government, is the
     one that must feel itself most constrained to the purpose of gebting the
     best results in RDT&E at the least cost. We cannd speak for the remains
     der of the government; such agencies as the National Science Foundal
     tion and the National Institutes of Health were created in part to support
     research, and therefore have legitimate additional criteria for their
     operations. We tend to follow competence where we find it and there-
     fore consider that greater uniformity in the geographical distribution
     of our RCW contracts and grants can only be achieved to the extent that
     more uniform competence is developed.” (Testimony)
Muy 5: Membership on the NASA Policy Planning Board, established Novem-
     ber 1, was formaPy designated, with Langley Research Center Director
     Dr. Floyd L. Thompson as Chairman and NASA General Counsel Walter
     D. Sohier as Vice Chairman. (NASA Circ. 317)
* On third anniversary of his historic space flight, first American in space
     Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., USN) received the Langley Medal,
     highest award of the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smith-
     sonian, Washington, D.C. (CRY5/5/64,9767-68)
0 L. D. Gable, of Longmont, Colo., died at Cape Kennedy of injuries sue

     tained in the Aptil 15 accidental ignition of Delta X-248. The Ball
     Bros. technician was third victim of the accident, which was still being
     investigated. (GSFC PIO)
  NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Dr. Eugene B.
     Konecci said in keynote address, Fifth Annual Conference on Human
     Factms in Electronics, in San Diego:
        “There is a great need today for simplification through a more funda-
     mental understanding of phenomena we take for granted. Mathe-
     matical theories to aid in simplification and a better understanding of
     the cosmos around us are needed. Specifically in Electronics we need
     to re-examine our traditional complex circuitry and the logic behind it,
     so we can make even more rapid strides in solid state physics and elec-
     tronics without imposing old circuit theory and wiring diagrams on
     new active elements.” In 50 years an electron tube as we know it will
     be an archaic museum piece.
           The greatest need in Human Factors research is a better understand-
       ((



     ing of man, his capabilities and limitations. The study of human brain
     mechanisms promises the greatest rewards to science and technology and
     in turn to the betterment of mankind. We need more cross fertilization
     between neuro- and psycho-physiologists and electronic engineers,
     through a new kducational tool ‘Systems Engineering’ that includes the
                      ..   .” (Text)
     human element.
* A U ~ A1964 James H. Wyld Memorial Award was presented to Brig. Gen.
      Joseph S. Bleymaier (USAF) head of USAF Titan I11 development pro-
      gram, for his work on Titan I11 launch vehicle. AIAA 1964 Propul-
     sion Award was presented to David Altman, United Technology Center
     vice president, for his contributions to science of propulsion. (A&A,
     6/M, 87; AIAA “Honors & Awards”)
  Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research
                                                        “. .. the number of
      and Development, addressed AIAA in Cleveland:
      new systems which can be fully developed is limited. The future, on
                                                                          167
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

                                                                  . ..
     the other hand, is highly uncertain. The inevitable result         is that
     the number of major weapon systems being developed for the inventory
     is relatively small. The number of concepts and potential weapm sys-
     tems being explored in other categdes of R&D are very large but still
     not all inclusive. The approach which we are taking to assure the
     availability of proven technology and prototypes of critical system ele-
     ments is through exploratory and advanced development programs ; this
     does not usually include full vehicle or system prototypes although in
     some cases it may. By working on the critical technical, cost or opera-
     tional problems of a potential new system intensively while ignoring
     the other elements of the system, we are placing ourselves in a better
     position to decide to buy that system and to get it in reasonable time,
     in the event that either our own national policy, the international situa-
     tion (especially the actions of our adversaries), or obsolescence arising
     from new technological developments in counterweapons make neces-
     sary the rapid acquisition of a new system, and we are doing this at
     considerably lower cost than the cost of developing all the candidate
     systems even if these developments were at a very low rate. For ex-
     ample research and exploratory development on high energy fuels for
     both solids and liquids support potential needs both for larger and im-
     proved ICBMS and for new space boosters. The 120" and 156" solid
     rocket under development by the Air Force and the 260" solids being
    supported by NASA provide at the prototype level the necessary com-
     ponents of much larger ballistic missile and space launch vehicle systems
     over a wide range of payload capacities. The application of the 156"
     solid technology to a new missile in the Minuteman tradition would
     provide a payload capability many times that of Minuteman. Studies
     are under way to examine the payoffs and tradeoffs relating to the appli-
     cation of high energy fuels to a new upper stage suitable for application
    to both DOD and NASA launch vehicles. The aim of these programs is
    to reduce the degree of uncertainty and the element of risk which would
     be associated with the decision to proceed with such systems. Yet there
     is no assurance that these developments will, in fact, be used in their
    present form. They may simply be stepping stones to a later generation
    of propulsion systems in advanced development. The coupling of re-
     quirements for economy, reliability and commonality has led to the
     dictum for technical advances that many are called, but few are
     chosen. . . ." (Text, DOD Release 361-64)
M@y6: MSC conducted roughwater egress test of Gemini spacecraft using
     boilerplate version of the spacecraft in the Gulf of Mexico. In waves
     running from six to eight feet high, Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and
     Gordon Harvey of MSC Flight Crew Support Div., practiced egress
     maneuvers with the boilerplate spacecraft, which was loosely tethered
    to NASA Motor Vessel Retriever. (MSC Roundup,5/13/64,1)
e AFSC announced experimental arc-jet engine for space use had completed
    a 500-hour endurance test at Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory,
    Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. The 10-lb. regeneratively cooled, hydro-
    gen-propelled engine had specific impulse greater than 1,000 sec. and
     efficiency of 55 per cent. (AFSC Release 43-9448)
e At American Astronautical Society meeting in New York, MSC'S Dr. Charles
    A. Berry said Apollo astronauts would be kept in isolation longer than
    earlier space crews, to prevent infection and disease. Families of
168            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    crewmen would be given intensive medical care to ensure the good
    health of the astronauts. If one member of the three-man crew becomes
    ill, the entire crew would be replaced, he said. (Houston Chron.,
    5/6/64)
May 6: ComSatCorp filed registration statement with Securities and Exchange
    Commission seeking registration of 10 million shares of common stock,
    one half to be offered to communications common carriers authorized
    by FCC and the other half to the general public, with 11managing under-
    writers of the public offering. (ComSatCorp Release 6 5 4 ;
    Prospectus)
  NASA announced selection of RCA Missile and Surface Radar Div. for ne-
    gotiations to procure C-band radars for support of Project Apollo.
    These radars would be part of instrumentation on the tracking ships
    being designed and built as joint DOD-NASA effort. (NASA Release
    64-107)
* Westinghouse engineer Harry L. Thurman, Deputy Director of laser pro-
    gram in Westinghouse’s Defense and Space Center in Baltimore, told
    AIAA meeting in Los Angeles that faser .may someday be used to cook
    meals in microseconds. Citing many present and future applications
    of laser, Thurman said industry spent $1,000,000 on laser research in
     1960 and estimated Government laser contracts alone in 1964 would
    amount to $27,000,000. (Roberts, Balt. Sun, 5/7/64)
May 7: EXPLORER XVIII, the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) satel-
    lite, survived sub-zero temperatures during eight-hour flight in the
    earth’s shadow, a duration record for satellites. IMP remained in the
    shadow for so long because of its highly eccentric orbit, carrying it out
     122,000 mi. at apogee. As it entered the shadow, IMP shut off auto-
     matically, and temperatures on IMP’S surface fell to more than 400’
     below zero. After it emerged once again, IMP’S transmitter signal was
    picked up by NASA tracking station at Santiago, Chile. Preliminary
     evaluation of telemetry tapes at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
     indicated data from the IMP experiments were of good quality. (NASA
     Release 64-111)
* First anniversary of TELSTAR 11 communications satellite. AT&T re-
    ported its second communications satellite was “functioning normally
     in every respect” and had completed 2,340 orbits of the earth. Nearly
    60 public demonstrations, most of them overseas TV transmissions, were
    conducted with TELSTAR 11. Radiation data collected by TELSTAR 11
    enabled scientists to determine that the very high intensity of electrons
     in inner region of the Van Allen belt had decayed slowly during the
    past year. Built with stronger shielding against radiation than its
     predecessor and equipped with specially. developed transistors to better
    withstand the space environment, TELSTAR 1 was orbiting in higher
                                                      1
    apogee than TELSTAR I, making possible communications experiments
    of greater length. (AT&T Release)
  At NASA background briefing for news media, Doctors W. Randolph Love-
     lace 11, Orr E. Reynolds, and Frank B. Voris made presentations on space
     medicine, biosciences, and effects of space environment on man. Dr.
     Lovelace described the close working relationBhip between the offices of
     Space Medicine, Biotechnology, and Space Science and Medicine. He
     pointed out Center responsibilities as well as the “detailed task-level
    technical coordination” completed at the NASA-DOD level “which ensures
     most effective use of all existing facilities” throughout the Nation. In
                                                                       169
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

question period, Dr. Reynolds discussed timing of life-detector experi-
                  “. . .
ments for Mars:            we had hoped that it would be possible to have
a landing capsule on Mars for the 1966 mission. Just as the plans for
that were being developed, questions were raised by recent astronomical
data about the density of the atmosphere of Mars that made it very di5-
cult, if not impossible, to design the proper landing system.
   “At the present time we are hoping to have a landing vehicle for
Mars for the 1969 opportunity. This is not an improved program.
But we are working on the development of plans in that direction. It
has already been decided that the biological sciences payload, that is,
the life detector instruments, or whatever else the biological community
thinks are most appropriate for that flight, will have high priority on
any landing mission.
   “So I think the best guess now would be that certainly our first oppor-
tunity would be for 1969, and we certainly hope we will have such instru-
ments aboard.”
                                                          ..
   Discussing space radiation, Dr. Reynolds said: “.          a number of
committees and meetings that have been held by the radiobiologists in
this country have recommended that an experiment be done below the
radiation belt carrying a known source of radiation. The reason for
this is that there have been reports, from organisms, living organisms
flown in the natural radiation belt, of a higher than expected effective-
ness of the radiation. There is no good theoretical basis for knowing
                           .
why this should occur. . : Experiment for checking this would be
                               ’
flown in first flight of Biosatellite, carrying known source and dosage of
radiation below the area of the Van Allen belts. Asked about the pre-
vious data, Dr. Reynolds said:
   (6
      There are experiments both by United States experimenters in piggy-
back flights, and the Russian experiments that show a higher than
expected effectiveness of the ambient radiation in genetic effect and in
systemic effect. These experiments we strongly suspect had this result
due to lack of adequate dosimetry, measurement of the aotual dosage
that was encountered. For this reason the radiobiologists who have
been advising us have recommended this experiment with a known source
so as to eliminate any question of whether the dosimetry was
        ..    .”
wrong.
   Dr. Voris discussed “our studies into the biological effects of extremely
low magnetic fields and into alternating and high magnetic field forces.
Because of a recently expounded theory that individual neurons possess
individual and isolated electromagnetic fields of their own, it is con-
ceivable that the functions of the human nervous system may suffer
impairment as a result of exposure to electromagnetic fields that deviate
                                               .”
markedly from ambient terrestrial levels. . .
   Asked about slow rotation for manned space stations to provide partial
gravity, Dr. Voris said that it presented “a problem in disorientation and
in the effects of mal de mer. Slow rotation is fine if you can keep your
head immobilized and become acclimated to it and stay in one spot.
If you move around, move with the turn or away from the turn, or move
from the periphery of a circular station into the center, you are changing
the field force there, you are developing what is called a Coriolis effect,
and you then disturb the balance mechanism or vestibular mechanism
of the body and you develop recurrent effects such as seasickness.”
 (Transcript)
 7864?38 -
         1
         2
170              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

May 7 Anglo-French manufacturers of the supersonic airliner Concorde re-
    :
     vealed a long-range version of the Concorde was in development stage.
     British Aircraft Corp. and France’s Sud-Aviation said the aircraft would
     have longer body and greater wingspan, greater fuel capacity and greater
     reserves, increasing passenger load from 100 to 118. (UPI,Phil. Eve
     Bull., 5/7/64; Av. Wk.,   5/11/64,36)
* NASA Director of Manned Lunar Mission Studies Thomas C. Evans dis-
     cussed at AAS meeting the systems that might be used for post-Apollo
     exploration of the moon. The concepts, making maximum use of the
     investment in Saturn and Apollo, included: Apollo itself, with separate
     missions to each point of interest; Apollo supplemented with Stay Time
     Extension Module (STEM), with increased payload capacity developed in
     Apollo system to transport “saddle bags” of supplies or surface equip-
     ment attached to outside of LEM; Apollo supplemented with Apollo
     Logistic Support System (ALSS) , with two flights-one to transport two
     astronauts, the other to deliver support equipment and supplies probably
     including lunar surface vehicle; and, Apollo supplemented with Lunar
     Exploration System for Apollo (LESA) , with 2 3 flights and payload to
     include shelter-laboratory and roving vehicle. (Text)
’ In paper on manned lunar scientific operations, prepared for AAS meet-
     ing in New York, NASA’s Dr. Paul Lowman (Office of Space Science
     and Applications) and Donald A. Beattie (Ofhe of Manned Space
                          ..
     Flight) said that “.      it is apparent that the moon is a virtual Rosetta
     stone that, if properly read, may permit us to learn how the solar
                                                                            .
    system, the earth, and the continents on which we live were formed. . .
        “Since the scientific investigations of highest priority are in the fields
     of geology and geophysics, it appears that there is definite value in
    extending manned lunar exploration by the use of modified Apollo
    equipment. Experience has shown that geophysical and geological
    mapping investigations of large areas are continuing tasks; like the
    painting of the Golden Gate Bridge, they are never really finished,
    because new concepts, questions, and methods evolve during the pro-
    gram. The occasionally-expressed view that the major questions about
    the moon could be settled by a few landings and the return of a few
    samples ignore the experience of several centuries of terrestrial geology
                        . .”
    and geophysics. .           (Text)
e Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland (USAF) , Deputy Commander for Space, AFSC, dis-
    cussed in AAS luncheon address the role of USAF in U.S. space program,
    tracing history of ICBM development:
       “The task for the Air Force in those early days was a tremendous
    one. It had full responsibility for the development, acquisition, and
    deployment of an ICBM force capable of deterring any missile threat
    the Soviets might develop. This meant that we had to develop reliable
    high thrust boosters, materials that could withstand extreme heat caused
    by re-entry friction, guidance components, and a host of subsystems for
                          We
    use in our ICBM’s. had to develop command, control and tracking
    systems, and a wide range of support and test facilities for launch and
    retrieval. We had to recruit and train a tremendous force of highly
    skilled specialists and technicians. In addition we had to set up whole
    new management structures and apply expedited management methods
    under which these tasks could be accomplished with the greatest possible
    speed.
                                                                        171
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

         “Time was the critical factor. The Soviets had a very substantial
     advance in technological lead times over us. For this reason it was
     essential that we have the fullest cooperation and support from all seg-
     ments of our society. The response to these needs was characteristic
                             ...
     OftheAmericanpeople.
         “We had tremendous support from many government agencies. The
     National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which became the Na-
     tional Aeronautics and Space Agency in 1958, gave unfailing support.
     For example, NACA’S Moffett Laboratories did a major portion of the
     high speed wind tunnel testing for our nose cone development program.
     NACA’S Cleveland Propulsion Laboratories provided vital support to the
     Air Force in the rocket engine field. These are just two examples of the
     highly successful partnership which has evolved between the Air Force
     as the primary military agency in space and the NASA as the primary
     civilian agency in space. The partnership continues to be one of the
                                                               . .”
     most vital and dynamic aspects of the national space effort. .     (Text,
     AFSC Release 4S-R-51)
Muy 7: Martin Marietta recently completed NASA-funded, Domconcurred-
     upon study of Centaur upper stage mated with various Titans. Most
     promising configuration-particularly for heavy Surveyor spacecraft
     and for advanced Mars missions-was using Centaur as trans-stage
     for Titan 111-A (without the strap-on solids). (SBD, 5/7/64, 34)
* FAAadopted safety regulation requiring that cockpit doors on all commer-
     cial aircraft be locked throughout flights. (FAA Release 6 4 4 5 )
May 8: NASA and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had begun operat-
     ing “Prairie Network” in midwestern US., a network of 16 automatic
     camera stations to photograph falling meteors and aid in tracking and
     recovering meteorites, NASA announced. Photographic measurements
     would assist scientists in determining how much mass is lost by bodies
     during atmospheric entry and in calculating origin of meteors. (NASA
     Release 66106)
  NASA signed $80-million incentive contract with Boeing Co. to build five
     Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. Beginning in 1966, Atlas-Agena boosters
     would launch Lunar Orbiters from Cape Kennedy on missions to take
     close-range photographs of moon’s surface for scientific study and to
                                                         Release 64-109)
     help select landing sites for Project Apollo. (NASA
  Four Soviet scientists reported to Committee on Space Research ( COSPAR)
     in Florence that “a distortion of sex ratio” occurred among offspring of
     fruit flies that bred on board manned spacecraft during four-day space
     flights. The abstract prepared for COSPAR preliminary program did
     not explain the change in sex ratios, did say that experiments’ purpose
     was to study effects of space flight-primarily weightlessness and space
     radiation-on the fruit fly and its cells. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/9/64; HTNS,
     Wash.Post, 5/9/69)
  Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate to COSPAR
    meeting in Florence, indicated to newsmen in press conference
    that the next major Soviet space flight might be a year away: “We are
    trying to open a way to the nearest planet. It will take a long time.”
    Asked if this meant that no launch was planned for the present, he
    replied: “We are preparing projects. The preparation might take a
    year.” (Levin, AP, 5/9/64?)
172             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

May 8: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced scientists were investigat-
     ing use of chewing gum for astronauts on long-duration space flights, “to
                                                                   .
    stimulate dental tissues and freshen the astronaut’s mouth. . .” (MSC
    Release 64-69)
0 Patent award to Bell Aerosystems Co. for electronic stethoscope, a by-prod-

    uct of space research, was announced. The 20-oz. transistorized stetho-
    scope enabled physicians for the first time to eliminate all unwanted
    heart sounds and focus on only those desired. Bell was offering manu-
    facturing rights to medical-electronics companies. (Jones, NYT,
    5/9/64, 31)
Muy 9.- U.S. delegation to international Committee on Space Research
     (COSPAR) presented annual report of U.S. activities in space. Pre-
    sented by Richard W. Porter of National Academy of Sciences, the chief
    of U.S. delegation, the report said 900 small rockets and 100 large
    rockets for weather and scientific studies were fired by U.S. in 1963, and
    56 satellites were successfully launched by the U.S. Porter said Project
    West Ford copper dipoles placed in space in May 1963 for communica-
    tions experiments had not interfered with astronomy as had been feared;
    however, “no further experiments of this kind are now contemplated
    by the United States.” (Levin, AP, 5/9/64)
0 Soviet annual repont to COSPAR listed 21 satellite and 114 rocket launchings

    for 1963.
       Omitting any mention of when U.S.S.R. might launch major space-
    craft, report said past manned space flight had “set some new problems
    before scientists requiring immediate solution for successful prepara-
                                                                 .”
    tion and realization of more prolonged space missions. . .         A major
    question to be answered was whether it was “possible for an astronaut,
    after two or three weeks stay under conditions of weightlessness, to
    endure satisfactorily stresses acting on an organism during re-entry.”
    Also studies must be made of methods to safeguard astronauts’ cardio-
    vascular systems. Longest section of report was on medical and biologi-
    cal problems of manned space flight; it offered evidence that U.S.S.R.
    was paying increasing attention to weightlessness and other problems
    of manned space flight.
       Soviet report was first such version ever submitted in English and
    was thought to be strikingly free of propaganda. Possibly significantly,
    report referred to U.S. space research in correlation with Soviet re-
    search; for example, findings of MARS I were said to correlate with find-
    ings of U.S. EXPLORER x and MARINER 11. (AP, 5/9/64; Simons, Wush.
    Post, 5/13/M)
May 11: XB-70 supersonic aircraft was unveiled at North American Avia-
    tion plant, Palmdale, Calif. The 2,000-mph intercontinental-range
    plane would be used to investigate feasibility of long-range high-speed
    flight. Speaking of achievements in the program thus far, Brig. Gen.
                                                                “. .  . Not all
    Fred J. Ascani (AFSC Aeronautical Systems Div.) said:
    of these and other accomplishments can be termed radical breakthroughs
    (although the XB-70 program has produced about a thousand patent
    disclosures), but taken together they have helped to advance a tech-
    nology which constitutes a base for a new generation of civil and military
    aircraft which will operate at sustained supersonic speeds.” (DOD
    Release 3 7 M ; Witkin, NYT, 5/12/64,1; AF Pol. Info. Ltr., 6/1/64)
                                                                       173
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

May 11: NASA announced appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant
     Director of Ames Research Center, as Deputy Associate Administrator for
    Advanced Research and Technology. In the newly created position,
    Dr. Eggers would work closely with staff members in planning NASA’s
    advanced and suppoFting research programs. Specialist in problems of
    hypersonic and space flight research, Dr. Eggers made many contribu-
    tions to theories o hypersonic aerodynamics and atmospheric entry
                          f
    problems of motion and heating. Among his past awards were Arthur
    S. Flemming Award in 1956 and Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (1962)
     of the IAS. (NASA Release 64-110; NASA Announcement 64-95)
* Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
    Flight, told group touring Saturn-Apollo industrial facilities at NASA
     Michoud Operations that astronauts on flight to the moon would not be
    harmed by radiation from Van Allen belts or solar flares. Project
    Apollo astronauts would be “safer than test pilots in industry have ever
    been,” he declared. (Maloney, Houston Post, 5/12/64)
  MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von BTaun discussed Saturn IB/Centaur
    launch vehicle at Michoud tour and said that “there will be money t o
    develop the booster in the FY ’66 space agency budget.” Dr. von Braun
    said he believed Saturn IB/Centaur would compete on cost-effectiveness
    basis with Titan 111; with the contemplated missions, cost of $920million
    per launch was possible. Dr. von Braun also disclosed NASA studies
    indicating manned circumlunar flight with Gemini spacecraft was feas-
     ible. Such a mission was not being seriously considered at this time,
    however. (M&R, 5/18/641,17)
  AEC announced a satellite carrying small Snap-9A atomic generator had
J




    been launched on Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg AFB last
    April 21, but it did not go into orbit. Preliminary data indicated the
    satellite burned up upon re-entry into earth‘s atmosphere. (AP, NYT,
    5/12/64; Av. Wk.,     5/18/64?, 38)
  Walter L. Lingle, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in address
    to the Missouri Bankers Association in St. Louis:
        “I cannot overemphasize the importance of incentive contracting as a
    force for improving NASA’s planning and decision making processes,
                                  own
    as well as the contractors’.
        66
           We expect to write more than $500 million of incentive contracts
    in the present fiscal year.
        “As you know, President Johnson has taken a very personal interest
    in the cost effectivenessand efficiency of companies which are contractors
    to the Government. We regard incentive contracting as a primary
    means for achieving the added efficiency which President Johnson seeks.
        “More than incidentally, we think that they can become a primary
    means for improving contractor profit levels. It is NASA’s   policy to let
    a contractor substantially improve his profit ratios if he can achieve
    the incentive targets which we mutually establish. Some recent targets
    which we have established will permit the contractor to more than double
                       .
    the profit ratio . . if all incentive targets are achieved.” (Text,
                            ,
    CR, 5/12/64?, 10308-11)
  Sen. J. W. Fulbright, Chairman of Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
    said at Copenhagen celebration of 50th anniversary of Denmark-America
    Foundation: “The most urgent need of this troubled world is new
174             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

    thoughts and attitudes toward the old problem of human relations, as
    distinct from excessive preoccupation with traveling to the moon.” (AP,
    Kansas City Times, 5/12/64)
May 11 : Dome of ancient rock at Vredefort, South Africa, was said to be
    one-mile-dia.meteor which impacted earth at 36,000 mph about 250 mil-
    lion years ago. Willian I. Manton, research geologist of Johannesburg’s
    Univ. of the Witwatersrand, said: “‘It is almost certain.that a meteorite
    struck the earth at Vredefort and completely changed the geological
    structure for 60 miles around the point of impact.” (AP, Phil. Eve.
    Bull., 5/11/64)
May 11-14: 35th annual meeting of Aerospace Medical Association held at
    Bal Harbour, Ha. At the meeting, USAF School of Aerospace Medicine
    scientists led by Dr. Billy Welch reported on SAM’S two 30-day experi-
    ments with 100% oxygen atmosphere and concluded that 100% oxygen
    was acceptable for 30-day period. USAF doctors also reported on tests
    with oxygen-nitrogen mixture at 7 psi for Manned Orbiting Laboratory
    Problem of bends in test subjects, occurring during change from M01
    atmosphere to 3.5 psi atmosphere in Gemini extravehicular spacesuit
    caused testers to extend denitrogenization period to 4% hours. (M&R,
    5/18/64,16)
e At Aerospace Medical Association conference, Dr. Dietrich E. Beischer
     and James C. Knepton, Jr., of Naval School of Aviation Medi-
    cine said high magnetic fields, such as those under study for spacecraft
    shielding, may have noticeable effect on behavior of heart. Squirrel
    monkeys subjected to high magnetic fields (20,000 to 70,000 gauss)
    showed up to       decrease in heart rate and marked change in heart-
    beat’s rhythm. Dr. Beischer also reported sea urchin eggs exposed
    to 140,000 gauss were retarded in their development, but fruit fly
    showed no effects after two-hour exposure to high gauss. High magnetic
    fields were being investigated for use in shielding astronauts against
    cosmic radiation and other space hazards, and D . Cornelius Tobias
                                                            r
    and N. M. Amer reported that magnetic fields around 3.5 kilogauss
    appeared to have protective effect against high doses of ionizing radia-
    tion. (M&R, 5/18/64, 16)
a At Aerospace Medical Association meeting, Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Demler,
    Commander of AFSC Research and Technology Div., said USAF was study-
    ing use of “space lifeboats” for astronauts who might have to abandon
    their spacecraft. The self-contained unit would be designed to sustain
    astronauts until they were rescued. (UPI, NYT, 5/12/64, 43)
May 12: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Jack McKay to speed of ‘3,OOO
    mph (mach 4.55), the aircraft’s skin reaching recorded temperatures
    of 800”. With sharp leading d g e on top portion of vertical tail alter-
    ing airflow over the tail surfaces, the X-15 was fitted with special sensors
    to measure effects of this altered airflow on skin friction and heat transfer
    rates. Also, special microphone mounted on aircraft’s side measured
    noise level of boundary layer flowing over surfaces. (NASA X-15 Proj.
    O f ;FRC Release)
      f.
e Soviet physicians’ report on behavior of human heart in weightlessness
    of space said increase in gravity when space traveler re-enters earth’s
    atmosphere and returns to earth would place heart muscle under heavy
    stress. Through Moscow broadcast from T s ,Drs. Roman Bayevsky
                                                    as
    and Oleg Gazenko reported cosmonauts’ pulse rate slowed as did elec-
                                                                         175
                ASTRONAUTICS AND bERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

    trical conductance of the heart. The doctors believed that the “lower
    level of the functioning of the heart and ‘readjustment’ of the cardiovas-
    cular system to a new level should cause a certain weakening of the heart
    muscle. As far as was known, not one of the Soviet cosmonauts suffered
    any untoward permanent effects in the state of weightlessness. However,
    for future prolonged flights, it is extremely important to establish the
                                         . . .”
    degree of ‘weakening’ of the heart.           (AP, 5/12/64)
May 12: FAA announced Panagra and Aeronaves De Mexico had each re-
    served two delivery positions for US. supersonic transport airliner,
    bringing total reserved positions for SST to 88 by 19 airlines. (FAA
    Release 644%)
  District Judge issued temporary restraining order to halt FAA’s sonic boom
    flight-tests over Oklahoma City. The order was issued in suit filed by
    Attorney George Miskovsky alleging that sonic boom shock waves were
    (6
       destroying, damaging and weakening the structures of private homes
    and business properties.” Hearing was set for May 19, after which the
    District Judge refused to halt the sonic boom tests (see May 21). Sonic
    booms were said to have cracked 147 windows in downtown office build-
    ings. (Miles, Wmh. Post, 5/12/64; AP, Wash. Post, 5/13/64)
May 13: Successful test of Apollo escape system was conducted at White
    Sands Missile Range by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate
    model of Apollo spacecraft (command and service modules) was
    mounted on Little Joe 11. At altitude of 17,000 ft. the Little Joe I1
    was exploded. Instantly the rockets in the escape tower ignited and
    propelled the Apollo command module away from the exploding
    booster-to maximum altitude of 24,000 fi.; then the escape tower was
    jettisoned automatically. Drogue parachute opened from nose to sta-
    bilize the spacecraft as it descended. Then at about 7,500 ft. three
    large parachutes were deployed from the nose. First chute broke loose
    from the spacecraft, but the spacecraft landed safely with two chutes at
    speed of about 30 fps. The 71/-min. test was termed successful, with
    all objectives achieved. (NASA Release 64-108; Freelander, Houston
    Po&, 5/14/64; Witkm, NYT, 5/14/@, 18)
 Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory successfully operated a Kiwi E 4 reactor,
                                                                   L
    designated the Kiwi M D , at n e x full design power for approximately
    one minute, at Jackass Flats, Nev. The test used liquid hydrogen as a
    propellant and coolant with a liquid-hydrogen-coolednozzle as would be
    required in a flight system. All principal test objectives were met.
    Operating time at the power plateau had to be reduced from the planned
    eight minutes to one minute because of nozzle leaks, but reduced test
    duration did not compromise the meeting of test objectives. Reactor
    performance was excellent, and the test was considered a major mile-
    stone in the NASA-AEC program to develop technology for using nuclear
    propulsion in space missions. (Finger, 5/29&l; SNPO)
 Disclosed at press conference in Florence, Italy, in connection with COSPAR
    meeting, that US.-U.S.S.R. cooperative space negotiations would be
                                              ding US. team would be NASA
    held in Geneva within two weeks.
    Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.          den, meeting with Soviet team
    led by Anatoli Blagonravov. (Simons, rash. Post, 5/14/a)
 Aerospace Medical Association honored D .W. Randolph Lovelace I1 and
                                             r
    Col. William K. Douglas at its meeting in Miami. Dr. Lovelace, Presi-
    dent of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research and
176            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    recently appointed NASA Director of Space Medicine, received the 1964
    Theodore C. Lyster award, and D .Douglas, Assistant Deputy for Bio-
                                       r
    astronautics at AFMTC and formerly personal physician to the original
    seven Mercury astronauts, received the Louis H. Bauer Founders award.
     (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/14/64)
May 13: NASA and DOD announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr.,
    USN) would participate in USN Project Sea Lab I off coast of Bermuda
    in July. The submerged lab would collect and evaluate scientific data
    on physiological and psychological reaotions to the undersea environ-
    ment. (NASA Release 6 6 1 1 2 ; DOD Release 3 8 3 4 )
* Launch of Ranger 7 lunar probe was postponed from late June date to third
    quarter of the year, to ensure most caTeful possible check and review of
    ithe many tests being made on the spacecraft. (NASA Release 6&114)
May 14: ZOND I interplanetary spacecraft made a course correction maneu-
    ver 13 million km. from earth, according to Soviet news agency Tass.
    Radio signals from ground command station brought the spacecraft “into
    an assigned position,” and onboard engine “boosted the station’s speed
    by about 50 meters per second.” Tass said the maneuvers of the “test
    session” were performed successfully, “thereby allowing the solution
    of problems connected with the prmise correction of trajeotory of the
    automatic cosmic apparatuses.” (Tass, Pravda, 5/19/64, ATSS-T
    Trans.)
* Completely assembled four-stage NASA launch vehicle was transported for
    first time in an airplane, the 72-ft.-long Scout flown from NASA Wallops
    Station to Langley AFB, Hampton, Va., in 6 1 3 3 transport. Flight was
    initial test of procedures being considered to improve efficiency and
    reliability of launch vehicle operations. (NASA Release 64-11?; Wal-
    lops Release 64-42)
* NASA announced Collins Radio Co. and Philco Corp. had been selected for
    final competition for prime contract to provide Apollo Network S-Band
    Systems. Estimated 85-million contract called for basic purchase of
    two complete tracking and data acquisition systems with 30-ft.-diameter
     antennas and three electronic subsystems. The band would handle such
     functions as tracking, telemetry, and TV and voice communication.
     (NASA Release 6 4 1 1 6 )
* 25-hour high-altitude balloon flight was completed when 100-lb. instrument
    package was dropped from the balloon ne= Oakwood, Tex., where it
    was “recovered in good shape.” Released from the Palestine, Tex.,
     National Center for Atmospheric Research station, the balloon carried
     instrumentation to study cosmic rays to altitude of 120,000 ft. (Hous-
    ton Post, 5/15/64)
* JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif.,
     the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights
     to the mom and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were
     Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans,
     Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H.
     Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet
     Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec.
      (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64)
  At the dedication of the JPL Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E.
     Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applica-
     tions, remarked :
    Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science.
                                     ecomes simply a matter of where the man
       “In the Space P r o g a
                                       s and measuring devices. For those
    is in relation to his
                                           d, man is back on earth while his
    space missions that
    eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechani-
    cally far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation- From
    his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and
    record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a
    continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space.
       “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data,
    measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility
                               ..   .” (Text)
    like the SFOF is necessary.
May 14: Langley Research Center announced three key management appoint-
    ments: Mr. Eugene C. Draley was appointed Assistant Director for
    Flight Projects; Dr. John E. Duberg was named an Assistant Director
    in charge of the research activities of the Dynamic Loads Div. and the
    Structures Research Div., and Mr. Francis B. Smith was appointed
    Assistant Director responsible for the Analysis and Computation Div.,
    the Instrument Research Div., and the Space Mechanics Div. (LARC
    Release)
0 NASA announced it would negotiate contract with General Electric Co.’s

    Valley Forge Space Technology Center to design and build gravity-
    gradient stabilization system for Advanced Technological Satellite.
    Contract was expected to exceed $5 million. The GE devices would be
    flown on three satellites; in addition, GE would supply two prototype
    and two engineering gravity-gradient system models plus ground opera-
    tions and data analysis. (NASA Release 66115)
* Tenth anniversary of directive to accelerate Atlas ICBM development pro-
    gram. Ten years ago General Thomas D. White, then USAF Vice Chief
    of Staff, directed that Atlas icBM program proceed with highest USAF
    priority. (AFSC   Releases)
  Explosion and fire destroyed Atlas F ICBM site near Frederick, Okla. The
    missile was not armed, and there were no injuries in the explosion. This
    was fourth such event in less than a year and prompted renewed inquiry
    into the situation by Senate Preparedness Subcommittee. (UPI, Wash.
    Post, 5/15/64; M&R, 5/25/64,11)
* Federal Judge Stephen Chandler refused to reinstate State District Court’s
    temporary restraining order against FAA’s   sonic boom tests at Oklahoma
    City, and FAA resumed its schedule of eight flights per day. (AP, Wmh.
    Post, 5/14/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 5/15/64)
May 15: Soviet cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 Popovich (VOSTOK
    III and N) had orthostatic hypotension following their space flights,
                                         V. Parin revealed. The condition
    Soviet physiologist Prof.
    was noted in the cosmonau           two days after the flight.” In address
    at cospm-prepared and delivered in English-and in the discussion
    which followed, the Soviet Director of Institute of Normal and Pathologi-
    cal Physiology, Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, said that the
    cosmonauts “showed no disturbances in their state of health” after their
178                                                      19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     prolonged space flights, and the “transient functional reactions” were
                                                       . .”
     said to have “disappeared in seven or 10 days. .           He added that
     “post-flight disturbances were largely related to the central nervous
     system, the cardiovascular systems and metabolism.”
        Prof. Nello Pace, head of Physiology Dept. at Univ. of California
      (Berkeley), closely questioned Prof. Parin about his statements. Prof.
     Pace considered that hypotension was “among the most significant facts”
     disclosed at the conference. He noted that the condition had been
     observed in U.S. Astronauts Schirra and Cooper, and that NASA had
     said that implications of blood pressure responses “will have to be given
     very serious consideration as larger missions are undertaken.’’ (Text ;
     Hillaby, NYT, 5/16]64,8; Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/17/64)
May 15: USAF grounded its fleet of more than 500 F-105 aircraft because of
     recent crashes. The F-105 had been involved in 18 major accidents this
     year, DOD spokesman said, and four pilots had been killed in 10 major
     accidents since March 1. (Raymond, NYT, 5/16/a,8)
* Hand-held navigational device called a “stadimeter,” conceived by USAF
     scientists at Air Force Avionics Laboratory, was displayed by AFSC.
     To be tested in Project Gemini manned space flights, the device used
     only manual and visual alignment and required no electronics. Astro-
     nauts would use stadimeter to determine optically the range of the space-
     craft from the earth. (AFSC Release 44-1&56)
* General order from AFSC established Eastern and Western Test Ranges
     of the National Range Division. WTR would assume range support for
     ICBM and satellite programs on a phased basis, gaining full responsibility
     some time between Mar. 1and Jun. 30,1965. Until then, overall respon-
     sibilities for these functions continued with PMR; after that time, PMR
     would continue to operate as a national sea test range under the Navy.
     It would comprise facilities in Pt. Mugu-San Nicholas Island area and
     certain downrange stations in the area of Hawaii, and would be respon-
     sible for Pacific Ocean-based launches.     (AFSC Release 45-R-61; NASA
     Announcement 61-161)
* First meeting of NASA Historical Advisory Committee, chaired by Prof.
    Wood Gray of George Washington Univ.
May 16: New and more detailed information about Van Allen belts gleaned
     by HITCHHIKER I satellite was reported to COSPAR by Ludwig Katz,
     AFCRL project scientist. HITCHHIKER satellite was launched pickaback
     on USAF satellite and separated last July 1. In the AFCRL measurements
    the count rate for protons between one and five million electron volts
     (mev) indicated that for this energy region there were two distinct Van
    Allen belts. The count was significantly lower in the middle region
    between two belts. A second feature, found in measurements between
     15 and 100 kev, was that more electrons were found in energy region of
    the radietion belt, although there was decrease in total flux of electrons
    from the inner to the outer areas of earth’s magnetic lines of force.
     ( USAF OAR Release 5-64-2)
* In speech to COSPAR on the NASA Biosatellite Program, Dr. Dale Jenkins,
    Bioscience Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applica-
    tions, remarked:
        cc
          The United States Biosatellite Program is a second generation series
    of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly
    sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline
                                                                          179
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

                                        .   This program has
                                           (a) zero gravity or
    (b) the effects of weightlessness combiied with a known source of radia-
   tion, and (c) removal of living organisms from the Earth’s rotation.
   These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to crit-
   ically test major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution,
   and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will delineate hazards to astro-
   nauts, and determine and define effects on degradation of human per-
   formance. Prolonged manned flights, for example, may involve changes
   observed in ten days of bed rest such as decalcification of bones (par-
   ticularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and
   certain cardiovascular changes. The effect of continued sensory dep-
   rivation on behavior and performance is unknown.” (Text)
Muy 16: Results of Soviet biological experiments reported to COSPAR meet-
    ing: Discussing fruit fly experiments in space [see May 81, report said
    fruit flies mated in space apparently normally, but when the eggs hatched
    in the laboratory after the flight there was excess number of females.
    Furthermore, report said, average weight of male fruit flies was lower
    than of flies bred in the laboratory. Soviets disclosed that Cosmonaut
   V. Bykovsky had conducted fixed biological experiments during his
    five-day VOSTOK v space flight, killing specimens to stop their develop-
   ment at various intervals. In another biological experiment, Soviets
   reported that normal cell division in spores of Tradescantia plant was
    upset in space environment, with rearrangements of plant chromosomes
    as well as development of freak cells. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
 Eight Tiros meteorological satellites had taken more than 350,000
   photographs from altitudes above 400 mi. The speotacularly successful
    weather-forecasting satellites did not live up to the one-time charge of
    “spying,” for of all the pictures, only two showed any indication of
    existence ofintelligent life on earth-and both of these pictures required
    corroborative knowledge to identify them. (UPI, Phil. Sun. Bull.,
    5/17/64)
 Temperature on planet Jupiter was reported to be higher than previously
   thought. Geology-astronomy team at Cal Tech that studied the planet
   with heat-sensitive detector fitted to 200-in. telescope on Mt. Palomar
    found sunlit atmosphere of Jupiter averaged 230 degrees below zero F.
    But in shadow cast by one of its moons-Ganymede-temperature
    jumped to minus 117 degrees. Dr. Bruce C. Murray, associate profes-
    sor of planetary sciences, and Dr. Robert L. Wildey, research fellow in
   astronomy and geology, gave two possible explanations for the unex-
   pected rise in temperature: “Perhaps in sunlight the atmosphere is
   photochemically stable, and the shadow removes the stability. Then
   the atmosphere may start to break down into more transparent material,
   permitting the heat detector to observe much deeper into the atmosphere
    where temperatures are higher. Another possibility is that a breakdown
   of the shaded atmosphere may result in an upwelling from deeper,
    warmer zones of the atmosphere.” Study also showed that another of
    Jupiter’s moons4allisto-radiated         twice as much heat as a normal
    moon would be expected to do. (Dighton, AP, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
May 17: Herbert Friedman of Naval Research Laboratory repol?ted to COSPAR
    a new picture of space cosmic rays, based on results of experiments with
    rocket-borne x-ray telescope. New results showed that less than one
                                                           r
180                              AND   AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

     ‘per cent of all cosmic rays could be produced in intergalaatic space.
     Therefore, Friedman said, all cosmic rays would appear to come from
     exploding stars. He said these findings showed that there were too
      many x-rays to support theory that x-rays are produced by cosmic rays’
      colliding with starlight, and too few x-rays to support theory that they
     come from the near-collision of electrons and protons (formed by
                                                                  .
     neutron’s disintegration in so-called “hot universe” theory) Further
     experiments were planned to gather more evidence. (Simons, Wash.
     Post, 5/18/64)
May 17: Dr. N. A. Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory, U.S.S.R., told confer-
     ence on geological problems in lunar research in New York that volcanic
     activity was evident in two of the moon’s craters--Alphonsus and Aris-
     tarchus. Overall, he said, “the Moon had an internal energy which
     can be not less than the internal energy of the earth.” And from
     analysis of certain light wavelengths, he believed there was “significant
     volcanic activity on Venus and only slight activity on Mars.” (AP,
     Houston Post, 5/18/64)
0 At COSPAR, Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Carl Sagan said acetaldehyde gas,

     believed to exist in atmosphere of Mars, turns to sugar on contact with
     ultraviolet sunlight. Martian life, which probably is microorganic,
     possibly gives off the acetaldehyde gas and then feeds on the sugar that
     falls from the atmosphere, D . Sagan said. (AP, Houston Post,
                                      r
     5/18/64)
0 Dr. Thomas Gold, Chairman of Cornel1 Univ.’s Astronomy Dept., told

     COSPAB that laboratory experiments to simulate conditions on lunar
     surface pointed “toward a surface of soft, crushable material, between
     6 and 10 times less dense than solid rock. It would have a texture some-
     thing like cake. A inan walking on the moon might sink pretty far
     into the soft surface. How far we don’t know.” (AP, Houston Post,
     5/18/164)
May 18: House Appropriations Committee voted to approve $5.2 billion
     in funds for NASA in FY 1965, $245 million less than the requested
     $5.4425 billion ($5.304 billion for FY 1965 and $141 million FY 1964
    suppbmental combined by the Committee). The appropriation was
    contained in FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriations Bill. (Finney, .
    NYT, 5/19/64,1)
  U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of COSMOS xxx satellite. Initial
    orbital data, according to Tass: 383.1-km. apogee (238 mi.), 206.6-km.
    perigee (128 mi.), 90.24min. period, and 64.94’ inclination to the
    equator. (Pravda, 5/19/64, ATSS-T Trans.)
  Discovery of relatively cool region inside three-million-degreesolar corona
    was announced at COSPAR meeting by Dr. Armin Deutsch of Mt. Wilson
    and Palomar Observatories and Dr. Guglielmo Righini, Director of
    Astrophysical Observatory at Arcetri, Italy. The corona clouds were
    believed to contain ionized calcium at relatively cool 20,000 degrees.
    They were discovered in analyzing spectrogram taken while the two
    astronomers were in DC-8 “flying observatory” during solar eclipse
    last July. (Reuters, Houston Post, 5/19/64)
  Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey introduced in the Senate a bill to estab-
    lish an Office of Solar Energy in the Dept. of Interior “to foster and
    coordinate the research, development, and utilization of solar energy
    to serve many terrestrial power needs.” The bill (S. 2853) was referred
    to Senate Committee on Aeronautical m d Space Sciences. (CR,
    5/18/64,10800-02)
                                                                               181
                                    ahTD   AERONAUTICS, 19 64
                 ASTRONAUTICS

May 18: A. 0.Tischler, Director of Propulsion in NASA Office of Advanced Re-
    search and Technology, said $4 million added by Congress for ad-
    vanced propulsion work in N 1965 would allow NASA to investigate
     a number of new possibilities, including all the amines and select hydro-
    carbons. Also there would be heavy concentration on materials tech-
    nology and cooling techniques. (M&R, 5/18/64,9)
  Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D.-Okla.) wrote in Washington World:
        6C Space research and development may be the glamour girl right now,

                                                                 ..
    but the lady-who can do the work for us is aviation. . The market
    exists in the field of aeronautics, while it is still too soon to start printing
    tickets for round trip flights to the moon.
        “Government itself is in danger of being too yielding to the glamour
                                                       division of the $55 billion
    girl. My principal complaint is about NASA’s
     it will spend in Fiscal year 1965. Only $37 million is budgeted for
    aeronautical research. The percentage for aeronautics is only seven-
    tenths of one per cent. Space exports will develop as we excel in this
    field, but by products-not      systemewill constitute the commodities.
    Aviation has immediate economic potential, and we must pursue it
                     (Wash. World, 5/18/64)
    vigor~usly.’~
  Noting there were 262 USAF officers assigned to NASA and that NASA had
    requested another 55, and pointing out areas of NASA-USAF mutual
    research and test support, Missiles and Rockets editorialized that US.
    military space effort was inadequate: “. . . We would like to see some-
    what less worry about coordination with NASA and considerably more
    concern with staying ahead of the Soviet Union in space technology.”
     (M&R, 5/18/64, 46)
* Aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran claimed new speed record for women-1,429
    mph (mach 2.2) at 37,100-ft. altitude, flying in F-104G at Edwards
    AFB, Calif. (AP, wash. Post, 5/19/64)
* GSFC announced engineers Barbara Lunde and William D. Hibbard had
    invented a valve with no moving parts for controlling flow of liquid
    propellants to satellite reaction jets. Valve freezes and thaws the propel-
    lant in the feed line. (GoddardNews, 5/18/64,2)
  Seventeen of the buildings programed for the John F. Kennedy Space
    Center, NASA, in the Merritt Island spaceport area had been completed
    or were about ready for occupancy, KSC announced. (rtsc Release
    69-64)
  USAF advanced development program to investigate laser’s intelligence-
    gathering capabilities in space was reported. Called “Lariat” (Laser
    Radar Intelligence Acquisition Technology), program was outgrowth
    of three-year effort by AFSC Aeronautical Systems Div. to develop satel-
    lite surveillance system at Cloudcroft, N . Mex. (Av. Wk., 5/18/64,104)
* Three persons were killed and eight injured when small missile exploded
    during preparations for test-firing from an airplane at Tyndall AFB, Fla.
     (AP, Wash. Post, S / N / a )
May 18-22: Review of recent accomplishments in advanced aeronautical and
    space research was held during Inspection Week at NASA Langley Re-
    search Center, with Ames Research Center and Lewis Research Center
    also participating. More than 2,000 guests from aerospace industry,
    Congress and Government agencies, and educators and civic officials
    attended the inspection. At the tour, LaRc scientists described newly
    developed material for spacecraft heat shields-silicone            elastomer-
182             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    containing hollow glass and plastic spheres in plastic honeycomb matrix
    to provide structural strength. Lunar Landing Research Facility and
    lunar mission simulators also were among the featured attractions. In
    conjunction with the inspection was the LaRc Open House on May 23.
     (Program; NASA Release 64-99; ARC, LARC, LRC Releases; AP, 5/18/64)
       NASA Administrator James E. Webb remarked on May 18:
       “Years ago, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, one
    of NASA% ancestors, annually conducted field inspection trips so that the
    nation’s leaders in aviation could have a first-hand look at the progress
    in research made by the scientists and engineers of NACA.
       “Today, we are gathered for a first-hand look at advanced research
    and technology not only in aeronautics, but also in the new realm of
    space.
       “It is most fitting that the revival of the annual field inspection trip
    takes place first at the Langley Research Center, for Langley was the
    first research center of the original NACA, and is today, as it was in 1917,
                                                                       ..  .
    working at the frontiers of scientific and technical knowledge.
         It is important to remember that NASA is not an operating agency, in
       G


    the sense that the Weather Bureau and the Air Force are. Rather,
    NASA’s is much closer to that of the NACA, a research and develop-
             role
                            .
    mentorganization. . .,’ (Text)
May 19: X-15 No. 1flown to 196,000-ft. altitude and 3,477-mph speed (mach
    4.85) by USAF pilot Capt. Joe Engle in flight to serve as altitude buildup
    for Captain Engle. The flight also conducted optical degradation
    studies. (NASA X-15 Proj. O f ; FRC Release)
                                   f.
e Two successful tests of parasail landing gear were conducted by NASA and
    US. Army at Ft. Hood, Tex. Army helicopter dropped one-third scale
    model of Gemini spacecraft from altitudes of about 10,000 ft., the at-
    tached parasail maneuvered by radio signals from the ground. (UPI,
    Houston Chron., 5/20/64)
0 USAF launched an unidentified satellite aboard an Atlas-Agena D booster

    from Point Arguello, Calif. (AP, 5/19/64)
  MSC began 10-day series of short weightlessness tests with Gemini space-
    craft installed inside a KC-135 jet aircraft. Astronaut John Young took
    part in the tests along with four USAF and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. test
    pilots. (Houston Chron., 5/19/64)
  US. National Academy of Sciences and Soviet Academy of Sciences an-
    nounced signing of exchange agreement providing for each academy to
    send 55 scientists to the other country for inspection visits, lectures, and
    cooperative research. This was third such agreement since the General
    CuItural Exchange Program was begun in 1959. (Finney, NYT, 5/20/
    64, 4)
  General B. A. Schriever, AFSC, said in address to National Space Club:
       “There are three facts about the ballistic missile and space effort which
    I would like to emphasize: first, it has given us today a substantial
    strategic superiority; second, it has built a base of experience, facilities,
    and hardware for the national space program; and third, it provides con-
    vincing evidence that trained and dedicated people, who are properly
    motivated, can work together to achieve something that skeptics consider
                        .
    to be‘impossible.’ . .
                                .
       ‘‘These five factors . .-awareness       of the competition, rapid ad-
    vancement of technology, acquisition of modern research and test facili-
                                                                          183
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUT1

    ties, employment of skilled and dedicated people, and use of streamlined
    methods of management-all of these were vital to the achievements of
    our ballistic missile and space efforts during the past ten years. The same
    factors are vital to any future national effort.
       CL
         One very clear lesson emerges from our ICBM experience, and it is
    this-we cannot afford to rest on our past accomplishments. Technology
    is not standing still. It keeps moving rapidly ahead, and we must keep
    pace with it. We must make use of our past experience as we tackle the
    challenges of the future.” (Text, AFSC Release 45-R-62)
May 19: DOD announced Deputy Secretary of Defense had directed military
    departments and Defense agencies to establish central pool of ftlnds and
    manpower spaces to be used for long-term education and training of key
    civilian DOD employees. (DOD Release 3954%)
May 20: White House announced new development plan for US. supersonic
    transport, authorizing technical deign competition between two air-
    frame manufacturers (Boeing and Lockheed) and two engine contrac-
    tors (General Electric and Pratt & Whitney). Thus North American
    Aviation and Curtiss-Wright were eliminated from airframe and engine
    competition respectively. New “program of action” recommended by
    FAA and President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport and
    endorsed by President Johnson called for: Commerce Dept. studies and
    forecasts of overall economy of the 1970’s; National Academy of Sci-
    ences advice on sonic boom studies; and Boeing and Lo+heed examina-
    tion of purchase cost, operating cost, and sonic booms as related to
    various designs, sizes, and ranges of the plane. This phase would be
    completed in November. (Clark, NYT, 5/21/64, 1; Av. Wk.,           5/25/64,
    22)
* FAA Administrator N. E. Halaby announced National Academy of Sciences
    had assumed advisory capacity in connection with sonic-boom research
    program, at invitation of FAA. First step in NAS program would be
    review of sonic boom study now being conducted at Oklahoma City.
     (FAARelease 64c50)
  During annual meeting of international Committee on Space Research
     (COSPAR) , which ended today, US. and Soviet scientists said manned
     space flights had raised the question of whether a man could tolerate
    more than five days in space, with present equipment. Scientists said
     astronauts showed effects o space flights, and last year’s five-day manned
                                 f
     space flight by Soviet cosmonaut was about the longest that could be
    attempted safely now. (Levin, AP, 5/20/64)
  Independent Offices Appropriations bill (H.R. 112%) was introduced in
     the House and discussed, with no resolution reached. The bill provided
     $5.2zbillion for NASA in N 1965. (CR, 5/20/64,11063-66)
* NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Bendix Corp. and Boeing Aero-
     space Div. for negotiations of separate identical nine-month $1.5 million
     studies of lunar exploration payloads for Apollo Logistics Support Sys-
    tem (ALSS). Payload would be carried to moon by Saturn V/Apollo
    using modified LEM (“LEM truck”) to deliver from lunar orbit to lunar
    surface. (Marshall Star, 5/20/fj4., 1)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in speech to Armed Forces Com-
    munications and Electronics Associaiion, Washington:
        “At the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, it has been
     estimated that about 40 percent o our booster costs, 70 percent of
                                           f
184                              AND    AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS

     our major spacecraft dollars, and 90 percent of our tracking and data
    acquisition funds go into electronics. Unfortunately, as Dr. Albert
            ...     recently pointed out in this same context, a vast majority
    Kelley
     of our flight failures, not to mention flight delays, arise from electronic
    failures. Success in this area is obviously a major factor in over-
                                  ...
    all mission accomplishment.
        “In space activity the United States is now at the mid-point of a 10-
    year program. It might be said, in a sense not entirely figurative, that
    we have reach4 the ‘mid-course maneuver point.’ Just as the Mariner I1
    Venus fly-by mhsion would have missed by almost a quarter of a million
     miles instead of coming within 22,000-mile target area, we can fail to
    iachieve our full potential if we do not seize every opportunity to correct
                               . . .”
    our course as we go along.           (Text)
May 20: In address to the Wayne State University College of Engineering
    Honors Convocation in Detroit, Mich., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA
    Associate Administrator fur Manned Space Flight, said:
        cc
           In the manned space flight program, we have tried to profit from +e
    experience of the past. We are creating this very great capability in
    advance of the formulation of many of the specific operational require-
    ments, which inevitably wl emerge when it becomes clear what can be
                                il
    done. There are many elements to this capability. It includes trained
    people, a base of industry throughout the United States, ground facili-
    ties, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational experience, and the ability
    to manage large research and development efforts. All of these things
    will enable the United States to undertake whatever exploration of space
    the national interest may require.
       “In the three years since 1961, the manned space flight effort has built
    up at a rapid rate until there are now 250,000 persons at work throughout
    the country-more than 90 percent in private industry-and their
    numbers will increase to 300,000 when we reach the peak activity of the
    presently approved programs next year. About 15 percent of these are
     scientists and engineers. The program has become a major element in
    the economic life of the country. Prime contractors assign work to
    subcontractors, who in turn engage second and third-tier subcontractors.
        cc
           As the program progresses, we are now beginning to realize some
     of the benefits. Whereas six years ago we were extremely limited in the
    power available to place objecrts in space, we are now approaching
     a period when we will have the rockets available to do things beyond
    those being used in present programs.
        “The time is approaching when we must give more thought to the
    exploitation of the capabilities provided through ‘theseefforts. To avoid
     the pitfall into which we have fallen in the past, we must plan for the
     future even while we press vigorously to accomplish present programs.”
     (Text)
0 President Johnson presented President’s Safety Award for 1963 to NASA

     at White House ceremony. NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C.
                                                    behalf. (NASA Safety Off.;
     Seamans, Jr., accepted the award on NASA’s
    MarshalZ Star, 5/20/&&, 2)
0 LRC announced two technical staff members, Richard A. Terselic and Dr.

    Louis Rosenblum, had applied for a patent on a portable electron-beam
    welder. ( LRC Release 64-44)
                                                                        185
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

Muy 20: Resolution approved at final session of COSPAR recommended that
   no spacecraft be landed on M r if there were more than one chance
                                as
     in 10,000 that it was carrying earthly micro-organisms that could con-
     taminate Mars. Resolution also said no nation should attempt an “un-
     sterilized flyby” of Mars if there were more than three chances in
      100,000 of its accidentally hitting the planet. (AP, Tulsa Daily World,
     5/21/64)
  NASA Administrator James E.’ Webb was presented with Armed Forces Com-
     munications and Electronics Association’s Distinguished Service Honor
     Gold Medal Award and Certificate at the Association’s annual banquet.
      (A-N-AF J&R, 5/23/64,2)
M a y 21: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Milton 0. Thompson to 63,000-ft.
      altitude and 2,045-mph speed (mach 3.10). The X-15 rocket engine
      burned d l sec. before Thompson cut back power to planned 40 per cent.
     Then engine unexpectedly cut off. Thompson could not restart it, and
     he had to make emergency landing on Cuddeback Dry Lake. Cause of
     premature shutdown was malfunction in engine control system. This
      was fourth forced landing in 107 X-15 flights. (NASA X-15 Proj. O f ;f.
     AP, Balt. Sun,5/22/64)
0 First two-way telephone call between US. and Japan via a communica-

     tions satellite was conducted by personnel of NASA Goddard Space Flight
     Center, Greenbelt, Md., and Radio Research Laboratory Station, Ka-
     shima, Japan, using RELAY II satellite in orbit about 4,000 mi. above the
     Pacific Ocean. (NASA Release 64c122)
0 House passed H.R. 112% by voice vote, making FY 1965 appropriations

      for independent offices but excluding the $5.2 billion for NASA. Because
     Senate had not yet acted upon NASA authorization legislation for FY
      1965, Congressional rules permitted any member to block appropria-
     tions on a point of order. Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) objected to
      the construction and administrative operation appropriation-because of
      $60 million included for electronics research center in Boston-and
      his objection was sustained. Then Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.) ,
      Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee
      on Science and Astronautics, objected to remainder of the NASA appro-
      priations, thus blocking any attempts to cut them further. (NASA LAR
      II1/102; CR, 5/21/64,11241 ff)
0 Following House debate of Independent Offices Appropriations Bill, Rep.

     Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.) *told press interviewers that cuts from F     Y
      1965 space appropriations came “very close to being the straw that broke
      the camel’s back” on goal to land man on the moon by 1970. $245 mil-
     lion less than requested, the $5.2 billion appropriation would leave “no
     place to cut this budget.” Without the $141 million requested supple-
     mental, which was included in the $245 million cut, Rep. Teague said
      he feared manned lunar landing goal was lost. (AP, 5/21/64)
0 Rep.     Louis C. Wyman (R.-N.H.) submitted his separate views on
      NASA F 1965 appropriations, which he had filed with Independent
              Y
      Offices Subcommittee. In his report, he said: “Two things are seriously
      wrong in our space spending: First, the 1970 target date for a man on
      the moon; and second, advance contracting for Apollo before we know
                                    ...
      that Gemini is going to work.
           We should slow down in our spending on space, reassess the situa-
         66


      tion and bring the programs back to a more realistic, down-to-earth
      766-598 0-65---13
186                                                      1964
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

            .. .  We should cut back the present space appropriation by at
    basis.
    least a billion dollars, or to an appropriation for fiscal 1965 of $4.2 bil-
    lion. This is not going to wreck anything except the best-laid plans of
    a few space contractors. But it will help a great deal in providing addi-
    tional funds for some of the pressingly important things we must do now
    on earth.” (CR,    5/21JM, A2704-05)
May 21 .- Dr. Eugene Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engi-
    neering, told House Military Operations Subcommittee of Government
    Operations Committee that Titan I11 space booster was potentially the
    most desirable and economical launch vehicle for medium-altitude com-
                                   “. . . if we could use the Titan there would
    munications satellite system.
    be a tremendous money saving’’ over the Atlas-Agena. He said a shared
    commercial military comsat system would have “undeniable advantages”
    over separate military system. (NASA LAR 111/102; Av. Wk.,5/25/64,
    32)
 NASA said major contractor on Project Apdlo, North American Aviation,
    Inc., Space and Information Systems Div., would soon reduce its Apollo
    personnel by about 1,OOO. The action was a cost-reduction measure, and
    was not indicative of either current Congressional debate or change in
    Apollo scheduling. “We are merely trying to keep costs down as much
    as we can,” NASA spokesmen said. (AP, WSJ, 5/22/64; Finney, NYT,
    5/22/64,9)
 Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of President‘s Office of Science and Tech-
    nology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’
     Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development in its hearings on
    geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal MD. Dr. Hornig
    said Congress was cutting administrative overhead funds in Federally
    financed research at universities, and universities were forced to divert
    funds from other needs to help pay for Federally sponsored research.
     “Since the university has many scholarly functions to perform, while
    Federal funds are devoted generally to the sciences or to areas within
     science, it does not seem to be in the national interest to pursue a policy
     which diverts private funds from the education of students or the per-
     formance of scholarly research in non-scientific areas.” Dr. Hornig
     stated Federal support of research in past decade had produced “a dis-
    persal of university strength,” adding that Southeast and Mountain re-
     gions now were producing proportionately more doctorates than 10 years
     ago. (NASA LAR 111/102; NYT, 5/22/64+,8 )
 Addressing American Ordnance Association in Washington, Dr. Edward
     C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Coun-
     cil, said :
        “It is my thesis that mutual disarmament-and prudence dictates that
     there should be no other kind-would greatly increase the flow of funds
     and effort into space exploration and into the building of greater space
     capability. This does not necessarily mean a full transfer of all avail-
     able resources to space applications. But, just for illustration, suppose
     that there were a 10% decrease in weapon. systems spending. With
     good planning at least half of it could be diverted smoothly and e5-
     ciently into an increased space effort. With greater di5culty, the re-
     mainder might be directed toward mending other inadequacies in our
              .
      society. . .
                                                                              7
                                                            64




                                                                        ...
    in the process. The basic objective is to strengthen our country.
        cc
           In conclusion, let me emphasize:
        “First. Disarmament, in the form of decreased production of weapon
    systems, does not need to cause an economic depression.
        “Second. Resources made available as a result of decreased produc-
    tion of weapon systems could most effectively be applied to accelerated
    development of space systems.
        “Third. While it is important to keep private industry healthy, gov-
    ernment financing of research and development is not in conflict with
    such objectives. In fact, it may well stimulate increased production and
    increased employment by private companies.
         “And finally, I do not suggest that there should be a sharp increase in
    spending for space. But I do believe space spending should increase at
    a rate at least consonant w t the increase in our gross national product,
                                  ih
    not only because increase in the GNP makes resources available for more
    space activities, but also because space exploration itself stimulated the
    gross national product.” (Text)
May 21 : US. District Judge refused to halt supersonic flight tests over Okla-
    homa City in FAAsonic boom study, after 19 Oklahoma City residents
     filed suit attempting to halt the flights. (AP, NYT,5/22/64,70)
* NASA announced that Joseph T Dickerson, Jr., was appointed Special
                                     .
     Assistant to Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned
     Space Flight. Mr. Dickerson would assist Dr. Mueller in the areas of
     management, labor .relations, and Government-industry relationships.
     (NASA Release 64-119)
                                     Dr. Hugh L. Dryden stressed to Scien-
May 22:  NASA Deputy Administrator
     tific and Technical Subcommittee of the U.N. Co,&ttee on the Peaceful
     U e ,of Outer Space, at opening of its third session in Geneva, that US.
      ss
    scientists shared the concern of those from other countries over possible
    contamination of Mars and other planets. (NYT,    5/23/64)
* Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace 11, NASA Director of Space Medicine, said in
    Dallas : “Physiologically, women would make excellent astronauts.))
      However, he added, “They lack the experience in flying high-speed
    planes and handling the complicated equipment used in the program.
       “All of our astronauts are seasoned test pilots or men with much ex-
    perience in combat flying. It would be very difficult for any woman to
    gain such experience.” (DaUas Norning News, 5/23/64)
* FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby said FAA had prepared new proposal
    for Government-industry sharing of supersonic transport development
    costs. Details were not given, but Halaby said the plan “spreads the risk
188                               AND   AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

    present noise research and said: “NASA spending on aircraft noise abate-
    ment research has increased by 628 percent since 1962, rising from
    $148,OOO in that year to $24’7,000 in 1963, to $931,000 in 1 W . The
                        ...    has tentatively approved a sum of $1.4 million
    Space Committee
                                                                          . . .”
    for this program next year, a decision which I strongly support.
     (CR, 5 / 2 2 / 6 4 , 1 1 W )
Muy 22: Capt. Robert E. Jasperson (USN, Ret.) recently received patent for in-
    vention of “satellite alert,” a hand-held computer for informing ships’
    officers when to expect radio reports from navigation satellites and
    meteorologists when to expect readings from weather satellites. (Jones,
    NYT, 5/23/64)
Muy 23: AEC spokesman said about 2.2 lbs. of plutonium 238 had been lost
    over the west coast of Africa last month after USN satellite carrying it had
    failed to orbit (see May 11). Onboard as fuel for Snap9A generator,
    the plutonium apparently vaporized on re-entry into earth’s atmosphere
    and now was dispersed in very fine particles at the edge of space, where
    it would gradually lose its radioactivity. It posed “no health hazard to
    the world’s population,” AEC spokesman said. ( UPI, Wash. Post, 5/24/
    64)
 Dr. Ted FOSS,   geologist at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, described model
    of the moon to be constructed at MSC for conducting time and motion
    studies with astronauts in their space suits. To be covered with slag
    rocks and ash, the area would be about 340 ft. in diameter and feature
    several craters about 50 ft. in diameter and about 15 ft. deep, as well as
    ridges as high as 12 ft. US. Army Corps of Engineers would perform
    basic work on the $50,000 construction job. (Houston Chron., 5/24/
    64; AP, 5/23/64)
         Goddard Space Flight Center held Open House with more than 4,200
 NASA’s
    visitors attending. (Goddard News, 6/1/64)
 Open House at Langley Research Center, in conjunction with field inspec-
    tion during the past week, featured specially prepared exhibits and other
    items of interest for citizens of Virginia and nearby areas. (NASA
    Release 64-99; NASA Announcement W 9 )
 The US. Fighter Aces Association awarded Astronauts Walter Schirra,
    Alan Shepard, Virgil Grissom, and Donald Slayton honorary member-
    ships. (HowtonChron., 5/14/64)
 New program combining study of science with study of U.S.S.R. at Colum-
    bia University’s Russian Institute was announced by Institute director
    Prof. Alexander Ddlin. (NYT,5/24/64,21)
 George C. Marshall Research Library dedicated by Presidents Eisenhower
    and Johnson at the Virginia Military Institute, Lexington, Va. (Wash.
    Post, 5/24/64)
May 24: Interviewed in Washington Sunday Star, NASC Executive Secretary
    and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh was asked how far US. now
    was on its way to the moon.
       “I suppose we went a good way toward the moon objective when the
    decision was made. Consequently, I would say that we are much more
    than a third of the way to the moon at the present time.”
       Asked about Administration policy to classify Saviet space failures,
    Dr. Welsh replied:
                     olicy of classifying Soviet space failures was developed
                     ect sources of information, many of which in those days
    were individuals actually in the Soviet Union.
                  ..
     justification. .
        “I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether or not
     it can be relaxed, to see whether there is any justification at all for
     keeping from the American people information in regard to Soviet
     failures.” (Wash. Sun.Star, 5/24/64)
May 24: Recently published testimony by NASA Administrator James E. Webb
     before a House subcommittee indicated for the first time that there was
    more than just presumption to indicate U.S.S.R. might be developing
     larger space booster to compare with Saturn I. In response to question,
     Mr. Webb said that “there is some evidence, although it is not sufEcient
     to draw a fr conclusion, that they [the Soviets] are proceeding with
                  im
                              .
    larger developments. . . There is some evidence that they are not
     stopping with their present [space] vehicle and are expecting to move
     into larger categories. It will take a longer period of time to evaluate
    that evidence clearly and be sure.” (Finney, NYT, 5/25/64, 1, 4)
.Vuy 25: Third anniversary of President Kennedy’s address to Congress on
                                                 .
     urgent national needs in which he said: “. . I believe this nation should
     commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of land-
     ing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.”
  Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. summarized study on
    Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (MORL) made for NASA Langley
    Research Center. Douglas said it would be possible for US. to have a
     six-man operational space station within the next five years. MORL
     would be launched with Saturn IB, would remain in orbit just over one
     year. (Houston Post, 5/25/64)
* Major improvements in performance of supersonic transport shapes
    had come from aerodynamic refinements at NASA Langley Research
    Center, NASA announced. Applied to the wing design of supersonic trans-
    port concept known as “Scat 15,” the refinements achieved much better
    flight characteristics and more than 15 per cent increase in range. The
    improved concept-Scat       15F-was now regarded more favorably in
    comparison with the two established concepts, Scat 16 and 17. (NASA
    Release 64-120)
  Compilation by NASA Procurement Office showed that two thirds of the $1
    billion in subcontract work assigned by NASA’s largest contractors
                                                        12
    during 1962 and 1963went to 2,697 different subcontractors in 46 states.
     (NASA Release 64-118)
e Delegates from US.,Canada, Australia, and Japan met with the European
                                                       body representing 15
    Conference on Satellite Communications-a
    European nations-to further negotiate formation of a world-wide com-
    munications sateliite system. Francis Trew, secretary of the European
    Conference, said at the London meeting he was hopeful an agreement
    “would be ready for ratification in the ‘near future.’ ” (Farnsworth,
    NYT, 5/26/64,11)
* NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co. for S-IVB
    stage mockup to be used with Saturn V launch vehicle simulator at NASA
    Marshall Space Flight Center. Expected to cost about $5 million, the
    mockup would be used in study of prelaunch, launch, and orbital check-
    out of third stage. (NASA Release 64-123)
190                                                     19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

May 25: United Technology Center      (UTC) had developed hybrid rocket com-
    bining best features of solid and liquid propellants and 20% more
    powerful than any solid-propulsion rocket operational today. Rocket
    used solid fuel-butadiene rubber-and liquid oxidizer-liquid oxygen.
    UTC Assistant Manager of Advanced Technology Douglas D. Ordahl said
    the rocket also was safer than solid-fueled rocket motors and was simpler
    and more reliable than liquid-fueled rockets. ( WSJ, 5/26/54?)
Muy 26: NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said at dedication
    of Aerojet General’s Dade County (Fla.) plant:
                                        .
        “Leadership in propulsion is . . synonymous with leadership in
    space-for both military and non-military purposes. We cannot afford
    to relax in this area. There is no room for complacency, only room for
              .
    urgency. . .
        “In supporting the thesis that there is real danger from complacency,
    I list the following points:
        “1. The USSR is having some economic difficulties, particularly in
    agriculture. Yet, their space program is expanding.
        “2. The USSR is far ahead of the United States in manned flight ex-
    perience. Even their female cosmonaut has flown more orbits than all
     of OUT astronauts combined.
        “3. The USSR has flown their heavier Vostok spacecraft in manned
     and unmanned flights some 45 times as many earth orbits as we have
     flown our much smaller Mercury.
        “4. Practically all of the competences developed for space could be
     used for aggression as well as for peacefulpurposes.
        “Please do not misunderstand what I am saying. We have made
    great strides, particularly in the past three years. We are actually ahead
     of the Soviets in some applications of space, such as communications
     and meteorology. We are, however, not yet ahead overall. But, our rate
     of progress is very impressive.
        “Probably what I am warning about more than anything else is the
     danger that we might slow down our rate of progress-that we might
     heed the voices of defeatism and impracticality. This is the one thing
     we cannot afford. We cannot afford to lose the momentum which stems
     from a growing program. To slow down is to be content with second
     place. This we should not do. In fact, we dare not do it.” (Text)
* Soviet scientists had established existence of cosmic-dust cloud averaging
     437 mi. deep surrounding the earth, Tass said. Cloud was believed to be
    composed of residues from burned up meteorites after they entered earth‘s
     atmosphere. (Reuters, Wush. Post, 5/27/64~)
* General Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC, said in speech to the Aviation/Space
     Writers Association in Miami, regarding the USAF/USN F-111 :
        “The outstanding characteristic of the F-111 is its versatility. The
     F-lll A-the Air Force version-can penetrate supersonically on the
     deck for interdiction or low altitude tactical reconnaissance. For pur-
     poses of close support, it must be able to maneuver well at low altitudes
     and be able to carry a variety of conventional weapons. It must also be
     able to loiter for extended periods while awaiting target assignments
     from the local ground commander. Combined with this low altitude
     capability, the F-111 requires a very high altitude capability for recon-
     naissance flexibility and air superiority missions. It must be capable
     of high altitude deployment between theaters without tanker support.
    tactical fighter i TAC’S inventory with a capacity to operate from short
                      n
    austere fields. This means greater dispersal and flexibility and, of course,
    quicker responsiveness to support Army requirements for immediate and
    effective close air support, air superiority and interdiction. In short,
    the F-111 represents a quantum step forward in the development of a
    tactical air weapon system providing optimum combat effectiveness at
    the lowest cost and with the greatest possible flexibility.
       “The F-111B-the Navy version-has a primary role of air superior-
    ity. It will be armed with the Phoenix missile system and will be able
    to loiter at the outer defensive perimeter of the fleet for much longer
    periods of time than present day Navy fighters. It will also be able to
    accelerate out of a subsonic loiter condition and maneuver for super-
    sonic attack.
       “It is easy to see that both the Air Force and Navy versions of the
    F-111 call for a number of conflicting inflight performance characteris-
    tics. The requirements for high subsonic cruise efficiency and for short
    takeoff capability call for maximum lift from the wing area. In other
    words, you need wings swept fully forward. On the other hand, super-
    sonic low altitude flight calls for swept back wings, since the body design
    itself provides sufficient lift to support flight; and additional wing area
    only induces instability. At altitude more wing area is required, but
    the higher speeds obtainable dictate either very thin straight wings or
    else a higher degree of sweep.
       “How do you answer these conflicting demands? The answer is
    obvious-develop a varidble sweep wing aircraft. Contrary to some
    impressions, the variable sweep design is not new. A variable sweep
    design was used in the Bell X-5, which was developed under Air Force
    sponsorship and flown at Edwards in 1951. A similar principle was
    utilized in the Grumman F-1OF prototype which flew in 1952. But
   there is a major difference between those designs and the one to be
    used in the F-111, The early designs required a bulky internal mech-
    anism to move the wings. That mechanism is not required for the newer
    designs, and consequently the use of a variable sweep wing has become
    practical.” (Text, AFSC Release 45-R-64t)
May 26: Kingman Brewster, Jr., president of Yale Univ., testified before the
    House Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics:
          .
       “. . if we would do our best to see to it that the Government’s sup-
   port of scientific activity           s as little as possible the competitive
    allocation of talent in the           c market place, we must not penalize
   the universities in competition with industrial and consulting firms; and
    we must not penalize the less well endowed or supported universities in
    competition with their richer rivals. Anything less than full reimburse-
    ment of indirect costs [of research] does exactly this.”
192             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,               19 64

                       “. . . it seems to me wholly unwise to permit con-
        He continued:
     siderations of political geography to control the choices of faculties and
     students alike, to keep them from working wherever they think they
     would be most productive. Because the excellent are so few, and because
     modern science cannot very often be pursued in isolation from a com-
     munity of one’s peers, a productive science policy is bound to lead to a
     high degree of concentration in relatively few centers of advanced educa-
     tion and research.” (CR, 6/17/M, A3307)
May 27: NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket at White Sands,
     N. Mex., the rocket serving as a test round for a series of rockets to be
     flown in Sweden in July, and containing micrometeoroid-particle 601-
     lector as follow-up to Aerobee 150 experiment three years before. De-
     spite extremely low peak altitude (about 30 mi.-the second stage broke
     up after about 4.5 sec. of burning), instrumentation functioned until
     impact except for aspect sensor and Dovap. No useful scientific data
     were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
           announced the large air-filled bag safety system performed
0 NASA

     successfully in DC-7 crash experiment conducted April 24. Results in-
     dicated that if a man had sat in for the dummy, he would have survived
     the crash. Martin Co. designed the airbag system under NASA contract,
     for poss3ble use by both airline passengers and astronauts. (NASA Re-
     lease 64-121)
0 Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (WAF)        told Aviation/Space Writers’ Asso-
     ciation that USAF would seek bids for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory
     ,(MOL) by Dec. 1. DOD had released $6 million for the project May 1,
     opening the door to preliminary study. Under present schedule, he
      said, hardware development could begin in about a year, with first un-
     manned flight late in 1967 or early 1968. (Benedict, AP, 5/27/64)
* Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (USAF), Commander of National Range Div.,
     presented to Aviation/Space Writers Association meeting at Patrick
     AFB, Fla., a “status report” on newly organized NRD: “The activation
      of the NRD and the renaming of its organizations has already been well
     pu’blicized.. Basically we have brought the old Atlantic Missile Range
      and the ICBM and satellite test range portion of the Navy’s Pacific Mis-
      sile Range under single management. Additionally, my job as the DOD
     representative in support of NASA’s       Projects Gemini and Apollo has
                                                   . . .”
     moved with me to the.new organization.                  (Text, AFSC Release
     45-R-61)
* ComSatCorp disclosed its initial stock issue ( 5 million shares) had been
     :oversubscribed by 27% by 163 firms in the communications industry.
      Of the 5 million shares, 2,895,750 were bought by AT&T. The other
      5 million shares were scheduled for sale to the general public June 2.
      (AP, Wash. Post, 5/28/64; MacKenzie, Wash. Post, 5/28/@)
M a y 28: Saturn I S A 4 flight was conducted successfully from Cape Ken-
      nedy, the huge two-stage launch vehicle boosting into orbit an Apollo
      boilerplate spacecraft attached to the S-IV second stage. The one mal-
      function in the flight was premature shutdown of one of the eight first-
      stage engines, cutting off 24 sec. early. Preliminary analysis of telemetry
      data indicated that the remaining seven H-1 engines burned additional
      two sec. to compensate for lost thrust of the eighth engine, and the Sat-
      urn 1’s guidance system corrected course deviations caused by the shut-
      of engine, so that orbital parameters (140-mi. apogee, 123.9-mi. perigee,
       f
                                                                           193
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    88.5-min. period, and 31.8” inclination to the equator) came very close
    to those predicted. This was first Saturn I flight test of active guidance
    system to inject upper stage and attached ApoUo spacecraft into orbit.
    Eight movie cameras mounted on the Saturn I to photograph propulsion
     and fuel operations were ejected and recovered. Main purpose of the
    flight was further qualification of the Saturn I launch vehicle and con-
    tinued development of technology necessary to build the more powerful
     Saturn IB and V launch vehicles, (Marsha star, 6/3/64, 1; NASA
    Releases 64-113 and 64-130; M&R, 6/8/64,10)
Muy 28: Seventh test in paraglider series was conducted by NASA Manned
    Spacecraft Center at Edwards AFB, Calif. Simulated Gemini spacecraft
    was dropped from 33,000-ft. altitude and paraglider deployed accord-
    ing to plan and lowered the spacecraft to 15,000 ft., where parachute
    opened for remaining portion of descent. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull.,
    5/29/64)
0 Plans for first operational weather satellite system, to be called Tiros

    Operational Satellite (TOS) system, were announced. NASA had selected
    RCA’S Astro Electronics Div. for negotiations leading to manufacture of
    five Tiros operational weather satellites, at cost expected to exceed $9
    million. Dept: of Cornmercerneather Bureau would finance TOSsystem,
    provide overall management, and be responsible for its operation. NASA
    was responsible for spacecra4t procurement, launch, and initial checkout
     after satellite is in orbit. After system begins in late 1965, two meteoro-
    logical satellites would be in orbit at all times, photographing cloud-
    cover of the entire earth every day. (NASA Release 64-125; Commerce
    Dept. Release WB 64-9)
* Successful static firing of 156-in. solid propellant rocket motor was con-
    ducted at Lockheed Propulsion Co., Potrero, Calif. The 110-sec. firing
    was considered successful in all respects. Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier,
    Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, AFSSD, said the test signified
    6b
       a completely new era with regard to the size of solid motors for bal-
    listic missiles, and in particular, for space boosters.” (M&R, 6/8/64,
    25 1
  USAF destroyed Athena missile about 70 sec. after launch from Green River,
    Utah, when “it appeared to be progressing out of the flight corridor.”
     (M&R, 6/8/64,10)
* NASA signed $237 million contract with General Dynamics/Astronautics
    for d&elopment of Centaur launch vehicle stages.. The contract, a con-
    firmation of letter contract issued January 1963, called for delivery of
    14 flight stages, exclusive of inertial guidance system being developed
    by Honeywell Co., and liquid hydrogen-fueled R G l O engine being built
    by Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. (NASA Release 64-
     127)
* NASA announced it would negotiate with Douglas Aircraft Co. for purchase
    of eight additional S-IVB stages for Saturn I’B launch vehicle. The
    eight stages would be flown on vehicles number 5 through 12. Esti-
    mated at more than $110 million, the contract would call for building
    the eight stages, supplying automated ground support equipment for
     Sacramento test site, providing launch support services at Cape Ken-
    nedy, and furnishing spare parts for entire Samturn S-IVB program.
     (NASA Release 64-126)
194             ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

May 28: NASA awarded $100,000 contract to North Carolina Science and
    Technology Research Center for establishment of experimental program
    for transfer of technology developed in U.S. space effort to civilian
    industry. Other participants in the program would be Univ. of North
    Carolina, Duke Univ., North Carolina State College, and Research Tri-
    angle Institute. (NASA Release 64-124)
0 Republican Critical Issues Council of the Republican Citizens Committee,

    chaired by Dr. Milton Eisenhower, issued statement calling upon U.S. to
    abandon the 1970 goal of a manned lunar landing. It also called for
    increased international cooperation in space exploration: “. . . The
    exploration of our universe is a goal too vast, too hazardous, too costly,
    and too important to all mankind to be financed and conducted by one
    country alone, and least of all in an atmosphere of unfriendly competi-
    tion.” Council also deplored claims for military value of space explora-
    tion: “We are aware of no compelling argument thus far for the devel-
     opment and deploying of weapons in space. . . .” (Text, CR, 5/28/
     64,11775-77)
* NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E.
    Mueller, addressed banquet of Aviation/Space Writers’ Association in
    Miami. Discussing possible hazards to Apollo astronauts, he said that
     based on data from EXPLORER XVI satellite it was “not anticipated at this
    time that meteoroids will constitute a major problem in the planning or
     scheduling of the first manned lunar exploration.” Radiation did not
     present a hazard either: “. . . In the case of solar flares, we compared
    the allowable safe dose with what would have been produced within the
     Apollo command module by the worst flares on record, that of July 1959.
     If an Apollo spacecraft had been in flight on a lunar mission at this time,
     the astronauts would have received only 15 percent of the safe dose,
     calculated on the basis of a report by a group established by the Space
     Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences. . . .
        “Very recently there have been suggestions that space flight-even
     relatively short duration flight-is harmful to man. There is no evidence
     from Project Mercury to support these fears. Based on our experience
     in Mercury, which included a flight of 34 hours by Gordon Cooper,
     there is no reason to believe that flights of two weeks or less will be
     harmful. . . .”
        Dr. Mueller then outlined nine medical experiments to be conducted
     during the two-man orbital space flights of Project Gemini. (Text;
     NASA Release 64c128)
  Three researchers from North American Aviation, Inc., stepped out
     of a rotating capsule after three days of rotation and one with the capsule
     at rest. The capsule, about twice the size of an Apollo capsule, was on
     the end of a 23-ft.-radius arm which traveled at a rate of five rotations
     per minute, producing a g force of 1.08. The test was preliminary to
     more extensive ones intended to study living and working conditions in
     a manned orbital laboratory. While in rotation, the researchers shot
     darts, maneuvered on a teeter-totter, worked puzzles and mathematical
     problems. Conclusion was that by end of second day, performance was
     back to normal. ( NAA S&ID Skywriter, 6/12/64,2)
* B. K. 0. Lundberg, Director General of the Aeronautical Research Institute
     of Sweden, predicted at Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami
     that more than 15,000 passengers would be killed each year by the
                                                                         195
                                                                 g the aviation
     year 1990 unless avi
    industry’s emphasis                                          (“we are now
    apparently on the verge of plunging ourselves into a supersonic adven-
    ture”), he stressed that the “No. 1challenge to aviation and the aeronau-
    tical scientists” was aviation safety, and urged the world to adopt “new,
    radical and long-term aviation safety policy.” (Morrow, NYT, 5/31/
     64,78)
Ma.y 29: At Aviation/Space Writers Association meeting, Harold B. Finger,
     Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Ofc and Director
                                                            fie
     of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power, said that in the Kiwi M D
     reactor test last May 13 the “planned power and temperature of the
                              ..
     reactor were exceeded. .        [Also,] there were no flashes in the jet as
     had been experienced in the Kiwi B 4 A reactor test in November 1962,
     none of the vibrations that had caused damage to that reactor were
                                                 .
     detected in this test, and extensive data .       [were] recorded on the
     reactor performance.
       “.   . . I think we can safely say that our structural problems have
     been overcome and nuclear rockets can be developed for the performance
     of future missions beyond Apollo.” (Text)
* NASA appointed Breene M. Kerr as Deputy Assistant Administrator for
     Technology Utilization, effective June 1. As deputy to NASA Assistant
     Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning Dr.
     George L. Simpson, Kerr would have operating responsibility for NASA’s
     Technology Utilization program. (NASA Release 64-129)
* Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted by former US. Senator William H.
     Benton (now US. representative to UNESCO in Paris) as saying: “If you
     wish, I can show you photos of military bases taken from outer space.
     I will show them to President Johnson if he wishes.” Mr. Benton said
     Premier Khrushchev suggested that US. could maintain adequate in-
     spection of Cuba with satellites and therefore should discontinue its
     aerial reconnaissance flights over the island. (Middleton, NYT, 5/30/
     6471)
     30: NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Pro-
     ducers Association in Sikeston, Mo.:
        “Whether the Russians are attempting to build a rocket and space-
     craft to match Saturn V and Apollo, we simply do not know. When
     they start flight tests of such a rocket, we should be able to identify it.
     Flight tests of our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and
     it is quite possible that the Russians may also be testing a super rocket
     by then.
        “This much we do know: It would be very foolish on our part to sit
     idle or to delay the Saturn V until we could confirm that the Soviets
     were also building super rockets. By that time, it would probably be
     too late for us to match them again in this century.
        (6
           In our national space program we are moving rapidly and vigorously
     to do the things we need to do as a nation to prevent technological
     surprise, to prevent another major Soviet initiative based on space
     superiority.
        “We believe that peace and security and the possibility of useful co-
     operation with the Soviet Union all depend on our making doubly clear
     that they can hope to have no monopoly of space achievement to ex-
     ploit for the purposes of communism.
196             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964
       L<
        Some people seem to think that our present space effort can be justi-
    fied only if we are in a neck-and-neck race to the moon. These people
    miss the point. Our aim is not to race the Soviets, but to thoroughly
    discourage them from making an all-out effort to use space as a political,
    propaganda, or military weapon for greater power on earth.
       “I don’t believe the American people are investing $20 billion in the
    Saturn-Apollo program of manned space flight in this decade just to
    keep even with the Soviets. I think the American people want to lead,
                                           . .”
    and lead without doubts and excuses. .           (Text)
* At Missouri Valley College commencement exercises, NASA Administrator
    James E. Webb said: “For some time we in NASA have been concerned
    with doing our part to help build up the nation’s supply of scientific and
    engineering manpower, and to ensure that our national competence
    grows rather than diminishes. Accordingly, in 1962, the agency initiated
    its present program of ,training graduate students in space-related fields,
    and nearly 900 students are already in training.
       “This fall the number of schools participating will grow from 88 to
    131, located in 47 states-with four of these colleges here in Mis-
            . .”
    souri. .         (Text)
Muy 31:Saturn I S A 4 satellite, consisting of boilerplate Apollo spacecraft
    and S-IV second stage of the Saturn I vehicle, re-entered earth’s atmos-
    phere and disintegrated over the Western Pacific Ocean about 8:30 p.m.
    EDT, during its 50th orbit of the eaith. (NASA Release 64-130)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in remarks at Univ. of Alabama:
    “In the 51/, years since the launching of Explorer I in January of 1958,
    scientists in the nation’s universities and in government laboratories, sup-
    ported by the engineering competence of American industry, have made
    an impressive record. In this 5% years 42 different university sponsored
    experiments have been orbited on 22 NASA satellites. Twelve of these
    experiments on five satellites are still operating. There are pending at
    the present time a total of 123 experiments representing 36 different
    experimental concepts contributed by nineteen universities. These ex-
    periments have been approved and will be flown on 19 NASA satellites
    including the orbiting geophysical observatories, the orbiting astronomi-
    cal observatories, the orbiting solar observatories, and the Explorers. Of
    great significance is the fact that some of these experiments will be flown
    on future international satellites, particularly the United States-United
    Kingdom series.” (Text)
  Reported that John Stack of Republic Aviation believed U.S.S.R. probably
    would beat the West with supersonic transport. Stack revealed Soviets
    had developed 1,200-mph delta-wing bomber, “the Bounder,” which
    could quickly be converted into transport “because the Soviets have
    lower performance standards than the US. for their aircraft and are
    not worried about the effects of sonic booms on their cities.” (Parade,
    5/31/64)
During May: Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., recommended to NASA that a
    data collection satellite system could be provided by a single satellite in
    polar orbit between 500 and 700 n. mi. altitudes. Satellite would collect
    meteorological and oceanographic data from about 1,200 sensors per
    day, store the information on magnetic tape, then relay it upon command
    to ground station. Sylvania’s study was performed under $97,000 con-
    tract awarded last year by NASA. (M&R, 6/1/64, 11; SBD, 5/13/a,
    68)
                                                                           197
                                                         19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICB,

During May: Sert I (space electric rocket test) payload began final series of
     tests in large vacuum tank at NASA Lewis Research Center, in preparation
     for space flight later this summer. (Lewis News, 6/5/64,2)
0 David B. Clark Co. began building eight flight suits for Project Gemini

     astronauts. MSC suit engineer Henry Friloux said the pressurized suits
     would protect astronauts up to 150-mi. altitudes. (M&R, 5/25/64, 31)
  Flight-rating test for F-1 rocket engine was delayed from mid-year to end
     of the year, and tests leading up to the qualification would begin in
     September. (M&R, 5/25/64,9)
0 On 20-day shakedown cruise in the Chesapeake Bay, tracking ship Rose

     Knot conducted tests with instrumented Lockheed Super Constellation
     aircraft equipped to simulate systems of Gemini and Agena. (M&R,
     5/25/64,9)
  USAF antisatellite system, utilizing Thor missile, completed successful op-
     erational testing and became operational. (Transcript, Defense Secy.
     McNamara News Conference, 9/18/64)
0 Bell Aerosystems study for NASA concluded that design studies of lunar

     surface vehicles could not be made in detail until data were obtained from
     Ranger and Surveyor lunar probe programs. General results of the
     lunar surface analysis indicated the best possibility for surface locomo-
     tion would be wheeled vehicle. (SBD, 5/21/64, 117)
0 Results of meteoroid-protection research were presented at AIAA Structures

     and Materials Conference in Palm Springs. North American Aviation
     said its research suggested that current protective requirements against
     impact hazard might be reduced. GM Defense Research Laboratories
     reported on hypervelocity impact studies that showed meteoroid bumper
     concept may do more harm than good at lower impact velocities. NASA
     Ames Research Center research indicated use of honeycomb material for
     meteoroid proteotion would increase damage from impacts, because
     honeycomb walls channel sprayed particles into highly damaging clus-
     ters of pulverized material that blast through rear sheet of target mate-
     rial. Investigation of fiber metals by IIT Research Institute showed that
     fiber metal bumpers were more efficient than solid bumpers in prevent-
     ing damage to target material. (M&R,5/25/a, 29)
  USAF began awarding small study contracts to industry to explore various
     aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Directed toward the orbit-
     ing of a 4-ton laboratory in 1968 to help DOD determine the military
     role of manned space flights, MOL would be launched by a Titan 1114
     rocket and would orbit for approximately one month. Contracts were
     let last month to ,the Martin Co. to study the role of Titan 111-C in rela-
     tion to launching the laboratory. Hamilton Standard Div. of United
     Aircraft Corp. and the AiResearch Div. of the Garrett Corp. got contracts
     for study of environmental control systems. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun,
     6/5/64)
  USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif., acquired 12
     more students, bringing enrollment to 35. The school's one-year course
     was designed to produce pilots, project managers, or consultants for fu-
     ture manned space programs. (A-N-AF J&R, 5/30/64, 17)
                      & Aeronautics article on Germany's space program,
0 In Astronautics

     Dietrich E. Koelle discussed recoverable sounding rockets being studied.
     Preliminary research and development as well as testing had been be-
     gun on the new guidance system for these rockets, which would make
198             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    guided descent with assistance of Rogallo wing. Largest German space
    project was production of third stage for ELDO launch vehicle, which
    would have its first live flight-test in 1966. (A&A, 5/64, 66 ff)
During May: At annual meeting of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Academician
    L. A. Artsimovich, physicist, observed that U.S.S.R. did not have a lead-
    ing role in astronomy because of inadequate facilities. He said that
    astronomy was more important than high-energy physics, but “our ex-
    penditures on high-energy physics many times exceed thaw on astron-
    omy.” Head o the Academy M. V. Keldysh replied:
                   f
       “There are some areas of science in which it is necessary for us under
    all conditions to maintain a high level. But we don’t have to try to main-
    tain such a level in absolutely all sectors. In scientific development, it is
    necessary to base oneself on international scientific cooperation.
       “I think that it is from this aspect we must examine the problems of
    astronomy’s development and in this area broadly utilize international
    cooperation. It is not obligatory to try to have in our country the
    world’s largest telescopes and radio telescopes, and telescopes in balloons,
    and on sputniks, etc.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/1/64, 2)
* Richard L. Schleicher of North American Aviation, Inc., received Royal
    Aeronautical Society of Great Britain’s George Taylor Gold Medal for
    1963 for paper on X-15 structural design which he presented to the
    Society. (Av. Wk., 6/1/a, 13)
* USAF’S “Summary of Lessons Learned from Air Force Management Sur-
    veys” found that cause of management deficiencies was absence of three
    essential elements: program-oriented management structure; compre-
    hensive written procedures spelling out guidelines in all foreseeable sit-
    uations; and effective discipline. (Armed Forces Mgmt., 5/64,37)
  Canadian Air Marshal C. R. Slemon retired as Deputy NORAD CinC at Colo-
    rado Springs to become Director of Aerospace Educational Center at
    USAF Academy. (A-N-AF J&R, 5/16/a, 4)
June 1: In an interview with U.S.N e w s & World Report, Dr. WeAher von
     Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the
     US.program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was
     his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%”
     that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting
     on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun
     ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another
     focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program”
     such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth.
     In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said
     they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this
     would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Rus-
     sians-or. for that matter. even to land on the moon-but to design a  ”
     hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.”
      (US. e w s , 6/1/64)
            N
0 Dr. George E.-Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight,

     NASA, asserted that “we learned we had more work to do’, in commenting
     on the fact that one engine in the Saturn I booster (SA-6) had shut down
     prematurely. Because the Saturn I booster was designed to operate
     successfully with one engine out, no damage was done by the early
     shutoff and the test was successful. (Houston Post, 6/2/64)
0 NASA awarded a $1.2 million contract for the design, development, and con-

    struction of a new simulator system for installation in a subsonic jet
    transport to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Buffalo, N.Y. The new
    system, called the General Purpose Airborne Simulator (GPAS), was to
    provide airborne simulation of advanced aircraft with particular em-
    phasis on the proposed supersonic transport. The system should allow
    inflight evaluation of specific configurations for a wide variety of flight
    conditions of speed, altitude, and attitude. ( FRC Release 13-64)
  Missiles and Rockets reported that NASA planned two Mariner-type flights
    to Mars in 1969 and a Voyager mission to Mars in 1971. M&R reported
    that D. P. Hearth, of the office of Advanced Lunar and Planetary Pro-
    grams in the NASA Office of Space Sciences, said that he expected both
    new projects to be funded in the FY ’66 budget. According to Hearth,
    neither project had won program approval by top NASA officials, but the
    chances for both sppeared good. Both 1969 and 1971 would offer attrac-
    tive launch windows because propulsion requirements to complete the
    missions would be the smallest of any period in the next 15 years.
     (M&R, 6/1/64, 15)
  NASA contributed $177,000 to the Univ. of Houston to support 10 pre-
    doctoral students studying space-related sciences and technology. The
    fellowships were for a three-year period and brought the total to 20 in
    the NASA-sponsored study program. With this grant, the space agency
    raised its total contribution to $354,000 in fellowship grants to the
    university. (Houston Post, 6/1/64)
                                                                    199
200                               AND   AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

June 1 : New York Times reported that AEC and USAF were jointly supporting
    work on a relatively simple nuclear rocket engine (Project Poodle) that
    was likely to be flyable in the next five years. The rocket would be
    clustered to propel an upper rocket stage, and it was reported that the
    newly designed device might save more than $300 million on space a i s -
    sions which had already been planned and for which conventional upper
    stages had been contemplated. The novelty of the new engine stemmed
     from the fact that its power would be derived not from a controlled nu-
    c1ezt.r reaction but from the decay of radioactive polonium 210. Propul-
     sion would be provided in gentle acceleration uf about y lb. thrust sus-
                                                               4
     tained for periods of weeks. (Witkin, NYT, 6/1/64)
* In a letter to Aviation Week, S. B. Kramer suggested that, on the basis of his
    computations, the U.S.S.R.’s ZOND I probe was on a trajectory that
     would bring it on the sunlit side o Venus around July 24, 1964. His
                                         f
     calculations were based on bulletins on ZOND I issued by Tass, and he
     asserted that they led him t~ two conclusions: first, that ZOND I was on a
     trajectory that would lead it to approach Venus closely; second, that the
     trajectory was such that the probe could return to the vicinity of earth
     during the latter half of March 1965. (Av.Wlc., 6/1/64,102)
* The policy committee of the Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center of
     New York urged the Government to begin immediately to develop pro-
     cedures for the selection and training of crews for the supersonic trans-
     ports now in the design stage. The group urged the initiation of inten-
     sive studies of the “operating environment” of supersonic aircraft now
     in use by the military, and the development of joint management-union
     programs for selection of crews based upon physical and technical com-
     petence rather than upon the seniority principle. (AP, NYT, 6/2/64,
   63)
* Marilyn Link, Executive Secretary of the Link Foundation of New York,
   was named winner of the national Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1963.
     The trophy, awarded by the National Aeronautic Association, honors
     “distinguished and outstanding meritorious service to the Air Youth of
     America in Aero Space Education.” (NU Release)
9- Mise Jacqueline Cochran flew the Edwards AFB 100-km. circular course at

     1,302 mph to recapture the international woman’s record held by Jacque-
     line Auriol. Miss Auriol had averaged 1,266 mph on June 4, 1963, to
     capture the 100-km. record from Miss Cochran. (AP, Wash. Post,
     W5/W
June 2: At his news conference, President Johnson stated, in reply to a ques-
     tion a%out reconnaissance of Cuba by means of planes and satellites:
     “I will say this: that we, at the time of the Cuba missile crisis, attempted
     to work out an agreement for inspection and that was refused. This
     nation, in order to protect its people, must have a knowledge of what is
     taking place and we propose to keep informed. As to what offers the
     best method, we will have to determine that.” (NYT, 6/3/64, 25)
   The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved au-
     thorization of $5,246,293,250 in the next fiscal year for NASA. This
     figure would be $52,482,750 more than was voted by the House, but still
     $57,706,750 less than the budget requests. The Senate Committee’s rec-
     ommendations included restoration of budget cuts by the House from
     the unmanned Surveyor program, the Orbiting Geophysical Observa-
     tory program, and funds for tracking network operations. (Wmh.
     Post, 6/3/64; Au. Wk., 6/15/@, 30)
                                                     requests of other states for
     the installation “a mere front” hiding the fact that the decision had
     already been made. Senators Keating and Javits (R.-N.Y.) , and Case
      (R.-N.J.) joined Lausche in criticizing NASA’s      refusal to divulge the
     contents of its site selection studies. (CR, 6/2/64, 11951-52; UPI,
     Boston Globe, 6/2/64?)
* PIASA named two companies to enter competitive negotiations for providing
     instrumentation support services at the Merritt Island Launch Area and
     the NASA facilities located within the Cape area. The two companies
     were Federal Electric Corp. of Paramus, N.J., and Chrysler Corp., Florida
     Missile Operations, Cape Kennedy, Fla. The total period of performance
     would be for three years, at a cost of $4.5 million. (KSC Release 80-64)
  NASA engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center were puzzled by the
     question o how a colony of fleas managed to infiltrate a special chamber
                f
     which was supposedly protected against invasion even by bacteria. The
     chamber had been designed and installed to test, under conditions simu-
     lating those of space, optical equipment to be placed on board the Orbit-
     ing Astronomical Observatory. One possible explanation for the pres-
     ence of the fleas suggested that they entered concealed in the fur-lined
     parkas worn by technicians adjusting equipment inside the low-tem-
     perature chamber. (Wash. Daily News, 6/2/64)
  NASA Flight Research Center awarded a $1.2 million contract to the Norair
     Div. of the Northrop Corp. of Hawthorne, Calif., for the design and
     construction of two full-scale lifting body research vehicles. The two
     research vehicles (the M-2 and HL-10) were to be used initially
     by NASA for full-scale wind tunnel testing and for free flight tests as
     manned subsonic gliders. (FRC Release 1 M )
* Representative H. R. Gross (R.-Iowa) told the House that Breene M.
     Kerr, son of the late Sen. Robert S. Kerr (D.-Okla.) and recently
     named Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization of
      NASA, would have to exercise great care to avoid conflicts of interest in
     his new job. He warned that Kerr’s new assignment “will require some
     serious thinking on his part if he is to avoid actions that may tend to
      confuse the Kerr financial interests with the interests of the government.”
      (Mollenhoff ,Des Moines Register, 6/3/64)
  In a House debate over the patent policy for the proposed Water Resources
     Research Center, Rep. Chet Holifield (DICalif.) criticized current DOD
      and NASA patent policies. He urged that the policy be revised to permit
      any industry to “use any kind of a device or any kind o a patent pro-
                                                                   f
     cedure which is paid for by federal funds.” (CR, 6/2/64,12045)
* The FAA awarded contracts totaling $6 million each to the Boeing Com-
      pany and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for the design of a supersonic trans-
      port. In addition, contracts totaling $5 million each were awarded to
      the General Electric Co. and the Pratt & Whitney Division of United
      Aircraft Corp. for designs for the engines of the transport. Boeing and
      Lockheed would do extensive design work, wind tunnel testing, and
      structural studies aimed at refining designs to conform to the technical
      and economic requirements established by the FAA. The two engine
      contractors would develop detailed preliminary layout designs. (AP,
     NYT,6]3/64,16; FAA Release 64-55)
      766-598 0-66----14
202            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONATTTICS, 1 9 8 4

June 2: Alexander Kuzin, Soviet member of
    the Efcs of Atomic Radiation, said that
         fet
    radioactive substances were disappearing. By the end of the current
    year, it would be practically impossible to trace any such contamination
    of the earth, Kuzin said in a speech reported by Tass. (AP, NYT,
    6/4/@4 4)
* A $lOO-rnillion issue of Communications Satellite Corp. stock was put on
    the market and almost immediately sold out. Five million shares were
    involved in the stock issue. The maximum allotment was 50 shares per
    customer from each security house, but the average was only about 15
    shares because of the great public demand. The par value of the stock
    was $20 per share, and it closed at around $23 after having reached a
    high of $27 in the first few minutes of trading. (NYT, 6/3/64, 59)
June 2-3: New, improved solar cell was described at Conference of Photo-
    voltaic Specialists by Joseph Mandelkorn, head of group at NASA Lewis
    Research Center that developed the solar cell. The new cell was made
    of pure silicon with small amount of aluminum added. Before 1960,
    solar cells were made of silicon with small amount of phosphorus
    added. In 1960, Mandelkorn discovered that substituting boron for
    phosphorus made cells with greater radiation resistance; these cells
    were used on TELSTAR I, whose orbit passed through Van Allen radiation
    belts. The newest cells, even more radiation resistant, were expected
    to have useful lifetime of 25-50 times that of silicon-phosphorus type.
     (LRC Release 6 6 5 1 )
June 3: NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island,
    Va., to 86.6-mi. altitude, but nose cone failed to release. Using CW
    propagation transmitter, Gerdien condenser probe, and ion trap, experi-
    ments were to have measured ambient electron and ion density, moni-
    tored integrated ultraviolet flux from the sun, and tested two 12.267-mc
    shroud antennas. The propagation experiment obtained good data
    from 83 see. to peak, but no other experimental results were obtained.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* A new division was formed within the NASA office of Advanced Research
    and Technology. The new Programs and Resources Division of OART
    would be headed by Merrill H. Mead who came to Hq. from the Ames
    Research Center. Dr. R. L. Bisplinghoff, Associate Administrator
    for Advanced Research and Technology, said the new division was
    created to “improve the program planning capability and provide com-
    mon objectives toward which all of the elements of the office can be
    directed.” (NASA Release 64-132)
* NASA revealed that it spent a record $1,939,000,000 in the first half of the
    current fiscal year, July 1, 1963, to December 31, 1963, for goods and
    services. The total sum was $15 million more than the previous high,
    for the six months ending June 30,1963. 44 states participated in direct
    awards of NASA prime contracts of $25,000 or more. Of these 44, Cali-
    fornia received by far the largest amount in money terms, more than
    $700 million. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/4/64)
  A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations
    Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center
    by the Goddard Space night Center. The contract called for the com-
    plete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications
    system for NASA% Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data
                                                                          203
                                  AND   AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

     Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would
                                                              .
     support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ATS) (GSFC Release
     G16-64)
June 3: Sh. P. Darchiya, an astronomer from the Pulkovo Observatory, suc-
     ceeded in photographing details of the lunar surface on the unexposed
     side of the lunar disk, i.e., under conditions of earthlight. Astronomers
     had previously recorded the luminescence of individual details of the
     lunar surface on the unexposed side of the lunar disk, but according to
     A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the Observatory, this phenomenon had
     never been confirmed by instrument observation. (Zzvestia, 6/3/64,
     4, ATSS-T Trans.)
  It was reported that U.A.R. planned to soon launch its own earth satellite-
     a 40-70 Ib. satellite boosted by a three-stage rocket. A source close to
     German rocket scientists in U.A.R. said the launching would probably
     be purely a prestige gesture, having little or no scientific value. (UPI,
     Wash.Post, 6/4/64)
e HF-24 fighter-bombers designed by a team of 18 German aeronautical
     engineers and manufactured in Bangalore at the Hindustan Aircraft
     Co. were reportedly being delivered to the Indian government. The
     chief of the team designing the HF-24 was reported to be Dr. Kurt Tank,
     principal designer for Germany’s World War I1 Luftwaffe. (NANA,
     Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/64)
e Miss Jacqueline Cochran claimed her third jet speed record in less than a
     month, flying a Lockheed F-104 fighter aircraft. Flying at 1,135 mph
     over a 500-km. closed course at Edwards AFB, Calif., Miss Cochran
     %bettered her own international record of 680.75 mph which she estab-
     lished over the same course on September 17,1961. (NU Release; AP,
      Wash.Post, 6/5/64)
* WAF launched unidentified satellite payload aboard a Scout vehicle from
     Pt. Arguelto, Calif. Purpose of the shot was not announced. (M&R,
     6/15/64,10)
June 4: The House Republican Conference’s task force on space and aero-
     nautics charged that NASA was disregarding the safety of astronauts in
     its haste to place men on the moon. The report specifically criticized
     the agency for not developing means of rescuing astronauts stranded
     in orbit and called for a slowdown in the program until the feasibility
     of “rescue ships” could be explored. The criticisms were directed at
     the Project Gemini flights. The report suggested that NASA’s     reluctance
     to develop a Gemini space rescue system resulted from a fear that it would
     slow the Apollo project. (Finney, NYT, 6/5/64)
  Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of .NASA, said he hoped for
      cooperation on space flights between the US.,the USSR., and other
     countries at some future time. He asserted that such cooperation was
      not possible at the current time because of the secrecy that surrounded
      Soviet space efforts. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/5/64)
0 A $1,313,000 contract was awarded by the Army Corps of Engineers to

     Carpenter Brothers o Dallas, Texas, for the construction of a test
                             f
     maintenance building at the NASA Mississippi Test Facility.            (DOD
     Release 438-64)
e USAF and USN astronomers planned special telescopic observation of the
     moon on June 4 and 5 in an attempt to identify the mysterious red
     spots first observed by Sir William Herschel in 1738. The spots,
204                                                      19 6 4.
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     located in the crater Aristarchus, were observed in October 1963 by
     astronomer J. 6. Greenacre from the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff,
     Ariz. They indicate the possibility of volcanos below its barren sur-
     face. (Ubel, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/4/64; AI?, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
June 4: Conference on New Technology at Lewis Research Center was opened
     by LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein: “The vehicles and spncecraft
     launched from Florida are the visible results of our nation’s space
     effort. Less evident is the body of technology that makes these and
                                                         30,000 employees are
     future flights possible. Almost half of NASA’s
      among those creating this technology.” Attending the two-day confer-
     ence were some 350 representatives of industry ; area development
     groups; universities; Federal. state, and local government; labor; bank-
     ing; and NASA Hq. and Centers. (Lewis News, 6/6/64,1)
e It was announced that the British government was spending $2.8 million
      to enlarge its space communications facilities at Goonhilly Downs.
      Future communications satellites would require more powerful re-
      ceivers because of higher orbits. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/4/64)
e Soviet scientists disclosed that they were planning to grow fresh vegetables
      in future Soviet spacecraft. Izvestia reported that scientists had al-
      ready grown cabbage, beets, tomatoes, and carrots in synthetic soil
      in simulated spacecraft conditions. ( AP, Chic. Trib., 6/5/64)
  France and Spain signed an agreement to set up a joint satellite tracking
      station in the ISpanish-owned Canag-y Islands. (UPI, Wash. Daily
      News, 6/5/64)
* New FAA Statistical Handbook showed substantial increases in aviation
      activity. Since 1950, domestic and international air passenger tra5c
      had more than tripled. The same was true for air cargo traffic. Do-
      mestic flights carried 56 million -passengers in 1962. International
      and territorial flights carried 6.6 million passengers. Revenue ton
      miles flown by all US. airlines, scheduled and nonscheduled, exceeded
      6.6 billion in the same year. Employment within the aeronautical
      industry increased from 668,500 in 1961to 707,300 in 1962, an increase
      of six per cent. (FAARelease 64-57)
June 5: The US. and the U.S.S.R. reached further agreement during ne-
      gotiations conducted in Geneva on cooperative efforts in space research.
      A joint weather satellite program would go into operation by the end of
      this year. The weather program would consist of the U.S. and the
      U.S.S.R. launching meteorological satellites on a coordinated basis with
      the data being exchanged via a special telegraphic link between Moscow
      and Washington. In addition, preliminary agreement was reached for
      extension of scientific cooperation in space matters to cover biology and
      medicine. Although details of this agreement were not available, it was
      reported to cover a wide exchange of information on the biological and
      medical problems raised by prolonged manned space flights. The ne-
      gotiations were conducted by Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator
      of NASA, and A. A. Blagonravov, a member of the Soviet Academy of
      Sciences; both agreements were subject to the formal approval of their
      governments. (Wash. Post, 6/6/64; NYT, 6/6/64; UPI, Wash. Daily
      News, 6/6/64)
  NASA and the Swedish Space Committee agreed to extend for another year
      their cooperative sounding rocket studies of the upper atmosphere and
      noctilucent clouds. Under the new agreement, the U.S. would provide
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERO

                                                              n a loan basis.

     port operations would be carried out by Swedish personnel. The joint
     studies,began in 1961. (NASA Release 64-131)
June 5: USAF Secretary Eugene M. Zukert said that the Titan I11 rocket
     would make its maiden flight during the coming summer. Eventually,
     Titan I11 would launch the USAF’S Manned Orbital Laboratory, probably
     sometime in 1967 or 1968. In addition, Zuckert announced that three
     firms, Douglas Aircraft Co., General Electric Co., and Martin Co., had
     been authorized to go ahead with work on orbital space-station studies.
      (UPI, LouisvilleCourier-Journal, 6/6/64)
  Prof. A. A. Blagonravov, chief delegate of the U.S.S.R. to the U.N. Com-
     mittee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, told a news conference in
     Geneva that the Soviet Union had no set plan for landing a man on the
     moon “within the present decade.” (AP, Houston Post, 6/6/64)
  USAF launched an unidentified satellite aboard a Thor-Agena D booster
     from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 6/15/64,10)
* Britain successfully launched a Blue Streak rocket from the Woomera
     Range in Australia. The rocket reached an altitude of 110 mi. and a
     top speed of 6,400 mph. Because the engines cut off seven seconds
     earlier than had been planned, the rocket fell 382 mi. short of impact
     area. The rocket traveled 620 mi. northwest of Woomera and disinte-
     grated over Western Australia. (NYT, 6/6/64)
0 Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium in Philadelphia, displayed

     in Tel Aviv a clock designed for lunar explorers. The clock, designed
     by Dr. Levitt, accounted for the fact that a lunar day and night would be
     more than 28 times as long as the earth’s 24-hour cycle. His clock
     showed Greenwich time on earth as well as local time for any point on
     the moon. (NYT, 6/7/64,78)
0 Astronomers at Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., failed in an attempt

     to sight and photograph red spots in the vicinity of the Aristarchus
     region of the moon. Conditions were about the same as on Oct. 29 and
     Nov. 27 when Lowell observers had sighted the red spots. (AP, Balt.
     Sun,6/6/64)
  A spokesman for Stanley Gibbons Ltd. of London, one of the world’s lead-
     ing stamp dealers, cast doubt on recent reports that the U.S.S.R. had
     issued a commemorative stamp honoring three cosmonauts lost in orbit.
     He stated, “We get all new issue stamps from the Soviet Union. We
     know nothing about this one.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 6/6/64)
June 6: U.S.S.R. launched earth satellite COSMOS XXXI. The orbit had the
     following initial parameters: period of rotation, 91.6 min.; apogee, 508
     km. (309 mi.) ; perigee, 228 km. (141.67 mi.) ; inclination to equator,
     49O. (Izvestin,6/7/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
  Amateur astronomers in Riverdale, the Bronx, saw a red spot on the moon
     between the craters Aristarchus and Herodotus at 4:20 a.m. It vanished
     at 5:lO a.m. before the moon had come into view of the western observa-
     tqries which had observed spots near Aristarchus last Oct. and Nov.
      (NYT,6/18/64)
0 It was reported that US. and Soviet officials would meet in Geneva on

     June 15 and 16 to discuss a possible Russian role in a global space com-
     munications system. The US. was already in the process of working
206             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 41

     out an agreement with the Europeans, and it was believed that the system
     would be greatly strengthened by Russian participation. The Geneva
     meetings, which would involve the US., European nations, and the
     USSR., would include a general discussion of recent developments in
     space communications. It was also reported that before the Geneva
     meeting a negotiation session in London between the US. and European
     nations would work on a preliminary agreement on an interim organiza-
     tion for a space communications system. (Farnsworth, NYT, 6/7/64,6)
June 6: Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned
     Space Flight, AFSC, said that USAF would sharply increase its participation
     in NASA’s   manned space flight program; USAF astronauts might be
     assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo
     flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control
     Center (IMCC) MSC. [George Low, MSC Deputy Diricetor, denied this
                     at
     claim three days later (see June 9) .]
        General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbit-
     ing Laboratory (MOL)would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at
     Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards AFB; (2) USAF would begin
     discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of De-
     fense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of MOL; (3)
     17 Titan 111-C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) pay-
     loads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA
     experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/M; M&R,
     6/15/64, 12)
0 Speaking at commencement exercises at New Mexico State University,

     University Park, N. Mex., Dr. George Mueller, NASA Associate Admin-
     istrator for Manned Space Flight, noted that the.NAsA program €or
     manned space flight has recorded 16 successes in 16 attempts. He
     explained this record: “A rather simple formula has contributed to the
     success to date. We fly a spacecraft, manned or unmanned, only after a
     comprehensive set of ground and flight tests has been completed and
     every deviation from expected performance has been explained. We are
     continuing to follow that policy.” (Text)
0 Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of MSC Apollo Spacecraft Office, said that US.

     would land men on the moon before Dec. 31, 1969. He stated that in
     his jndgment “we have a much better than even chance” of landing the
     first two astronauts on the lunar surface ahead of the 1970 deadline
     set by the late President Kennedy. (UPI, Wash. D d y News, 6/6/64)
0 Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle (USAFR)     was awarded the Pennsylvania Mili-
     tary College Engineering Centennial Medal. In his acceptance speech,
     General Doolittle spoke on USAF Project Forecast report, which con-
     sidered “national policy, technological opportunities, and capability” in
     its IO-year predictions. Based on the technological opportunities eval-
     ulated (including materials, propulsion, aerodynamic development,
     special weapons, and guidance), there would be eight important
     possible technical advances : Advanced Manned Precision Strike
                        ,
     System (AMPSS) very accurate ICBM’s,          very precise air-to-ground
     missiles, a Vtol fighter, a Vtol light transport, a large cargo aircraft
     (cx-x), Mobile Air Defense, and a hypersonic mach 6 reconnaissance
                                              “. .  . our national security and
     aircraft. General Doolittle concluded:
     our national welfare, in future, will depend very largely on military
     technology and, of wwm, as dways, on the spirit and will of out citizens.
                                                 *
                                                                           207
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

                               me and remain superior science and technology.
                               and better scientists and engineers. This is one
      of the very important challenges to Pennsylvania Military College and
                                                                 . .”
      to all of the other fine educational institutions of our land. .     (Text,
      CR, 8/31/64, 2040446)
June 6-7: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center near Houston held its first public
      open house, with more than 52,000 visitors attending. Visitors walked
      among the 27 buildings and viewed models of the Gemini and Apollo
      spacecraft set up inside the auditorium, as well as viewing a film on NASA.
       (MSC Roundup, 6/%/64,2)
June 7 : Speaking at the commencement of the Univ. of Vermont iri Burling
      ton, James E. Webb, Administrator of NASA, said that “historians and
      psychologists see a universal interest and participation in space efforts
      as providing mankind with a moral and creative substitute for war.”
      He remarked that the US. was ahead of the U.S.S.R. in weight-lifting
      power in space. He stated that the US. was building a national capacity
      for operating in the new environment of space that would serve the
      national purpose for many years to come. (Text; NYT, 6/8/64, 22)
e Parade magazine’s Intelligence Report said the US. had 50 Samos
      surveillance satellites in orbit photographing Soviet military installa-
      tions. Photographs were reported to be parachuted to earth between
      Calif. and Hawaii. Russians were said to have similar satellites spying
      on US. ( P a r a d e , Wash. Post, 6/7/64)
e’ It was reported that the Army was seeHpg ways to increase the forward
      speed of helicopters. To speed its rotor-borne craft, and thus lessen
      their chances of being shot down by enemy air or ground forces, the
      Army was reported to be interested in adding short conventional wings
      and small jet engines. The resultant craft, called a compound heli-
      copter, was considered capable of flying above 200 mph. Research
      contracts were awarded to the Lockheed-Georgia Co. and the Kaman
      Aircraft Corp. for development of helicopter modifications. i(NYT,
      6/8/64, 58)
* The USAF was reported pushing the development of a new material which
      offered promise of revolutionizing the manufacture of planes, missiles,
      and many other products. The material was a combination of boron
      fibers and epoxy resins to bind the fibers together, reported to be far
      stronger and stiffer per unit weight than any existing structural mate-
      rial. According to Gen. Bernard Schriever, Commander, AFSC, if the
      development program were adequately funded, the technology could
      be perfected in five to seven years. (Witkin, NYT, 6/7/64, 63)
   Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
       Flight, answaed GOP critics, complaining of a “crash program” to
      reach the moon, with a “Not so. The eight years devoted to the Apollo
      Project is a longer period than the duration of any previous United
      States research end development program.” He continued: “Apollo’s
      time scale for development is four years longer than the time scale for
      the Mercury spacecraft, two years longer than the B-58 bomber and
      one year longer than the X-15.” (Houston Post, 6/7/64)
e Dr. S. Burman Long, Worcester, Mass., minister, delivered address on
      religion in the space age at the 73rd convention of the General Federa-
      tion o Women’s Clubs in Atlantic City, N.J.:
             f
208              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

            ..
           . My religion in the space age confirms my faith in a spiritual
       b6


     heaven as real as my humble earthly home. The sooner that mankind
     accepts an orderly and unlimited universe, the earlier we will have faith
     in truth. Our cosmology has changed because our knowledge has
     changed. It has changed before. Once a new continent was dis-
     covered. We no longer limit the universe to hell below, heaven above,
     and some of both between. The God of creation is in control now as
                            ..   .” (Text, CR 7/24/64, A3801-02)
     He always has been.
Early June: Air Force Space Systems Div. announced 10-ft. delta wing glider
     able to travel almost around the world as goal of improved Asset pro-
     gram. Glider wo,uld be ready for launch in two years. This improved
     Asset program was said to be more “realistic” prospect for manned re-
     entry vehicle than canceled Dyna-Soar project. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
June 8: NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L, Dryden announced to newsmen
      the bilateral agreement negotiated between US. and U.S.S.R. in June
      1962 (the “Dryden-Blagonravov Agreement”), by which the two coun-
      tries would cooperate in space programs for communications, meteorol-
      ogy, and geophysics, was discussed by him and Academician Blagon-
      ravov at Geneva. Cooperation in Soviet-American communications for
      global meteorology was to be implemented by the two countries’ sharing
      costs equally, each supporting the program in alternate months; a
      bilaterally financed communications link between Moscow and Wash-
      ington was to be solely for the purpose of exchanging cloud pictures.
      The 1962 agreement grew out of correspondence ,between President
      Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev in Feb. and March 1962. Dryden
      and Blagonravov also discussed American-Soviet cooperation in space
      biology. Agreement was reached, subject to review before final ap-
      proval, by which American and Soviet space biologists would prepare
      bilingual reports on similar subjects.
          Soviets had proposed cooperation in biology and medicine, both of
      which had great bearing on manned space flight when exploration
      extended beyond the moon. (Wash. Post, 6/9/64; NASA Tran-
      script, 6/8/a[ 21 “Background Information,” “News Conference.”)
 * NASA announced industry design competition for Automated Biological
      Laboratory (ABL) for detecting possible life on Mars. An ABL would
      be landed by Voyager spacecraft to be flown in 1970’s. Proposals re-
       sulting from preliminary studies would lead to contract for a one-year
      effort to review scientific objectives, define an experimental payload
       suitable for landing and operation on Mars, and establish spacecraft
       and launch vehicle requirements. ABL would incorporate several life-
      detection devices still in developmental stages and would be equipped
      to analyze and describe any organisms discovsred by such devices.
       (NASA Release 64-134)
 * It was reported that technicians had experienced some difficulty returning
       to their spacecraft couches during test designed to see how well astro-
       nauts would be zble to perform certain functions in weightless space
       flight. The tests were performed inside a mockup of a Gemini capsule
       meunted in a KC-135 flown to produce short periods of weightlessness.
       The difficulty was caused by pressure suits swollen by pressurization and
       couches designed to fit the astronaut only when his suit was not pres-
       surized. Dr. M. Debrovner of MSC said that the difficulty would soon
       be overcome. (Houston Post, 6/9/64)
                                                               in a miniature



  Federal investigators and an attorney from the NLRB were dispatched to
e
    Cape Kennedy to seek a solution to labor troubles which halted work
    on America’s programs for landing on the moon and for orbiting a
    manned space laboratory. An estimated 80% of workers on the Verti-
    cal Assembly Building for Project Apollo and the launch complex for
    the USAF’S Titan 111 refused t         icket lines thrown up by the Broth-
    erhood of Maintenance of Wa             yees in protest to use of a Govern-
    tment-owned railroad spur which had been operated since Jan. 23, 1963,
    by nonunion personnel. Cost of the projects affected by the work halt
    was estimated at $215 million. (Chic. Trib., 6/9/64; Balt. SUR,6/9/64)
  ComSatCorp said it would award three additional study contracts for design
    of communications satellites systems. AT&T and RCA would design a
    system of 18 satellites to be placed in random orbits. TRW Space Tech-
    nology Laboratories would engineer a system of 12 satellites in con-
    trolled orbits. Hughes Aircraft would plan an improved synchronous-
    orbit communications satellite. Based on these preliminary studies, a
    choice was to be made for use in the initial comsat system to begin
    operation in 1966-67. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 6/9/64;
    Balt. Sun,6/9/64; NYT, 6/9/@, 25)
0 A daughter was born to Soviet Cosmonauts Valentina Nikolayeva-Teresh-

    kova and Andrian Nikolayev. She was first child t o be born of parents
    who had flown in space, and no ill effects were noted. (Houston Chron.,
  . 6/10/64; Balt. Sun,6/11/a)
  Nuclear submarine Daniel Webster completed a perfect series of tests by
    firing two Polaris A-3 missiles from beneath the surface o the Atlantic.
                                                                 f
     (Wash. Post, 6/9/64+)
June 9: George M . Low, NASA MSC deputy director, said all pilots in
    Projects Gemini and Apollo would be astronauts trained by NASA for
    its own manned space projects. Brig. Gen. Bleymaier (USAF) , in inter-
    views at Houston, had previously said he thought pilots selected by USAF,
    whose M O L project he heads, would participate in Apollo and Gemini
    in order to acquire experience for the MOL project. Without NASA
    training for its astronauts, USAF would have to orbit its men without
    previous space flight experience or launch its own Gemini training flights.
     (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/10/@; Houston Chron.,6/10/64)
  Managing underwriters of ComSatCorp’s 10-million-share public offering
     at $20 a share announced the offering was oversubscribed and the books
    closed. Thus ComSatCorp had enough money to launch the fleet of
     satellites that was expected to be handling global communications by
     1967. ( WSI, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/12/64, 47)
* A new British jet, the Hawker-Siddeley DH-125, was expected to be the
     first of five new models of aircraft to get government approval for use
     as a private passenger carrier. The new small jets were being built
    for the business executive market. The British plane was to cost $750,000
    and fly about 500 mph. (NYT, 6/9/64)
210             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

June 9: Soviet Ministry of Defense said Pentagon was spying on Russian
    military and space installations in Moscow, via radio and radar monitor-
    ing stations on borders of U.S.S.R. and other Socialist nations and satel-
    lites. Allegation called for increased Soviet vigilance against such
    LL
       espionage.” American embassy in Moscow called statement “non-
    sense.” (NYT, 6/11/64,10)
  AFSC reported completion of a portable hydrogen-fire detector, for use
    with the volume of hydrogen anticipated with future space boosters.
    The unit detected ultraviolet radiation emanating from invisible hydro-
    gen flame. (AFSC Release 43-89-67)
June 10: NASA launched an Aerobee rocket from White Sands Missile Range,
    N. Mex., to a height of 95 mi. The payload, an inflatable paragliaer
    equipped with mylar-sandwich-typemeteoroid penetration sensors, was
    flown in a meteoroid shower to investigate meteoroid hazards in space.
    Experiment performed as planned, vehicle worked successfully, and
    payload was recovered. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10; NASA Release 66141,
    641135)
  Nike-Apache launched from Wallops Islarid, Va., to 90.6-mi. altitude, in
    flight to detect quiet-day ionospheric electric currents using for first
    time a very small rubidium vapor magnetometer designed for use
    in small rockets. Experiment was project of NASA Goddard Space
     Flight Center. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Tass reported Soviet Union had launched COSMOS XXXII, latest satellite in
     series of launches initiated in March 1962. Initial orbit: 333-km
     apogee (206.9 mi.), 209-km. perigee (130.5 mi.), 89.78-min. period,
     and 51.28O inclination to the equator. COSMOS XXXII re-entered earth’s
     atmosphere June 18. (Pravda, 6/11/64, in MSFC SIN, 7/64; GSFC
     SSR, 6/30/64)
  Two-stage French Rubis rocket reached altitude of 1,800 km. (1,118.49
     mi.) in launch from Hammaguir base. First stage of Rubis was Agate
     rocket and second stage was third stage of France’s satellite launcher
     Diamant. (M&R, 6/29/64,12)
  A Japanese astronomer of the Kurashika Astronomical Observatory ob-
     served a new comet. It had been earlier sighted by an observer at
     Tokyo Astronomical Observatory on June 7, as well as by an Australian.
     On June 9, Soviet astronomer Anatoli Bakharev discovered what was
     described as a 9th-magnitude comet moving rapidly with respect to the
     stars. (AP, NYT, 6/15/64; Pravda, 6/13/64, 6, ATSS-T Trans.)
  American Institute for Biological Sciences expressed concern that NASA
     was not giving sufficiently high priority to the investigation of extra-
     terrestrial life. The Institute, a federation of biologists, said NASA
     should begin planning a project for detection of possible life on Mars
     when the planet comes into favorable position in 1969. Search for
     extraterrestrial life also was advocated by NAS Space Science Board
     nearly two years ago. NASA originally had hoped to perform the Mars
     biology mission in 1964, but technical, scientific, and political obstacles
     delayed the attempt. (Finney, NYT, 6/11/64,2; Wash. Post, 6/11/64)
  NASA announced replacement of Dr. Richard B. Morrison by Vincent L.
     Johnson as Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs Div.
     of Office of Space Science and Applications, effective June 14. Dr.
     Morrison was to return to Univ. of Michigan where he had been on leave
     of absence as Prof. of Astronautical Engineering since 1962. (NASA
     Release 64-136)
                                                                         211
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

June 10: Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (DAI.) called attention to CBS broad-
    cast by correspondent Stuart Novins in which he discussed Soviet ef-
    forts to provide an efficient system for the retrieval of data from scien-
    tific research. In the Soviet Union’s Institute of Scientific and Tech-
    nical Information, thousands of specialists read the Scientific literature
    and abstract the contents of scientific publications from around the
    world. Last year they abstracted the contents of 770,000 reports, and
    it was decided to publish an annual summary of world-wide scientific
    results, an achievement probably of the widest scope yet attained in
    retrieval of scientific information. (CRY  6/10/M, A3174)
  Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.411.) called attention to an article in the
    Chicago Sun-Times on the Midwest’s dissatisfaction with the distribu-
    tion of Federal R ~ projects. President’s science adviser Dr. Donald
                             D
    F. Hornig said two Congressional committees were investigating wheth-
    er research contract funds had been concentrated in too few areas of
    the country to the detriment of other regions. Dr. Hornig also said
    that this investigation showed that science can no longer ignore the
    political process. (CRY    6/10/64, A3138)
* House and Senate received from NASA Administrator reports on a grant
    to Cornell Univ. of $1,350,000 for construction of facilities for research.
    Reports were referred to the twa Congressional space committees.
     (NASA LAR, III/116)
* In answer to Air Transport Assoc. president Stuart 6. Tipton’s disapproval
     of FAA’s policy of publicizing its test plane crashes, FAA Administrator
     N. E. Halaby said FAA would continue informing the public on its
     safety research. Tipton had said the publicity “scared the daylights
    out of people.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/64)
* American scientists began a two-year experiment at the South Polar ice
     cap in which they would study comic rays of solar and galactic origin.
     Located at the South Pole so that the same background of stars would
     be present at all times, experiment was to investigate any regularities
     in solar outbursts of cosmic rays, as well as reason for cosmic rays
     from sun and galaxy. Cosmic rays could be lethal to astronauts.
      (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/10/64)
* US. Army Missile Command awarded contract to Perkin-Elmer CO.
     for Optical Re-entry Instrumentation System, Project Glow, which
     would gather “signature” data from vehicles re-entering cprth’s atmos-
     phere, in various wavelengths. Program to use system was being spon-
     sored by ARPA, as part of Project Defender, and by Army Materiel
     Command’s Nike-Zeus Project Office. (Marshall Star, 6/10/64, 7 )
* First of improved H-1 engines, whose thrust had been upped from 188,OOO
     lbs. to 200,000 lbs., were delivered recently by North American Avia-
     tion’s Rocketdyne Division to NASA Michoud Operations. Cluster of
     eight H-1 engines was to improve thrust of Saturn booster, augmenting
     thrust of 1.5 million Ibs. for Saturn I to 1.6 million Ibs. for Saturn IB.
      (Marshall Star, 6/10/M, 1)
* Gen. B. A. Schriever (USAF), Commander AFSC, at a 10th anniversary
     commemoration of USAF ballistic missile and space programs, said
     Communist drives toward world domination presented challenge to
     US. to maintain technological superiority as war deterrent. At same
     time we should develop military flexibility to deal with conflict levels
     below all-out war. In future such flexibility would be provided by
212                                                      19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    manned aircraft of novel design, to be used for support as well as
     actual fighting.
        Next step in space would be to investigate military strategy of
    manned space flight. This was a major purpose of USAF’S recently
     acquired mission of developing Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL).
        Another possibility to investigate would be recovering used boosters
    to save new construction costs. “This would be a very important
     building block for future operations in space.” (AFSC Release 46-R-
     72)
June 10: Soviet aviatrix Marina Popovich, wife of Cosmonaut Pave1 POPO-
     vich, flew a jet trainer at speeds of 600 km/hr (373 mph) , 5 km. (3.1
     mi.) above the ground. This was said to be an excellent result for
     such a light aircraft as the 6 2 9 . (Zzvestia, 6/12/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
June 11: NASA announced plans to let contracts for improving thrust of
     Delta launch vehicles. Boosted energy was to have been achieved
    by enlarging 2nd-stage fuel tanks. Some Deltas to be modified would
     use three solid-propellant motors strapped to the Thor main stage, being
    called Thrust Augmented Deltas (TAD). With larger tanks, TADS
     could place 1,200 Ibs. into earth orbit or 225 lbs. into escape velocity,
     as compared to 100 lbs. for standard Delta. (NASA Release 64-133)
* Goodyear Aerospace Corp. developed solar collector for USAF. The
     4-story-high mirror, to be used in tests of electricity sources for
    manned space station, was capable of setting fire to buildings or blinding
     people with a single flash of sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/64)
0 1.5 million-lb.-thrust S-1-8   Saturn booster was successfully fired in a full-
     duration static test at MSFC. Built by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud
     Operations plant near New Orleans, the booster was the first to be pro-
     duced by private industry. (AP, 6/12/64)
0 Cook Electric Co., Chicago, unveiled a $2 million observatory to be included

     in NASA’s Oao. Cook built the equipment for NASA under contract
                first
     to Univ. of Wisconsin, where astronomers were planning observations
     in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum. (Houston Post, 6/12/64)
* In an address to Plans for Progress Seminar, NASA Administrator James E.
     Webb said American success in space technology represented several
     accomplishments and potentialities: we can make benefits available to
     other nations; space achievements are vital in maintaining technological
     balance of world power; and it gives opportunity for utilizing all our
     human resources in carrying out the broad-gauge programs necessary
     for making significant inputs into space knowledge, regardless of race,
     creed, or color. (Text)
0 A Federal court ban on picketing of railroad workers at Cape Kennedy that

     was issued June 10 went into effect, and construction of the Saturn and
     Titan I11 launch facilities resumed. 3,824 members of building trades
     union effected the work stoppage. The District Judge who handed down
     the temporary injunction also scheduled a hearing with NLRB. (AP,
     6/11/64?; UPI, Houston Chron., 6/11/64)
  NASA MSC officials announced first Gemini spacecraft for a manned space-
     flight (GT-3) had passed design and engineering inspections; project
     manager Charles W. Mathews declared it would perform its mission in
     satisfactory fashion. (Houston Chron., 6/11/64; MSC Roundup,
    6/24/64,8)
                                                                        213
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

June 11 :House Appropriations Committee cut off developmental funds for the
     AX’S Pluto low-flying, nuclear-powered missile, proposing the missile
     be mothballed until DOD decided whether it needed the weapon. Having
     gone through nearly 10 years of development costing $196 million,
     Pluto was nearing the flight stage. The committee provided $1million
     to mothball it. AEC had requested $8 million additional funds to get
     the missile to operating stage. (Finney, NYT, 6/12/64, 1,23)
  NASA announced appointment of two directors in Advanced Manned
     Missions Program, Office of Manned Space Flight. M. J. Raffensperg
     assumed duties last week as Director of Manned Earth Orbital Missiox
     Studies. F. P. Dixon would become Director of Manned Planetary
     Mission Studies on June 15. (NASA Release 6 6 1 3 7 )
June 12: It was reported that the Atlas ICBM program had cost $5.4 billion
     for 129 Atlases. In the closing year of his administration President
     Eisenhower had objected to the $35 million cost of each Atlas on the
     launching pad. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/12/64)
  Soviet Defense Ministry newspaper reported a trainee cosmonaut had
     narrow escape recently when he jumped with defective parachute.
      (AP, 6/12/64)
  NASA intended to award contracts for studying feasibility of improving the
     weight-lifting capacity of the Saturn V by more than one third in case
     the needs of the moon program dictated such an increase. Preliminary
     studies were to cost about $2 million. Proposals were being sought by
     MSFC. With its 7.5-million-lb.-thrustbooster, Saturn V would be able to
     launch either 120 tons into earth orbit or 45 tons to the moon. (AP,
     6/12/64; NASA Release 6 6 1 4 0 )
June 13: USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster combination with unidenti-
     fied satellite payload into a polar orbit. (AP, Chic. Trib., 6/14/64;
     UPI, rash. Post, 6/14/64)
  Space editor James J. Haggerty, Jr., compared Saturn IB and Titan 111-C
                         ..
     launch vehicles: “.     In any head-to-head clash between the two pro-
     grams, Saturn IB must be considered the favorite. Titan 111-C’s quick
     reaction capability may be handy some day, but not in the next few
     years, since there are no military manned spacecraft to do the reacting.
     Saturn IB starts out with a 25% payload advantage and it has consider-
     ably more ‘stretchability.’ For instance, adding the same 120-inch solid
     motors in the Titan 111-C design to the Saturn IB’s lower stage would
     permit boosting 65,000 pounds into a 100-mile earth orbit. Other
      improvements being considered could give IB a 120,000-pound earth
      orbit capability.
         “Thus, Saturn IB poses a threat to continued development of the only
      heavy payload military launch vehicle. ( A - W A F J&R, 6/13/64, 15)
  It was reported that former astronaut John Glenn had recovered sufficiently
      from his inner ear ailment to work in his yard and walk around the
      neighborhood. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/13/64)
  Resolution of the policy committee of Cornell-Guggenheim Aviation Safety
      Center, headed by former FAA Administrator Elwood R. Quesada, was
      inserted in Congressional Record:
         “( 1) That the Government agencies and the broad aviation industry
      recognize and avoid the danger and economic waste that could result,
      if the exacting technological task of developing a sound supersonic
      transport were permitted EO become a race to be first or a psychology of
      haste.
214            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

       “(2) That the pressures of prestige and competition not be permitted
    to overcome the more worthy considerations of public safety and eco-
    nomic logic.
       “(3) That all design and economic factors be deliberately tested and
    evaluated to assure maximum effectiveness of the solutions selected to
    insure that the end product be first in point of excellence rather than
    first in point of time.” (CR,  6/13/64,13226)
June 13: Johnson Administration was expected to postpone until next year a
    decision as to whether the U.S. should establish antimissile defenses
    around the country in a $15 billion program, as advocated by Gen.
    Maxwell D. Taylor (USA). Such a defense system would work in con-
    junction with civil defense facilities. Question seemed to be whether
    proposed system7s effectiveness wodd warrant the cost. (NYT,
    6/14/64,72)
June 14: Space Park at New York World’s Fair, sponsored by NASA and DOD,
    had not turned out to be a prominent drawer of crowds, although those
    who visited found it one of the most instructive and rewarding exhibits
    at the Fair. (NYT, 6/14/64,79)
  Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D.-Wis.) said General Accounting Office had, in spot
Q




    audits of military financial records, discovered almost $500 million of
    waste. Included in the alleged waste was Navy’s ordering of 24 air-
    craft to be built before satisfactory model had been developed and con-
    tract monies paid by military to builders of planes and missiles who,
    doing no work themselves, made profits on work done by subcontractors.
     (Houston Post, 6/15/64)
* Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research Center, was awarded
    honorary Doctor of Applied Science degree by Fenn College, Cleveland,
    0. (Lewis News, 6/19/a, 2)
June 15: FRC test-flew modified X-15 No. 2 with Maj. Robert Rushworth
     (USAF) as pilot, the aircraft remaining attached to B-52 mother craft
    for airborne checkout of the aircraft systems. Flight was first for this
    X-15 since Nov. 1962 landing accident. Modifications, completed by
    North American Aviation, included four astronomical cameras mounted
     on fuselage, designed to take stellar photographs above ozone layer of
    earth’s atmosphere, and external propellant tanks which would enable
     engine to increase top speed by at least 1,000 mph, to a maximum speed
    over 5,000 mph. (FRC Release 15-64; NASA Release 64-138)
* NASA’s  leading 12 contractors issued $1,027,000,000 in subcontracts during
     1962 and 1963 to 2,697 firms in 46 states, Aviation Week reported.
     (Av. P . 6/15/64,71)
             k,
  FAA fire tests began in cooperation’with USAF at FAA’s   National Aviation
Q




    Facilities Experimental Center to determine whether rotor downwash
    from helicopters can disperse flames and cool the fuselage of a crashed
    and burning plane. Five surplus USAF Stratocruisers were burned in
    the tests. (FAA Release G 6 2 )
0 NASA granted nine companies 16 waivers of U.S.        commercial rights to
    inventions that resulted from work performed on NASA contracts, bringing
    to 90 the number of patent waivers granted by NASA. (NASA Release
    64-141 )
  NASA Summer Faculty Fellowships, a unique 10-wk.summer program, began
Q




    at Lewis Research Center. The 12 Fellows, all young professors and
    instructors in engineering and the physical sciences, would work on
                                                                        215
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

                                      and would attend a special graduate
                                                at Case Institute of Tech-
June 15: William G. Gisel, President of Bell Aerosystems Co,, said before
    N.Y. Society of Newspaper Editors, Niagara Falls: “I cannot contemplate
                                      .
    the space exploration project . . without a tremendous surge of pride
    in the human race. We are going to the stars, gentlemen. The human
    race will travel to the planets and, in time, to other solar systems and
    in doing so will fan the spark of greatness which in spite of ourselves
    has carried us from the cave to the threshhold of space. Man can go
    to the moon in this decade. The important question is, will it be an
    American?” (NASA R&SC Div.)
June 15-16: U.S. began exploratory talks in Geneva with U.S.S.R. on the
    use of artificial satellites in a global communications system. This was
    first talk between American and Soviet representatives to discuss possible
    Russian participation. Informed sources in Geneva said the Soviets
    were friendly but showed no current interest in a global satellite corn-
    munications scheme. In joint communique at end of two days of ex-
    ploratory talks, Soviet and American officials said only that “both sides
    recognize the usefulness of the exchange of opinions.” No future
                                                       Simons, Wash. Post,
    meeting was scheduled. (NYT, 6]16/64;
    6/17/64; M&R, 6/22/64, 10; NYT, 6/18/64)
June 16: NASA ordered a third Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) and
    took an option on two more, from Grumman Aircraft Engineering
    Corp., prime contractor for the current Oao program. If only one satel-
    $litewere purchased the contract would be more than $20 million, and
    if all three were purchased the contract would total more than $50 mil-
    lion. (NASA Release 64-142)
* House Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of House Committee on Science
     and Astronautics issued a report on its hearings on the repeated failures
     in the Ranger spacecraft program. The committee concluded that NASA
     provided too little direction on Ranger, while JPL was too resistant to
     following NASA orders when they were issued.
        To strengthen management over JPL, the committee recommended :
      (1 ) JPL should be restricted to doing the work of a center rather than
    that of an industrial contractor; (2) a general manager with industrial
     experience should be appointed as deputy to JPL director to be in charge
     of complex projects such as Ranger; (3) NASA should streamline its
     relationship to JPL to achieve JPL responsiveness to NASA direction.
     (Text; Finney, NYT, 6/17/64; Wush. Post, 6/17/a)
* Scientist R. M. Lemmon told lunar exploration symposium at MSC that he
     would recommend officially that astronauts returning from trips to the
     moon be quarantined for at least three weeks “for the protection of
     everybody.” He said that astronauts might pick up disease-causing
     organisms during their stay on the moon “which may be totally dif-
     ferent from anything we have here on earth.” (Wash. Post, 6/17/64)
* Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, dedicated J4      propulsion
     engine test cell at Arnold Engineering Development Center. He said:
         “In recent years, there has been much talk about a ‘space race’.
     There is such a race and we should not forget it for a minute. How-
     ever, we must not let the pace of our national space program be deter-
     mined just by the actions of others. Actually, the real opponent in the
216            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 41

    space race is time.” We must continue ‘
    and “recognize the importance to the
    quate technical facilities.”
       In answer to reporters’ questions following dedication, Dr. Welsh
    said the U.S.S.R. still led the US. in the space race and was speeding
    up its program. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/17/@)
June 16: Western Materials Co. was awarded a $1,178,517 contract by the
    Army Corps of Engineers for construction of roads at NASA’s    Mississippi
    Test Facility. (DOD Release 64-64)
* FAA announced plans to celebrate the formal beginning of postwar inter-
    national cooperation in civil aviation twenty years ago. It was in
    November 1944 that the U.S. convened the International Civil Avia-
    tion Conference in Chicago, resulting in the Convention of International
    Civil Aviation signed by the 52 attending nations. (FAA Release 64-60)
June 17: Space and Information Div. of North American Aviation, Inc.,
    announced that it would lay off workers at a rate that would total 2,500
    firings by July 1, 19M, as a result of “continuing studies of changes in
    the moon program.” But a NASA spokesman said the reduction was
    caused by termination of the tooling-up phase and start of the produc-
    tion phase in Project Apollo. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/18/64)
0 FAA announced award of $1,659,460 contract to Raytheon Co. to design,

    develop, and manufacture data-filter equipment to give the air trafEc
    controller a means of selecting out desired information for dispIay on
    his radarscope. Delivery of the equipment would be completed in
    March 1965. (FAARelease 69-59)
  NASA announced it had selected Collins Radio co. for procurement of a
    major portion of the S-band tracking, data acquisition, and communi-
    cations system to be used in Project Apollo. Nine systems with 30-ft.-
    diameter parabolic antennas were to be provided, at a cost of approxi-
    mately $20 million. (NASA Release 68-146)
0 NASA purchased hingeless rotor helicopter, the XH-51N Research Vehicle,

    from Lockheed Aircraft Gorp. for use in flight research at LaRc. The
    cost would be $556,158. It would be used as a flying laboratory to
    assess the loads and flying qualities problems that are likely to be en-
    countered by operational aircraft of the hingeless rotor type. (NASA
    Release 6P-147; LaRc Release)
* XC-142A V/Stol aircraft, built by Ling-Temco-Vought for the Army,
    USN, and USAF, was unveiled in Dallas. The aircraft’s four turboprop
    engines act like helicopter rotors for takeoff and landing, when the air-
    craft’s wings are tilted. Once aloft, the aircraft flies with wings and
    propellers in conventional position and attains top speed of over 400mph.
     (U.S. News, 6/29/64.)
  NASA announced Purdue Univ. had been awarded grant of $84+0,000
    to finance expansion of Purdue’s Jet Propulsion Center. The con-
    struction would enable Purdue to conduct studies of ultra high pressure
    combustion in rocket thrust chambers. (NASA Release 64-145)
  Scientists from the U.S. and Norway sent three gigantic balloons across
    the North Atlantic above the Arctic Circle to Alaska during the summer
    to measure cosmic radiation and other phenomena at an altitude of
    115,OOOft. (AP, NYT, 6/19/64,16)
June 18: USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster from WTR with unidentified
    satellite payload. It was later disclosed that two satellites were orbited
    with one launch vehicle. (HHN-48)          9
                                                                          217
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

Jzme 18: Lewis Research Center completed wind tunnel tests to study the aero-
    dynamic forces which would occur on the launch vehicle when Mariner
    spacecraft was launched toward Mars. (LRC Release 64S5)
  Edward 2. Gray, Director, Advanced Manned Missions Program, Office
    of Manned Space Flight, addressed the National Space Club:
        “From [the objectives of the Space Act of 19581, the objectives of the
                                               .
    Manned Space Flight Program are .             derived. They are:
                                                                           .
        “1. The conduct of manned scientific space flight missions . . as
    an integral part of a total program to expand our knowledge of the
     universe.
        “2. The development of launch vehicles, spacecraft, lunar and plan-
                                  .
     etary surface equipment . . and a broad foundation of industrial
     support, all of which are required to support manned space flight.
        “3. The utilization of the space environment to provide direct bene-
     fitstotheearth. , . .
        “4. The application of manned space flight activities to promote the
     national security and to stimulate the national economy, scientific
     achievement, technological growth, and educational capability.” (Text)
e USAF fired Atlas-D 5,000 miles downrange from Vandenberg AFB as part
     of an advanced re-entry systems rogram, and indicated shot was suc-
     cessful. (UPI, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/plS/64)
  NASA granted Dr. George Wharton, Ohio State Univ. scientist, nearly
     $70,000 for a three-year research program to determine the least amount
     of water necessary to sustain earth life. (Wash. Daily News,6/18/64)
0 Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, delivered an address on

     occasion of the Martin Co. Honors Night Banquet. He suggested that
     private industry was not doing its share in the job of educating “the
     public to the value, the significance of space progress, space leadership,
     and space benefits. It should not be possible for anyone to take seri-
     ously the public diatribes against the national space program. Anyone
     who knows anything about ‘crash programs’ or the space program would
     never talk [about ‘moondoggle’] . Crash programs have unlimited
     funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel approaches to the end objective.
     None of these aspects applies to the space program or even to the lunar
     project.”
        Dr. Welsh said that in educating the general public, the contribution of
     the space program to education, national security, technological and
     managerial innovations, international status, and the national economy
     should be emphasized. He concluded: “The national space program
     is a creative force in our society. As we marshal our progressive
     strengths, let us use them to stamp out the evils of ignorance and mis-
                          .
                          .” (Text)
     understanding.
* AFSC revealed a device known as RMU (Remote Maneuvering Unit),
     which is designed to be launched from a manned orbiting mother craft
     and carries a television camera to examine other nearby objects in space.
     The RMU would televise its image to the crew of the mother ship. Built
     by Ling-Temco-Vought, the device weighed less than 125 lbs. and meas-
     ured less than 21/-ft. long. It is propelled by a nitrogen reaction gas
     ejected from one or more of 16 nozzles on the RMU. (AFSC Release
    42-43-76)
  NASA issued list of its Technology Utilization publications, designed to
    acquaint the public with useful innovations from space research. (NASA
    Release 64-149 )
      76B-598 ih-6&--15
218                                                      1964
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

June 19: TIROS VII completed one year in orbit with all components working
    as well as the day it was launched. During the past year, the satellite
    transmitted about 70,000 pictures to earth, 90 per cent of them usable.
     and spotted 16 hurricanes and typhoons. (NASA Release 64-144)
  President Johnson was shown lunar landing research vehicle and X-15
    during visit to Edwards AFB. It was first public showing of the lunar
    craft. The President said: “No one can come here and doubt that
    America is, and will remain, first in the world in the strength, the di-
    versity, and the genius of its defense.” (N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/20/64)
* USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster from WTR with undisclosed satellite
    payload. (FIHN-48)
0 Navy dedicated 61-inch astrometric reflector telescope at Naval Observa-

    tory, Flagstaff, Ariz. Its quartz primary mirror was largest quartz
    reflecting surface manufactured to date. It would be used primarily to
    study white dwarf, red dwarf, and sub-dwarf stars. (Wash. Post,
    6/18/64)
  Labor Dept.’s new edition of government handbook on job classifications
    was to include 6,000 job titles not in existence when the last edition was
    published several years before, a reflection of the technological up-
    heaval which had occurred in science and industry. (Houston Post,
     6/19/64)
lune 20: NASA announced that AC Spark Plug Div. of General Motors Corp.
    would become the prime contractor for production of the complete
     guidance and navigation systems for Project Apllo. Formerly, in the
     design and development phase of the systems, AC shared responsibility
     with Kollsman Instrument and Raytheon Missile and Space Div. The
     latter two firms now become subcontractors to AC. In this realignment
     of contractor relationships, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Ad-
                                                    .
     ministrator for Manned Space Flight, said : ‘ b . . it has been determined
     that the most effective management of manufacturing complete systems
     can be achieved through a prime contractor.” (NASA Release 64-148)
  First full-scale development firing of uncooled M-1 engine was cut short
     after 1.6 seconds instead of the planned three seconds because of mal-
     function in the liquid oxygen system. The engine reached 800,OOO-lb.
    thrust in test programed for 1,000,000 lbs. (Av. Wk.,6/29/64, 25;
    H&R, 6/29/a, 11)
0 Third internationa1 working conference on satellite communications ended

     in London after three days of consultation between delegates of US.,
     U.K., Canada, Australia, Japan, and European nations. Next confer-
     ence would be held in Washington in July. (NYT, 6/22/64,45)
0 USN commissioned the guided missile ship Norton Sound at Baltimore, Md.

     For 12 years previously Norton Sound had served as a seagoing test
     platform far various missile systems, particularly for numerous sound-
     ing rocket and “Rockoon” launches. (DOD Release 4 6 W )
June 21 : Ranger 7 arrived at Cape Kennedy after cross-country trip by van
     from JPL. Spacecraft was to undergo series of tests with Atlas-Agena
     launch vehicle before the planned launch in late July or August. (NASA
    Release 64-152)
  France planned to launch a series of constant-levelballoon weather stations
     in the southern hemisphere and a satellite to “interrogate” them on their
     findings. Named Project Eole, it was scheduled for 1967. Up to 256
     balloons were to be sent aloft, each carrying four pounds of weather
     and communications equipment, to remain at fixed altitudes between
                                                                         219
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,           1964

                        ft for at least ten days. The French satellite would
                             twice during a single pass overhead. (Simons,

                               jects voted by U.N. Special Fund was $582,000
June
     grant to help India establish a satellite tracking station and perform
     research in space communications. (L.A. Times, Wmh.Post, 6/22/64)
June 22: U.S. Senate passed H.R. 10456, autborizing $5,246,293,250 budget
     for NASA in N 1965. Included in this amount was $52,482,750 restored
     by Senate Space Committee from the $110,189,500 reduction made by
     the House. The bill would authorize $4,354,150,000 for research and
     development ; $262,880,500 for construction of facilities; and $629,-
     262,750 for administrative operations. Bill was passed by voice vote,
     was reintroduced two days later for record vote (see June 24). (CR,
     6/22/a, 14069-78)
* NASA announced initiating Atlas flox program, involving addition of about
     30% fluorine to the rocket’s oxidizer to obtain "flax,)' which would
     significantly increase booster performance. In first phase of program
     possible hazards and operation problems of flox would be studied,
     including component compatibility tests and rocket engine static-firing,
     at estimated cost of $8 million. Second phase, not yet funded,
     would conclude with R&D launch of flox Atlas with dummy upper stage
     in 1966. NASA Lewis Research Center would negotiate contracts with
     GD/A for work on the Atlas and with Rocketdyne Div. of NAA for work
     on the engines. (NASA Release 64-150)
0 First manned Gemini space flight (GT-3)     was scheduled for late December,
     MSC public affairs o5cial Ben Gillespie told reporters at weekly press
     briefing. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/23/64?)
0 NASA Wallops Station announced selection of General Electric Co. to nego-

    tiate 21-month $1.5-million contract for real-time impact prediction and
     data processing system. The system would enable Wallops Station to
     more accurately predict impact points for launch vehicles at any time
     during flight as well as to process telemetry, radar, and general purpose
     data in larger quantities and at greater speeds. (NASA Release 64-151;
     Wallops Release 6d-50)
0 Radiation hazards to Project Apollo astronauts bound for the moon were

     described at American Medical Association conference by Dr. Hermann
    J. Schaefer, scientist at US. Naval School of Aviation Medicine. Dr.
    Schaefer predicted that in 1969 proton streams from the sun could range
                                                          He
    from deadly “downpour” to very light “showe~.~’ calculated chance
    of lethal-dosage proton stream was three in 10,OOO; chance of moderate
    but incapacitating “rain” would be one in 1,000; and chance of light
    “shower” would be one in 100. Dr. Schaefer emphasized his forecast
    was based on predictable solar behavior and that the weather of the sun,
    like that of the earth, could be unpredictable. (Justice, Houston Post,
    6/23/@)
* Communications Satellite Corp. announced it had filed application with
    FCC for authority to modify AT&T ground station at Andover, Me., so it
    could be used with ComSatCorp synchronous satellite scheduled for
    launch in March 1965. The application requested FCC approval of
    technical characteristics of the modified station. ComSatCorp also
    filed proposed agreement with AT&T for modification and operation of
    the station. (ComSatCorp Release)
220                                                     1984
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

          NASA Flight Research Center Director Paul Bikle said in Missiles and
June 22:
    Rockets that rocket engines to power M-2 and HL-LO Iifting bodies
    would accelerate the manned mockups to mach 2 for investigation of their
    handling characteristics. “The maximum altitude they reach will not
    be very high, maybe 70,OOO or 80,000 ft.” FRC planned to select the
    engine by mid-July. (M&R, 6/22/64,20-21)
  Dr. Uri Shafrir, head of cosmic dust and hydrodynamics labs of
    UCLA, conducted drop tests under NASA-NSF grants program. Tests
    proved Dr. Shafrir’s conviction that spherical objects descend in ir-
    regular corkscrew pattern of spirals rather than straight down. In
    the three drops at Pt. Arguello, aluminum spheres 16-in. in diameter and
    10 lbs. in weight were dropped from USN helicopter at 10,000-ft. altitude.
    As the spheres descended, plume of red smoke from sphere marked
    400-ft. width in the spirals. Two skydivers falling within 40 .Et. of the
    spheres photographed them during descent, and ground observers
    tracked them with radar, survey instrumentq and cameras. ( L A Times,
    6/23/64; AP, Balt. Sun,6/23/64)
  Aviation Week reported that NASA and JPL were seeking a compromise to
    House subcommittee recommendation that NASA appoint a general
    manager to act as deputy to the director of JPL. James E. Webb, NASA
    Administrator, opposed the suggestion that NASA make the appointment.
    It was reported that JPL was seeking someone mutually acceptable to the
    committee, NASA, and JPL. (Av. Wk.,      6/22/64,25)
* Hearings on S. 2602, to establish a national air and space museum in the
    Smithsonian Institution, were held by Subcommittee on the Smithsonian
    Institution of the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration.
     (NASA LAR III/125)
* In letter to New York Times, FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby en-
    dorsed suggestion in Times editorial that two or more aircraft manu-
    facturers join together to develop US. supersonic transport. Halaby
    said he would welcome such a partnership and would recommend to
    Justice Dept. that it “interpose no objection on antitrust grounds” be-
    cause of “the clear national interest factors in the program.” (Clark,
    NYT, 6/23/64,66)
* Based on reports circulated at recent COSPAR meeting, Missiles and Rockets
    said that U.S.S.R. probably would not attempt another manned s ace
                                                                        B
    flight for about a year but that flight probably would be an or ita1
    rendezvous mission. (M&R, 6/22/64, 33)
Jum 23: COSMOS XXXIII launched into orbit with the following initial param-
    eters: apogee, 293 km. (182.06 mi.) ; perigee, 209 km. (129.87 mi.) ;
    period, 89.38 min.; and inclination to the equator, 65”. Tass said the
    satellite carried scientific apparatus designed for investigation of space
    in accordance with program announced March 16, 1962, and onboard
    instrumentation was operating normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya
    Pravda, 6/24/6d, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
  Army Map Service announced completion of its topographic study
    of the moon. Prepared under agreement with NASA, the lunar map
    was the most complete ever made, the first to show variations in heights
    over all the visible surface of the moon. Map covered area of about
    8,000,000 sq. mi., and more than 5,000 surface features were identified
    by name. The topographers established that the moon’s highest peaks
    reach about 35,000 ft. above its lowest points-making the lunar moun-
                                                                         221
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    tains about 6,000 ft. higher than Mt. Everest. (NYHT, Ymh. Post,
    6/24/64; SeMstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/24/64)
June 23: At request of Senator Wayne Morae (D.-Ore.) and by unanimous
    consent to motion of Senator Mike Mansfield (D.-Mont.) , Senate re-
    quested House to return H.R. 10456, NASA authorization bill for FY 1965.
    Senator Morse was requesting record vote on the bill; action of the pre-
    vious day was taken without quorum call and with only voice vote.
     (NASA LAR 111/126; CR, 6/23/64,14234-35 and 6/24/64,14392)
* NASA announced formal award of $24 million contract to General Electric
    for development of six flight model Biosatellites plus additional space-
    craft for ground testing. GE was selected for the contract last August
    and had been working under preliminary $5 million contract, now in-
    cluded in formal contract. ( Y S I , 6/24/64)
* NASA Group Achievement Award presented to Centaur “E” Stand Project
    personnel at NASA Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station for their
    (6 significant contributions resulting in the successful completion of re-

    search testing of the Atlas 116 D booster under simulated loading and
    environmental conditions and [for] providing data vital to the first
.   flight of the Centaur vehicle.” (LRC Release 64-56)
  Speech by Peter Hackes of NBC News inserted in Congressional Record by
    Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) advocating a progressive space
    program. Hackes said:
        “Some of those who have studied space age economics tell us that
    by the mid-1970’s our space spending will return to the American econ-
     omy a dime for every nickel we’re spending now. Aside from the very
    obvious race with Russia to be first to land on the moon; in addition
    to advancing science to the point where we may locate life on another
    planet and might discover the secrets of the beginnings of mankind;
     and besides the use of space to defend ourselves militarily-besides all
    these reasons, the U.S. space program wl bring us two other exceed-
                                               il
    ingly important dollars and cents lhnefits : a sizable advance in industry
     and employment. And an as-yet uncalculated fallout in new civilian
                 .
    products. . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/64, A3690-92)
* Nuclear submarine John Adams, submerged off Florida coast,
    successfully fired Polaris A-2 missile about 1,500 mi. to its target in
    the Atlantic Ocean. This was last American missile-firing submarine
    to be equipped with the A-2 model. (UPI, NYT, 6/24/64, 38)
June 24: Senate passed (78-3) H.R. 10456 authorizing funds for NASA for
    FY 1965. Senate adopted the committee amendments en bloc. Amend-
    ment introduced by Sen. Fulbright to reduce R&D funds for Project
    Apollo by $267,750,000 was rejected by vote of 42-38. Bill would be
     sent to House-Senate conference committee. (NASA LAR 111/127; CR,
     6/24/64, 1436744)
* NASA Manned Spacecraft Center made its final move from all leased facili-
     ties, with more than 700 employees moving to the Clear Lake location
     between now and June 30. (MSC Roundup, 6/24/64,1)
  15 NASA astronauts began three days and two nights of jungle survival
     training in the Panama Canal Zone, under supervision of the USAF Tropic
     Survival School. (MSC Roundup, 6/%/64,8)
  Theory that moon’s surface resembled cotton candy and was only about
     19% solid was expounded by David D. Cudaback of Univ. of California’s
     radio astronomy laboratory at Berkeley. Based on his four years of
222             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, I90 4

    research with microwaves from the moon, Dr. Cudaback said moon had
    highly porous surface extending down to a depth of “at least” nine or
     10 f. and “very possibly” deeper. He said only one other American
          t,
    scientist had obtained the same figures on high porosity, but that “quite
    a few Russians” had produced findings similar to his own. (Justice,
    Houston Post, 6/25/64)
June 24: It was reported DOD may coordinate a geodetic survey program com-
    bining Secor satellite, a planned Transit satellite, ECHO 11, and a planned
    Anna satellite. A ground station would correlate the flashing light of
    Anna, the optical system of Secor, and the doppler radar system of the
    Transit, using ECHO 1 as a reference point. (SBD, 6/24/64)
                             1
June 25.- Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) flew X-15 No. 2 to 83,OOO-ft. alti-
    tude and 2,966-mph speed (mach 4.49). Engine of the rocket research
     aircraft burned 76 sec. This was the first flight of the rebuilt No. 2
    aircraft, and performance was successful. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off .)
  NASA launched companion Nike-Apache sounding rockets from Wallops
     Island, Va., with instrumentation to detect quiet day ionospheric electric
     currents and to detect and study configuration of ionospheric currents
     under disturbance conditions. Each payload contained a dual-cell
     rubidium-vapor magnetometer to measure magnitude of the magnetic
     field. Both rockets performed and transmitted excellently, the first
      (launched at 10:57 a.m.) reaching 92.5-mi. altitude and the second
      (launched at 8:52 p.m.) reaching 96.7-mi. altitude. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
  First tracking station to be built for Project Gemini was dedicated
     at Carnarvon, Australia, a site close to the antipodal point to Cape
     Kennedy, the launch site. Carnarvon was first land station over which
     Gemini spacecraft would pass as it went into orbit. NASA Administrator
     James E. Webb participated by telephone in the ceremonies, and his
     remarks initiated the new station into “SCAMA,” the NASA 13-country net-
     work of operational voice communications connecting the manned space
     flight tracking network. (NASA Release 64-155)
* Scout rocket launched by USAF from Pt. Arguello, Calif., exploded in flight.
      (M&R, 7/6/64, 8 )
  NASA announced award of three-year, $3.6-million contract to Federal Elec-
     tric Corp. for instrumentation support services to the Merritt Island
     Launch Area of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. (NASA Re-
     lease 64-156)
  First four divisions of NASA Lewis Research Center had completed
     moving into new Development Engineering Building, LRC announced.
     Occupancy of the building by LRC units temporarily housed in a
     Cleveland shopping center would be completed by end of summer.
      (LRC Release 6 6 5 8 )
  Dow Chemical Corp. selected by Kennedy Space Center, NASA, for contract
     to provide engineering support services at Merritt Island Launch Area
     facilities. Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract was estimated at $1.4 million for
     the first year, with two one-year options for extensions. (SBD, 6/26/64,
     315)
  DOD announced Aeronca Manufacturing Corp. was receiving $1,809,724
     contract from Office of Naval Research for design, fabrication, and instal-
     lation of an advanced antenna tracking system for NASA Wallops Station.
      (DOD Release 45-64)
                                                                         223
                ASTRONAUTICS BND AERONAUTICS, 1964

June 26: NASA announced it had requested proposals from scientists for ex-
    periments on Advanced Technological Satellites to be launched from
     Cape Kennedy in 196668. Primary mission of ATS would be to evalu-
     ate advanced oommunication techniques, meteorological components,
     and gravity gradient stabilization systems, but additional space for
    scientific experiments was available. (NASA Release 64c153)
0 NASA Lewis Research Center program of metal fracture toughness testing

    was helping make supersonic transport possible, according to William
    F. Brown, Jr., Chief of LRC Strength of Materials Branch. Co-author
    of paper on fracture toughness test methods with John E. Strawley, Head
    of Fracture Section at LRC, Brown said listening to amplified sounds of
    metal cracking under stress was one of the techniques of testing fracture
    toughness. (LRC Release 64-59)
* Curtiss-Wright X-19 Vtol transport was flown successfully for the first time
    in series of short-duration tests. (Av. Wk.,7/6/64.,278)
June 27: Analysis o findings by Stratoscope I1 balloon-astronomy investi-
                      f
    gation last November was announced by National Science Foundation
    and Princeton Univ. astronomers. Dr. Martin Schwarzschild, director
    of Project Stratoscope 11, reviewed first findings of the telescope and
    instrument package carried aloft by balloon. Studies of the moon
    showed lunar surface material reflected more solar light in the infra-
    red band than in the visible spectrum. Other findings included confir-
    mation that water vapor exists near red giant stars-for example, there
    is “about as much water vapor above one square mile of Mira as there
    is above one square mile of Earth.” (NYT, 6/28/64, 56; Burkett,
    Houston Chron., 6/28/f%%)
June 28: NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in open message to AIAA,
    convening in Washington, that Saturn V space booster, used in Project
    Apollo, would enable U.S. to ‘‘catch up with and pass the Russians” in
    space. “But the development and flight testing of this rocket have been
    delayed by a reduction of $600 million in the NASA ‘budget for this fiscal
    year and efforts are now being made to further delay it through reduc-
    tions of up to $500 million for the next fiscal year. This effort to slow
    up and hold back the progress both President Kennedy and President
    Johnson have recommended is a matter of important and immediate con-
    cern as the MAAmeets.
       “Members of AIAA will do well to study and understand the very
    large foundation of space operational capability which is now being
    put in place by this country and consider the long-range future of space
                                                                        ..
                                           ::-, will be very large. .”
    in terms of the proper use of a c
     (Text, Wash. Post, 6/28/64)
  New maps of the moon made by USAF Aeronautical Chart and Information
    Center, St. Louis, were termed “the best lunar maps ever made” by
     E. A. Whitaker, astronomer at Lunar and Planetary Laboratory in
    Tucson, Ariz., and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, lunar geologist of US.
    Geological Survey Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz. Maps were on scale
    of one inch equals eight miles. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 6/28/6d)
June 29: New research project would study feasibility and design concept
    of advanced hypersonic ramjet engine, NASA announced. The work
    would extend ramjet propulsion technology which NASA and NACA had
    been developing for more than 15 years. To be conducted under di-
    rection of Langley Research Center, the project w s being organized
                                                         a
224            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     to determine potential of the ramjet as a propulsion system for hyper-
     sonic flight. Project would use hydrogen as fuel. (NASA Release
     64-158)
June 29: George Friedl, Jr., was appointed NASA Deputy Associate Adminis-
     trator for Industry Affairs, succeeding Earl D. Hilburn, who was recently
     named Deputy Associate Administrator. Since 1962 a management
     consultant in Santa Ana, Calif.,‘Friedl served from 1960 to 1962 as
     Chairman of the Board and President of Matthews Corp. and from
     1956 to 1%0 as Corporate Vice President of Litton Industries, Inc.,
     and General Manager of its Electronic Equipment Div. (NASA An-
     nouncement 69-140; NASA Release 64-157)
8 GSFC reported that NASA was considering development of a satellite-borne

     radiotelescope to investigate low frequency radio emissions from galactic
     regions, distant planets, and stars. Long antennas would be required
     to receive the very-lowfrequency radio emissions. The program would
     study the development and effects of sporadic radio noise bursts from
     the sun and the sporadic decameter radio emission from Jupiter, de-
     termine the low frequency spectra of galactic and extra-galactic radio
     sources, and map the spatial distribution of galactic and extra-galactic
     radio sources at low frequencies. ( Goddard News, 6/29/64,3)
   Appointment of Maj. Gen. Alvin R. Luedecke (USAF Ret.) as Deputy Di-
     rector of Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory was announced by JPL
     Director Dr. William H. Pickering. General manager of AEC since his
     retirement in 1958, General Luedecke would replace Brian Sparks ef-
     fective August 1. (NASA Release 66159)
8 NASA awarded $16,975,000 contract to Blount Brothers Corp. for construc-

     tion of three major elements of space environment facility known as
     Space Propulsion Facility, to be built at Plum Brook Station of NASA
     Lewis Research Center. The facility would simulate temperatures and
      pressure conditions at altitudes up to 100 mi. from earth, permitting
      evaluation and development testing of spacecraft, chemical propulsion
      systems, and nuclear electric power generation and propulsion systems.
       (LRC Release 64-61)
8 Studies of two-stage recoverable lifting body space vehicle, by NASA Mar-
      shall Space Flight Center were reported in Aviation Week. Envisioned
     primarily as a passenger/supply space ferry, the system could be
      launched by track-mounted rocket sled or take o f horizontally similar
                                                        f
      to conventional aircraft. Both stages would be manned, the first with
      only a flight crew and the pickaback second stage with 10-19 men and
      supplies. In this concept, both delta-shape stages would be recover-
      able. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 38)
   NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in
      Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question :
         “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter
      of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned
      space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the
      United States large increments of manned space flight capability.
      Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn-
      and perfect-the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before
                                               . . .”
      attempting the trip to the moon and back.          (NASA)
 * NASA completed negotiations with Honeywell Aeronautical Div. for con-
       tract to furnish three spacecraft for Project Scanner horizon definition
                                                                           225
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAW’MCS, 19 6 4

     experiment. The $1,224,616 contract included design, fabrication, in-
     tegration, qualification, environmental testing, and certain launch sup-
     port services. Project Scanner payloads would be flown on suborbital
                                                       Release)
     trajectories from Wallops Island, Va. ( L ~ R C
June 29: Future Delta launch vehicles with larger propellant tanks, the Thrust-
     Augmented Delta (TAD), would be used to launch payloads in the Bio-
     satellite, Pioneer, and meteorological satellite families, GSFC reported.
      (Goddard News,6/29/64r, 1 )
                                                                        FY
  Senate’s narrow margin of defeating amendment to cut NASA’s 1965
     Apollo authorization by 10% was subject of editorial by Robert Hob
     in Aviation Week:
       “. . .   There should be little satisfaction for supporters of the US.
     space program in the narrow margin by which the Fulbright amend-
     ment was defeated. It indicates clearly what a long, hard pull still
     lies ahead to educate the people of this country fully on the long-term
     needs to maintain this nation’s pre-eminence in the vital area of space
     technology. There will never be any lack of criticism of any legisla-
     tive program that has progress as its goal. But it should be the genuine
     concern of the supporters of the US. space program to state their case
     with such force and clarity that this conservative carping from Sen.
     Fulbright and his ilk will produce only the hollow echo in history that
     it merits.” ( A v . Wk., 6/29/64,11)
  Aviation Week reported that President Johnson had inspected USAF-
     Lockheed YF-12A (A-11) supersonic aircraft at Edwards AFB during
     his recent tour of West Coast defense installations. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64,
      15)
   ‘ohn H. Boyxrton of MSC discussed pilot’s role in Mercury space flight sys-
     tems failures, in paper to AIAA first annual meeting. He summarized:
     “For the two unmanned missions, M A 4 and MA-5, control system
     difficulties made impossible the successful completion of a three-pass
     orbital flight, which was the design mission for the Mercury spacecraft.
     But in both cases, the presence of a pilot and the capability to control
     the spacecraft attitudes manually would have made the three-pass mis-
     sion possible. This fact was demonstrated in the M A 4 mission in
     which a similar malfunction occurred but in which the astronaut com-
                                                           . ..
     pleted the flight by using his manual control modes.
                                  ...
         “For the M A 4 mission,          the flight would undoubtedly have been
      terminated before the planned time because of an excessive rate of fuel
     consumption in the automatic control mode. In the successful MA-7
     flight, manual initiation of the retrorocket-ignition sequence prevented the
     horizon scanner malfunction from significantly delaying this critical
     event. Although an error in yaw angle caused the spacecraft to land
      somewhat beyond the planned landing area, this error would have un-
      doubtedly been much greater had the pilot not been present. The six-
     pass MA-8 mission was successful, although a problem of an abnormal
     increase in suit temperature could have terminated the fli ht early had
      no means been available for reducing this temperature. T%e      pilot, how-
     ever, was able to correct this situation by manual adjustment of his
     coolant flow valve. Short circuits in the automatic control circuitry
     during the MA-9 flight made it essential for the pilot to control the
      spacecraft manually during retrofire and reentry.” (Text)
226             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4;

June 29: C. A. Syvertson and David H. Dennis of NASA Ames Research
     Center, in paper for AIAA first annual meeting, reviewed problems of
     atmospheric entry, atmospheric exit, and atmospheric cruise, suggesting
     that “future vehicles in each of these areas will differ significantly from
     their current-day counterparts. For example, entry vehicles for use in
     the interplanetary missions which may follow the lunar mission will enter
     the Earth‘s atmosphere at speeds up to twice that of Apollo. At these
     speeds, radiative heating predominates and dictates the use of more
     slender configurations than the very blunt Apollo. The interplanetary
     entry vehicles will also require very precise guidance and control both
                                                                           ..
     when approaching the Earth and when flying within the atmosphere. .
        “For cruise aircraft that follow the supersonic transports, the most
     characteristic feature will be the probable use of hydrogen fuel. This
     high-energy fuel provides excellent payload and range capabilities for
     transports flying up to about twice the speed of the supersonic transport.
     The low density of the fuel results in aircraft with very large fuselages
     which may be twice the size of current-day subsonic jet transports.”
      (Text)
* At AIAA meeting and press conference, Dr. Bernard M. Wagner, Chairman
     of New York Medical College’s pathology dept., reported Soviets had
      decided not to send any more women cosmonauts into space. Soviet
     doctors were not satisfied with performance of Valentina Tereshkova,
     first woman cosmonaut. She had been too excited during the space
     flight, as seen by wide variations in her pulse rate, and she did not re-
     cover from effects of space flight as quickly as the male cosmonauts.
     Dr. ,Wagner visited in Moscow earlier in June at invitation of Prof.
     Vassily V. Parin, Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological
     Physiology. Dr. Wagner reported Prof. Parin, prominent in Soviet
     space program, believed artificial gravity would be necessary for astro-
     nauts on long space flights, and Soviet space planners were considering
     possibility of equipping Vostok spacecraft with centrifuge providing
     periodic spin of 1/3 earth‘s gravity for the crew. Dr. Wagner added that
     Soviets were preparing for another manned space flight before the end
     of the year. (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/30/6d)
  First meeting of the AIAA Technical Committee on History of Aeronautics
     and Astronautics held in Washington, NASA Historian Eugene M. Emme
     as Chairman.
* Employment in aerospace industry during the past year reflected overall
     downward trend, according to Aviation Week survey. Exceptions to
    the general trend were McDonnell Aircraft Co. and Douglas Aircraft
     Co., the former mainly due to work on Gemini spacecraft and F-4 Phan-
     tom I1 aircraft and the latter due to increased work for Saturn launch
    vehicle program and commercial programs. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 20)
  Reported that legislation was being drafted that would apply system
     of US. agricultural extension service to industry to heIp solve prob-
    lems of economic dislocations due to decreased defense spending. Pres-
     ident Johnson said such an industry extension service would “do for
     urban America what the agricultural extension service ha$ done for
    rural America.” (Av. Wk., 6/29/64+,21)
  Pilots of South African Airways had been warned to fly at least 9,SOO-ft.
     above sea-level altitude when over Muden on the route between Jo-
    hamaburg and Durban, because large citrus estate at Muden was shoot-
                                                                           227
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

     ing rain-making rockets into storm clouds. The estate had been plagued
    by hailstorms and was experimenting with rockets to reduce the fruit-
     damaging hailstones. With eight launch pads on the estate, it was
    possible to launch 50 Italian rockets at once to a height of 6,000 ft. (AP,
    NYT, 6/29/6,4, 30)
June 30: Atlascentaur 3 (AC-3) was launched from ETR in partially success-
    ful development test which NASA officials termed “highly successful from
     an engineering point of view.” Five of the six primary objectives were
    fully achieved : nose fairing and insulation panels withstood flight-loads
     and jettisoned properly; structural integrity of Atlas and Centaur stages
    during all phases of flight were verified; Atlas-Centaur separation oper-
    ated satisfactorily; operation of the guidance system was demonstrated;
    and capability of Atlas-Centaur to be launched at scheduled time was
    demonstrated, the vehicle lifting off only four minutes after pre-planned
    launch time. The sixth, partially-achieved objective was ignition and
    burn of Centaur stage$ two RGlOA3 liquid hydrogen engines: They
     ignited properly but cut off 127 sec. before programed 380 sec. burn
    time. Four seconds after engine ignition, hydraulic pump to engine
    actuators had failed, so that hydraulic system did not actuate the engine
    swiveling mechanism to maintain control of the stage during powered
    flight. The Centaur began to roll. Increasing roll motion forced pro-
    pellant to side of propellant tanks, uncovering feed-line outlets; engine
    cut off after 253 see. because of lack of fuel. Stage maintained its
    trajectory, however, and at programed cutoff time thk stage attitude
    control system regained roll control and remaining inflight events oc-
    curred as planned. Because of the shorter engine burn, A 6 3 reached
     speed of only 11,425 mph instead of the 17,400 mph which would have
    put it, incidentally, into orbit. Spent stage re-entered and impacted in
    Atlantic Ocean 2,706 mi. from Cape Kennedy. (NASA Release 6 6 1 4 3 ;
    CR, 7 / l / a , 15086-87; AP, Balt. Sun,7/1/64; Wash. Eve. Star, 7 / 2 / a ,
    A5)
          No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (NASA) reached only 98,000-
0 X-15

    ft. altitude and 3,375-mph speed (mach 5.10) in flight near Edwards AFB,
    Calif. Within seconds after launch from mother ship, all guidance
    equipment on the rocket aircraft failed, forcing Pilot McKay to cut back
    speed and altitude. Flight had been planned to reach 180,000-ft. altitude
    and 3,550-mph speed in test for future X-15 flights to photograph the
    stars from above atmospheric interference. The rocket engine burned
    83 sec. (NASA X-15 Proj. O f ; Vush. Post, 7/1/6LE)
                                   f.
  House and Senate conference committee agreed on $5,227,506,000
     as compromise between the two versions of H.R. 1M56, the NASA Au-
    thorization Act for FY 1965. This was $33.7 million more than the
    House had voted and $18.8 million less than the Senate had approved.
     ( M S A LAR II1/129-131; Confr. Rpt., House Rpt. 1529)
  New York Times editorialized on the four-vote margin of the Senate de-
    feat of Sen. Fulbright’s amendment to reduce FY 1965 Project Apollo
                      “. . .
    funds by 10%.             The narrowness of the margin may be illustrated
    by the fact that if there had been abstentions by the Senatars from
    even three of the states having direct economic interest in t most rapid
                                                                   b
    prosecution of the moon race-say, California, Texas and Florida-
     Senator Fulbright’s amendment would have been adopted.
228             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 4

       “. .  . [Senator Fulbright] lost his battle on the authorization bill,
    but he will have another chance when the bill actually appropriating the
    funds is considered. The new mood in Congress suggests that this
    battle may produce a decision to scrap the artificial 1970 deadline.
      .. .” (NYT,6/30/64)
June 30: NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said
                                       “. . .
    at AIAA Luncheon in Washington:            the concept of the lunar landing
    was not new when NASA was founded in 1958. Research was continu-
    ing on the various technical aspects of such a mission. In 1959, in-
    house work began on mission definition. In the fall of 1960, three six-
    month feasibility design study contracts were awarded. In January
    1961 NASA received these interim findings. There were two basic ve-
    hicle approaches to be considered-direct ascent and rendezvous. In
    May of 1961, the study contract results were available, and supported
    our interim findings, and the recommendation was made to the Con-
                                                    .
    gress that the nation proceed with the mission. . .
        “There will be missions after Project Apollo. We are already examin-
    ing their feasibility, cost, and potential return. We are carefully es-
    tablishing a variety of future space missions, both manned and uw
    manned, that exploit the near earth, lunar, and planetary environments.
    No decisions have been made and we are not ready to recommend them
    yet. As the information becomes available and as the results are
    analyzed, we will be able to present the country with a solid spectrum
    of achievable, well-conceived mission alternatives and options. The
    selection will be a national, not an agency, decision.” (Text)
0 Self-sealing structural  walls for spacecraft application were demon-
    strated at AIAA by Arnold J. Tuckerman, Hughes Aircraft Co. materials
    scientist. Tuckerman and his colleagues fired .22 pellets at pressurized
    chamber with walls in which polyuretanes and polyamide prepolymers
    were impregnated within the laminations of the walls. As the pellets
    pierced the chamber, they triggered chemical reaction causing the seal-
    ant to foam instantly, hardening into an airtight plug that would last
    up to two weeks without major leakage. (Haseltine, Wmh. Post,
     7/1/64)
  A. 0. Tischler, NASA Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, said
    in paper for AIAA :
        “At this time the United States stands on the threshold of transport
     in the space environment. Until now, with the exception of a relatively
    few payloads such as Syncom, payloads launched into space were put
    on their trajectory by the launch vehicle. Only minor path corrections
    were applied by the on-board propulsion systems. Even the Mercury
    capsule returns were made by a relatively minor slowing of the orbiting
    capsule, with aerodynamic braking providing the rest of the kinetic
    energy change. However in Gemini which may fly with men this year,
     and which will later effect rendezvous of separate payloads in space, and
     in Apollo, which will perform an intricate series of space maneuvers,
    we recognize systems that carry significant propulsion capability into
     space for use entirely in that environment. The time is rapidly coming
     when space is no longer something we throw darts into but is an en-
    vironment in which working propulsion systems will maneuver and
     transport spacecraft payloads and eventually convey these payloads back
                                                                           ..  .
     to the earth‘s atmosphere for descent to the surface to be used again.
                                                                           229
                ASTRONAU’I’JCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1904

                  ...    booster engines have passed, or in the case of the
       “[Spacel
    Saturn V engines, are approaching their preliminary flight rating tests,
    while the more conservative spacecraft propulsion systems have not yet
    arrived at that milepost. While these spacecraft engines may be ex-
    pected to come along at a faster pace than the big booster engine de-
    velopments, the fact is that they are presently in a tail chase situation.
     I think we must observe that at this moment the status of spacecraft pro-
    pulsion systems under development lags the development status of launch
    vehicle engines and is additionally behind in
    That is the area that warrants propulsion
June 30: Paper surveying space nuclear propulsion by Harold 3. Finger,3
    James Lazar, and James J. Lynch of NASA and AEC was presented to m          .
       “. . .  a major forward step has been taken in the milestone estab-
    lished by the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in its design, develop-
    ment, operation, and analysis of the KIWI-B4D nuclear rocket reactor
    experiment. This test provides good reason for confidence in the suc-
    cessful execution of the tests to be conducted this year and next and
    provides a good basis for confidence in the availability of nuclear rockets
    when they will be required for the performance of advanced space mis-
    sions. The availability of these nuclear rocket propulsion systems will
    give this country a propulsion capability far advanced over any other
                                           ..
    rocket propulsion system available.
       “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the
    thrustor area, but important research data and technology are also b e
    ginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear reactor electric
    generating systems required for prime electric propulsion in space.
       “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts
    are not yet well enough understood to justify undertaking significant
    development efforts. Careful and systematic accumulation of research
    information to evaluate the feasibility of these concepts and to arrive at
    a real understanding of them appear appropriate.” (Text)
0 Appearing &before  Special Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution of the
    Senate Committee on Public Works, NASA Assistant Associate Adminis-
    trator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop said:
       “The NASA activities having a bearing on air and water pollution are
    almost entirely in the area of nuclear and chemical propulsion. Even
    in this area, however, only a fraction of the work offers a pollution threat.
       “With regard to water pollution, it is standard practice at NASA Cen-
    ters and in the rocket industry to capture water used in test operations
    and, if necessary, treat it before re-use or discharge.
       66
          In considering air pollution, the NASA uses two approaches :
       “ ( 1) Isolated locations and atmospheric dispersion, and

                                                 ..
       “(2) Containment and neutralization. *
            ...
       “In        our nuclear propulsion activities, neither routine reactor
    development testiilg and flight operations nor conceivable accidents are
    expected to release sufficient radioactivity into the atmosphere to con-
    stitute a hazard to public health and safety.
       “In chemical propulsion, there are some propellants that are toxic
    prior to combustion and some rocket exhausts that contain toxic prod-
    ucts. Fortunately, the NASA space program is primarily concerned with
    non-toxic propellants. In our largest program, the Apollo effort, for
    example, the giant Saturn I and V boosters both burn oxygen and kero-
230            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 190 4

    sene in their first stages and oxygen and hydrogen in their upper stages.
    The Ap01l.o spacecraft uses toxic nitrogen tetroxide and a mixture of
    hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine, but the quantity is
                                                            ..  . [and is not
    small compared to that used by the Saturn boosters
                                                                         . ..
    used] until the Apollo is well into space under normal operation.
       “In most rocket testing and in vehicle launches, the rocket exhausts
    directly into the atmosphere. The very high exhaust temperature and
    velocity serve to rapidly disperse the exhaust products. In some rocket
    testing we must simulate the low pressures encountered at altitude. In
    these facilities, the rocket exhausts into a duct where there is an oppor-
    tunity to scrub the products with water before discharging into the
    atmosphere. A unique facility, an example of the containment and
    treatment method for use in populated areas, was built at the Lewis
    Research Center in Cleveland, for rockets using fluorine. This facility,
    put into operation in 1956, was designed to handle hydrogen-fluorine
                                             .
    rockets up to 20,000 pounds thrust. . .” (Testimony)
June 30: Vernon G. MacKenzie, Chief of Public Health Service’s Div. of Air
    Pollution, testified before Senate Committee on Public Works’ Special
    Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution that investigation should be
    made of “suitable means” to insure that rocket-fuel development tests
    by private organizations be conducted under “suitably controlled con-
    ditions.” He said PHS had “full confidence” that Federal agencies
    would apply appropriate precautions of health protection of rocket fuels
    “insofar as these are under the direct control of Federal agencies.” He
    named beryllium among “the most toxic and hazardous of the non-
    radioactive metallic substances used in industry today,” and cited also
    fluorine as a potentially dangerous component. (M&R, 7/6/64, 11)
* Museum of Modern Art in New York opened exhibition titled “20th Cen-
    tury Engineering,” which featured 195 spectacular and dramatic struc-
    tures combining beauty with utility. NASA Langley Research Center
    wind-tunnel was represented among the dams, antennas, observatories,
    skyscrapers, and other structures. (Huxtable, NYT, 6/30/64, 29)
* Arthur Kantrowitz delivered 1964 von KBrmAn Lecture at MU annual
    meeting.
During June: Analysis of infrared radiation measurements of TIROS1 meteor-
                                                                      1
    ological satellite was detailed by R. s. Hawkins of AFCRL. Hawkins
    suggested that when discrepancies ‘between data from satellite and from
    other sources are understood and accounted for, infrared data from
    meteorological satellites could provide an invaluable tool for plotting
    and predicting course of cold fronts as well as for obtaining information
     on structure of frontal zones and regions of convective activity. (OAR
    Research Review, 6/64, 3)
* Total number of contractor and civil service personnel at NASA
    Michoud Operations passed the 10,000 mark. Of the total, 281 were
     employees of NASA. (Marshall Star, 6/24/64,9)
* Water-cooled space suit, employing plastic tubing sewn into long under-
     wear, was in research and development at NASA Manned Spacecraft
     Center. Begun by Royal Aircraft Establishment in 1962, suit w s un-a
     dertaken by MSC in 1963 when Dr. John Billingham left RAE to join
     MSC. Dr. Billingham said, “In operation and in theory the suit looks
     acceptable. But we must test it much more for reliability.” (M&R,
     6/22/641,28)
                                                                         231
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

During June: Detailed report on global satellite weather prediction system,
     “Swami” (Stanford Worldwide Acquisition of Msteorological Informa-
    tion), was completed by 31-man team of Stanford Univ. students. Three
     1,200-mi. circular polar orbit satellites orbiting 120” apart would re-
     ceive meteorological data from global network of weather balloons,
    transmit the stored information after each two-hour orbit to a single
     ground command station. (M&R, 6/22/64,25)
  NASA-DOD-AEC committee studying space power requirements of U S space
                                                                     ..
    program through 1975 presented its report to Aeronautics and Astro-
                                        .
     nautics Coordinating Board (AACB) (M&R, 6/22/64)
* NASA Reliability and Quality Assurance Ofc published “Quality Assur-
                                               fie
     ance Provisions for Government Agencies, June 1964 Edition” (NPC
    20&1A), a complete revision, reflecting experience gained by NASA
     and DOD agencies at supplier operations on behalf of NASA. (NASA Re-
     lease 6 6 1 5 4 ; NASA Announcement1-)
                                          3
                                          2
                                          f
                                          l
                                          9
* First of two main experiment units for Orbiting Astronomical Observa-
     tory (Oao) was delivered to NASA by Univ. of Wisconsin. Designed
    and built by Cook Electric Co. under contract to the university, the
     experiment consisted of clustered 16-in. nebular photometer telescope,
     four 8-in. stellar photometer telescopes, and two scanning spectrometers.
      ( A v . Wk., 6/29/64,55)
  At Institute of Navigation meeting in New York, panel discussion on pro-
    posed civilian navigational satellite system reportedly indicated only
     mild interest by potential users of the system. Unnamed NASA 05cials
    were said to be optimistic that NASA-FAA-Commerce-DOD-Interior      repre-
     sentatives would agree “in the near future” on setting up an ad hoc com-
    mittee to study the requirements of such a system. (M&R, 6/22/64,
     17)
* A 60-ft. pad was rapidly fabricated at Moffet Field, Calif., for
     full-scale evaluation using the Bell X-14 vertical take-off aircraft. In
    this test neither the. 1,500” F temperature nor the wheel-loading ad-
     versely affected the rapidly prepared pad, AFSC Research and Tech-
     nology Div. reported, The instant-landing pad, a ground-hardener of
     polyester resin, was King developed by Air Force Aero Propulsion
     Laboratory for rapid preparation of landing sites for future jet vertical
    take-off and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Operational Vtol aircraft would
     drop or spray the semi-liquid Preparation in forward combat areas,
     land on it 15 min. later. (AFSCRTD Biennial R ~ E7/62-7/64,23)
                                                         .,
* Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. concluded in its manned Mars ex-
    ploration study for NASA Marshall f, . ?light Center that futur, it-ter-
    planetary space travelers should be no taller than 5’7’* and no heavier
     than 145 lbs. Six of these “20 percentile” men-smaller than approxi-
     mately 80 per cent of American m e n - o n a manned Mars flight would
     require ly3 lbs. less food per day than larger men, thus saving nearly
     500 lbs. of food=cargo weight on a one-year trip. Study said 70,000
     Ibs. could be saved in gross weight of Mars spacecraft if the six astro-
     nauts were 20 percentile men. (DMMSD Apogee, 6/64)
* Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
     Flight, described in Astronautics & Aeronautics the future space capa-
     bilities being developed for the U S through Project Apollo. The
                                            ..
     Saturn IB, Saturn V, and Apello manned spacecraft would provide ca-
    pabilities including extended lunar explorations, orbiting laboratory re-
232             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,            196 4

     search, manned escape missions, and long-duration operations-includ-
     ing satellite inspection and repair. (A&A, 6/64,26-29)
During June: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator
    for Advanced Research and Technology, said in Scientific American
    article on the supersonic transport that NASA Langley Research Center
    and Ames Research Center had “devised several aerodynamic designs
    for what they call a SCAT, which is an acronym for ‘supersonic commer.
    cial air transport., Four of these designs, known as SCAT’S 4, 15, 16,
     and 17, are the products of eight years of research. Each design has
                                                                       ...
    characteristics that make it somewhat different from the others..
          NASA engineers conducted extensive wind-tunnel tests of the four scm
       66


    models at the Langley and Ames centers to evaluate and compare their
                                   ...    It is evident that we must discover
    aerodynamic characteristics.
    how to combine the supersonic L/D [lift-drag ratio] characteristics of
     SCAT 4 with the subsonic performance of SCAT 16. we are optimistic
                            ...
    that this can be done.
       Discussing special structural problems of SST designs, Dr. Bispling-
    hoff said the metal fatigue would be accelerated under exposure to high
    temperatures of supersonic flight, but at the same time it was essential
    that the airframe provide safety and serviceability for more than 10 yrs.
    or 30,000-50,000 hrs. flying time.
       bC Prolonged screening of materials by NASA’s   Langley and Lewis lab-
    oratories has identified a titanium alloy that appears to meet the unique
    and stringent requirements for strength, stiffness and high temperatures
    of an SST. The alloy contains 90 percent titanium, 8 percent aluminum,
                                                         . . .”
     1 percent molybdenum and 1 percent vanadium.                  (Sci. Amer.,
    6/@)
* Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, was
    awarded an honorary degree by Iowa Wesleyan College. (Marshall
    Star, 6/17/64,1)
* Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President,
    in which he laid down his views on the form the US. space program
    should take, appeared in Science and Mechanics: “The concept that
    speeding men to the moon is the same as jockeying trotters over a
    muddy track must ‘be abandoned, regardless of Kremlin propaganda.
    The idea that we can cooperate with the Russians to do the job quicker
    and cheaper is too ludicrous for comment. We axe spending entirely
    too much money on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted
    program using unmanned lunar landing equipment could steadily build
    up a solid body of scientific knowledge about the lunar environment
    that would increase the safety factor for astronauts much later. Auto-
    matic landing equipment could be designed at minimum cost. The
    program should expand in easy steps, each one leading to the next.
    The billions of dollars thus saved could be profitably invested in other
    aspects of space research.”
       Speaking of the military role in space, he said: “All manned space
    research should be directed by the military, with national security and
    control of the accesa to space as primary goals. The threat from space
    now and in the foreseeable future is from spatial regions withi4 a
    thousand miles of Earth and not from lunar distances. Routine daily
    surveillance of these regions must be established, and the additional
    capabilities of positive identification, interception, and destruction of
                                                                            233
                 ASTRONAUTICS AM, AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     hostile enemy space vehicles will be necessary. This would be the great-
     est deterrent to an enemy’s military space aspirations. It would also
     give us the means of developing experienced space pilots, scientific and
     technological methods, and new scientific knowledge which could be
     used later in sending men to the moon and the planets. The hardware,
     on a routinely reliable basis, would be available off-the-shelf.
        “It might be added that almost every successful NASA launch to date,
     manned and unmanned, has been made with military support-with mis-
     sile rocket-boosters, launch facilities, technical know-how, communica-
     tions (including air transport of boosters) or safety procedures-or
                    ...
     with all five.
        “Finally, I believe that an immediate initial step of any effective mili-
     tary space program must be a manned station in near orbit about the
                                                   ..   .”
    Earth, with necessary support equipment.
        Senator Goldwater also stated that in his opinion there was the need
    for two crash programs in space research. The first would develop the
    Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, and the second would develop the po-
    tentiality of lasers for use as military weapons. (Science und Mechanics,
    6/64; Wash.Post, 7/21/64)
During June: France’s Office National $Etudes et de Recherches Aero-
    spatiales (ONERA) revealed it had successfully flight-testedhybrid rocket
    engine in a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility
    on the Ile du Levant in the Mediterranean Sea. Engine employed com-
    bination of liquid nitric acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel. (Av.
    Wk.,6/29/64, 24)
  Trustees and President of Clark Univ. announced Clark’s proposed new
    library would be named the “Robert Hutchings Goddard Library” in
    honor of the distinguished rocket pioneer, who was an alumnus and
    professor of physics at Clark. (Clark Announcement)
0 Pan American Airways’ Guided Missile Range Div. was awarded one-year,

    $112 million contract from USAF for continued operation of Air Force
    Eastern Test Range. (Av. Wk.,         6/29/a, 25)
During Muy and June: Project Taper (Turbulent Air Pilot Environment
    Research) was conducted by FAAand NASA to study turbulent air hazards
    for jet aircraft and ways for pilots to deal with them. Project involved
    flights into light-to-moderate turbulence at high altitudes by FAAConvair
    880 flown by FAA and NASA pilots. Data on motion effects experienced
    in the cockpit, gathered in the 800 flights, were used in NASA laboratory
    tests on motion simulator. In second series of flight tests, using FAA
    Boeing 720 airliner, instruments recorded pilot control actions and air-
    craft response in turbulent air, also tested autopilot and yaw damper
    for their gbility to maintain control. (Hudson, NYT, 5/1/@&,         58)
                              July 1964
July 1 :Referring to Centaur rocket (AC-3) which splashed into Atlantic
     on June 30 after failing to orbit, NASA officials pointed out that “from
                                                                         ..   .’,
     an engineering point of view the flight was highly successful.
     Five of six test objectives were achieved, and the sixth-liquid-hydrogen
    engine start and run-was partially achieved. Grant Hansen, vice-
    preident of General Dynamics/Astronautics, which built Centaur, said
     examination of instrument readings from the flight indicated failure
     of a nylon coupling which joined two shafts in hydraulic system asso-
     ciated with one of Centaur’s two engines. Coupling seemed to have
    failed about four seconds after Centaur stage ignited. (Wash. Eve. Star,
     7/2/% A5)
  Soviets launched COSMOS XXXIV artificial earth satellite equipped for sci-
     entific study of outer space. It was part of program announced by Tass
     on March 16,1962. Period was 90 min., apogee was 360 km. (223 mi.),
     perigee was 205 km. (127 mi.), and equatorial inclination was 64~96”.
      (Tass, Kumsomolskaya Pravda, 7/2/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
* President Johnson congratulated American Institute of Aeronautics and
     Astronautics (AIAA) on its first annual meeting and technical display,
     held June 29-July 2, Washington. He said: “I am particularly pleased
     that you have selected this occasion to honor the highly respected and
     capable Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, of the National Aeronautics and Space
    Administration.” (AIAA Booster, 7/2/64+, 1)
  NASA’s George E. Mueller reported to AIM that “beginning in 1958 with
    the first United States satellite launching, the Explorer-Jupiter C, and
    continuing through the Thor, Atlas, Thor-Delta, and Thor-Agena to the
     Saturn V in 1968 through 1970, the cost of payload in orbit will be
     reduced by about three orders of magnitude.
        “This remarkable decrease in costs results from the growing relia-
    bility and operational effectivenessof our launch vehicles and from the
     trend towards larger and larger weight-lifting capacity. The relative
     incT2ase has been greate: ‘- .’      ;e vehicles because of the economies
    associated with their operation.”
        Regarding the extension of capability of existing launch vehicles,
    Mueller reported: “Basically, our launch vehicle technology is sound,
     and it is advancing in an orderly, evolutionary fashion. We have mas-
    tered the design, manufacturing, transporting, checking out, and launch-
     ing of small, medium, and large launch vehicles.
        “Existing space boosters have done a creditable job. Engine relia-
    bility has been exceptionally good; the clustering of relatively large
    numbers of engines is now a proven technology; uprating of engines in
    thrust and efficiency has been possible; and further uprating can be
    accomplished to meet additional payload demands.
      234
                                                                         235
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

         “We are developing a basic launch vehicle industrial and techno-
     logical capability that can be extended and expanded for both future
      space exploration and exploitation.
         “For the future, we are building on today’s fr foundation. New
                                                         im
     high-energy propellants and nuclear rockets have great promise. Large
     solid-propellant motors are being employed. Much progress is being
     made in correlating high-energy propellants and engine materials and
     engineering technology.
         “Increased emphasis will be placed on management and the develop-
     ment of reliability. Management responsibilities will continue to grow
     more complex, while cost effectiveness will continue to be stressed. A
     smaller inventory of vehicles wl be developed whick; have greater
                                        il
      reliability and broader utility.
         “All in all, we can look forward to a new and challenging era of prog-
      ress in launch vehicle technology.” (Text)
J d y 1 : Paul G. Johnson of AEC-NASA SNPO said at AIAA meetings that early
      explorers of Mars may pass by planet Venus on way back to earth, to
      slow down spacecraft to safe re-entry speed. Side trip would lengthen
      voyage by a few months. Johnson also said that nuclear rockets might
      make Mars trip possible in 1980’s. Mission could involve six to eight
      crewmen and take from 400 to 500 days. (NASA Release 6 1 6 5 )
* Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineer-
      ing, called on defense industry at AIAA meetings to stop what he called
      unjustified and potentially dangerous “gloom and doom talk” about
      future defense spending. He said Pentagon R&D spending, currently
      at a $5.5 billion annual level, should remain relatively stable in coming
      years. Such pessimistic fears on part of industry, based on recent
      very small decrease in defense budget, Fubini said, could prompt top
      engineers and scientists to move into other industries and thereby weaken
      US. military posture by reducing industry’s capability of generating
      new ideas for DOD and developing new weapons. (AIAA Booster,
      7/2/64; NYT, 7/2/64+ 32M; Av. Wk.,       7/13/64,19)
                                           Ninth Semiannual Report to the Con-
   President Johnson transmitted NASA’s
      gress on progress and projects for period from January 1, 1963, to
      June 30, 1963. President’s covering message stated that “the breadth
      of performance promises subsequent periods of even greater accom-
      plishment in meeting the challenge of space.” (NASA LAR III/132)
   Richard H. Nelson, Boeing’s project manager for production of Saturn V
      rockets, said production was about 10 weeks behind schedule because of
      a parts shortage. However, first rocket scheduled for flight was to be
      delivered on schedule in late summer or fall of 1966. Present delay
      affected Saturns designed to test design and engines in ground firings
      at MSFC. Last 10 of Saturn V’s were expected to be delivered to Cape
      Kennedy by late 1968. Nelson was addressing Aviation Writers As-
      sociation in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
* Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator since 1958, received
      the AIAA premiere award, the Louis W. Hill Award for 1961, for the
      Outstanding Contribution to Space Transportation. Dr. Dryden was
      honored for his fluid mechanics research leading to space era, technical
      leadership of NACA and NASA teams which made civilian space program
      a reality, and personal contribution to research in the X-15 program.
      He was called “a symbol of our aerospace success.”
236                                                      19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

         In his address at the AIAA Honors Night Banquet, Dr. Dryden said that
     those involved with our space program must consider broad national
      goals in addition to scientific details. Other goals mentioned by Dry-
      den were “to obtain maximum benefit to the welfare of the Nation and
     to all mankind” and “to provide not only material benefits to free man
     in a peaceful world, but also incentives for mental and spiritual growth
     and accomplishment.” While recalling the day about 40 years ago,
     “when an airplane was essentially the product, from concept to final
     machine, of one man, the designer with the aid of two or three assist-
     ants,’, Dr. Dryden said today’s space technologist “. . . must search
     for knowledge of the facts, conduct our work with devotion to intel-
     lectual honesty and objectivity, and realize in our activities the highest
     moral aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.”
         Dr. Dryden expressed confidence that the Nation would continue to
     support comprehensive space exploration program because of sum total
     of goals space planning strove for. These included national prestige,
     national defense, human knowledge of space, development of efficient
     space vehicles, and utilization and international exchange of technologi-
     cal information. He added: “I believe that the rate and scale of the
     program are not excessive in view of the great resources of this country.”
      (AIAA, The Louis W . HZ Award pamphlet, 7/1/64; AIAA Booster,
     7/2/64, 1;Speech Text; NASA Release 64-161)
July I : At AIAA banquet, G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Andrew
     G. Haley for his “pioneering contribution to the analysis of governmental
     and international legal questions arising from the rapid development
     of space travel and space exploration, as exemplified by his book,
     Space Law and Government, published in 1963.” AIAA Lawrence B.
     Sperry Award was presented to Daniel M. Tellep, Manager of Launch
     and Entry Thermodynamics Research and Engineering at the Lockheed
     Missiles and Space Co., for Tellep’s “contributions to re-entry technology
     through participation in the United States’ first re-entry flight test pro-
     gram and for advancements in the field of heat transfer as reIated to
     aerospace programs.” Also presented were the 1964 Graduate and
     Undergraduate Student Awards to Richard C. Lessman and Lawrence S.
     Iwan. (AIAA Annual Mtg. Program; AIAA Booster, 7/2/64)
* At AIAA former American Airlines’ vice president William Littlewood
     said problems of sonic boom and economics might postpone introduction
     of supersonic airliner from 1970 target date to some time between 1975
     and 1980. Problems of practicability and noise would have to be solved
     before supersonic transport became reality, Mr. Littlewood said (Fin-
     ney, NYT, 7J2/64, 28)
  NASA awarded $1,125,040 contract to Ling-Temco-Vought for construction
     of Dynamic Crew Procedures Simulator which would allow astronauts
     to simulate orbital, lunar, and interplanetary flights in model spacecraft.
     Simulator’s completion was scheduled for May 1965, when it would be
     delivered to MSC. (MSC PAO; Denver Post, 7/5/64)
* NASA announced award o contract to North American Aviation’s Rocket-
                              f
     dyne Div. to provide four RN-6 liquid-hydrogen-cooled nozzles to be
     used in tests. Three nozzles were to be used for Nerva program, the
     fourth for Lewis Research Center’s Advanced Nuclear Rocket Systems
     Analysis Program. (NASA Release 64-162)
                                                                          237
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

July 1 :NASA awarded contract to Documentation, Inc., of Bethesda, Md., for
     $4.9 million to operate NASA Scientific and Technical Information Facil-
     ity for another year. Maintaining world’s largest collection of aerospace
     literature, facility was to operate selective dissemination of information
     program during coming year, using automatic equipment to notify
     individual scientists and engineers of new developments in their special
     fields. (NASA Release 64-163)
* Dr. Oscar E. Anderson, Jr., was appointed Director of International Or-
                                   Office of International Programs. He was
     ganizations Div. of NASA’s
     previously Project 06cer in Cooperative Projects Div. of same office.
     Before coming to NASA in 1962, Anderson was a historian at AEC. (NASA
     Announcement 64-135)
* John H. Glenn, Jr., discussed with NASA Administrator James E. Webb the
     possibility o the former astronaut’s returning to NASA in advisory ca-
                  f
     pacity, according to NASA spokesman, but nothing had been decided by
     the two. (UPI, Wash. Post, 7/2/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
* Dr. Allen E. Puckett, vice president of Hughes Aircraft, said world’s
     first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird, being built for
     ComSatCorp, would be completed in less than one year and ready for
     launch a month later. Early Bird was a first step toward global tele-
     communications and was a commercial version of Hughes’ Syncom
     satellite. (Miles,L. A. Times,7/1/64)
  NASA-USAF Memorandum of Understanding defined responsibilities of
     NASA and various USAF organizations which loan aircraft to NASA or pro-
     vide logistical support for such aircraft. (NMI 2-334A)
July 1-2: NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned
     Space Flight was holding three days of meetings with MSC officials on
     problems related to Project Apllo. Members of Committee, estab-
     lished By NASA Administrator James E. Webb in December 1963, and
     which functioned in advisory capacity to NASA Associate Administrator
     for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, delved into problems
     posed by launch vehicle systems, spacecraft systems, launch operations,
     science program, and space medicine.
        MIT physicist Dr. Charles Townes said at MSC meeting of the Com-
     mittee that he believed astronauts, not scientists, should be first men to
     explore moon. Scientists, he said, would concentrate on their own
     specialties in exploring the moon’s surface, but astronauts trained in
     scientific principles would bring back important information on the
     moon as a whole. ( MSC Roundup, 7/8/64,1; Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
* Manpower needs of civil aviation were discussed in Washington by FAA’s
     Aviation Human Resources Study Board. (FAA Release 64-61)
July 2: House adopted by voice vote the conference report on NASA FY 1965
     authorization bill (H.R. 10456) and sent bill to Senate. Senate adopted
     conference report, clearing bill for President’s signature. Bill provided
     NASA authorization of $5,227,506,000 of which $4,341,100,000 was for
     research and development, $622,880,500 was for construction of facili-
     ties and 8623,525,500 was for administrative operations. (NASA LAR
     III/133)
* Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) called for 10% cut in NASA’s        Apollo FY
     1965 budget, in statement submitted to Senate Appropriations Commit-
     tee. He stated 1970 Apollo goal had already been missed, SO that cut in
     funds would have no serious effect,and that NASA’s estimates of costs
                                                          past
238                                                    19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     and time were not reliable, so that little confidence could be placed in
             meeting its 1970 deadline. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, AS)
     NASA’s
J y 2: USAF launched Thor-Agena D space booster from WTR with undis-
 d
    closed satellite payload. (HRN-4 8 )
              William G. Huber of MSFC outlined NASA’s
0 At AIAA,                                                   plans for space
    projects beyond Apollo project. According to one set of plans for the
    1970-1990 period, space program costs would be $6,97O,OOO,OM) per
     year for 20 years. This figure was highest yet publicly discussed by a
    NASA official. Huber was outlining possibilities for the future in his
     discussion o large post-Saturn launch vehicles. (Wash. Eve. Star,
                   f
     7/3/64]
0 Paul D. Reader, Head of Lewis Research Center’s Electrostatic Thrustor

     Systems Section, presented test results of experimental ion engine which
     was six times larger than any other electric engine. Large engine
     ejected beam of charged particles 20 in. in diameter with power of 30
     kw. Development of large, high-powered ion engines, which may pro-
     vide thrust for extended deep-space exploration, was step in direction
     of solving weight problem posed by electrical circuitry for smaller ion
     engines. ( LRC Release 64-60)
0 Columbia Univ. Electronics Research Laboratories announced develop-

     ment of plasma-jet generator that produced continuous jet of hot
     plasma-8,000 to 20,000° F-and that required no confining jacket or
     chamber. (A&A, 9/64,97)
0 In satellite communications demonstration at ALAA Washington meetings,

     Lt. Cdr. J. F. DeboId, Commanding 05cer, US. Naval Research and
     Development Satellite Communications Group, spoke via SYNCOM 11
     satellite with his second in command on board USNS Kingsport. Kings-
     port, which can acquire, track, control, and communicate via a satellite
     while cruising at sea, was built by Navy to complement two Army-
     developed communications terminals on East and West Coasts. (AIAA
     Booster, 7/2/64, 2)
* Engineers proposed development of intercontinental ballistic troop trans-
     port capable of carrying 1,200 troops to any trouble spot on earth in 45
     minutes. Such an Ithacus rocket transport would be ideal for helping
     stamp out “brush fire” conflicts, according to engineers Philip Bono
     and George C. Goldbaum of Douglas Aircraft who spoke at AIM annual
     meeting. If funds were committed to project, they considered the ICBM
     transport system might be operational by 1975. (Houston Chron.,
     7/3/64)
                                                                          Ad-
0 Final Polaris A-3 in test program was launched from Cape Kennedy.

     vanced Polaris’ 2,500-mi. flight was 41st in program begun in summer
     1962. (M&R, 7/13/64,14)
July 3: In preparation for launching of seventh Saturn I rocket (SA-7),
     NASA had completed major phase of evaluation of flight records of SA-6.
     Review of S A 4 data, in form of magnetic tapes, strip charts, oscil-
     lograms, photographs, etc., was made in collaboration with major ve-
     hicle contractors. Analysis reaffirmed the success of previous flight on
     May 28 despite loss of one engine 23 sec. before engine programed
     cutoff. (NASA Release 64-160)
July 5: NASA extended contract with Mason-Rust Co. for provision of support
     services at Michoud Operations near New Orleans. New $6,839,069
     modification awarded by MSFC, to continue in force till end of 1964,
                                                                           239
                                 AND    AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

     increased total Mason-Rust contract to $17,751,806, (Marshall Star,
     7/8/a, 1 )
July 5: Library of Congress had distributed to 30 large city and state libraries
     copies of Braille translations of books on space exploration. These in-
     formation aids for the blind had been published by Library of Congress
     under a NASA grant. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/5/64)
* Effective this date, USAF Western Test Range’s facility at Point Arguello
     became part of Vandenberg AFB, and its facility at Kwajalein Island was
     turned over to the Army. Organization plans for National Range Di-
     vision with its Eastern Test Range and Western Test Range had been
     announced M9y 4. (L.A.Times, 7/2/68)
* During 1,OOOth session in U.S.S.R. on radar probing of planets, Tass said,
     Soviet scientists used newly designed equipment and high-speed com-
     puter to successfully gather data on topography of planet Venus.
      (Pravda,7/5/64, ATSS-T Trans.)
* Second US. manned rocket flight was made 20 years ago today, when
     Northrop MX-324 flying wing was towed aloft and propelled by 200-
     1b.-thrust Aerojet rocket engine and flown for four minutes by test pilot
     Harry Crosby over Harper’s Dry Lake, Calif. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/64,
     44; A&A, 1915-60,47)
* Reported that new 125-fk. radiotelescope opened at England’s Jodrell Bank
     Radio Astronomy Station early in June could give insight into creation
     of universe. Radiotelescope was to detect and analyze high-frequency
     radio pulses emitted by stars 6 billion light-years distant. (Reuters,
     Chic. Trib.,7/6/64)
During week of July 5-11: Unmanned paraglider wing designed to make
     air-to-ground cargo deliveries to forward battle areas successfully com-
     pleted series of three flight tests at US. Army Yuma Proving Ground,
     Ark. The paraglider, also designed to be a spacecraft recovery system,
     slipped three 1,000-lb. cargo packages to earth without mishap from
     3,100 ft. Demonstration was performed by Space and Information Div.
     of North American Aviation under program called Precision Aerial
     Delivery System (PADS). (NAA S&ID Skywriter, 7/17/64, 1)
July 6: USAF launched Atlas-Agena D space booster from Vandenberg AFB,
     Calif., with unidentified payload. (M&R, 7/13/64, 14; SBD, 7/8/64,
     331
  European Space Research Organization (ESRO) made first launching, a
     British Skylark sounding rocket, to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di
     Quirra range in Sardinia. (NYT, 7/11/64, 5)
* NASA selected International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div.
     to supply technical services for support of Goddard Space Flight Cen-
     ter’s computer facilities. The computation services and allied systems
     permitted GSFC to acquire high-speed raw data from spacecraft and to
     convert it almost instantaneously into intelligible information concern-
     ing the spacecraft. Contractor was to staff and operate computer facili-
     ties related to launch monitoring system at Cape Kennedy, the early flight
     tracking station on Bermuda, and GSFC control center. (NASA Release
     64-166)
  MSC announced approval of improved Gemini spacesuit for use by Apollo
     astronauts in the earlier flights in earth orbit. Adoption of Gemini
     spacesuit would allow more time for development of Apollo suit, which
     would allow astronauts greatest mobility for walking on surface of
     moon. (Houston Post, 7/7/M)
240                                                      19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

             airlines pilot who used a weather map based on information trans-
                          a Tiros meteorological satellite on a flight from New
                                       “. ..
                         ar, Africa, said     the map was 50 accurate as to be
                           ...    in my estimation we have found the answer,
                          e.
     let’s send up more Tim.” Weather maps based on Tiros information
     were being given to pilots flying international routes, as a matter of
     course. (Las Cruces Swn-News, 7/6/64)
* In Aviation Week editorial, Robert Hotz said that until the past two years
     most nations in the world considered space technoIogy to be monopoly of
     the competing US. and U.S.S.R. Now they were beginning to partici-
     pate in space program themselves. Two primary reasons given were
     technical success of weather and communications satellites and “enlight-
     ened and effective” program in international cooperation operated by
     NASA. Hotz saw international space cooperation as the most powerful
     force binding nations of the world if early promise of international space
     technology is realized.
        “Perhaps the most heartening aspect of the international expansion
     of space activity is the manner in which the hard technical and financial
     facts are persuading nations to work together on cooperative projects
     ranging from global satellite systems to booster development and
     scientific exploration.
        “Part of this has been achieved through the NASA international coop-
     eration program for which Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy NASA Admin-
     istrator; Arnold Frutkin, head of the international programs office of
     NASA; and Dr. Harry Goett, director of Goddard Space Flight Center,
     deserve special credit.
        “The other portion has been achieved through Communications Satel-
     lite Corp., currently organizing global communications system with
     heavy international participation, and through the US. Weather Bu-
                                                                          .
     reau’s leadership in developing a global weather satellite system. . .”
      (Av. Wk., 7/6/64; CRY7/31/64, A4040-41)
0 McDonnell Aircraft Corp. ceIebrated its 25th anniversary.         Today with
     facilities worth $90 million, a )backlog of $1 billion in contracts, and
     35,000 employees, the company looked back to the day in 1939 when
     James S. McDonnell’s office had a typewriter, one employee, and no
     contracts. (AP, New Orleans Times-Picayune, 7/6/64)
* Scholars on UCLA faculty, having judged that space age overemphasized
     science in education at the expense of the humanities, sought support
    for proposed independent National Humanities Foundation. Founda-
     tion was to be structurally similar to NSF. Proposal, drawn up by M)-
     man Commission on the Humanities, was already in the hands of
     President Johnson. (Hartt, L.A. Times, 7/6/64)
July 7 : Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara reported to President
    Johnson that DOD’S cost-reduction efforts had saved GovernmGnt $2.5
    billion, iastead of previously estimated $1 billion, during FY 1964. In
     next three years DOD’S annual savings would total at Ieast $4.6 billion.
     McNamara singled out Titan 1 1contract with Martin Co. as one of best-
                                      1
     managed contracts DOD had, as result of incentives applied to program.
     Spending on Titan 1 1program was 1%
                           1                   below cost estimate. McNamara
     assured reporters that savings were not being achieved at expense of
     defense posture. (NYT, 7/8/M, 1 3; M&R, 7/13/64., 11)
                                          ,
                                                                          241
                ASTRONATJTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

Ju2y 7: U.S. Army presented two pioneer communications satellites, Score
     and Courier, to Smithsonian Institution during opening of Museum of
     History and Technology’s Hall of Electricity. Both Satellites were de-
    veloped at present Army Electronics Command, Ft. Monmouth, N.J.
     (Balt. Sun, 7 / 8 / a )
* In study financed by NASA, a Mexico City matador had his heart beat, res-
     piratory rate, and body temperature monitored during the height of a
    bull fight. Readings from sensors fixed to his skin were telemetered to
     instruments inside bull ring. Doctors at MSC used information in study
     to determine how much physical stress human body could withstand
     and what effect stress had on performance. It had been determined
    previously that many athletes undergo more physical stress than do
     astronauts in flight. (AP, NYT, 7/8/64., 12; MSC Roundup, 7/22/64,7)
  Yevgeny F. Loginov, head of Soviet Union’s airline, Aeroflot, said Soviet
     designers were working on supersonic airliner. He indicated U.S.S.R.
     hoped to have one in operation before the U.S. (AP, NYT, 7/8/64,
     58)
July 8: X-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joe Engle (USAF), flew 3,511 mph
      (mach 4.94) and gained altitude of 170,000 ft. in first test of infrared
     horizon scanner designed to give sharper outline of earth to astronauts
     re-entering earth’s atmosphere. Flight also enabled Engle to make
     pilot checkout of adaptive control system which had ability to sense
     atmospheric conditions surrounding the craft. Flight was postponed
     twice before successful effort. (NASA X-15 Proj. 0%; @ash. Post,
                                                               AP,
     7/9/64)
* Scientists from the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, the
     Swedish Space Committee, and NASA announced they would investigate
     the natuxe of noctilucent clouds during a period starting the last week
     in July and Extending through Aug. 24. This would be the second in
     series of rocket-borne experiments to be conducted from*Kronogird
     Range in Northern Sweden. Principal purpose of experiments was to
     confirm results of experimental flights completed in August 1962, when
     it was tentatively determined that noctilucent clouds were composed of
     meteoric particles or the residue of burned out meteors. Program calls
     for the firing of four Nike-Apache rockets for collection purposes and
     four Nike-Cajun rockets to measure temperatures and winds associated
     with the presence or absence of the clouds. (OAR Release 7-64-2)
a NASA announced grant of $1,125,000 to univ. of Illinois to finance con-
     struction of research laboratory facilities as wing to university’s Co-
     ordinated Science Laboratory. To be called Aerospace Research Cen-
     ter, the facilities were to be for investigations of ionosphere properties,
     propulsion, molecular densities, rendezvous problems, and plasma
     physics. (NASA Release 64-169)
* After two previous failures, USAF successfully launched four-stage, solid-
     fuel Athena missile. Rocket was fired from Green River, Utah, on es-
     timated 15-min., 475-mi. flight to White Sands, N. Mex., carrying one of
     series of subscale experimental re-entry vehicles being tested as part
     of program to develop advanced re-entry vehicles for space travel and
     ICBM’s. No other details of flight were given. (AP,Hartford Courant,
     7/9/64)
  Senate Independent Offices Subcommittee of Committee on Appro-
     priations concluded its hearings on H.R. 11296, FY 1965 appropriations
     for independent offices (including NASA). (NASA LAB III/134-135)
242            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964,

J d y 8: European Space Research Organization launched second British
    Skylark sounding rocket with scientific payload to altitude of 125 mi.
    from Salt0 di Quirra range in Sardinia. This launch and identical
    one the previous day were initial attempts of the 10-nation organization.
     (NYT, 7/11/64, 5)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Senate Appropriations Commit-
    tee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee that 15 Saturn V flights were
    planned for Project Apollo program, the lunar landing to be accom-
    plished in the last three months of 1969 with the fifteenth flight. Webb
     also said that if the proposed $5.3 billion NASA budget for fiscal year
     1965 were cut so that the Apollo program had to be slowed down, the
    cost of the program would increase by a billion dollars with each added
    year of delay. (Text)
0 Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation received four NASA contract

    modifications worth $22,378,626 on existing research and development
    production contracts for the F-1 engines, which provide thrust in first
    stage of Saturn V launch vehicle. NASA also awarded contract modi-
    fications to Douglas Aircraft Co. totaling $31,471,836 for additional
    work on the S-IV and S-IVB rocket stages. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64,
     1,9; Nashville Tennessean, 7/9/64)
  Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC,
     announced specific assignments for astronauts. Included in assignments
     was that of Alan Shepard, Jr., who was named chief of Astronaut Office,
    taking place of Slayton, who had been acting in the position in addition
    to other duties. ( MSC Roundup, 7 / 8 / a , 1)
* Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, re-
     ported in New Scientist that technical difficulties, and not a deliberate
    slackening o effort, were hampering Soviet activities in getting men
                  f
    to the moon. He noted that the Russians apparently had not made a
     probe work in space successfully for more than a few weeks and con-
     cluded that the Soviets were failinq where “once they shone-in basic
     rocketry techniques.” (Sirnons, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
  FAA experiments conducted over Oklahoma City during prior five
    months showed that the magnification of a sonic boom under certain
    atmospheric conditions occurred more frequently and with more force
    than had been predicted. The unexpected finding led FAAAdministrator
     Najeeb E. Halaby to declare at a news conference that the sonic boom
    problem presented by a supersonic airliner appeared to be “more sen-
    ous” than had been supposed. Halaby rejected charges that nation’s
    supersonic airliner program vias k . 3 hasty. He said tbat those most
    concerned with the plane’s development felt that they were “going about
    the right rate.” Further sonic boom tests would be made, he said, prob-
    ably over desert areas. (Finney, NYT, 7/9/64, 12; Wash. Post, 7/9/
      64)
  ComSatCorp announced that six persons had been nominated by its board
    of directors for election to the new board by public stockholders. They
    were: Leo D. Welch, Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, David M. Kennedy, George L.
    Killion, Leonard H. Marks, and Bruce G. Sundlun. The corporation
    announced that the first annual meeting of the shareholders was tenta-
    tively planned $or Sept. 17 in Washington. (ComSatCorp Release,
    7/8/64; NYT, 7/9/64?, 43C, 4%)
                                                                           243
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64,

Ju2y 8: Dr. John P. Meehan, physiologist at Univ. of Southern California, an-
     nounced he would begin experiment in which 15 young men would
     lie fiat on their backs for 30 days, then be put in a centrifuge and be
      subjected to forces eight times normal gravity while attempting to
      operate simulated space capsule controls. Purpose of the experiment
      was to duplicate effect of long periods of weightlessness in space on
      body’s heart-blood system and to devise ways of overcoming it. (AP,
     Balt. Sun, 7 / 9 / M )
0 Teamster President James R. Hoffa ordered end to picketing that had tied

     up vital construction work at Cape Kennedy. (Wash. Daily News,
     7/8/64)
July 9: NASA Nike-Apache vehicle launched at 1 2 1 3 a.m. EDT from Wallops
      Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 1M-mi.altitude in experi-
     ment to measure light intensity and charged particle flux as functions of
     altitude. Payload and spent second stage, which were not separated
     during flight, impacted 98 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Experi-
      ment was fifth in series to measure and study the nature and causes of
     aurorae and airglow in the night sky during the dark of the moon, project
     ‘of Rice Univ. under NASA grant. (Wallops Release 64-53)
  Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed utiliza-
     tion of space technology for commercial application before American
     Management Association in New York:
        U
           In the present century, the lag from basic discoveries to applications
     has become progressively shorter. The Space Age is still further re-
     ducing the lag.
        “TWOmajor programs are under way to meet the Congressional
     mandate for the widest possible dissemination of the results of space
     activities. The first aims to make available the primary technical data
     to aerospace scientists and engineers. The second repackages the in-
     formation and moves space-generated technology out of the agency’s
     laboratories and the plants of its contractors into the non-space industrial
    complex.
        4L
          NASA collects, organizes, and disseminates scientific and technical
     information on its in-house and contractor work by means of the latest
     in computer, microfilm, and other methods. Decentralization with local
     access is the keynote.
        “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged
     to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the purpose
     of the Technology Utilization Program, the first national program of its
     type: Staffs at each NASA Center are systematically organizing the re-
     porting of new or improved ideas, materials, methods, and technology
     developed in the course of research and development activities. The
     more promising reports go for analysis to a group of industrial research
     institutes familiar with current industrial needs and requirments. If
     the ana€ysis indicates promise, reports are published and indexed so
     that they are readily available to any segment of the economy that may
     find them useful.
        “NASA is making significant contributions to the growth of science and
     technology in most major fields. More important, NASA is dealing with
     the organization and utilization of expanding knowledge in a highly
     advanced and, we Believe, very effective manner.” (Text)
244             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

J d y 9: Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of MSC, was one of featured speakers
     at opening of Houston Museum of Natural Science and Burke
      Baker Planetarium in Houston. Dr. Gilruth said MSC was negotiating
      with museum officials for part time use of planetarium for Apollo
     project. (MSC Roundup, 7/22/64, 1)
* George Miskovsky, Oklahoma City attorney, said he would seek reinstate-
     ment of Okla. court injunction against sonic booms later reversed by a
      US. District Court. He termed FAA plans to continue sonic boom test-
      ing over Oklahoma City while admitting it was a more serious problem
      than originally believed as “more bureaucratic double talk.” (AP, Balt.
     Sun, 7/10/64)
* Lt. CoL Floyd J. Sweet (USAF, Ret.), member of NASA Administrator’s staff,
      became the twenty-ninth member of the Helms Hall Soaring Hall of
      Fame. He was cited for sustained leadership in US. soaring activities as
      a pilot, instructor, club organizer, and officer of the Soaring Society
      of America. Colonel Sweet’s first glider competition was in 1932.
       (Helms Release)
July 10: Asked at news conference if he thought Congressional budget-cutting
      would preclude lunar trip in this decade, President Johnson said: “I
      think the funds requested are necessary. I hope the Congress will act
      on this appropriation soon. The committee has not acted on the appro-
      priation yet. I don’t know how to gauge the exact way it will exercise
      its judgment. I have every reason to believe that it will be sympathetic
      to our national objectives, and I would hope that they will be generous in
      this response to our request for funds.” (Transcript, NYT, 7/11/64,
      6)
’ Dr. Winston Edward Kock, vice president-research for Bendix Corp., was
      named Director of NASA’s     Electronics Research Center to be located in
      the Boston area, effective Sept. 1. As director, he would have charge
      of fundamental work in space and aeronautical electronics. (NASA Re-
      lease 64-172; UPI, Wash. Post, 7/11/64)
* USAF launched unidentified satellite toward polar orbit from Vandenberg
      AFB with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle.         (UPI, Wash. Post, 7/11/64;
      NYT, 7/12/64, 2)
* Astronaut Neil Armstrong addressed Aerospace Workshop at Drake Univ. :
      “We don’t feel at this time it is particularly important whether an astro-
      naut is masculine or feminine. Astronauts are picked on the basis of ex-
      perience and training. At present there are no women with the proper
      qualifications available. Some day we will have qualified women and
      I’m sure they’ll be included in the program.” (Des Moines Register,
      7/11/64)
9 Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC, said at a Los Angeles Rotary Club lunch-

      eon : “We have identified and produced experimental quantities of revo-
      lutionary new high strength, lightweight, high temperature materials”
      among which is one formed of boron fibers and a new plastic binder.
      “The advantages of such a material for construction of aircraft and
      space vehicles are obvious,” pointing out that it would allow a high
      increase in the operating temperatures of most power plants. This
      would permit the use of fuels generating higher thrust levels for greater
      payloads and speed. (Text; AP, NYT, 7/12/64,5)
                                                                         245
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

July IO: Univ. of Southern California’s human centrifuge, only facility of its
     kind on a college or university campus in America, was to be modernized
     and its office areas enlarged to accommodate expanding biomedical
     and aerospace research programs under two NASA grants totaling
     $280,000. ( L A .Times, 7/10/64)
* James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, talked and dined with Astronaut
     John H. Glenn, Jr., at the home of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of
     MSC, in Houston. Afterwards, Col. Glenn told an interviewer: “We
     talked about a number of different areas in which I could work. I
     want a part-time job, a consulting job.” (NYT, 7/12/64)
  Reception honoring Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of NASA Lewis Research
     Center, was held on his 35th anniversary of service with NACA-NASA.
     (Lewis News, 7/17/64,3)
July I I .-U.S.S.R. announced successful orbiting of two satellites, ELECTRON
     ~n and ELECTRON IV, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency
     Tass said the satellites were studying the earth‘s magnetic field and
     radiation belts, radiation arriving from deep space, and the physical
     conditions in the upper atmospheric layers. ELECTRON 1 1 was orbiting
                                                               1
     at 7,040-km. (4,375-mi.) apogee, d05-km. (252-mi.) perigee, 2-hr.,
     48 min. period, and 60.86” inclination to the equator. ELECTRON IV
     was orbiting at 66,235-km. (41,158-mi.) apogee, 459-km. (285-mi.)
     perigee, 21-hr., 54-min. period, and 60.86” inclination to the equator.
     (Tass, Izvestia, 7/12/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7 / l l /
     64)
  Gemini-Titan I1 (GT-2) rocket which was to launch unmanned Gemini
     spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy. It arrived by C-133B cargo
     plane from Martin Co. plant in Baltimore where it had undergone test-
     ing. (AP, Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel, 7/12/64)
  USAP Titan I11 transtage was successfully static-test-fired for more than
     six minutes to verify compatability of various subsystems, in operation
     to simulate injection of MOL into 100-mi. orbit. Officials said firing
     went as expected, including length of burn time, although no mention
     was made as to whether it reached 312-second specific impulse de-
     manded by Air Force. (SBD, 7/14/64,66; M&R, 7/20/64,8)
* Japan successfully launched three-stage Lambda 111, its largest and most
     advanced research rocket, on a flight to collect data on the upper layer
     of the atmosphere. The rocket attained an altitude of 600 mi. in the
     17-min., 20-sec. flight from Kagoshima Space Center in Kagoshima
     Prefecture, Japan. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64; NASA Off. Int. Aff.)
* The Federal government was critized by National Academy of Sciences
     committee for plunging into such major undertakings as a moon ex-
     pedition or a supersonic airplane without assessing the effects on the
     Nation’s limited scientific and engineering manpower resources. The
     study, made public by President Johnson, said that since the Govern-
     ment supported about three fifths of all those engaged in research and
     development, it had a “massive influence” on the deployment and utili-
     zation of scientists and engineers. This, in turn, imposed an “entirely
     new order of responsibility” upon the Government to prevent “malutili-
     zation” of the manpower and to achieve a “balanced allocation of sci-
     entific and engineering talent.” Two of the committee’s principal
     recommendations :
246            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 96 41

        (1) Steps be taken by the Executive Office of the President to de-
    velop an integrated program for collecting and analyzing information
    about scientific and engineering manpower.
        (2) “Before the government reaches a decision to undertake a
    great technological program, it should make a careful assessment of
    the impact of the decision on the deployment and utilization of scien-
    tists and engineers.”
        Nowhere in its report did the committee suggest that the lunar expedi-
    tion had unduly diverted manpower from other fields; in fact, the re-
    port showed that slightly less than 30 per cent of the Nation’s scien-
    tists, engineers, and secondary school teachers of science and mathe-
     matics were engaged in defense, space, and atomic energy research, and
     that space accounted for less than 5 per cent.
        The study, an outgrowth of a request by President Kennedy in 1961
     for a review of the Nation’s scientific and engineering manpower re-
     sources, was prepared by a 17-man committee headed by D .James R.
                                                                  r
     Killian, Jr., science adviser to former President Eisenhower and now
     chairman of the corporation of MIT. (Finney, NYT, 7/12/64, 1, 33;
     Carey, AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64)
July 11 : Journal of the Armed Forces noted that Philip Bono, with Missile
     and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co., had redeveloped Itha-
     cus (formerly Icarus) , his study concept of a spatecraft which could
     move 132 tons of cargo or 1,200 troops anywhere in the world in 30
     or 40 min. Ithacus was formerly conceived for launch from fixed land
     site, but under the new concept, there would be seaborne launch from
     nuclear aircraft carrier of Enterprise class. This would reduce vul-
     nerability of the system. (Haggerty, J / A m e d Forces, 7/11/64, 2 )
  Council of Defense and Space Industry Associations (CODSIA) formed
     under sponsorship of Aerospace Industries Association, National Secur-
     ity Industrial Association, and Electronic Industries Association.
     Council would operate solely as coordinating and communicating vehicle
     between Government and industry, not as master association. ( J /
     Armed Forces, 7/11/64,15)
July 12: NASA announced that Europeans in nine countries would be able
     to watch the Republican National Convention via NASA’s     RELAY 1 com-
                                                                        1
     munications satellite. Television networks in England, France, Bel-
     gium, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, and Italy
     were to use RELAY Ir five times during the four-day convention, July
     20-23. Similar coverage would be provided during the Democratic
     National Convention, beginning August 24. (NASA Release 64170)
0 NASA announced that four flight tests of liquid-hydrogen stages in Centaur

     and Saturn rockets had established liquid hydrogen as a new high-
     energy fuel for space vehicles. Liquid hydrogen, when mixed with
     liquid oxygen, produced about 35 per cent more thrust than the kerosene-
     type fuels normally used. ( NASA Release 64164)
  It was probable that the Soviet space probe ZOND I, was nearing
     Venus and would try to send back the first close-up television pictures
     of that planet, reported Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank
     Radio Experimental Station. (UPI, Wash. Post, 7/13/64)
* AEC disclosed decision to discontinue Project Pluto, attempt to build low-
     flying, atomic-powered missile, despite ten years of effort and $9200
     million investment. Livermore Radiation Laboratory, initiator and
                                                                          247
                     ON




July 13: President Johnson signed NASA Authorization Act (H.R. 10456)
    authorizing $5,227,506,000 for NASA JY 1965. Largest part of au-
                                            ?
    thorization was for Project Apollo, $2,677,500,000, The bill was
    $76,494,000 less than the Johnson Administration had requested. (AP,
    NYT, 7/15/64, 15)
  The largest contract awarded to date for work on the NASA Mississippi Test
     Operations facility was awarded to Koppers Co., Inc., Malan Construc-
    tion Department, New York City, for the construction of the first test
    position on the S-IC dual test stand. The contract was for $17,280,157,
     and was awarded by the US. Army Corps of Engineers, Mobile Dis-
    trict. Work on the stand would include construction of three concrete
    tiers each about 158 ft. high, a tower approximately 105 ft. high, a
    steel flame deflector, and other equipment. (Marshal2 Star, 7/15/64,
     1)
  DOD announced it was abandoning plans to join with ComSatCorp in a
    space communications system meeting both military and commercial
    needs. Despite the economies of participation, the factor of inter-
    national participation in the satellite system and the control foreign
    nations would have over a communications network that DOD wanted
     for emergency command control over its forces finally tipped the balance
     against DOD cooperation. (Finney, NYT, 7/14/64,15)
  MSFC planners believed a post-Saturn V booster would be needed if
    the US. were to undertake a manned planetary exploration program,
    Missiles and Rockets reported. They also favored the so-called Block I1
    vehicle, which would have two stages using new propulsion techniques
    and high-pressure engines. First stage would be recoverable. (M&R,
    7/13/64, 9)
  Mercury capsule (MA-9) i which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper flew 22
                              n
    earth orbits was viewed by more than 20,000 people when on display
    in Nebraska State Capitol at Lincoln. (Omaha E v e . world-Her., 7/13/
    64)
  Spatial orientation and stabilization of Early Bird, ComSatCorp's first
    experimental satellite, was to be achieved using a hydrogen-peroxide
    reaction jet control system. Developed by Walter Kidde and Co., and
    originally intended for SYNCOM 11, newer version would be capable of at
    least a 10-yr. lifetime. (M&R, 7/13/64,27)
  NASA announced that it would participate in about 200 one- to three-week
    aerospace workshops and teacher institutes at colleges and universities
    in 48 states during the summer. NASA spacemobiles, films, exhibits, and
    lectures would be used to acquaint teachers with the latest in space activ-
    ities. (NASA Release W 1 6 8 )
248                                                      1 9 0 4.
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

July 13: Paul Haney, MSC Public Affairs Officer, said he would make a study
      of facilities used for dissemination of news at Republican National Con-
     vention in effort to develop efficient techniques for disseminating news
     during manned space flights controlled by MSC. (Malonqr, Houston
     Post, 7/14/64)
* Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that the week of
     July 20 would be Defense Cost Reduction Week as an occasion to honor
     civilian and military personnel who had helped trim $2.5 billion from
     defense costs and to stimulate efforts to reach the projected goal of $4.6
     billion savings over the next three years. (Phillips, NYT, 7/14/64)
* Largest monolithic solid grain ever poured was well into its 20-day curing
     cycle at Aerojet-Dade Div. of Aerojet-General Corp. The 12ain., 37-ft.-
     long “Subscale 1” would be test-fired in the same cast-cure pit in mid-
     August. Both batch and continuous mix processes were used with the
     continuous mix working for 55 straight hours in the Z%-day pouring
     job. The 100-ton grain was to produce about 600,000 lbs. thrust in
     checking out the nozzle, materials, and.processes developed for the up-
     coming 260-in. large solid rocket test at Aerojet. (M&R, 7/13/64, 11)
* Yelena Andrianovena Nikolayeva, infant daughter of Russian cosmo-
     nauts Valentina Tereshkova and Andrian Nikolayev, was to be thor-
     oughly examined for next few years to determine whether weightlessness
     or radiation of her parents had any effect. (Snider, CDNS, Houston
     Chron., 7/13/fj4)
* Observations by University of Bern (Switz.) scientists for several years in
     the Simplon Tunnel showed that effects of ionizing radiations also existed
     in a radiation-free environment. In the tunnel, which had proven to be
     free of any traces of cosmic radiation, artemia eggs showed only a 60-
     70% rate of offspring, Hordexurn seeds became sterile after six months,
     and algae did not grow after a few weeks. (M&R, 7/13/64,27)
July 14: Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation and Douglas Air-
     craft Co. received three contract increments totaling more than $8
  , million for work on S-IVB stage of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch ve-
     hicles from NASA MSFC. Additional funding of $3.6 million went to
     Rocketdyne to equip their plant for production of 5-2 engines and for
    providing static test site and propellant storage area. Douglas received
    two incremental contracts. One, for $2.3 million, was for purchase of
     long-term items on recently ordered additional eight S-IVB stages.
     Other, for $2.2 million, was for purchase of additional set of automatic
    checkout equipment. (SBD, 7/14/641, 63; Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 9)
  NASA announced it had selected General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics
     Corp. to perform preliminary work, estimated to be worth about $1.7
    million, on development of advanced type of nuclear reactor for use in
    powering spacecraft. Company would conduct studies on use of tung-
    sten to contain uranium fuel in compact high-powered reactor that might
    power a rocket. Work would be performed for Space Nuclear Pro-
    pulsion O5ce operated jointly by NASA and AEC. (NASA Release 64-173;
     .WSJ, 7/15/fj4)
  Pratt & Whitney received $685,000 contract .from NASA MSFC for study
     and integration of an advanced liquid-oxygen-hydrogen rocket engne.
    Objective would be to integrate existing feasible concepts into one engine
    best able to meet future requirements. Work would be coordinated with
     other advanced mission studies such as Saturn V improvement, post
                                                                          249
                                  AND   AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS

     Saturn, and the reusable orbital shuttle transport. Configuration would
     be an engine with a single chamber turbopump iinit with variable mix-
     ture ratio control. It would be throttleable and capable of multiple
     restarts and with a thrust range of 300,000 to 350,000 lbs. One-year
     study would use data produced under several separate NASA engine
     technology contracts at Pratt & Whitney with inputs from Aerojet-
     General Corp., Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, and Gen-
     eral Electric Co. (M&R, 7/20/64,8; SBD, 7/14/64, 63)
July 14: Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co. has sub-
     mitted study to NASA which concluded that six-man space research sta-
     tion, capable of orbiting for one year, could be orbiting earth within five
     years. Crew, serving on staggerEd schedule, would travel to and from
     station on modified Gemini or Apollo spacecraft. Station itself would
     provide small degree of artificial gravity by rotating slowly and would
     include centrifuge to simulate re-entry forces. (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib.,
     7/14/64)
  Dr. Charles A. Berry of NASA’s said that some communicable diseases
                                     MSC
     could develop on space missions of up to 14 days if astronauts were
     exposed during preflight preparation period. Therefore NASA plans
     included turning the spacecraft around and returning to earth in severe
     cases and equipping vehicles with emergency medical supplies. Also,
     doctors might be trained as astronauts for 30- to 60-day missions.
      (Phil. Eve. Bull., 7/14/64)
July 14-15: NASA’s   Wallops Station, Wallops Island, Va., launched seven sci-
     entific experiments in a period of less than 10 hours. All of the experi-
     ments involved sounding rocket experiments carried aloft by Nike-
     Apache rockets. Four of the payloads carried sodium vapor cloud
     experiments for GSFC to provide data on wind directions and speeds and
     at various altitudes and the changes which occurred during the period
     from sunset to dawn (peak altitudes: 118 mi., 119 mi., 119 mi., and 119
     mi., respectively). . The other three were ionosphere experiments for the
     Univ. of Illinois and the Geophysics Corp. of America (peak altitudes:
     97 mi., 99 mi., and 106 mi., respectively). The main purpose of these
     tests was to observe and measure structural changes in the ionos here
                                                                         l
     from nighttime to daytime, as radiation from the sun penetrated own-
     ward. All seven experiments were successful. The sounding rocket
     experiments were part of the third International Year of the Quiet Sun
      (IQSY) “quarter day” in the coordinated solar study program.        (Wal-
     lops Releases 64-54, 64-55, 64-56; GSFC Historian; NASA Rpts. SRL)
July 15: The U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS xxxv into orbit. The satellite’s
     initial orbital parameters were: period, 89.2 min.; apogee, 268 km.
      (161 mi.); perigee, 217 km. (130 mi.); inclination, 51.3”. The
     satellite, carrying scientific equipment for space studies, was reported
     to be functioning normally. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/17/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.;
     AP, NYT, 7/16/64)
  NASA announced that it had selected 22 scientific experiments for the fifth
     Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-E), scheduled to be launched
     in 1966. 54 scientists from four countries (U.S., U.K., France, and the
     Netherlands) representing universities, government, and private in-
     dustry would take part in designing and constructing the experiments.
     The satellite was scheduled to be launched into an eccentric orbit, with
     an apogee of 92,000 mi. and a perigee of 170 mi. The Ogo-E experi-
      768-598 0-69-1’7
250                                                        196 4
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     ments would study energetic particle radiation, earth and interplanetary
     magnetic fields, effect of solar gases on the earth’s magnetic fields and
     radio communication, and the effect of solar radiation on the earth.
     (NASA Release 64-171)
July 15: DOD announced that since early July the Army had operated a spe-
     cial radar at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The radar, the Multi-
     function Array Radar (MAR)        was part of the Nike-X anti-ICBM missile
     system. Called a phased array radar, MAR worked on the theory that
     radar beams could be “bent” electronically by playing one beam against
     another. This called for a delicacy and timing far exceeding man’s
     capabilities. It took an extremely fast computer to play the beam.
     The MAR was to replace three radars used in the Nike-Zeus Antimissile
     Missile System: acquisition radar for detecting missile warheads at
     long ranges; the target tracking radar for pinpointing the location of
     the warheads; and the discrimination radar for sorting live warheads
     from decoys. (DOD Release 519-64)
  In a speech before the Briefing Conference on Government Contracting for
     Research and Development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association
     and the Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., in Boston, Ernest W. Brackett,
     NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator for Procurement Policy,
     spoke of NASA’s    policy towards incentive contracts : “Incentive contracts
     are not the answer to everything, but much good can and will come
     from them. They will effect more realistic cost proposals. When a com-
     pany’s incentive fee or profit is based on its cost proposal, it will not
     be on the low side. This means less cost overruns which are subject to
                                                                      ...
     so much criticism and which disrupt Government budgets.                There
     will also be more careful and detailed work definitions because a con-
     tractor wants to know what he is expected to do and be able to price
     it out if his incentive fee depends on performance and cost. It takes
     longer to negotiate incentive contracts and negotiations are harder. . . .
     Government personnel will be more careful, particularly in the tech-
     nical areas, when incentive provisions are included. Another advan-
     tage should be fewer controls by Government over contract administra-
     tion details, such as approval of overtime or sub-contractor selection.
     NASA would like to see contractors make higher profits but wants to have
     proof they have earned them. The health of the aerospace and elec-
     tronics industries depends on their realizing a reasonable return for what
     they do. Incentive methods of contracting appear to be the best way
     this can be done.” (Text)
  The platform adopted by the Republican National Convention con-
     tained a number of statements pertaining to the US. space program.
     The platform stated: “This administration has delayed research and
     development in advanced weapons systems and thus confronted the
     American people with a fearsome possibility that Soviet advances, in
     the decade of the 1970’s, may surpass America’s present lead. Its mis-
     use of cost effectiveness has stifled the creativity of the Nation’s military,
     scientific, and industrial communities.
           It has failed to originate a single new major strategic weapons sys-
        $6


     tem after inheriting from a Republican administration the most power-
     ful military force of all time. It has concealed a lack of qualitative
     advance for the 1970’s by speaking of a quantitative strength which
     by then will be obsolete. It has not demonstrated the foresight necessary
     to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple Orbit-
                                                                         251
                                 AND                    19 0 4
               ASTRONAUTICS            AERONAUTICS,

        “It has endangered security by downgrading efforts to prepare de-
     fenses against enemy ballistic missiles. It has retarded our own military
     development for near and outer space, while the enemy’s development
               ...
     moveson.
                  ...
        “We pledge         replanning of the present space program to provide
     for a more orderly, yet aggressively pursued step-by-step development,
     remaining alert to the danger of overdivision of skilled personnel in
     critical shortage from other vital areas such as health, industry, educa-
     tion, and science.” (Text, CR,7/28/64, A3934, A3939)
Mid-July: US.Weather Bureau prepared a letter to the World Meteoro-
            The
     logical Organization advising that Automatic Picture Transmission
     (APT) pictures from TIROS VIII were no longer usable. Useful APT
     pictures totaled 4,067. (GSFC Historian)
July 16: NASA Wallops Station launched a sounding rocket with instru-
     mented payload to determine the effects of the ionosphere on delicate
     low-frequency radio radiation receiving sensors. A Nike-Apache rocket
     boosted the payload, designed to test instrumentation for possible use
     in the space astronomy program, to an altitude of 85 mi. Preliminary
     data indicated the experiment was successful. (Wallops Release 64-57)
0 US. Army’s       XV-SA “lift-fan” research plane, a craft with hori-
     zontal fans buried in its wings and nose, made its first vertical takeoff
     and landing, at Edwards AFB. The horizontal fans provided downward
     thrust for the vertical takeoff. The fans were powered during takeoff
     by the exhaust from the craft’s jet engines, which was then diverted
     straight behind the plane for horizontal flight. This technique had the
     advantage that no more engine power was required for vertical flight
     than for normal subsonic cruising, and hence the plane had more eco-
     nomical fuel consumption. (DOD Release 5 2 1 4 ; Witkin, NYT,
     7/18/64)
0 White House announced that the US. and the U.S.S.R.          had reached an
     informal agreement on limited scientific cooperation in developing
     methods for desalting sea water, including possible use of atomic
     energy. The first step in the cooperative program was to be an ex-
     change of inspection visits by technical experts of the two countries to
     laboratories and experimental desalinization plants in the two countries.
     In addition to the reciprocal visits, the informal agreement called for
     an exchange of scientific reports, including results obtained by the two
     nations from work on pilot and demonstration desalting plants. (Fin-
     ney, NYT, 7/16/64,1,6)
0 It was reported that NASA was actively considering methods to be used for

     exploration by astronauts on the moon. Two devices were under con-
     sideration: a mobile laboratory (Molab) in which men could work
     and also go out in spacesuits to gather rock and soil samples, and a
     “lunar hopper,” a helicopter device for short flights to sites that
     could not be reached on foot or by Molab. Parallel studies of the Molab
     concept were being undertaken by Boeing Co., Seattle, and Bendix Corp.
     of Ann Arbor, under contracts of $800,000. Bell Aerosystems Co.,
     Buffalo, had been awarded a $199,333 contract to study the lunar
     hopper concept. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
0 It was reported that Douglas Aircraft Co., Santa Monica, had submitted a

     proposal to NASA for a system which would enable a single booster
      to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple Orbit-
252             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4.

    Multiple Satellite (MOMS), consisted of a number of satellites fastened
    together by explosive bolts. The system was designed for use with a
    Douglas Delta launch vehicle. Several successful launches of two and
    three satellites together had been accomplished before, but never as
    many as five as proposed in the new system. (Houston Post, 7/16/64)
Jdy16: In a speech before a briefing conference on contracting for research
    and development sponsored by the Federal Bar Association and the
    Bureau of National Affairs, General Bernard Schriever, AFSC, stated
    that in his opinion “when understanding is fostered and encouraged
    among the various sectors of national life, such as industry, the pro-
    fessions, the scientific community, and government, then rapid progress
    can be made toward national objectives.” He cited the USAF ballistic
    missile program as an example of this principle at work and stated
    that the long-range USAF planning study (Project Forecast) set up in
     1963 attempted also to put this principle to work, by employing broad
    participation by all the services, several Government agencies, and
    personnel from universities, corporations, and non-profit organizations.
     (AFSC Release 47-R-91)
  Astronaut Scott Carpenter was involved in a motor bike accident in Ber-
    muda and suffered a fracture of his lower left arm. Carpenter was in
     Bermuda to participate in a Navy test in which he would have submerged
     in Sea Lab I diving chamber with four Navy divers to a depth of 192
     feet, but his injury precluded his participation in the test. He was
    reported to be resting comfortably. (N.Y. Her. Trib.,7/17/64; AP,
    Balt. Sun,7/17/64)
  Brig. Gen. David Sarnoff, Chairman of the Board of RCA, addressed Na-
    tional Automation Conference of the American Bankers Association
     at the New York World’s Fair, and predicted: “Over the next 20 years,
     I am convinced, computers will touch off an explosion in the social
    sciences comparable to that which we witnessed during the past half cen-
                                   ..  .
    tury in the physical sciences.
        “A global linkup of computers will be accomplished through com-
     munications satellites, high-capacity transistorized cables, microwave
    conduits, as well as standard telephone and telegraph links. Data will
     move through broadband channels at speeds of up to 20 million bits
     per second, thousands of times faster than in today’s systems. Ulti-
    mately, laser beams may transmit vast quantities of information in-
                                                                 ...
     stantaneously in the form of light through hoselike cables.
        “Such advances will inevitably bring about basic transformations in
     fields far beyond those in which computers function today. Matching
     the technical prospects to the human environment, I see society making
    profound adjustments in many directions. The five main areas af-
     fected are likely to be: Work, leisure, education, health, and poli-
            . .”
     tics. .        (Text; CR,8/3/64, A4051-53)
July 17: USAF launched Atlas-Agena D booster from Cape Kennedy with
     triple-satellite payload. Press sources reported the booster orbited two
     DOD Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites and a 4.5-lb. tetrahedral satel-
    lite. The three satellites were reported to be injected initially into
     elliptical orbits ranging from 120 to 65,000 mi. altitudes; ground com-
     mand signal maneuvered one NRDS into 65,000-mi. circular orbit, and
     similar maneuver was planned for the other NRDS two days later. The
     “Pygmy,” designed to measure electrons in the Van Allen belts, would
                                                                           253
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

     continue in the elliptical orb
     twin radiation detectors were
     to the first pair, reported to h
      (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 7]19/64; Av. Wk., 7/20/64,24; M&R, 7/27/64,
     22)
July 17: The US. Weather Bureau reported that a hurricane having winds
     of 75 mph had been located by TIROS VII satellite 1,000 mi. southwest of
     San Diego. (Sun Diego Union, 7/18/64; US.Weather Bureau)
* British scientists at the Jodrell Bank radio astronomy station were reported
     searching the skies for the Russian space probe ZOND I which was be-
    lieved to be approaching Venus. The Russians had never revealed
     the precise mission of the probe and refused to supply the Jodrell
     Bank scientists with the radio frequencies on which it was operating,
     but it was believed that the probe would closely approach Venus during
     the 72-hr. period beginning July 17. (Reuters, Minneapolis Morning
     Trib., 7/18/64)
           Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving stud-
  NASA’s
     ies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed
     to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed
     on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth
     orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA
     Release 6 6 1 7 5 )
  In speech accepting Republican nomination for President, Sen. Barry M.
     Goldwater said: “I can see, and I suggest all thoughtful men must con-
     template, the flowering of an Atlantic civilization, the whole world of
     Europe reunified and free, trading openly across its borders, communi-
     cating openly across the world.
                                                                         ..   .”
        “This is a goal far, far more meaningful than a moon shot.
     (Text, NYT, 7/11/64?, A10)
* Two attorneys in Oklahoma City sought a Federal court injunction to
     stop unlimited testing of supersonic aircraft over the city. The suit
     alleged that the tests being conducted by the FAA were causing undue
     mental and physical harm to Oklahoma City residents because of sonic
     booms. (AP, NYT, 7/19/64)
* The British Aviation Ministry was reported to have recently agreed to
     pay the equivalent of $840 to a Welsh farmer, David Lloyd-Davies, who
     contended that his mare died of fright when a sonic boom hit his farm.
      (UPI, NYT, 7/17/64,12)
  A report from GAO to Congress charged that USN had spent $13.3 million
     to put rocket launchers on fighter planes and then had taken them off
     again because they created too many problems. The rockets had caused
     the fighters to pitch upward, and in many cases a plane would overtake
     and collide with a rocket it had launched. The GAO report said that
     the Navy could have saved about $4 million if it had gotten information
     available before t e launchers were ordered. (UPI, Houston Chron.,
                          h
     7/18/64)
        article in the Russian publication Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star)
0 An

     reported a speech delivered by Russian Premier Khrushchev before a
     group of professors and students in Mishkol’tse in April 1964. In the
     speech Khrushchev noted that in the U.S. “the scientists to a considerable
                                   ..   the US. has pirated its scientific stafh
     degree are not Americans ,
     from the representatives of various nations.” The article went on to
                                                          c
2                                      AERONAUTICS, 19641




     ments in the field of rocketry and cosmonautics, to be sure in all fields
     of science and technology, are due to the brains and the talent of the
     Soviet scientists alone, without any help from the outside.” (Krasnaya
     Zvezda, 7/17/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Jzdy 18: It was reported that NASA was considering diverting money from
     some of its other programs in an effort to save the National goal of land-
     ing men on the moon in the 1960’s. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Asso-
     ciate Administrator of NASA, said in an interview that the agency
     “faced a real uphill battle in the next five years” to achieve a lunar
     landing before 1970. He stated that the probability of success was
     “not as high as we’d like it to be, since this is a national commitment.”
     Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space
     Council, said in interview that any further schedule slippages would
     inevitably throw the lunar landing into the 1970’s. Space officials were
     still holding to the 1969 goal, and, he added, “We haven’t given this up
     yet.” At the current time NASA was $217 million short of the bare
     minimum it had requested for FY 1965. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star,
     7/19/a)
  A Naval Research Laboratory team under Dr. Herbert Friedman an-
     nounced that it had disproved the theory that the Crab Nebula in
     the constellation Orion had a superdense neutron star at its center.
     The experiment was carried out July 7 by means of x-ray detectors flown
     to an altitude of 144 mi. over New Mexico by an Aerobee sounding
     rocket. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/18/64)
  It was reported that USAF was planning to orbit the third in the Oscar
     series of satellites. These satellites were built by radio hams in Cali-
     fornia and had no military significance. It was designed to receive
     and re-transmit a single word in Morsp“Hi.” The 25-lb. satellite was
     to be launched as a pickaback payload on some USAF launch from
     Vandenberg AFB. (J/Armed Forces, 7/18/64, 8 )
* A report in the Journal of the Armed Forces noted that during FY 1964
     199 new objects were placed in orbit. NORAD Space Detection and
     Tracking Center (SPADATS) , which .tracked the objects, reported that
     as of the end of FY 1964 there were 438 items in orbit. The items in-
     cluded not only satellites and probes, but also “junk” items such as
     upper stages of rocket boosters. As of the date of this report there were
     101 satellitw or probes in space. The US. had been responsible for
     89 of them, the U.S.S.R. for 9, the U.K. for 2, and Canada for 1 Of  .
     the 199 objects launched in FY 1964, 122 were pieces of debris, and
     the other 77 were payloads. 58 were U.S., 28 were U.S.S.R., and 1was
     from U.K. (J/Armed Forces, 7/18/64,8)
  Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer of the F-12A
      (A-11) aircraft, said that the airplane could easily outfly Russian air-
     craft. He stated that the F-12A could capture all three absolute world
     flight records currently held by the Russians. (AP, Kansas C t Times,
                                                                     iy
     7/18/64)
  It was reported that DOD had decided to invest $200 million in a military
     communications satellite system. The first launching was said to be
                                                                         255
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64.

     scheduled for late 1965 or 1 6 . Plans called for seven or eight satel-
                                   96
     lites to be placed in orbit by a single Titan 1 1 booster. The satellites,
                                                    1
     perhaps as many as 24 simultaneously, were to be placed in orbit at
     around 6,000mi. altitude (see July 13). (UPI, NYT, 7/19/64)
July 18: Hanson Baldwin, military analyst for the New York Times,reported
     that the U.S.S.R. Bad developed and was presumably producing an im-
     proved ICBM: The missile was said to have a range of more than 6,000
     mi. and could carry a multimegaton warhead to its target. In addi-
     tion, its accuracy was believed to be greater than the first Soviet long
     range missiles. It was reported that it was designed for use against
     the below-ground silos of U.S. Minuteman missiles. (Baldwin, NYT,
     7/18/@)
   An experiment designed by youthful rocket scientists ended in tragedy
     when “Gus,” a two-ounce mouse, was killed in a mishap. Several youths
     from Schenectady had designed the rocket, which was to carry Gus to
     an altitude of 6,000 ft. The rocket went off at an angle upon launch
     and smashed into the ground killing its passenger. The launch, which
     had been protested by local humane societies, was viewed by a crowd
     of 400. (AP, L.A. Herald Examiner, 7/19/64)
July 19: The second of two DOD satellites, reported by press sources to be
      one of two Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, maneuvered into
     station 65,000 mi. above the earth. On signal from the ground a rocket
     motor aboard the satellite fired, moving it from an eccentric orbit with
      an apogee of 65,000 mi. into a circular orbit at that altitude. The
     motor aboard the companion satellite, boosted by the same launch ve-
     hicle, was fired successfully on July 17. (AF’,    NYT, 7/20/64; Wash.
     Post, 7/20/@)
   NASA announced it had begun a pilot program designed to help
      scientists and engineers cope with the greatly increased amount of
     literature on new discoveries and developments. The program, called
      Selective Dissemination of Information (SDI) was being developed
      for NASA under a contract to the Advanced Systems Development Divi-
      sion of IBM, Yorktown, N.Y. The SDI system was designed to notify
     those enrolled in the program of fresh information within their re-
     spective fields. (NASA Release 6 4 ~ 1 7 4 )
   Leo D. Welch, Chairman of the Communications Satellite C o p , reported
      that Soviet 05cials had refused to answer a question as to whether they
      were developing their own system of communicationsby satellite. Welch
      said that the Soviets would say only that they were conducting experi-
     ments in the space technology. The questions were asked when the
      Soviets attended a meeting in Geneva in June at which they received a
      briefing on the formation of the 18-nation communications satellite net-
      work. (Wash. Post, 7/20/64)
 * Preliminary findings from a six-year study by the National Merit Scholar-
      ship Corp. found that many top students who as college freshmen wanted
      to work as engineers frequently changed their minds by the time they
      were seniors. The report also stated: “The interest of able students in
      physical sciences and engineering has been decreasing during the period
      covered by this study and interest in the social sciences and humanities
      has been correspondingly increasing.” For both sexes biology, history,
      and mathematics had become more popular. At the start of the study
      13% of the males and 27% of the females said they expected to major
July 19: In editorial
     water. The Times lauded the agreement both because of the.serious-
     ness of the increasing shortage of fresh water                 and also as a
     step in the “trend toward wider common effarts                 and American
     scientists in areas where progress will bring m               enefits.” The
                           “. . .
     editorial continued,          as Americans and Russians get accustomed
     to cooperation for common benefit in scientific fields, they may gen-
     erate habits and attitudes that could ultimately spread to the political
     field, again with mutual gains.” (NYT, 7/19/64, E8)
July 20: Space flight of NASA’s I (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft
                                  Sert
     marked first successful operation in space of an electric rocket engine.
     NASA launched the Sert I on a suborbital trajectory from Wallops Island,
     using four-stage Scout booster rocket which lofted the Sert I to 2,500-mi.
     altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 2,000 mi. downrange
     from Wallops. One of the two ion propulsion engines aboard the 375-1b.
     Sert I was operated twice, for total run of 30 min.; this engine was built
     by NASA Lewis Research Center. The other engine, built by Hughes
     Research Laboratories, did not produce thrust. Primary purpose of
     the experiment was to verify that electrostatic (ion) engines can produce
     thrust in space, and all technical objectives were achieved. NASA later
     announced the test was so successful that a second test would not be
     necessary (Oct. 16). (NASA Releases 64-167, 66180; LRC Release
     6 4 4 3 ; Wallops Release 64-58)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to the President that NASA
     had accomplished cost reductions totaling $128,783,000 in N 1964.
     This greatly exceeded the agency’s target of $81,780,000. (NASA An-
      nouncement 64-162)
  AEC scientists were reported to be planning even more sophisticated nuclear
      radiation detection satellites to follow the two identified by press sources
      as having been maneuvered into patrol positions during the preceding
      weekend. The advanced Sentries were reported to carry optical devices
      to monitor not only space nuclear blasts but also those in the earth’s
      atmosphere. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/64)
  Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) discussed national space program on
      Senate floor: “If our nation is to remain strong and a leader of men,
      then it is necessary that we maintain a position of leadership in the
      greatest adventure of our time.
        GC
          Not only would a slowdown in this program have an adverse effect
      on US. leadership, but it would cost the taxpayer more money. NASA
      estimates that for every year the program is stretched out a billion dollars
      would have to be added to the program. That is not surprising. Any
      major R&D program requires a tight timetable if it is to be an efficient
      program and provide the necessary incentive. Without a tight timetable
      the work drags on through repeated changes and indecision. As in
      most human endeavors the establishment of a tight schedule in fact
      provides assurance that the program will in fact be accomplished.
         “For the present, however, there is the fact that the huge space in-
                            d the space psychology itself-has found a place
                                                                              257
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

     in the Nation’s consciousness. The United States is more than six years
     away from its first puny satellite, and in that time the acceleration of
     progress has been on the edge of the fantastic. The space age has barely
     been born but we cannot see how anyone can misread the promise of
     adventure and discovery in the years to come.” (CR, 7/20/64,15720-
     21 1
July 20: It was reported that NASA planned to cancel its lease for a Lockheed
     JetStar at the KSC in Florida and purchase the plane outright. This
     came out in a report by NASA to a Senate appropriations subcommittee.
     The report indicated that NASA planned to operate a total of 80 aircraft
     in F 1965, an increase of 4 planes. NASA officialstold the committee
           Y
     that 37 of the 80 would be used for research, 20 for proficiency and
     flight training, and 23 for administrative aircraft. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64,
     18)
* Premature shutdown of the U.K. Blue Streak space launcher engines
     during its first flight for ELDO at Woomera, Australia, in June had been
     traced to gain settings of the autopilot system, it was reported. Calcu-
     lations showed that a simple change in autopilot settings could prevent
     future recurrences of the problem. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 24)
  Aviation Week recounted an exchange between Defense Secretary Robert
     McNamara and Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) in which Me-
     Namara stated that the Apollo program had psychological value but no
      direct military worth. In response to a question about the effect of the
     Apollo program on the mission of DOD, McNamara said: “.. . if a psycho-
     logical victory that might result from the Soviets arriving at the moon
      first leads to a shift in attitudes in the world, tending to reduce the belief
      in the strength of the West, and in increasing the Soviet’s view of the
      weakness of the West, this is bound to have a military effect. This i        s
      exactly what occurred in connection with our space programs, and it
     led to a very costly response by this country.” (Av. Wk., 7/20/64)
* Aviation Week stated that a technological war plan task force under the
      cognizance of AFSC had been established at Space Systems Div., to in-
      vestigate a variety of subject areas as a continuation of the USAF’S Project
      Forecast. Participants were expected to include key personnel from
      industry and NASA as well as AFSC. Areas to be studied included boron
      fiber technology €or application to structural materials, operational
      requirements of biological satellites, manned hypersonic vehicles to
      investigate thermodynamic and aerodynamic regions, and laser appli-
      cations and requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 23)
* USAF was reported continuing to seek industry support for avionics sub-
      systems studies for DOD’S manned orbiting laboratory (MOL) program.
      The Space Systems Div. of AFSC asked avionics companies to submit
      bids for a study of an image velocity sensor subsystem, which would
      enable orbiting astronauts to acquire and track space targets visually
       and to take fixes an terrestrial bodies for navigation. SSD also asked
      Honeywell to submit a sole-source proposal for a study of the labora-
       tory’s attitude control system. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 24)
 9 It was reported that contractors were accusing NASA of naming a Mars

       exploration idea “Project Beagle” just to appeal to President Johnson.
       NASA officials denied this and stated that the project was named after
       the ship in which Charles Darwin sailed around the world. ( A v . Wk..
       7/20/64, 15)
258                                                    19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,                 1

July 21: NASA invited scientists to propose research experiments and studies
     for manned and unmanned space flights during the last half of the
     1960’s. The announcement of deadlines and guidelines for the sub-
     mission of proposals was distributed by NASA’s   Office of Space Science
     and Applications to domestic and foreign scientists in universities, in-
     dustries, and Government installations. The agency gave the world
     scientific community detailed descriptions and timetables covering a
     wide range of space research opportunities, including placing scientific
     experiments in avaiIable space on Gemini and Apollo manned flights,
     weather satellites, sounding rockets, the X-15 research plane, orbiting
     observatories, and balloons. (NASA Release 64-177)
e Col. Robert P. Young (USA), Executive Officer of NASA since 1%1,was
     awarded NASA’s     Medal for Outstanding Leadership. In making the
     award, NASA Administrator James E. Webb cited Young for “his out-
     standing leadership and dedicated service displayed in all aspects of
     performance while serving as executive officer of NASA, and for his
     significant and noteworthy contributions in co-ordinating internal man-
                                                      ; Wash. Post, 7/22/64)
     agement of the agency.” (NASA Release &&--181
8 The appointment of Dr. Jerome Spar, Professor of Meteorology and Oceano-

     graphy, NYU, as Director of Meteorological Research for the US.
     Weather Bureau was announced. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-12)
   Commenting on Republican Presidential candidate Goldwater’s recently
     published views on the space program, Warren Burkett, science writer
     for the Houston Chronicle, pointed out that a good deal of research
     which can be of use to the military services was being carried on as
                       Project Apollo. He suggested that an Apollo Orbital
     part of NASA’s
     Research Laboratory, based on components being developed in the
     Apollo program, could be used for military aspects of the space program
      such as space patrol and interception. The article suggested that the
     Apollo program was generally developing a group of “off-the-shelf’
     space systems which could be adapted for military use should this appear
     desirable. (Houston Chon., 7/26/@&)
July 22: NASA and ESRO announced signing Memorandum of Understanding
      for project involving two scientific satellites. Under the agreement,
      NASA would launch into orbit two satellites, ESRO 1 and ESRO 2, for the
      nine-nation West European organization. Both satellites would be
      launched on NASA Scout rocket boosters into near-polar eccentric orbits
      and were tentatively scheduled during 1967 from Western Test Range.
      (NASA Release 64-178)
   USAF successfully sent a delta-winged Asset glider through a 12,000-mph
      re-entry test in an experiment designed to gather data on the conditions
     that future manned spacecraft might encounter when returning to earth
      from space missions4ncluding skin heating as high as 4,000” F. The
     1,150-lb. spacecraft was lifted to an altitude of 44 mi. aboard a Thor-
      Delta booster launched from Cape Kennedy, then was fired downward
     for a 1,650-116. glide through the atmosphere. The glider, the third
     in this series of experiments, was recovered in t e Atlantic Ocean by
                                                        h
                        NYT, 7/23/64,46; Wash. Post, 7/23/64; Wash. Eve.
      frogmen. (UPI,
     Star, 7/22/64)
  The White House and Communications Satellite Corp. announced
     television coverage of the Olympic Games from Tokyo to the US. and
      Canada would be attempted via communications satellite. Project
                                                i
               ASTRONAUTICS




     of TV coverage of the Games, which would take place Oct. 10-24.
     (ComSatCorp Release; Finney, NYT, 7/23/64,42)
July 22: Details of method to be used in first U.S. attempt to rendezvous
    a manned and unmanned spacecraft in space were disclosed by NASA
    Manned Spacecraft Center. Launch of Atlas-Agena into orbit would
     be followed 95 min. later by launch of Titan I1 with two-man Gemini
     spacecraft. Five hours after Titan I1 launch, rendezvous and docking
     Gemini spacecraft and Agena stage would be accomplished. (AP,
     Wash. Eve. Star, 7/22/64)
* Results of experimental drop tests down elevator shaft of Cleveland’s
     Terminal Tower showed that Styrofoam could be used successfully as
     a deceleration medium, according to NASA Lewis Research Center design
     engineer Terrence E. Russell. Purpose of the deceleration tests, con-
     ducted by LRC last May, was to verify use of Styrofoam as filler in cart
     used to “catch” free-falling test packages at LRC’S new 500-ft. zero-
     gravity facility. (LRC Release 6 - )
                                     4a
* NASA announced Univ. of Arizona would receive $1,200,000 NASA grant
     to construct Space Sciences Center on the campus at Tucson. The
     four-story structure would “further the University of Arizona’s multi-
     disciplinary program that is proving invaluable to the national space
     effort,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said. (NASA Release
     64-183)
0 NASA selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of contract for feasibility and

     preliminary design studies for automated biological laboratory (ABL)
     to detect and describe indigenous life on the planet Mars. The one-
     year study would define life-detection payloads for Voyager-class mis-
     sions, which were under study bv NASA O f c of Space Science and
                                                fie
     Applications. (NASA ReleAse fj4-182)
* Japan launched its first meteorological sounding rocket from the National
     Space Development Center’s testing range on Nii Jima Island. The two-
     stage rocket reirched 68.2-mi. altitude. (AP, NYT, 7J23/6p, 46; AI?,
      Wash. Post, 7/23/64)
* House passed H.R. 11611, a bill to establish a National Commission
      on Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress. Bill was then
      referred to Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. (NASA LAR
   III/140)
* William B. Bergen, president of Martin Baltimore, said US. had closed
    the so-called “space gap” of Russian competition “without fanfare, and
    almost without knowing it ourselves.” Addressing National Space Club
    in Washington, Bergen said that, with all the “Hollywoodian propa-
    ganda” about enormous Soviet satellites, “there seems little doubt that
    the objective part of the scientific world is now convinced that our
    modest-sized couriers into space      e brought back far more useful
    information than has been coll         by the Russians’ more massive
    messengers.” (AP, Houston Post, 7/23/64)
  FAA awarded $975,000 contract to Bunker-Ram0 Corp. for study of all-
    weather landing instrumentation of modern jet passenger aircraft.
     (FAA Release -72)
260             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964.

h ? y 23: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Churchill,
     Canada, reached 14.5-mi. altithde in experiment to study very low
     energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Rocket performance was good and
     instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Two of three trays
     containing experimental emulsions did not completely retract and were
     damaged by heat and upon impact by water. Preliminary estimate was
     that l,OO% good data were obtained by the emulsion that functioned
     properly and 60% by the two which did not retract. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA Langley Research Center asked industry for proposals on the kind
     of launch vehicle it would take to put a small spacecraft into orbit
     around the ‘sun. The purpose of the program would be to put an
     instrumented satellite into position for a clear view and study of the
     sun’s plasma corona. (Newport News Daily Press, 7/24/64)
   Senate passed S. 2602 to establish National Air and Space Museum under
      the Smithsonian Institution. The bill was then sent to the House.
       (NASA LAR III/141; CR, 7/23/64,16138-39)
July 24: At international conference in Washington, two interrelated agree-
     ments for establishment of global commercial communications satellite
      system were initialed by the negotiators from 13 participating countries.
      Five other nations planned to join the agreement on or before Aug. 19,
      date of formal enactment. Under these agreements, ownership in the
      $200 million enterprise would be shared among 18 nations and Vatican
      City, with the United States’ Communications Satellite Corp., owning
      61% of the shares and serving as manager of the system on behalf of
      all participants. Agreement would be open for six months beginning
      Aug. 19 to any nation belonging to International Telecommunications
      Union. (ComSatCorp Releases;- Finney, NYT, 7 / 2 5 / a ; N.Y. Her.
      Trib., 7/25/64; WSJ, 7/27/64)
 0 1,000-hr. operating test at full power of S n a p 4 experimental reactor

      was completed in a ground test at Atomics International’s Nuclear Field
      Laboratory, contractor to AEC for the reactor. During the test, the
      reactor was operated at 600 kw. of heat output and 1,300” F coolant
      outlet temperature, thus exceeding the current Snap43 system require-
      ment of 450 kw. of heat. Snap development was joint program of NASA
      and AEC. (Marshall Star, 9/23/64, 8 )
 0 At    his Washington press conference, President Johnson announced
      successful development of an advanced, long-range reconnaissance air-
      craft to be employed by Strategic Air Command :
          “This system employs the new SR-71 aircraft and provides a long-
      range, advanced strategic reconnaissance plane for military use capa-
      ble of worldwide reconnaissance for military operations.
          “The Joint Chiefs of Staff, when reviewing the RS-70, emphasized
      the importance of the strategic reconnaissance mission. The SR-71
       aircraft rwonnaissance system is the most advanced in the world.
          “The aircraft will 0y at more than three times the speed of sound.
       It will operate at altitudes in excess of 80,000 feet. It will use the most
       advanced observation equipment of all kinds in the world.
          “The aircraft will provide the strategic forces of the United States
       with an outstanding long-range reconnaissance capability. The system
       will be used during periods of military hostilities and in other situa-
       tions in which the United States military forces may be confronting
       foreign military f o r m .
                                                                           261
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,             19 0 4

         “The SR-71 uses the same J-58 engine as the experimental inter-
     ceptor previously announced, but it is substantially heavier and it has
    a longer range.
        LC
           The considerably heavier gross weight permits it to accommodate
    the multiple reconnaissance sensors needed by the Strategic Air Com-
    mand to accomplish the strategic reconnaissance mission in a military
    environment.
        “This billion-dollar program was initiated in February, 1963. The
     first operational aircraft will begin flight-testing in early 1965, and d e
    ployment of production units to the Strategic Air Command will begin
     shortly thereafter.
         “Appropriate members of Congress have been kept fully informed
     on the nature of, and the progress in, this aircraft program.
         “Further information on this major advanced aircraft system will be
     released from time to time at the appropriate military secret classifi-
     cation levels.” (Transcript, NYT, 7/25/64?, 6)
July 24: McDonnell Aircraft Gorp. was awarded a $81,189,500 fixed-price
     contract for study of Gemini B spacecraft for the Manned Orbiting
     Laboratory (MOL) program. The contract was awarded by the USAF
     Space Systems Division. (DOD Release 545-64)
* NASA announced small businesses received three out of every four sub-
     contracts awarded by NASA contractors in the first three quarters of
     FY 1964. Of 1,337 subcontractors, 983 (or 74%) were small com-
     panies. The small businesses received $119 million, or 23% of the
     $526 million awarded in the time period. (NASA Release 64-179)
  Governors and senators from 12 midwestern states meeting in Washington
     held under consideration a suggestion from Gov. James A. Rhodes
      (R.-0.) and Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D.-Wis.) that a regional bloc be
     formed in Congress to obtain Federal contracts for the Midwest: “When
     we refuse as a unit to support east and west coast projects until a sensible
     policy of government spending is established, then we’ll get a hearing,”
     Senator Nelson said. “We aren’t going to support the others and make
     a wasteland of the Midwest.” (Dodd, CTPS, Chic. Trib., 7 / 2 5 / a )
  Cape Kennedy celebrated its 14th anniversary as a missile and space
      vehicle launching base. The first missile from the Cape was a hybrid
      Bumper (V-2) booster with an Army Wac Corporal second stage,
      launched on a 200-mi. trajectory on July 24, 1950. Since then more
      than 1,400 launches had been made. Since its establishment in 1958,
      NASA had been responsible for 84 flights. (Marshall Star, 7/29/64+, 9)
  It was reported that USAF was planning to permanently preserve the launch
      complex from which the first American astronauts were launched into
      space and to develop the area around it into an Air Force Space Museum.
       (Strothman, Miami Herald, 7/24/64)
  An exhibition of US. communications equipment-including a model of
      the Telstar satellite-opened in Leningrad. (AP Wire, 7/24/64)
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced researchers had developed
      first known high-temperature-resistant ceramic potting compound in
      which space electronics could be imbedded for protection against ex-
      treme heat. The ceramic potting compound can be cured at tempera-
      tures as low as 150° F, permitting it to be cured in place around the
      electronics without subjecting the delicate equipment to damaging heat.
      The ceramic potting compound combined protection against heat up to
      2,500” F with protection against vibration. (GSFC Release 618-64)
262            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

July 24: Results of space poll of 2,000 ra            selected U      members,
                                                                S
    1,134 of whom responded, were publish              nce. To the statement,
    “The vital national interests o the United States require that a high prior-
                                    f
    ity be given to landing a man on the moon by 1970,” 31% of the respond-
    ents said ‘‘Yes,” 62% “NO.” To the statement, “A reasonable objective
    would be a lunar landing by 1970,1975,1980,1990, [or] Never,” 20%
    chose 1970; 23%, 1975; 19%, 1980; 9%, 1990; and 776, Never. Asked
    to select “the most important justification for manned exploration of
    the moon” from prepared list of alternatives, respondents said: military,
    7% ;scientific, 58% ;resources on moon, 1%; national prestige, 13% ;
    technological fallout, 6%; spirit of adventure, 7%. Asked to rank
    following fields “in order of their potentiality for producing new knowl-
    edge,” respondents said: earth-based astronomy, 2% ; manned lunar
    research, 10% ;biomedical research, 51% ;oceanography, 6% ; physics
    research, 15% ; chemical research, 9% ; other, 7%. Asked to choose
    “what fraction of the total federal $15 billion” R&D funds “should be
    devoted to the space program,” 30% chose O-lO%, 31% chose 10-2076,
    14% chose 20-30%, and 5% chose 3040%.
       Commenting on the poll, Robert C. Toth of Los Angeles Times noted
    that Science editor Philip Abelson was “an outspoken opponent of the
     moon program” and that the survey did not directly ask the key question:
     Should the existing program be slowed down now? Journal of the
     Armed Forces space editor James J. Haggerty, Jr., pointed out that “it
    a11 depends on who you ask.” Of the 1,134 respondents, he said, “it
     turned out that 86% were not connected with the space program. As a
     matter of fact, there is a strong suspicion that they are all medical
    researchers, since 51% of them indicated that biomedical research is
     the scientific field with the potential for producing the greatest amount
     of new knowledge, where only 10 percent thought manned lunar re-
                                                    ..   .” (J/Armed Forces,
     search would contribute anything of value.
    8/8/64, 12; Science, 7/24/64, 368; Toth, Wash. Post, 7/27/64)
July 25: NASA launched Aerobe 150 sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill,
    Canada, with instrumented payload to study very low energy cosmic
     ray heavy nuclei. The rocket reached 133.7-mi. altitude, ejected recov-
     ery package. After land recovery of the payload, examination revealed
     the emulsion trays all had fully extended and fully retracted properly, so
     that very good data would be obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
8 According to press reports, the twin satellites launched July 17 by USAF

     continued to send back clear signals from space. Press sources had
     indicated the satellites were Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, said
     one satellite was in almost perfectly circular orbit ranging from 63,314
     mi. to a 9 1 5 mi. altitude, while the other was in slightly higher orbit
     ranging from 58,686 mi. to 69,387 mi. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7J26/64;
     Wash. Swn. Stw, 7/26/64)
8 Soviet space probe ZOND I apparently was unsuccessful in its mission to

     land on or fly by the planet Venus, according to unidentified official
     in Washington. Western scientists had predicted ZOND I would reach
     Venus between July 18 and 25, but no Soviet announcement had been
     made. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/26/64)
8 Drew Pearson wrote in his syndicated column that there were about 500

      Germans in Egypt working on militarv rockets and other arms programs.
     Among more important: Prof. Wolfgang Pitz, former Austrian, and
                                                                       263
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

                                                                   Dr. H n
                                                                        as
     expert on rockets; Prof. Paul Goercke, expert on radar;
     Kkinsaechter, expert on automatic pilots. (Pearson, Wwh. Post,
     7/25/64t, B11)
July 26: Details of a report financed by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center
     delving into the question of why so few Negroes were qualified for jobs
     with MSC were made public. The report on manpower available from
     minority groups indicated that Negroes seeking scientific and technical
     jobs in the space age would have to change their attitudes toward
     education, shifting from traditional subjects to those needed in the
     space age, such as physics. It also indicated a need for changes in
     curricula and in educational emphasis by Negro schools, as well as im-
     proved placement provisions in many schools. The report, financed by
     a $38,000 contract from MSG, was prepared by Drs. J. A. Pierce and
     B. A. Turner of Texas Southern Univ. (Houston Chron., 7/26/64)
0 Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of Malaysia toured John F. Ken-

     nedy Space Center. Rahman stated after his tour: “I can’t say what
     impressed me most. Everything impressed me. It was so scientific.”
      (AP, N.O. Times-Picayune,    7/27/68)
July 27: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center named Capt. James A. McDivitt
      (USAF) and Capt. Edward H White I1 (USAF) as pilot and copilot for
                                    .
     the second manned space flight of Project Gemini ( G T a ) , a four-day
     earth-orbital mission in early 1965. Astronauts named as backup crew
     for the flight were Maj. Frank Borman (USAF) and Lt. Cdr. James A.
                        .
     Lovell, Jr. (USN)       All four were “second generation’: astronauts
      selected for the NASA program in Sept. 1962. ( MSC Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
   NASA announced modifications to X-15 No. 1 rocket-powered aircraft
     that would enable it to carry on scientific experiments above much
      of the earth’s atmosphere were being made at NASA Flight Research
      Center. The aircraft would have new inertial guidance system, origi-
      nally designed by Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co. for the USAF
      X-20, and streamlined compartments for experiments at each wing tip.
      One compartment would contain device to collect micrometeoroids and
      extraterrestrial dust and special spectrometer to measure radiation and
      polarization of daytime skylight; other pod would contain densitron
      to measure air densities at high altitudes. (NASA Release 64-184;
      FRC Release 19-64)
 0 Dr. Robert H. Goddard was named posthumously as winner of the 1964

      Daniel Guggenheim Medal. (Wash. Ewe. Star, 7/27/64)
 July 28: NASA’s    RANGER VII spacecraft was launched from Cape Kennedy on
      its flight to the moon. After an almost perfect countdown, Atlas-Agena
      launch vehicle boosted the 806-lb. spacecraft into a parking orbit around
      the earth, and then the Agena engines refired to place RANGER VI1 on its
      trajectory to the moon. The spacecraft carried six television cameras
      designed to take and relay to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface.
      Flight to moon would take about 68 hours, ~ t the pictures to be taken
                                                          h
      during the last 15 min. before craft impacted on the moon. The launch-
      ing was so accurate that, even without the standard midcourse correction
      maneuver, RANGER VII would hit the moon. However, scientists wanted
       pictures of the “Sea of Clouds” region and planned to execute mid-
      course correction to ensure impact and pictures in this area. (NYT,
      7/29/64; NASA Release 66176)
264
July 28:          Ae
           NASA


    tude. Instrumentation included electrostatic probe, omegatron gage,
    Bayard-Alpert ion gage, as well as a solar aspect sensor to provide
    proper attitude. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, al-
    though the omegatron made no measurements. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Unspecified “informed sources” in Paris said that the first foreign base on
    US. territory-a satellite tracking station in Alaska-was to be estab-
    lished by the European Space Research Organization. It was reported
    that the establishment of the station had been agreed to in principle by
    the US. State Department, and that a formal agreement was expected
    to be signed in the near future. ESRO had plans for launching about 400
     sounding rockets, 6 small satellites, 8 medium satellites, 7 space probes,
     and an orbiting astronomical observatory during the following 8 years
     and would use the station to help track, control, and communicate with
     these spacecraft. ESRO planned a network of similar stations extending
     from Alaska across North Pole to the Shetland Islands, Belgium, and
     Italy. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/29/64)
  The USAF successfully fired a Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg AFB,
     Calif. (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
July 29: RANGER VII spacecraft successfully completed its midcourse correc-
     tion maneuvers to put the spacecraft on its final collision course to the
     moon. RANGER VII carried out series of orders involving switching
     from the directional to the omnidirectional antenna, folding the direc-
     tional antenna out of the way of the midcourse motor, pitch and roll
     maneuvers to properly orient the spacecraft, firing the midcourse motor,
     and reorientation by earth and sun acquisition after the midcourse motor
     had been fired. Telemetry indicated that everything aboard the space-
     craft was normal after the midcourse correction activities had been
     completed. (NASA Release 64-187)
* USAF capt. Joe Engle flew the NASA-AirForce X-15 No. 3 experimental
     plane fromaEdwardsAFB, Calif., in a test of the heat-resistant qualities
     of special materials attached to the craft’s fuselage. The X-15 reached
     maximum speed of 3,511 mph (mach 5.32) and peak altitude of 78,000
     k (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/30/64)
       .
* NASA conducted two successful test-flights of paraglider vehicles at Ed-
     wards AFB, Calif. In the first test, a simulated Gemini spacecraft
     manned by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot E. P. Hetzel was
     towed aloft beneath a pre-inflated paraglider landing sysiem. The tow
     test vehicle (TTV) +wastowed to 6,000-ft. altitude by C H 4 C helicopter.
     While airborne, Hetzel manually controlled the TTV through preplanned
     maneuvers to its landing. In the second test, a similar but unmanned
     system was dropped from a C-130 aircraft at 32,000-ft. altitude. The
     paraglider was automatically deployed and remotely controlled in flight
     from 22,000-ft. to 12,500-ft. altitude, where it was separated from the
     Gemini test vehicle. The tests were part of NASA’s     continuing evalua-
     tion of the paraglider system as a means of landing and recovering
     manned spacecraft (MSC Rolmdup, 8/5/64,1)
                                                                           w.
                                Research Center would negotiate with J.
  NASA announced its
     Fecker Co., division of American Optical Co., for satellite attitude
     control simulator. Contract would amount to about $1million. The
                                                                            265
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

         simulator would be used in vacuum chamber to evaluate performance
         of systems and components being developed for attitude control. of
         spacecraft. (NASA Release 64r188)
’

    July 29: At MSC press conference, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Project
         Manager of Project Gemini, stated that an experiment assigned to the
         second manned flight ( G T 4 ) in Project Gemini would involve the first
         exposure of an astronaut to the hazards of outer space without full space
         vehicle protection. He said that the experiment would involve “stepping
         into space,” but modified this later to say that it might involve nothing
         more than the crewman’s opening up the spacecraft hatch and standing
         up in his seat. In addition to this experiment, the second flight (sched-
         uled for early 1965) also would include other scientific assignments,
         including medical tests, radiation measurements, and measurement of
         the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, NYT, 7/30/64)
    * Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Assistant Director for Flight Operations of NASA
         Manned Spacecraft Center, was appointed flight operations director for
         the second Gemini-Titan flight (GT-2), an unmanned suborbital flight
         scheduled for autumn. Kraft had been responsible for flight direction
         in Project Mercury and in the first Gemini-Titan flight. For the GT-2
         mission he would replace Dr. Walter C. Williams, who resigned from
         NASA last March to become Vice President and General Manager,
         Manned Systems Div., Aerospace Corp. (NASA Release 66185 1
    * Communications Satellite Corp. announced its Board of Directors had
         elected John A. Johnson as Vice President-International. Mr. Johnson
         had been Director of International Arrangements of ComSatCorp since
          Dec. 9,1963. From October 1958until he joined ComSatCorp in 1963
         he had served as General Counsel of NASA. (ComSatCorp Release)
    * His Excellency Philibert Tsiranana, President of the Malagasy Republic,
         toured NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and received briefings on
         the Goddard mission by GSFC Director Dr. Harry Goett. In his official
         party were his wife, the Malagasy Foreign Minister, their Ambassador
         to the US.,and officials o i the U S . State Dept. and NASA Hq. (Goddard
         News, 8/10/64,1)
       Dr. Norman W. Rosenberg, of the Air Force Cambridge Research Labora-
         tories, was presented the DOD Distinguished Civilian Service Award,
          highest decoration for civilian employees. Since joining AFcRL in 1959,
          Rosenberg designed and executed a number of important experimental
          studies in upper atmosphere physics, most of which were part of Project
          Firefly. (OAR Release 7-64-3)
    0 West Germany’s vertical take-off aircraft successfully passed the speed of

          sound in a test flight. The two-jet VJlOl achieved its vertical rise by
          tilting its jets downward and then went into forward flight by swinging
          them up to a horizontal position. The plane was being developed by
          the West German firms of Boelkow, Heinkel, and Messerschmitt. (AP,
          Wash.Post, 7]31/64)
     * USAF successfully fired an Atlas ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, California.
          (M&R,8/3/68,8)
     July 30: The U.S.S.R. launched another earth satellite, COSMOS XXXVI. The
          initial orbital parameters were as follows: period, 91.9 min.; apogee,
          503 km. (300 mi.); perigee, 259 km. (155 mi.); inclination, 49”.
           (KrasnuyaZuezda, 7/31/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
          7@3-598 0--6&---18
266            ASTEONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

July 30: At his news conference, President Johnson noted the first anniver.
                                             “. .. a year ago this week the
     sary of the nuclear test ban treaty:
     nuclear test ban treaty was signed and agreed upon. Today, a year
     later, more than 100 nations have joined the three original signing
     countries. We have also seen a United Nations resolution banning
     weapons of mass destruction in outer space and steps to cut back pro-
                                       ...
     duction of fissionable materials.        A year without atmospheric test-
     ing has left our air cleaner. This is a benefit to every American family,
     and to every family everywhere, since all radiation, however small,
     involves some possibility of biological risk to us or to our descend-
          ..    .”
     ants.
         President Johnson said that the problems of economic conversion
     posed by shifts and cutbacks in military activities had been “greatly
     relieved by our general prosperity.” In a report delivered at his news
     conference, the President called the problem of economic conversion
      “hard” and “complex” and said that it “will not be solved in one month
      or one year.” But he stressed that the main element in a solution was
     to keep the general economy prosperous. (Transcript, NYT, 7/31/64y
      8 ; Dale, NYT, 7/31/64)
   The Senate Committee on Appropriations marked up and ordered favorably
      reported with amendments H.R. 11296, F 1965 appropriations for
                                                    Y
      independent offices. The bill included a NASA appropriation of $5.3
      billion. (NASA LAR 111/143-46)
* The USN’S Sea Lab I, with four Navy divers aboard, began ascent to the
      surface after 10 days on the ocean floor at a depth of 192 ft. The experi-
      ment was terminated 1 days ahead of schedule because of an approach-
                               1
      ing storm. Astronaut Scott Carpenter was to have participated in the
      experiment, but was forced to withdraw because of the broken arm he
      suffered recently. (DOD Release 558-64)
 * USAF’S Vice Chief of Staff General William F. McKee was presented his
      third Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson. Retiring
      after 35 years in the armed forces, General McKee was joining NASA
       Sept. 1, as Assistant Administrator for Management Development.
       (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/28/64; AP, NYT, 7/31/64,5)
 * Professor Wallace Osgood Fenn of the Univ. of Rochester School of
       Medicine was named recipient of the Daniel and Florence Guggenheim
       Award for 1964 of the International Academy of Astronautics. This
       was the first time the award had been given to a physiologist. Prof. Fenn
       was Secretary General of the International Union of the Physiological
       Sciences. Previous winners of the award included Sir Bernard Lovell,
       Dr..James A. Van Allen, and Prof. Marcel Nicolet. (IAA Release 21)
 * French Premier Georges Pompidou declared that France would take
       every possible precaution to prevent harmful fallout in forthcoming
       atomic tests in the Pacific. He said that a special team would be sent
       to the Polynesian test site area on Mururoa Island to ensure that waters
       and air were not contaminated by the tests. ( AP, Wash. Post, 7!31/64)
 * The nuclear submarine Daniel Boone test-fired a Polaris A-3 missile with
       a dummy warhead more ‘than 2 O mi. down the Eastern Test Range
                                        ,O
                                        O
       while lying submerged 30 mi. off the Florida coast. This marked the
       eighth success in nine undersea shots with the advanced-model Polaris.
        (UPI,Wash. Post, 7/31/64)
                                                                        267
             ASTRO                                          64




  as seen from the earth by a factor of 1,000. The closest pictures were
  snapped 2 3 see. before impact, at 1 . ” south latitude and 2 . ” longi-
                                                                    07
                                         07
              .
  tude, 6%   hrs. and 36 min. after takeoff.
      At news conference on preliminary results from RANGER VII, held at
  JPL, principal experimenter Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of Univ. of M .          i
  Lunar and Planetary Laboratory described Sam ling of the lunar photo-
                                                   P
  graphs as they were shown to the public. In rep y to a question, he said:
  “. . . the thing that struck me most was that the Moon, the region of the
                                                                 .
  Moon, the dimensions which we have been able to observe. .this range,
  tremendous range of new knowledge has not resulted in any totally
                        ..
  unforeseen problems. .
      “The Moon has shown-the records show a continuity of features
  from the large craters observable with telescopes down to smaller sizes.
      ‘Think that the rounded features of the large numbers of secondary
                                                       ..
  craters is new. Also their large number is new.      (.




      “It is alm clear that primary craters exist, little pits which have very
                          ..   . They are smaller, but the shape, the form,
  much the same shape.
                                      .. .
   is the same as the bigger craters.
      “There are some ridges shown. These ridges in the maria are rather
   of the same nature, of the same shape, sort or form, as the larger ridges.
      “So I would say, in summing up, that the new region of knowledge is
   in a true sense an extension of the earlier knowledge. I think it shows
   that the craters continue to occur down to sizes of about three feet in
   diameter, about one foot depth.
      “This clearly implies that we are not dealing here with enormous
   layers of dust, of very. loose dust, that is, very loose material, where one
   would not expect any small features to be visible at all. It is not like
                          ..
   sand, in other words..
       “This is a great day for science, and this is a great day for the
                  ...
   United States.         the amount of information that has been gained
   about the lunar surface is truly remarkable.” (NASA Transcripts)
President Johnson personally congratulated scientists and technicians re-
   sponsible for the success€d flight of RANGER VII. He congratulated Dr.
   William Pickering, Director of JPL, and Dr. Homer Newell, NASA Asso-
   ciate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and then is-
    sued a statement on the experiment. He called the flight “a basic step
   forward in our orderly program to assemble the scientific knowledge
                                             ..
    necessary for man’s trip to the moon. .        The pictures obtained of the
   lunar surface should prove extremely useful. . . . They will be a guide
    in constructing the lunar excursion module and in phnning the trip.
                        able to better map out our descent route. We’ll be
    Now we shall ‘h
    able to build our lunar landing equipment with greater certainty and
   knowledge of the conditions which our astronauts will encounter on
    the moon. I recognize that this great success has come only after a
    number of failures and partial failures in our efforts to send probes
    to the moon. This success should spur us on to added effort in the
268             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

             . ..   On behalf of a grateful nation, let me again congratulate
     future.
     you on this magnificent achievement. AU of you today have helped
     further the peaceful exploration of space.” (NYT, 8/1/64)
July 31 t The U.S.S.R. announced a new program of Pacific rocket firings, to
     begin August 4 and to last to the end of 1964. The announcement,
     describing the impact areas south and west of Hawaii, said “test flights
     of new types of rocket carriers for space objects” would be conducted.
     The Soviet government requested that ships and aircraft stay out of the
     impact areas during announced periods. (Balt. Sun, 8/1/64; Tass,
     Pravda, 8/1/64, ATSS-T Trans.)
   W. S. Bellows Construction Corp. and Peter Kiewit and Sons, Inc., re-
     ceived a $2,061,358 fixed-price contract for construction of the Con-
     tractor’s Support Facility at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The
     contract was awarded by the Army Corps of Engineers. (DOD Release
     563-64)
* A six-month study was concluded of public acceptability of sonic boons
     that had been conducted by the FAA in the Oklahoma City area since
     February 3, 19@. The study was designed to gather data on public
      reaction to the noise that would follow the supersonic airliners of the
      1970’s. During the test approximately 8 booms a day (total in test,
      1,253) were created. During the 6 months the agency received 12,588
     telephone calls, most of them complaints. In addition to these direct
     manifestations of opinion, the Univ. of Chicago conducted a detailed
      public opinion survey in conjunction with the experiment. Gordon M.
      Bain, FAA Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Develop-
     ment, said in announcing the completion of the study: “Sonic boom
     presents the most imposing single challenge to design and operation
      of a supersonic transport plane. The people of Oklahoma City have
      Been helping explore this challenge as, in effect, major participants in
      the nation’s supersonic transport development program.” (FAA Release
      64-74; Clark, NYT, 8/1/64)
 * Alvin H. Parker soared his Sisu 1A sailplane from Odessa, Tex., to Kimball,
      Neb. (644 mi.) to claim new world soaring distance record over the
      previous 544.331-mi.distance record. (SSA Release)
 During July: Two 10-story buildings had been completed in KSC Merritt
      Island Launch Area and were turned over to NASA. They were the $7.8
      million operations and checkout building for the Gemini and Apollo
      spacecraft, and the $1.3 million spacecraft pyrotechnic installation build-
      ing. (AP, Orlando Sentinel, 7/22/64)
   Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical
       and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article:
          “Our [US.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned
      lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon
       is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles.
       We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20
      minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe
       less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based
       rocket to reach Russia.
          “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential
       that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple
       of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a s i p e d United Nations
       agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as
                                                                          269
                ASTRONAUTIC8 AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64




    measurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a
    country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon,
    you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no
    telling what they can do to us.) ” (Pageant, 7/64)
During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight
    aboard the research and development launchs of the USAF Titan 1 1        1.
    Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications
    satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup
    communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were
    scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid
    confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were
    to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8 )
  The Boeing Co. was awarded the annual Missiles and Rockets New Product
    of the Year Award for its development of a microminiature welder. The
    award was presented to Boeing officials by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Execu-
    tive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and
     Space Council. Awards of Honor went to Kollmorgen Corp. (for com-
    pact pointing interferometer), and to Control Data Corp. (for its 6600
                .
    computer ) (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
0 Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, AFSSD, said perfect record of reliability of the

     Atlas (LV-3) during 14 consecutive flights in N 1964 had resulted in
     savings of $81 million. Three additional flights, made since that period,
    had given the Atlas 100% reliability record for 17 straight firings;
     five of these were for NASA. General Funk made the statement in letter
    to J. R. Dempsey, President of General Dynamics/Astronautics, prime
    contractor for Atlas. (Aw. Wk.,8/3/6d, 19; Missile/Space Daily,
     7/27/64)
  First stage of Titan 111-A had been installed at Launch Complex 20, Cape
    Kennedy. The second stage, transtage, and an aerodynamic nose shield
     were expected to arrive at Cape soon. Assembled vehicle, to form core
    of Titan 111-C, was scheduled for launch in late summer. Launch of
     111-A would be first from Cape Kennedy of vehicle specifically designed
     for a military space system. (M&R,      7/20/64, 8)
0 U.S.S.R.   submitted brief, nontechnical report of its space activities to the
    United Nations and donated magazines for new U.N. “space library.”
     This was first such Soviet report submitted to the U.N. and was inter-
     preted as evidence that U.S.S.R. was willing to cooperate in space re-
     search and share its findings with others. (Teltsch, NYT, 7/18/64)
  One of U.S.S.R.’s top test pilots, Col. Sergei G. Brovtsev, was killed in
     accident while testing helicopter. (Au. Wk.,     8/3/64, 15)
  Kenneth W. Gatland, Vice-president of British Interplanetary Society,
     described space progress in Great Britain in Astronautics & Aeronautics.
     He pointed out that Britain not only played a leading role in establishing
     ELDO but also was contributing to ELDO “the 300,000-lb.-thrust Blue
               ..
     Streak .      as the booster for a three-stage satellite launcher [Europa
        .”
     11      Other activities-not     counting the ELW contribution-had
     made Britain, in cooperation with Australia, “easily the biggest
     participant in space rksearch outside the United States and the Soviet
     Union.
270              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

         “Upper-air research with Skylark rockets began at Woomera in Feb-
      ruary 1957 and has continued to the present time. Black Knight r o c h
      have reached heights of 500 mi., and with it a number of interesting
      investigations have been made on both re-entry and stabilization and
      control of rocket vehicles at high altitudes. The growth of the Weapons
      Research Establishment at Woomera as a launching, tracking, and com-
      munications center under joint investment by the British and Australian
      Governments, and latterly by ELDO and NASA, has made this facility the
      finest and best-equipped overland rocket range in the Western
                ..
      World..
         “With the advent of Sputnik 1 in October 1957, Jodrell Bank [radio-
      astronomy facilities] quickly established itself on both sides of the Iron
      Curtain as an important center for space tracking and communi-
               ...
      cations.
         “In addition, the General Post Ofc in 1961-62 built an experi-
                                              fie
      mental ground station at Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall, for relaying tele-
      communications signals between the United States and the United King
      dom via Telstar and Relay. There are plans to develop this station into
                                                                     ...
      a ground terminal for a global telecommunicationsnetwork.
         “In July 1%3, it was announced in Washington that Black Knight
       would be used by the United States, Great Britain, and Australia in a
      joint program of re-entry research [Project DazzIeJ to be conducted
                                       ...
      over the Woomera rocket range.
                                                 ..
         “[British] universities and industry.       [supplied] scientific instru-
      ments for the satellites S-51 and 5-52 built and launched by the United
      States. A third scientific satellite, 5-53,wholly engineered in the United
                                                    ...
      Kingdom, will be launched by Scout in 1966.
         “In the small rocket field, excellent results are currently being ob-
                                                    ....
      tained with the Skua meteorological rocket            a cheap and simple
      tool for the meteorologist to conduct routine research measurements in
                              ..
      theupperatmosphere.
                   ...
         “Finally,      [studies] are currently being made in the United King-
      dom into the concept of the Aerospace Plane, or space Trans-
      porter. . . .” (A&A, 7/64, 18-26)
                           August 1984
August I: The day after RANGER VII’S historic photographs of the moon
   climaxed a “textbook flight,” President Johnson was briefed on the mis-
   sion by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications
   Dr. Homer E. Newell and Jet Propulsion Laborator Director Dr.
                                                            h‘
   William H. Pickering. Discussing the lunar surface p otographs, Dr.
    Newell said the principal investigators (Dr. Gerard Kuiper and Dr.
   Eugene M. Shoemaker) had tentatively concluded that “because there
    exists such sharp little craters here on the surface, this indicates that
    there is not a deep layer of dust in this area. There would be expected
                                                ...
   to be a layer of dust on the lunar surface           there has been much
                                              ...
    speculation about how deep it would be.          Some people had specu-
    lated as much as a thousand feet. Many as much as 30 or do feet.
    Others had said no, it can’t be. And those who said no, it can’t be,
    Dr. Shoemaker now thinks were right. At least as far as this area is
   concerned.”
       Asked by the President whether the RANGER VII success confirmed
    ‘khat you folks had known what you were doing,” Dr. Pickering replied:
    “Yes, I think it does.
       “First of all, it confirms we know what we are doing technically when
    we design something to do this job. Secondly, that as far as the Apollo
    Program is concerned, it confirms that the basic assumptions that they
    were making about the sort of surface we are going to have to land on
    is probably correct.”
       The President asked, “What similar achievements, scientific achieve-
    ments, can be compared to this?” and Dr. Newell replied: “Dr. Kuiper
    was asked this question yesterday. He stated he felt this was comparable
   to the photographing of the sun in the ultraviolet light by the Naval
    Research Laboratory a number of years ago.
       “Someone else said that this amounts to a big jump in lunar science,
    equivalent to the jump that occurred when Galileo turned the telescope
    on the heavens.’’
       President Johnson said: “If we were to conclude-if I were to con-
    clude, if the Budget were to conclude, or if the American people should
    conclude-that we want to effect a savings here of a few billion dollars,
    would it b.e your opinion, Doctor [Pickering], that we would be penny-
    wise and pound-fwlish?”
       Dr. Pickering replied: “It would indeed, sir, because I believe that
    this is truly an investment not only which is needed to demonstrate our
    leadership in the relatively mar future, but it is a long-term investment
    for the future.” (NASA Transcript)
  Concluding his White House briefing by scientists on RANGER VII, President
    Johnson stated:
       ‘?want to say that all Americans are very proud of you today. We
    are proud of this historic extension of man’s knowledge, We are proud
                                                                  271
272            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    of our scientists, our engineers and all the great team under the leader-
    ship of one of the greatest of all Americans, Jim Webb, who are re-
    sponsible for this success. We can be duly proud of our free and open
    society, our system of government.
       “We started behind in space. We were making many apologies just
    a few years ago. We had our failures, but we kept our faith in the ways
    of freedom, and we did not follow the easy or the inexpensive course.
    We know this morning that the United States has achieved fully the
                                               ..  .
    leadership we have sought for free men.
       “I think we can say this morning that this is a victory for peaceful
    civilian international cooperation in this hour of frustration, when so
    many people are getting upset at some minor disappointments.
        “I think we can all take great pride in this development. More than
    60 countries all around the world work for us and work for peaceful
                                                          . ..
    progress and work for peaceful uses of outer space.
        (6
           These men don’t wear a DSM this morning, and we are not presenting
    them any Congressional Medal of Honor. But they do have, and all
    of their associates from Mr. Webb down to the fellow who sweeps out
    the dust in the remote test laboratory, the gratitude and the admiration
    of all Americans of all faiths, of all parties, of all regions.
        “You are welcome to the White House. The people who live here
    are mighty proud of you.” (NASA Transcript)
August 1: In article on RANGER VI1 flight, Soviet newspaper Pravda con-
    cluded: “Soviet scientists are happy to note that the launching of ‘Ranger
     7’- a new national achievement of the USA in its program to investigate
    the moon-represents a contribution to the study of outer space.”
    Zzvestia published photograph of the lunar surface taken by RANGER VII
    as illustration of interview with Soviet astronomer Boris Levin, who said
    the RANGER VII flight was “definitely an important contribution to the
    study of the composition of the lunar surface.” (Pravda, 8/1/64, 1,
    ATSS-T Trans.; USIA Research Results, CR, 8/11/64,18370-73)
* In lead editorial on the RANGER VII flight, New York Times lauded the
     success of the experiment but expressed the opinion that the flight once
     more emphasized the possibilities for international cooperation in such
             “. . . Proud as this country has reason to be of Ranger 7’s ac-
     efforts:
     complishment, we can only conjecture how much more rapidly and
     cheaply its photographs could have been obtained had Soviet and
     American scientists been able to pool their efforts and resources years
     ago, rather than being required to pursue their efforts in competitive-
     and costly-isolation.     The case for a unified international effort to
     reach the Moon-as urged by Presidents Kennedy and Johnson-is
     strengthened by every consideration of the needless waste and duplica-
     tion that have marked humanity’s space exploration to date.” (NYT,
     8/1/64,20)
* Washington Daily News editorialized that the success of RANGER ~ I ’ S    mis-
     sion represented “a significant milestone on a historic road to manned
     exploration of the moon.” The lunar flight was termed “a demon-
     stration of man’s ceaseless, boundless quest for knowledge-and
     one which, in the end, is likely to pay off as well as similar past vovages
     into the unknown.” (Wash. Daily News, 8/1/64; CR, 8/4/64. A41141
                                                      .
* Baltimore Sun editorialized on RANGER VII: “. . we hear much talk of
     what this means in international prestige, and to what extent we have
                                                                             273
                ASTROI?ATJTICS AND AERO               CS, 1964



                                                                e surface of the
     enhanced by its proximity and by the fact that something could always
     be seen there, is a matter of awe and wonder; and that is the main thing
     about this moonshot.” (Balt. Sun,8/1/64)
August I ; Soviet satellites ELECTRON m and ELECTRON N were successfully
     conducting scientific investigation of upper atmosphere and outer space,
     according to Soviet newspaper source. Since their orbiting last
     July 11,50 communication sessions had been held with ELECTRON III and
     19 with ELECTRON IV, and valuable scientific and engineering data had
     been obtained. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/2/64, ATSS-T Trans.)
* Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced that Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr.
      (Maj., USAF) ,would receive the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy
     for 196d for his 34-hour orbital space flight (MA-9) in a Mercury
     spacecraft May 15-16, 1963. Others to receive Harmon Trophy would
     be Aviatrix Betty Miller for her solo transpacific flight and Lt. Col. Fitz-
     hugh Fulton (USAF) for 11,000-lb. payload of B-58 to 85,318-ft.
     altitude. The Harmon awards for 1963 and 1964 would be presented to
     recipients in White House ceremony September 14. (NYT, 8/2/64,78)
a Expressing congratulations on the success of RANGER VII lunar mission,
     Chancellor Ludwig Erhard of West Germany said in telegram to Presi-
     dent Johnson: “We are happy with the American people over this
     tremendous technical and scientific achievement.” Other response to
     the successful lunar mission included statement by President of Mexico
     Adolfo Lopez Mateos, who said that RANGER VII was “without doubt,
     up to the present moment, the most brilliant page registered in the
      scientific history of modern times.” British astronomer Sir Bernard
      Love11 praised the success of RANGER VII and said: “The results will be
          ..
      of.      critical importance to the American plan for a soft landing of
      instruments on the lunar surface next year and for Project Apollo,
      involving a manned landing at the end of the decade.” (AP, Wash.
     Sun. Star, 8/2/64)
   French Dragon rocket was successfully fired to an altitude of 275
      mi. from a ’base in Iceland, National Center of Space Research an-
      nounced in Paris. Fired in cooperation with Icelandic scientists, the
      sounding rocket carried instruments to measure energy and direction
      of particles from Van Allen radiation belts. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star,
      8/2]64; M&R, 8/10/a,11)
 August 2: Giving his Sunday blessing to the public, Pope Paul VI referred
      to the successful U.S. RANGER VII lunar flight: “We also would unite
      ourselves in the admiration of all for a happening that concerns the
      life of all humanity and that shows how far the man of science and
                                   .
      technology has progressed. . .” (AP, Houston Post, 8/3/64)
 * In article from Houston, UPI reported on first manned space flight in
      Project Gemini (GT-3), quoting “informed sources” as saying: “We
      cannot possibly make it this year. It will be early 1965.” NASA’s       offi-
                                                                        (UPI, L.A.
      cially announced planning date was in last quarter of 1%.
      Times, 8/2/68)
   Soviet newspaper Kmsnuya Zvezda published erroneous map of the target
      area in the Pacific for its rocket tests which it had previously announced
274            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    would begin August 4. T e map placed the impact areas withim lOQ
                                 h
    mi. of populated islands, but the targets as previously defined were
    several hundred miles from nearest inhabited areas and in another part
    of the Pacific. (Shabad, NYT, 8/3/64)
Augmt 3: Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) ,speaking on the House floor, praised
    the team of scientists and technicians that made the successful RANGER
    VII lunar flight possible, and said that the “validity of the space program
                             .
    has been reconfirmed.. .”
       Also in the House, Rep. Louis C. Wyman (R.-N.H.) said the trans-
    mission of lunar photographs was “a great tribute to the scientific prog-
    ress of our experts in America’s space program,” and RANGER VII was
                                    ...
    “a highly technical success           in the right direction; namely, the
    use of machines” rather than man in space exploration. He added
    that Project Apollo need not be called off, but he felt Congress should
    “hold back on the appropriations for Apollo space vehicle procurement
    until we have established that man can rendezvous in space by complet-
                                                    ..    .” He also advocated
    ing successfully the present Gemini program.
    elimination of a target date for US. manned landing on the moon.
     (CR,  8/3/64,17203)
* NASA announced Col. Lawrence W. Vogel (U.S. Army) replaced Col. R.
    P. Young as NASA Executive Officer. Colonel Vogel was detailed to NASA
    from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. (NASA Announcement fX-172)
  Results of decompression experiments with mice in atmospheres of
    helium-oxygen, nitrogen-oxygen, and argon-oxygen were reported in
    M s i e and Rackets. Performed by group at Purdue Research Facil-
      isls
    ity, experiments showed mice survived decompression markedly longer
    in helium-oxygen atmosphere than in air. In one experiment, eight mice
    decompressed in helium-oxygen atmosphere survived an average of 6.1-
    min. longer than six mice decompressed in air. Extrapolation of these
    results might indicate desirability of helium-oxygen atmospheres in
    spacecraft for prolonged manned flights; the extra minutes of survival
    would provide safety margin, in case of accidental decompression, for
    crew to take necessary emergency measures. (M&R, 8/3/64, 32)
* Discussing President Johnson’s July 24 announcement of the SR-71
    mach 3 aircraft under development for SAC, Robert Hotz editorialized
                           “. . .
    in Aviation Week:              The ‘SR-71’ was, of course, the A-11
     [YF-l2A] with still another designation pasted on its titanium
    s i . But many congressmen were fooled, and unthinking daily news-
      km
    papermen and wire service reporters failed to catch the. deception and
    spread the news across the nation of the ‘new’ billion-dollar aircraft
    program.
       “The inception of this program also was conveniently shifted from
     1959 in the Eisenhower Administration to 1963 in the Kennedy Ad-
    ministration. Anybody familiar with aircraft development cycles knows
     that if this program were really started in 1963, it would be impossible
    to deliver operational aircraft to Strategic Air Command in 1965, as
                                 ..  .” (Av. Wk., 8/3/64, 11)
    President Johnson stated.
* Preliminary survey of public readtion to sonic booms in Oklahoma City,
    disclosed by FAA, indicated that 10-20% of those interviewed expressed
    “varying degrees of negative reactions” and about 4% made formal
    complaints. In the six-month test program which ended July 30, 1,253
    sonic booms were created over the city. (Clark, NYT, 8/4/64)
               ASTRONAUT1




                             tment was e
    NASA research program in electronics and control when he was assigned
    to his position in November 1%1; he joined NASA in March 1960 to
    establish development program for Agena launch vehicle. (NASA Re-
    lease 64-199)
  Sen. Hubert €3. Humphrey (D.-Minn.) discussed responses he had re-
    ceived to bill he had introduced for establishment of Oflice of Solar
    Energy, among them a letter from George Lof, Acting Director, Solar
    Energy Laboratory of Univ. of Wisconsin. After visiting U.S.S.R.,
    Mr. Lof related that the solar development program there was “weU
    directed, well staffed, and exceptionally well financed.” There were
    about 10 institutions in various parts of the U.S.S.R. engaged in this
    work, with 80-100 full-time scientific personnel. (CR, 8/4/64+17471)
e Rep. Lionel Van Derelin (D.-Calif.) said in a telegram to J. R. Dempsey,
    president of Generd Dynamics-Astronautics: “Spectacular success of
    the Ranger moon shot should not overshadow the equally spectacular
    record of consecutive successful launchings by Atlas boosters. Ranger
    shot was the 17th straight. Such amazing reliability is the backbone of
                        . . .”   (CR,
    our space program.                 8/4/64,17368)
e The “strange object’’ that fell from sky near remote Venezuelan vil-
    lage was identified by two US. Army officers as a US. satellite, accord-
    ing to US. Embassy spokesman in Caracas. The 175-lb. satellite had
    been charred by re-entry heat, damaged by impact, and partly dis-
    mantled by local residents. (UPI, Wash. Post, 8/7/64)
Augzcst 5: RANGER VII briefing to members of Congress, with Harris (“Bud”)
    Schurmeier, Ranger Project Manager, JPL, and Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper,
    Director of Lunar and Planetary Div., Univ. of Arizona, as principal
    speakers. Dr. Kuiper said: “I do not think it is an exaggeration to
                                                                  ...
    say that a new era has begun in the exploration of the Moon.
        “Here, in one step last week a gain of a factor of 2,000 was made-
    2,000 in the eflktive magnification of the image of the lunar surface
                                 ..   .”
     [earlier reported as 1,OOOl.
        Discussing preliminary results of the lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper
           “. .
    said:           down to the size of approximately two or three feet, the
                                                                    ..   . an
    primary craters caused by direct impacts on the moon covered
     area amounting to about one percent of the lunar surface. So this is
     a very great help in landing operations, either by unmanned soft land-
    ings, such as Surveyor, or manned landings as planned for Apollo.
           . . . t b innocent-looking ray systems, such as one has around
        6C


     Copernicus, Tycho, Kepler, a number of craters really are danger spots.
                                        ..
     When you look at them closely, .        one sees them resolved into mul-
                                             ..
     titudes, clusters of secondary craters. . I wouldn’t be surprised
     if slopes of the order of 15 degrees would be found. This would be
     somewhat difficult. This is a rather uncomfortable inclination on which
    to land.
       “. .    . the surface between these craters is smoother than I had
              .. .        ...
                      I have     many times hypothesized that if you would go
     thought.
    to higher and higher magnification, higher and higher resolution, that
276            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    there would be a large number of cracks on the moon, fissurea similar
    to those one finds on lava fields such as on Mauna Loa, Hawaii, or
    recent lava fields which have not yet been eroded.
                                                             ...
        “This apparently is not the caw. This was wrong             these cracks
    are not present. It looks as if the surface of the moon has been buffeted,
    has been simply pounded on, and has been sort of smoothed out, and
                                    ..
    the cracks filled in the process.
        “NOWthe question is, what about the surface? what is the nature
                     ...      It is not just a loose pile of sand, dust. It has
    of the surface.
                                   ...    while we know from other data that
    considerable stiffness. And
    the top structure is open, it is sort of like snow or a biscuit, a cracker.
     It has an open structure; nevertheless, it looks as if the moon may have
    considerable bearing strength. That, however, is something which must
    be measured separately, with separate equipment.
        “However, we can say that there are not enormous depths, several
    feet, ten, or a hundred feet of dust, which would simply not have per-
    mitted formation of the sharp little craters as we observe them.” (NASA
    Transcript)
Augmt 5: Success of RANGER MI spotlighted NASA’s         preparation for further
    lunar and planetary exploration, including two more Rangers (early
    next year), Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft, Lunar Orbiter photograph-
     ing spacecraft, and Project Apollo manned lunar expedition, as well as
    two Mariner spacecraft to gather data from the vicinity of Mars (last
     quarter of 1964). (NASA Releases 66196,66205)
  Senate passed H.R. 11296 ( N 1%5 appropriations for independent
     offices), after rejecting (69-20) amendment sponsored by Sen. William
     Proxmire to reduce NASA funds by $68,594,000 for Research and De-
     velopment; by $17,880,500 for construction of Facilities; and by
     $13,525,500 for Administrative Operations. As passed by the Senate,
     NASA appropriations for N 1965 amounted to $5.3 billion, divided as
     follows: R&D, $4,413,594,000; CofF’, $262,880,500; and AO, $623,-
     525,500. Bill was sent to conference. (CR, 8/5/64, 17554-77)
* Boilerplate Gemini spacecraft was dropped from C-119 aircraft at 1,500-ft.
     altitude, sixth in series of such tests to study landing on solid ground.
     The tests were being conducted by Landing and Recovery Div., NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center. (AP, Houston Post, 6/8/64; MSC Roundup,
     8/19/64,3 1
  At NASA Hq. awards presentation ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of Lewis
     Research Center and William R. Cherry of Goddard Space Flight Center
     jointly received NASA Contributions Award for development of improved
      (n-on-p) radiation-resistant solar cells. Mandelkorn received $5,000
     cash award and Cherry, $1,000. William W. Smith, formerly of Jet
     Propulsion Laboratory, and Bruce W. Schmitz of JPL received $l,OOO
     award for their contribution of Trajectory-Correction Propulsion Sys-
     tem, used recently in RANGER MI lunar photography mission. Wilmer H.
     Reed 111 of LaRC received $1,500 award for his contribution of a Test
     Unit Free-Flight Suspension System. Howell D. Garner and Henry
      J. E. Reid, Jr., of Langley Research Center, received $1,700 award for
     their contribution of Dynamic Precession Damper for Spin Stabilized
      Vehicles. Awards were presented by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr.
      Hugh L. Dryden. (Program)
                                                                         277
               ASTRONAUTICB AND AERONAUTICS, 196.4

                                                       D        booster from
                                                                , Wmh. Post,
                                                      ad
* Senator John Stennis (D.-Miss.) said on the floor of the Senate:
       66
         In exploring space, our Nation as well as any other nation is strain-
    ing at the state-of-the-art and technology. We are movin
    where relatively little is known. As we move into such
    confident that we can stay abreast in the field of scientific discovery and
    its application to space with any other nation. In this medium it is not
    a case of being able to defend ourselves by building ten planes to every
    five planes of a potential aggressor nation or five ships to two ships or
    three tanks to one tank in order to establish our superiority. By staying
    abreast of advancements in science and technology our Nation will be
    able to prevent any surprise in this new medium. Our national space
    program is geared to this accomplishment. As for the present, our
    Nation subscribes to the philosophy that space should be explored for
    peaceful purposes, and we will do so. However, should an aggressor
    attempt to utilize this medium for warlike activities in the future,
    I am confident that our Nation will be prepared to defend itself.” (CR,
    8/5/64)
* National Academy of Sciences announced establishment of 10-man com-
    mittee to study effects of sonic boom phenomena as related to develop-
    ment of supersonic transport. Chaired by Dr. J. R. Dunning, dean of
    School of Engineering and Applied Science, Columbia Univ., the com-
    mittee would assist Government in planning an expanded sonic boom
    test program and evaluating the data obtained in the program. FAA
    would continue to manage the test program operation, with support
     from NASA and USAF. NAS organized the committee upon request from
    President Johson. (NSNRC           Release)
  Dave W. Lang, Chief of MSC Contracts and Procurements Div., said in
     address to Gulf Area Development Committee of the Houston Chamber
     of Commerce that MSC “ranked first in the agency in terms of dollar and
    percentage awards” to contractors for the first half of FY 1 9 a . MSC
     awards totaled $629.1 million, or 32% of total NASA spending in that
     period. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/6/64)
August 6: NASA and Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare announced
     cooperative one-year research project to study anti-cancer, carcinogenic,
     and anti-radiation potential of certain chemical compounds closely
     related to plant growth regulators. Project would extend studies made
     at North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. in
     NASA research program to protect man in space. To he conducted
     at *ID under $198,185 contract with HEW’S Public Health Service,
     project would be directed by PRS National Cancer Institute and
     financed through a transfer of funds by NASA as part of its Technology
     Utilization program. (NASA Release 6 6 1 9 0 )
  Nike-Caiun sounding rocket with upper atmosphere grenade ex-
                                           lops Island to 73-mi. altitude, and
     periment was launched fr
     series of 12 grenades was             and detonated at intervals from 23-
     to 58-mi. altitude. Experiment was coordinated with similar grenade
      shot from Sweden’s Kronogh-d Range (81-mi. ak altitude) and with
     another experiment launched there on a Nike-             rocket to measure
     noctilucent clouds (77-mi. peak altitude). These launchings marked
278                                                     19 6 4
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    beginning of third series of grenade experiments conducted by NASA
    GSFC from Wallops Island, Fort Churchill Research Range, and Ascen-
    sion Island, with Sweden joining the group for ithis series. The Fort
    Churchill and Ascension Island launchings were canceled because of
    weather conditions. (Wallops Release 6459;NASA Rpt. SRL)
August 6: Black Knight rocket was fired at Woomera Rocket Range in
    U.K.-US.-Australia Project Dazzle. Minister of Supply Allen F a i r h d
    said the rocket reached 370-mi. altitude, where second stage rocket
    ignited to drive instrumented re-entry package back through the atmos-
    phere. (Reuters, Houston Post, 8/7/64)
0 Research in extrasensory perception as a means of communication with

    astronauts on space flights was advocated by Harold Sherman, Presi-
    dent and Executive Director of ESP Research Associates Foundation,
    Little Rock, Ark. Speaking in Los Angeles, Sherman said: “It is en-
    tirely feasible for the Air Force to experiment in the training of astro-
    nauts to transmit and receive thoughts and, in this connection, a battery
    of ‘sensitives,’ who can communicate with them on a two-way basis
     while they are traveling through space.” (L. A. Herd-Examiner,
    8/6/64)
August 7: NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill with
     grenade payload to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and
    pressure data. The rocket attained 86.5-mi. altitude and all but the
    first of the 12 grenades detonated. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* First manned free-flight test of Gemini paraglider landing system was un-
     successful at Edwards AFB, Calif. The paraglider, with pilot E. P. Hetzel
     of North American Aviation in mockup spacecraft slung beneath it, was
     towed to 13,000 ft. by helicopter, then was cut loose. Pilot Hetzel lost
     control and at 3,000 ft. was forced to bail out. The paraglider crashed.
     (Wash. Eve. Star, 8 / 7 / a )
* NASA and Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research
     announced agreement for joint scientific sounding rocket project.
     Under the agreement, four Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying
     sodium vapor payloads would be launched from Coronie, Surinam,
     near the equator next autumn. Netherlands would provide scientific
     payloads and launch site, as well as other support facilities in Surinam.
     NASA would provide the rockets and launching device and train Dutch
     launching personnel. (NASA Release 64-197)
  USAF Titan I11 solid-fuel rocket motor was fired in static test at United
     Technology Center’s Coyote, Calif., test facilities. A joint in the
     nozzle skirt failed during last 10 sec. of the 112-sec. test, causing a
     fire that did only minor damage to the test stand, but all test objectives
     were met. AFSC Space Systems Div. Deputy Chief of S a f for Manned
                                                              tf
     Spaceflight Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier termed the test an absolute
     success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/@; M&R, 8/16/64, 8)
0 Research in use of laser radar to map air turbulence in the skies was

     described by Drs. Ronald T. H. Collis and Myron G. H. Ligida of Aero-
     physics Laboratory at Stanford Research Institute. The laser equip-
     ment would be installed in aircraft. Dr. Collis and Dr. Ligida reported
     their research in Nature. (NYT, 8/7/64,8)
  Discussing U S . space costs in terms of the gross national product, Sen.
     Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said the GNP was nearly $2 billion a day,
                                                                          279
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AER

    “and I guess we                                        to get to &.e moon.”
    (AP, Louisville,
August 7: AFSC announced fabrication of ultrahigh strength, lightweight
    steel cases for solid-propellant rockets. Solid-rocket case constructed
    of 18%nickel maraging steel was as strong as similar-size conventional
    steel case but was 25% lighter. The steel was developed under contract
    by Curtiss-Wright Corp. (APSC Release &12%94)
* Michael V. Lighthill, director of British laboratory involved in developing
    Anglo-French supersonic airliner Concorde and reputable expert on
    sonic booms, spoke optimistically in interview about outcome of recent
    US. sonic boom experiments. Lighthill said that although there was
    not yet enough information from the Oklahoma City studies, prelimi-
    nary reports were “very encouraging.” Damage from sonic booms
    was apparently less than many experts had feared. (Simons, W s h .
    Post, 8/8/6$)
  USN successfully launched Polaris A-3 from submarine submerged 30 mi.
    east of Cape Kennedy. (M&R, 8/11/64,9)
* Common stock of Communications Satellite Corp. had risen as high as
    $35 since it was put on sale to the public at $20 last June 2, surprising
    many Wall Street experts. (Vartan, NYT, 8/7/64,33)
Augwt 8: President Lyndon B. Johnson said in press conference at LBJ
                                 ..
    ranch, Stonewall, Tex.: “.       it seems to me that these last seven days
    deserve very s p i a l consideration and contemplation of every thinking
    citizen. All week long the Americans have been doing what Americans
    do best-working together.
        “The results have been highly gratifying. The week has been deeply
    reassuring. Wherever we have faced them, we have been meeting our
    challenges-at the Gulf of Tonkin, the halls of Congress, in distant space
    of our universe and all sections of our Nation.
        “Only a week ago, we saw a steady, stable, straight-forward national
    course yield an important national success in the mission of Ranger
    7....   9,


        The President announced :
        “The Air Force will proceed immediately with the program to orbit
    24 satellites for an interim, independent defense satellite communica-
    tions system. This system will provide reliable, worldwide circuits,
    highly resistant to jamming and physical attack, for carrying essential
    military communications in times of crisis.” (Transcript, AP, Wash.
     Post, 8/9/64, A12)
  DOD statement on military communications satellite system, announced
    earlier in the day by President Johnson, described the satellites as an “in-
    terim system” designed to provide “extremely reliable duplex high-qual-
     ity voice circuits.” The 24-satellite network would be placed into near-
     equatorial orbits, eight at a time, by three Titan 111-C launch vehicles,
     beginning with the first launching of eight satellites in early 1966. This
     interim system would be replaced after about three years by an “ad-
     vanced” military comsat system. (NYT,8/9/64; UPI, Wash‘. Post,
     8/9/64)
  Addressing Aerospace Industries Association Council in Seattle, Dr.
     Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the Nqtional Aeronautia and
     Space Council, summarized future aerospace trends. He foresaw no
     immediate substantial decrease in dollar amount of defense spending,
280                                                    196 4
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

   but said industry should be able to shift emphasis from production of
   weapon systems to “other useful types and forms of economic activity”-
   which he said should be toward an expanding space program and an
   increase in R&D of advanced weapons technology. Of space program
   values he said:
        “The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all
   levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. How much
   is it worth to have raised the educational sights of our young people and
   at the same time to have increased significantly the wealth of knowledge
   with which to condition them? I cannot put a price on it, but I believe
   its value will exceed the total cost of the space program.
        “The contribution of our space program to our national security i s
   also considerable. How much more secure are we, due to improved
    communications, more accurate navigation, more complete weather
    information, and better world-wide mapping? How much is it worth
   to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we
    assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset
    possible aggression from space? I cannot put a price on these contri-
    butions to national security, but I am confident that their value also
    exceeds the total cost of the space program.
        “The space program stimulates the development of new products,
    new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. I cannot
    place a precise value upon such innovations, but I would estimate that
     such investment will repay itself many times over.
         “A substantial difference in influence in world atairs evolves from
     whether a country i s in a first position or a second position in power.
     To a significant degree, a nation’s relative position depends on how it
                                      ...
     stands in advanced technology.
         bC
            Combining, as the space program does, the best talents in manage-    7


     ment, in engineering, and in science, with the most modern facilities
     available, the net result is the production of progress. A program which
     stimulates education, expands research and development, augments total
     productivity, increases employment, and improves our international
                                                                       .
     relations, is a program of the greatest economic significance. . .”
      (Text)
August 8: Brazilian sources reported that Brazil was negotiating with British
     firm for purchase of unspecified number of Seacat ship-based guided mis-
     siles. (Miller, Balt. Sun,8/9/64)
August 9: Smithsonian Institution, under grant from NASA, had purchased
     collection of meteorites from estate of Arthur R. Allen who, before he
     died in 1962, collected 45 meteorites and several hundred other rock
     specimens. (Wash. Post, 8/9/64, B9)
August 10: Paraglider landing system definitely would not be used for the
     scheduled Project Gemini space flights, MSC Public Affairs Officer Paul
      Haney announced. Development of paraglider system was too far be-
      hind for the 12 scheduled flights. After many rumors and much specu-
      lation, this statement was first 05cial announcement of decision not to
      use the paraglider. It followed by three days the first manned free-
      flight test of the system, which was unsuccessful. Development and
      testing of paraglider by North American Aviation would continue,
      Haney said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/11/64)
                                                                         281
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

August 10: Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Adminis-
    trator (Procurement Policy) , addressed National Association of Pro-
    fessional Contract Administrators in Orlando, Fla. Discussing some
    NASA contract matters of current interest, he outlined ways in which
    NASA worked similarly to and differently than DOD contract administra-
    tion, then said :
        “Perhaps &heoutstanding difference between NASA and DOD in the
    field-of. contract administration is in the area of quality control and
    inspection. NASA’s    contracts are almost wholly for research and the
    development of satellites, space vehicles, engines, etc., the like of which
    have never been made before. There are no production type contracts
    and these probably will be very few. The system of inspection and
    quality control as envisaged by NASA is quite different from the sampling
    type of inspection used on a production line.
        “We buy only a few of each item and a failure may mean the com-
     promise of a program. Also, development items are very expensive and
    the loss of a shot may mean the loss of millions of dollars. There have
     been failures where the cause has been traced to the failure of a small
    component costing a hundred dollars or so which might have been
    caught with proper inspection. The Saturn is an example of a project
     where very high degrees of quality control have been applied and very
     detailed inspection has taken place. The six Saturn shots have all been
     successful and it is difficult to criticize success.
        “NASA has had over 100 space shots. There have been successes and
     failures. In 1960 only 47% of the shots were successful,,but in 1963
     successes had risen to 85%. You can expect continued emphasis on
     quality control from NASA. Someone described that degree of reliability
     that NASA is looking for as being the equivalent of 1,000 TV sets made
                                                                 .
     to run continuously for a year without a single one failing. . ? (Text)
  The newest 14 NASA astronauts began week-long desert survival course in
     Nevada, under direction of USAF 3637th Survival and Special Training
     Squadron, Stead AFB. (MSC Roundup, 8/19/64, 2)
* Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.)
     discussed the work of his research and development subcommittee of
     the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. One current activ-
     ity: “The National Academy of Sciences is undertaking several studies
     for us through a 14-man committee headed by Dr. George Kistiakowsky,
     science advisor to former President Eisenhower. It will look into such
     questions as what is the level of basic research that should be supported
     Federally to maintain the nation’s security, economy and industrial
                 .”
     strength. . .    (M&R, 8/10/64,26)
* Orbital tanker study by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. for NASA Marshall
     Space Flight Center was discussed in Aviation Week & Space Technol-
     ogy. Tanker would be unmanned and would be used to transfer pro-
     pellants to other unmanned or to manned spacecraft in earth orbit.
     Concepts in which orbital refueling capability was underscored were
     future manned planetary flights and potential reusable lunar transport
     ferries. (Av. Wk.,   8/10/64, 55-57)
* US. Samos (Satellite and Missile Observation Systems) satellites,
     undiscussed by DOD since secrecy policy was adopted in late 1%1,
     had been orbited “periodically” ever since then, Albert Ravenholt said
     in New Orleans Times-Picayune article. Even though Samos was de-
      ?W-5980-4~~
282                                                          19 6 4
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    veloped as successor to U-2 high-altitude photographic airplane, Raven-
    holt said, U.S.S.R. had “made no threatening noises about Samos,”
    probably because some Russian Cosmos satellites are equipped with
    cameras; U.S.S.R. has no missile capable of shooting down a Samos;
    and, if it could down one, the action would open whole new vista of legal
    problems about control of outer space. (Ravenholt, N.O. Times-
    Picayune,8/10/a)
August 10: According to unnamed DOD official, U.S.S.R. had yet to demon-
    strate “even the beginnings of US. solid rocket t e ~ h n ~ l ~ g y The of-
                                                                           .”
    ficial said in Missiles and Rockets that this fact, combined with the fact
    that Soviet operational ICBM’s liquid-fueled vehicles stored above
                                      were
    ground rather than in hardened silos, had greatly influenced defense
    planners’ viewpoint that US.could mount a second strike and destroy a
                                   before they were fired. (Trainor, M&R,
    number of Soviet ICBM’s
    W10J6d)
a Soviet newspaper Izvestia singled out Marina Popovich, wife of Lt. Col.

    Pavel R. Popovich, as a possibility to become woman space traveler,
    saying the cosmonaut’s wife had “finished the higher aviation school and
    has now left for a distant business trip.” Zzvestia quoted Pavel as say-
    ing: “The machine with which she is now familiarizing herself is con-
    siderably more powerful than the one in which she established a new
    record for speed two months ago.” (UPI, NYT; 8/11/64, 3 ; Wash.
    Post, 8/12/64)
August 11 : Echo, Relay, and Syncom communications satellites were pre-
    sented to the Smithsonian Institution in ceremony at Museum of History
     and Technology. Among the NASA officials participating in the presenta-
    tion were Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Langley Research
     Center Director Dr. Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center
     Director Dr. Harry Goett.
        Carl T. Rowan, Director of US. Information Agency, said in address
     at the ceremony:
        “As we view the unfolding drama of the American space program
     it can be clearly seen that one of its most significant aspects is that it has
     been carried out in the full, open view of an interested and anxious
     world. When it was written into the National Aeronautics and Space
     Act of 1958 that the activities of the new space agency were to be open
     to the widest practicable and appropriate spread of information, the
     Congress cast into law one of the deepest instincts of the American peo-
     ple. It was an act of faith to specify that this enterprise should be
     carried on openly *before gaze of those who wished us well and those
                                 the
     who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of faith in freedom and
     the ability of Americans to meet the challenges and opportunities of an
     era when each day unfolds new perils and new promises.
        “If openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in the entire space
     program, the decision to carry out a satellite program dedicated to free-
     dom of communications on a global scale represented that concept con-
                                              .
     verted into a highly meaningful fact. . .
        “It is obvious that the over-riding quality of communications satel-
     lites is their internationalism. A practical system based on communica-
     tion satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of little use if it did
     not mean communicating between the peoples of widely separated lands.
     Its basic premise involves the inclusion of a many countries as possible
                                                     i
     in the interchange that the system allows.
                                                                         283
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

        “This presentation of communication satellites to our national museum
    of science and technology is, therefore, most truly an international
    occasion. For it is their international utility in the cause of world
    understanding, peace and progress which gives them their deepest
    meaning.” (Text)
August 11: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands,
    N. Mex., reached 107-mi. altitude with four spectrographs to obtain
    spectra of planets, but no data were obtained because attitude control
    system’s despin valve failed and the rocket spun out of control. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
* USAF Titan I1 rocket was launched successfully from an underground silo
    on flight down Western Test Range. Same day, faulty relay box in
    Thor-Agena launch vehicle postponed launch of NASA’s       Nimbus meteor-
    ological satellite into polar orbit. (Wash. Post, 8/12/M; M&R,
    8/17/64, 9)
* Communications Satellite Corp. said DOD’S last-minute demands on
    ComSatCorp to change the terms of the international comsat agreement
    were the reason why DoD-ComSatCorp negotiations fell through.
    ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk said DOD had insisted on changes
    which would have barred foreign members from any voice in letting con-
    tracts to build the military portion of the network. DOD’S demands were
    presented in July, shortly before the conference that created the new
    consortium and after all technical details of the proposed military-com-
    mercial sharing plan had been agreed upon in June. (Toth, Wush. Post,
    8/12/64)
  Four Soviet parachutists at world parachute jumping championships,
    Leutkirch, West Germany, set new world record for men’s team jumping
    from 1,000 meters, landing an average of 66.5 centimeters from center of
    target. Previous world record of 89.5 centimeters was set two days
    earlier by US. team. (Reuters, NYT,8/12/64,35)
August 11-12: Four NASA sounding rockets were launched in coordinated
    studies of the atmosphere from Wallops Island, Va.: Ft. Churchill, Can-
    ada; and Kronogtrd, Sweden.
        Nike-Cajun launched from Ft. Churchill reached 77.5-mi. altitude with
     12 grenades ejecting and detonating during rocket ascent. Ground-
    based microphone array recorded time and direction of detonation
    sounds’ arrivals to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and
    pressure data.
        Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops Island ejected 12 grenades during
    its ascent to 72-mi. altitude, with similar ground-based microphone array
    to obtain data.
        Nike-Apache launched from Kronogtrd reached 75.5-mi. altitude with
    micrometeoroid-particle-sampling payload. Although sampling cans
     did not seal completely, preliminary evaluation indicated that data would
    be recovered. Experiment was cooperative effort of USAF Cambridge
     Research Laboratories and Meteorological Institute of Stockholm Univ.
       Nike-Cajun launched from Kronogtrd, with grenade payload func-
     tioned properly, but no usable data were obtained because of loss of
     Dovap near Cajun ignition. For same reason, peak altitude was un-
     known. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
August 12: X-15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot Milton 0. Thompson in flight to
    test and measure heating effect of atmospheric friction on certain aircraft
     structural components. Aircraft reached altitude of 81,000 ft. and
284             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    traveled at 3,511mph (mach 5.32) in the 7-min. flight near NASA Flight
                                                           .
     Research Center, Edwards, Calif. (NASA X-15 Proj O f ;CR, 8/20/64,
                                                        f.
    20046)
August 12: Senate-HouseConference Committee on H.R. 11296 filed its Con-
     ference Report on the Independent Offices Appropriation Bl for Nil
     1965. Committee recommended $5,250,000,000 NASA appropriation,
     which was $50,000,000 less than Senate-passed bill had provided and
     $50,000,000 more than House Committee had recommended. One
     amendment, regarding use of funds for a manned lunar landing by U.S.
    and another country, was reported in disagreement. (House Rpt. 1781)
* Fourth birthday of ECHO I passive communications satellite, still orbiting
     the earth in its visible path. G. T. Schjeldahl Co., builders of the 100-ft.
     sphere for NASA, said ECHO 1’s supply of gas had long ago leaked out
    through holes made by micrometeoroids, but even so, ECHO I had “dem-
     onstrated the practicability of employing large inflatabIe and erectable
     reflectors to rebound intelligent signals beamed at it.” (Schjeldahl Re-
     lease; Wash. Post, 8/11/64)
* NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of GE Command
     Systems Div. to negotiate contract for additional spacecraft tracking
     system for Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) sta-
     tion at Fairbanks, Alaska. The new system, known as Goddard Range
     and Range Rate System because it was originally developed by GSFC
     engineers, was designed to provide improved tracking data for space
     probes, satellites, and launch vehicles traveling in elliptical OF synchro-
     nous orbits. Two previously completed systems installed at Rosman,
     N.C., and Carnarvon, Australia, had proved highly successful in tracking
                                 (GSFC Release 6-21-69)
     EXPLORER XVIII (IMP).
* Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Arthur Sylvester denied
     statement made yesterday by Communications Satellite Corp. President
     Joseph Charyk that DOD had demanded, at the last minute, unmeetable
     conditions for military-civilian comsat cooperation. Sylvester said :
     “The Department of Defense stated at the outset of negotiations that it
     would require assurance that the international agreement be so drafted
     as to protect the technical and security requirements of the national
     communications system.” (AP, NYT, 8/13/M,17)
* IBM Corp. said newly developed mathematical methods would permit
     great increase in use of computers to design and test aircraft,
     missiles, and spacecraft. Designers now could “simulate flight 15 to 20
     times faster than ever before possible on a general-purpose digital com-
     puter.” IBM had used the new technique to help design and evaluate
     guidance computer for Gemini spacecraft. (NYT,8/13/64)
* General B. A. Schriever, AFSC, said in keynote address at Ninth Symposium
     on Ballistic Missile and Space Technology, U.S. Naval Training Center,
     San Diego:
       “. . .  technology is a key to our nation’s future. This is true not only
     in the military area but also in the economic area. Technology is vital
     not only to our security and survival, but also to our growth and general
     well-being. Technology must be utilized to support national objectives.
        “Those of us who are responsible for the national security must ensure
     that technical progress does in fact serve national military policy
     effectively. To meet this responsibility there are three things we must do.
        “First, we must advance the state of the art as the necessary first step
                               .. .
     towardnewcapabilities.
                                                                         285
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

       “Second, we need to identify the technological opportunities during
    the next ten to fifteen years and relate them to national security
                    ..
    objectives.
       “[Third, we need] a means of presenting alternatives clearly so that
    decisions can be made promptly and with a high degree of con-
             . . .”   In this regard, he discussed new AFSC Hq- activity to
    fidence.
    facilitate decision-making process: PROM (Program Management, Re-
    sources Management, and ObjectivesManagement). (Text)
August 13: House passed conference report on H.R. 11296 (Independent
    Ofkes Appropriation), providing NASA FY 1965 appropriation of
    $5,250,000,000. House also voted to recede from its disagreement with
    Senate-sponsored amendment which provided that no part of the NASA
    appropriation be used “for expenses of participating in a manned lunar
    landing to be carried out jointly by the United States and any other
                                                                (CR, 8/13/64,
    country without the consent of the Congress.”
    18672-81)
* Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) spoke in the House of recent report
    by Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development which was a
    preliminary investigation of how existing Congressional resources of
    scientific and technical information can be made more effective.
    “. .. The critical need for Congress to study and evaluate its uses of
    scientific information cannot be minimized. It is imperative that we be
    prepared to assemble the necessary information for Congress to make
    complex policy decisions in order to meet national goals. As I have
    indicated we are more concerned with the policy of the decision than its
    technical aspects. In making these decisions the translation and con-
    version of scientific and technical information into policy terms is
               ..  .” (CR,8/13/64,18753)
    essential.
  ComSatCorp announced in its first report to shareholders that there
    were more than 130,000 public stockholders in the Corporation.
    President Joseph Charyk said: “It is good to be able to report that the
    foundations of the Corporation have been solidly placed-in technical
    preparations, in the recruitment of key personnel, in the development of
    a program to create a commercial communications satellite system, and
    in other ways.
       “It gives even greater satisfaction to report that the program to create
    a satellite system is under way and on schedule and that the documents
    setting upon the arrangements for foreign participation in the system
    have recently been initialed by the United States Government, the
    Corporation, and a number of foreign governments and telecommunica-
    tion entities.” (ComSatCorpRelease)
August 14: X-15 No. 2 made its second flight since major modifications
    were made on the aircraft, with Major Robert A. Rushworth (USAF) at
    the controls. Flight was part of series of flight requalification tests
    being conducted on the modified aircraft, which attained maximum speed
    of 3,580 mph (mach 5.29) and altitude of 99,000 ft. The nose wheel
    popped out as the X-15 was flying 3,068 mph at 88,000-ft. altitude, but
    the wheel performed normally when the aircraft landed after nine-
    minute flight at Rogers Dry Lake. (NASA X-15 Proj. Of ;FRC Release;
                                                              f.
    AP,Nilwaukee Journal,8/15/64)
* Two satellites were orbited with single Atlas-Agena D booster, launched by
    USAF from WTR. ( HHN-4 8 )
286              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

August 14: Senate agreed to report of Conference Committee on H.R. 11296
     and cleared for the White House the Independent Offices Appropriation,
     including $5,250,000,000 for NASA in FY 1965. (NASA LAR III/159)
* NASA announced Syncom C communications satellite would be assisted into
     proper orbit later this month by its sister satellite Syncom 11, which
     would provide a reliable relay point in space for communications be.
     tween ground stations and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA
     Syncom Project Officer H. N. Stafford said: “As far as we know, this is
     the first time one satellite has been used to help in the launch of another.
     Tiros satellites have been used to help predict weather before manned
     space flights. The Relay satellite carried pictures of the Cooper flight.
     But this appears to be the first case of direct use of a satellite in an opera-
     tional role during a launch.” (NASA Release 64-204)
   U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XXXVII into earth orbit: 300-km.(186.42-mi.)
     apogee, 205-km. ( 127.39-mi.) perigee, 89.45-min. period, and 65” angle
      of inclination to the equator. T s said the satellite contained scientific
                                        as
      equipment intended for carrying on space research according to pro-
     gram announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Krasmya Zvezda, 8/15/64,
      1,ATSS-T T a s )
                  rn.
   NASA announced selection of the name “Pegasus” for its micrometeoroid
      detection satellite, to be launched into orbit with Saturn I rocket booster.
      Named for the winged horse of ancient mythology, the satellite has a
      wing-like panel 96-ft. long and 14ft. wide which would record and
      transmit the penetrations of meteoroids. (NASA Release 6 6 2 0 3 )
   ComSatCorp petitioned FCC for rule to give it exclusive eligibility for
      ownership and operation of the initial ground stations for the global
      commercial comsat network. Under Communications Satellite Act of
      1962, FCC must decide whether ComSatCorp or other commercial com-
      munications carrier, or both, shall build and operate the ground stations.
       ( ComSatCorp Release)
 * DOD announced award of $2,750,000 initial increment to Martin-Marietta
      Corp.’s Space Systems Div. on a letter contract for work on an advanced
      re-entry test program for AFSC Space Systems Div. Press sources identi-
      field the program as Start (Spacecraft Technology And Re-entry Test),
      an expansion of USAF Asset re-entry program, and said this contract was
      just one of 10-14 areas which had been identified in the program. (DOD
      Release 596-64; M&R, 8/24/64, 10)
 * Moscow Radio quoted Cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 Popovich
      as saying their “standbys” were ready for space flight and that their
      scientists were “planning new experiments in space exploration.”
       ( Wmh.Post, 8/14/64)
   Sen. Hubert Humphrey (D.-Minn.) discussed in the Senate H.R. 11611,
      act to establish National Commission on Technology, Automation, and
      Economic Progress. He said the legislation would “enable the essential
      fact-gathering” about technological change to be made. He continued:
      “I have long been interested in legislation of this kind. I have intro-
      duced S. 2427 to establish a Hoover-type Commission to work broadly
      in the area of investigating the impact of automation, technology, and
      employment. I have also joined in the sponsorship of S. 2274 which
                                                                       .
      focuses primarily on problems in the defense industry. . .” (CRY
      8/14/64,19018)
                                                                          287
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

August 15: In memo to heads of Executive Departments and Agencies, Presi-
     dent Johnson said that in the past, US. had not done enough to help
     international organizations “secure the services of highly qualified men
                                                                   ..   .” The
     and women from private life and from government agencies.
     President presented ways in which all Executive Departments and Agen-
     cies should take “affirmative and continuing steps” to assist international
     organizations in gaining access “to talented citizens of this country who
     are qualified for positions in the international agencies.’’ (White House
    Memo, 8/15/64)
0 In White House press conference, President Johnson announced Secretary

     of Defense McNamara had approved “a program for the development
     of an aircraft designed specifically for air support of counter-insurgency,
     and limited war operations, and the Department of the Navy to contract
     for the building of seven prototype aircraft at a cost of about $18million.
        “This counter-insurgency (COIN) aircraft will be an airborne equiva-
     lent of the ‘jeep.‘ It will be able to perform peacetime emergency func-
     tions such as disaster relief, medical missions or riot control, as well as
     military missions to include light armed reconnaissance, helicopter escort
     and attack, and support of ground troops.” (Transcript, Wash. Post,
    8/16/fj4)
* Patent for manned space station design was awarded to its inventor Emanuel
     Schnitzer, technical assistant at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The
     space station was designed to erect itself in space after being lofted
    into orbit. Crewmen could be sent up in an auxiliary spacecraft or
    launched to it later in a ballistic “ferry.” Until two weeks ago, Schnitzer
     was at NASA Hq. in Advanced Manned Missions Program office. (Jus-
    tice, Houston Post, 8/15/64;NYTS, Cleveland Plain Deater, 8/15/64)
  Astronauts’ contracts with Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Time
     Inc. were discussed in Editor and Publisher editorial, which stated that
     the “principle of letting the astronauts sell their stories is all wrong.”
     Before granting personal interview, editorial said, “astronaut must get
     permission in writing from Field and Time which will grant approval
     ‘in an instance where the acceptance of such outside offers will not ma-
                                                                ..
     terially affect the value of any of the rights granted.’ .          It con-
                                                                    ¶
                                                                    ,



     cluded by saying that reporters could not interview these “national
     figures” unless two “competitors say it’s okay.” (E&P, 8/15/64)
August 15-16: Coordinated series of four NASA sounding rocket launches was
    conducted at Wallops Island, Va. ; Ascension Island; and Kronogird,
     Sweden. A Nike-Cajun was launched from each range with exploding
     grenade payloads to provide temperature, wind, density, and pressure
     data. Peak altitudes: rocket launched from Wallops, 75.9 mi.; from
     Ascension, 77 mi.; and from Kronogiird, 84 mi. The fourth experiment
     was a Nike-Apache launched to 74.3-mi. altitude with payload to collect
     micrometeoroid particles during a weak noctilucent cloud display above
     Sweden. Meteorological Institute of Stockholm Univ. participated in
     in the Kronogsrd experiments. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
August 16: President Johnson announced he was sending a set of lunar
     photographs taken by RANGER MI to leaders of 110nations. “The success
     of the Ranger 7 exploration has been greeted with enthusiasm and in-
     terest around the world. Men of a l nations recognize this is one of the
                                           l
     greatest extensions of human knowledge about the lunar surface to occur
     in many centuries.
288            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

        “The American people can be justly proud. We started behind in
    the space age. But we placed our trust in our open society and free
    system. Our achievements in peaceful exploration of space give us all
                                              ...
    cause to be proud, grateful and confident.
        66More than 60 countries now work together voluntarily in this pur-

    suit. We continue to hope that the extent of such international coopera-
    tion will be enlarged and that all nations will join through the United
    Nations to place the peaceful realms of space off limits to the designs of
    aggressors on earth.
         “I am sure the American people will continue to support what is
    necessary to assure leadership. In return, they will rightfully expect
    that our program hold to the orderly and responsible course which has
     brought such outstanding success in such a short period.” (Spivak, UPI,
     Wash. Post, 8/17/64)
h g w t 16: Scientists at AF Cambridge Research Laboratories discovered
     definite relationship between phases of moon and cloudiness around the
     earth, OAR announced. Statistics covering 21,184 days from 1905 to
     1962 indicated sunshine was slightly below seasonal averages for a few
    days following each new moon and slightly above average between
     last quarter and the new moon. (S.F. Chronicle, 8/17/64; SBD,
     8/18/64, 241)
* Analyzing the US. aerospace industry Richard Rutter said in New York
     Times: “There have been some reductions in employment here and there
     and some production cut-backs. On the whole, however, the aerospace-
                                                                      ...
     defense industry remains not only very healthy but still growing.
         “Change, of course, has been the hallmark of the aerospace industry
     almost since its very beginning. This characteristic continues. At
     present, for instance, there is some shift in production and procurement
     from aircraft and missiles to space vehicles and related space projects.
     This i not yet a sharp trend, but it may be indicative of the industry’s
            s
                    ..   .” (Rutter, NYT, 8/16/64, F1)
     future course.
* USAF reported experiments to develop chemical to be spread on aircraft and
     spacecraft windows for protection of pilots’ eyes against a nuclear ex-
     plosion’s damaging flash showed promising results. (AP, NYT,
     8/16/64, 92)
* Stuart G. Tipton, head of Air Transport Association of America (ATA) ,
      was quoted as advocating development of US. supersonic transport
      “because in and of itself, this new transportation tool is good for the
                   ...    The advance here is speed and speed in transportation
     United States.
                                                                            ..
      is good in itself. Time, after all, is our one irreplaceable resource..
         “Every time that an airline or airliners have offered to the public a
      faster trip between two points, the results have been clear and positive.
          “When an airline ordered an aircraft which would cut the flying
      time from New York to Chicago from 10 hours to eight or five to two,
                                    . . .”    (Clark, NYT, 8/16/64, 94)
      that airline got the business.
August 17: Two NASA sounding rockets were launched from Kronog%rd,
      Sweden, in early morning coordinated launchings. Nike-Apache with
      micrometeoroid-particle-collector payload reached 77-mi. altitude in
      conditions of moderate noctilucent cloud display. The payload impacted
      in a lake and was recovered safely. USAF Cambridge Research Labora-
      tories and Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated in the
      experiment. Twenty minutes later, Nike-Cajun was launched with
                                                                           289
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    grenade payload to 80-mi. altitude, providing good data on atmospheric
    temperature, wind, air density, and pressure. Stockholm Univ.’s
    Meteorological Institute cooperated with NASA Goddard Space Flight
    Center in this experiment. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Augwt 17: NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocketslaunched within 10min. of each
    other to provide data on evening atmospheric temperatures, winds,
    densities, and pressures from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island,
    Va., using explosive-grenade technique. Ft. Churchill rocket reached
    77.5-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all 12 grenades. Wallops
    Island rocket reached 74.9-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all but
    the ninth grenade. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
0 NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ascension Island to peak

    altitude of 75.8-mi., in flight to measure wind and temperature and derive
    density and pressure from 12 grenade explosions during rocket ascent.
    All grenades ejected and detonated as programed, and ground micro-
    phones recorded the sounds. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Lightning damaged certain electrical systems in Titan I1 launch
    vehicle and ground checkout equipment at Cape Kennedy, where the
     boosier rocket was being prepared for launching of unmanned Gemini
    spacecraft (GT-2)- NASA spokesman said: “The over-all effect of this
    condition may result in a delay of the first manned flight [GT-31 into
     next year.” (Houston Post, 8/19/64; UPI, NYT, 8/19/64,15)
  U.S.S.R. was developing an “aerospace craft” capable of taking off and
     landing on a conventional air strip as well as flight in outer space, Chief
     Air Marshal Konstantin Vershinin announced in Moscow. “Our genera-
     tion will definitely witness the fight of such an aerial-spacecraft,”
     Vershinin said. (UPI, NYT, 8/18/64,17)
0 Numerous reports of an “unidentified flying object” observed in the skies

    over northeastern Ohio early in the morning were recorded, but R. A.
    Thompson, Assistant Director of the Sohio Tracking Station, identi-
    fied the UFO as ECHO I. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8/18/64)
  Plans for military communications satellite system were described in Auk-
    tion Week & Space Technology, which reported that latest DOD plan for
    interim military comsat network called for two or three Titan 111-C
    boosters to place 16-24 satellites into near-equatorial orbit. First launch
    was scheduled for February 1966. (Av. Wk.,8/17/64, 19)
0 USAF was reported to be interested in possible use of air-cushion vehicles

     (similar to “hovercraft”) for transporting heavy missiles and space
    boosters over land, and scientists from Republic Aviation Corp. were
    planning presentation to USAF on this adaptation of the transporters.
     (Getler, M&R, 8/17/64, 18)
  Dr. Winston R. Markey, Associate Professor of MIT Dept. of Aeronautics
     and Astronautics and Director, MIT Experimental Astronomy Labora-
     tory, was named to succeed Dr. Robert W. Buchheim as Chief Scientist
    of USAF. ( DOD Release 600-64)
August 18: NASA launched re-entrp heating experiment aboard Scout booster
     at 2:06 a.m. EDT from Wallops Island, Va., in test of low-density char-
    ring ablator materials’ ability to withstand intense heat during space-
    craft re-entry into earth’s atmosphere. In addition to the four stages
     of the Scout launch vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to the
    payload as velocity package. First two Scout stages lofted remainder of
    the vehicle to altitude of about 130 mi. ; then the vehicle arced over in
290             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,            19 0 4

     descending path and remaining stages fired the payload back into the
     atmosphere, attaining maximum speed of about 19,500 mph. Payload
    impacted about 1,265 mi. downrange after 11-min. flight. No attempt
    was made to recover it. Experiment was devised by NASA Langley Re-
     search Center scientists. (Wallops Release 64-62; NASA Release 6 4 2 0 2 )
August 18: Results of five “Sammy” experiments sent aloft with NASA
     Nike-Apache sounding rockets were announced in Houston by Rice Univ,
     team of experimenters, which assembled the Sammy payloads and inter.
     preted the data. After studying data, scientists concluded that airglow
     and aurora were of different origin. Data from experiments probing
    aurora, launched last March from Fort Churchill, showed that aurora
    originated when electron particles from space bombarded oxygen and
     nitrogen atoms in the upper atmosphere. However, data from two
     experiments launched from Wallops Island, Va., to probe airglow showed
    “there weren’t enough particles around to account for airglow” by elec-
    tron bombardment. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/19/64, C20; Houston
    Post, 8/19/64)
* U.S.S.R. launched into orbit three earth satellites-cosMos XXXVIII, COSMOS
     XXXM, and COSMOS XL-with       a single booster rocket “of a new type.”
    Tass said the three satellites were orbiting in close orbits with initial
    parameters as follows: 876-km. (544-mi.) apogee, 210-km. (130-mi.)
    perigee, 95.2-min. period, and 56.16” angle of inclination to the equator.
     (Tass, Krasmya; Zvezdu, 8/19/64, ATSS-T Trans.)
0 Addressing National Space Club in Washington, ARPA Director Dr. R. L.

    Sproull said the nuclear detection satellites orbited last month were op-
    erating “without a hitch.” He described the sateIlites as “experimental”,
    said they were being used “to determine the most appropriate Sensors and
    the most attractive modes of processing information from them.” He
    said the success of first launch (October 1963) enabled ARPA to revise
    the program with fewer launches. The satellites were still operating
    ‘bexcellently” providing information on radiation. (SBD, 8/19/64,
                  and
    246; NSC Release)
* Thomas M. Canning, chief of Hypersonic Free-Flight Branch of NASA Ames
    Research Center, described aerodynamic shape being studied for space-
    craft of the future, at Conference on the Role of Simulation in Space
    Technology, WI, Blacksburg, Va. Canning said laboratory tests were
    being made of high-angle (wing-shaped craft) as possible optimum
    design for manned spacecraft entering atmosphere at speeds ranging
    from 50,000-55,000 fps returning from interplanetary journeys. (AP,
    Wash. Post, 8/19/64)
  Professor Verner E. Suomi of Univ. of Wisconsin was appointed to
    the newly created post of Chief Scientist of the US. Weather Bureau.
     (CommerceDept. Release WB 6 4 1 5 )
August 19: NASA’s   SYNCOM 111 synchronous-orbit communications satellite
    was launched into preliminary orbit high above the earth by a TAD
     (Thrust-Augmented Delta) launch vehicle, its premiere satellite launch-
    ing. Preliminary orbit: 23,675-mi. apogee, 695-mi. perigee, 1 hrs.  1
    35 min. period, and 16” inclination to the equator. Four hours after
    launch from Cape Kennedy, the satellite received and sent back a test
    recording of music of “The Star Spangled Banner” as well as test voice
    and teletype message. Further maneuvers during the next 10 days
    would move SYNCOM 111 into a synchronous position over the Pacific,
                                                                        291
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 190 41

    where it would be able to communicate with surface stations at Clark
    AFB in the Philippines, at Guam, and a Camp Roberts, Calif. Work was
                                           t
    underway to make it possible to transmit the 1964 Olympic Games from
    Tokyo via SYNCOM III in October. (NASA       Release 64-193; NASA Tran-
    script of Press Conference; AP, NYT, 8/20/64, 51)
August 19: NASA GsFc-launchedaOl-ft.-diameter balloon carrying 160-lb. ex-
    periment package from Moberly, Mo., at sunrise. The bdioon flew at
    altitude of about 24 mi. over 300-mi. course, ejecting its payload on
    signal about 12 hours after launch. The experiment package contained
    instruments to record and store data on cosmic rays in the earth’s mag-
    netic field, data which would be used to he1 map radiation fields around
                                               P
    the earth and in space. Experiment payoad was designed and built
    by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center ; the balloon was launched under
    ONR’S “Skyhook” balloon flight program.      (GSFC Release G22-64; AP,
    NYT, 8/19/64; K.C. Times, 8/20/64)
                                                             ..
  Rep. Peter W. Kodino (D.-N.J.) said on House floor: “.          Hardly any
    problem seems beyond solution by our scientists and engineers. We
    marvel at our achievement of landing a vehicle on the moon, trans-
    mitting pictures of its progress to the very instant of impact. Yet, we
    are doing practically nothing to solve a major air safety problem, or,
    worse yet, to discover its cause. I refer to the increasingly serious jet
    age problem of clear air turbulence--ctll-a     danger to every passenger
                                                       ..   .
    flying commercial or military transport aircraft.
       “Our scientific and industrial communities must be given adequate
    funds promptly to initiate work on the problem; and that can best be
    done through a coordinated research effort jointly undertaken by Gov-
                                   ...
    ernment and private industry.
       “Our failure to implement without delay a national effort to develop
    an effective CAT detection and avoidance system may-in fact, probably
    wilI--cost the lives of many future air passengers. With every gain in
    air traffic, with every increase in aircraft speed, with every additional
    mile flown by every additional plane, the problem becomes more seri-
           .
    ous. . .” He introduced into the Record an article on CAT by James A.
    Fusca in Space Aeronautics, August 1964. (CR, 8/19/64,19715-20)
* Western Devices, Inc., was awarded $1,615,111 NASA contract for
    work at Launch Complex 39, John F. Kennedy Space Center Merritt
    Island Launch Area. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engi-
    neers. ( DOD Release 605-64)
* Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (I&L), advised Army,
    Navy, Air Force, and DSA that it was DOD policy “to provide quality and
    reliability assurance services to NASA in a manner fully responsive to
            technical requirements.” Memo clarified use of NASA Quality
    NASA’s
    Status Stamps by DOD personnel and NPC 200-1A as the document es-
                        quality assurance requirements. (NASA Proj. O f )f.
    tablishing NASA’s
0 Communications Satellite Corp. stock reached $48, highest price since it

    went public June 2 at $20. (Hammer, NYT, 8/20/64,37)
* Cal Tech announced new superconducting alloy of gold and germanium
    was made by a new ultra-fast cooling technique that opened the way
    toward development of other such alloys. (SciSenr., NYT, 8/19/64,13)
  Lockheed-California Co. engineers disclosed concept for a reusable rocket
    plane to transport 10passengers between earth and orbiting space station.
    Prepared in a study for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the design
292            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage
    and capable of hauling three tons of cargo in addition to the passengers.
    Lockheed engineers said if the vehicle system development program were
     begun in 1967, the transport could be operational in 1975. (Huntsville
     Times,8/19/&l)
August 19-22: 50 amateurs competed in national model rocket championship
    meet, sponsored by National Association of Rocketry, at NASA Wallops
    Station, Ya. Astronaut William A. Anders made trophy presentations
    on the 22nd. (Wallops Release 6M1; AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/6LE)
August 20: SYNCOM 111 communications satellite, high above Sumatra in the
    Indian Ocean, was boosted into near-circular orbit above the equator
    by its apogee motor. The motor burned for 19.6 sec. at the command
    of ground station at Salisbury, Australia, which based its command on
    computer calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The satel-
    lite was now in orbit of 23,550-mi. apogee;. 21,235-mi. perigee; 1 / O
    inclination; and 1,Ug-min. (24 hr. and 9 mm.) period. It was drift-
    ing westward at rate of about 3%” per day. (NASA Press Conf. Tran-
    script; NASA Release 64-193)
* NASA Administrator James E. Webb informed Mayor Edward A. Crane of
    Cambridge, Mass., that 29-acre site offered by Cambridge had been
    selected for NASA’s Electronics Research Center. Decision was re-
                         new
    sult of four-month study of 160proposed sites in the greater Boston area
    by NASA committee. (NASA Release 64-208)
* NASA announced $4.6-million contract had been awarded by MSC to Space
    Technology Laboratories for mission analyses and trajectory simulation
    work in Projects Apollo and Gemini. Contract would be a continua-
    tion of Gemini spacecraft analysis project begun in September 1963 and
    an extension of similar activities in Apollo. (NASA Release 64-206)
* Speaking on the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.)
    pointed out :
       “In our preoccupation with our national space program, we often
    overlook the fact that aeronautical research and development is a very
                                                                    .
    important and productive part of the whole NASA program. . .
       “I should point out that the technology that has evolved from the
    X-15 program has made possible the creation of the A-11 and the RS-71,
    hypersonic aircraft in the 2,000-mile-an-hour range, which offer great
    potential to our Air Force as versatile, high-flying reconnaissance ve-
    hicles. NASA, with the x-15, is contributing significantly to the super-
    sonic transport program through new materials, construction techniques,
    guidance and control systems, and aerodynamic designs that are avail-
    able now because the NACA had the foresight and determination to under-
    take the X-15 program in 1954, in association with the Air Force and
    the Navy.
       “In 1959, the first flight was made. Since then, the X-15 pilots have
    rocketed out into near space, where 99 percent of the earth’s atmosphere
    is below them, have reached speeds 6 times the speed of sound that have
    made the plane glow red hot.
       “NOW,an advanced X-15 is ready to reach for new heights and even
    greater speeds. Our investment in the X-15 program and our confi-
    dence in the men and pilots who have made it so successful, have paid
    off handsomely for the individual taxpayer and for the country. Our
    world leadership and prestige in aeronautics have been enhanced mani-
                                                                          293
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

    fold by the X-15. It has played an indispensable role in making sure
    that America’s place in the search for new knowledge of flight will never
    be less than it is now.” (CR, 8/20/64,20046)
August 20: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for
    Advanced Research and Technology, spoke at C0nference.m the Role of
    Simulation in Space Technology, at VPI:
       “The history of applied science and engineering is really a history of
    simulation-a history of searching for methods of observing apriori the
    behavior of engineering systems and of varying the parameters of such
                                                ...
    systems in order to seek optimum results.
       “Our ability to develop the engineering systems of atmospheric and
    space flight depends in turn upon our ability to simulate in the labora-
    tory and thereby study new concepts as well as systems and their com-
    ponents prior to flight. In general, two kinds of simulation facilities
    are required. Those which are used to develop new concepts and physi-
                        ..   . [and] the larger simulation facilities needed
    cal understanding
    for the ad-hoc testing and development of subsystems and systems in
    preparation for flight. In addition to facilities, however, there is needed
                                                                          . .”
    a certain level of knowledge of the arts and sciences of simulation. .
     (Text)
e Delegates from 10 nations and the Vatican formally signed in Washington
    an agreement for a global communications satellite system. Previously
    initialed by the negotiators, the agreement designated Communications
     Satellite Corp. of the US. as the partnership’s “manager in the design,
    development, construction, establishment, operation of the space seg-
    ment.” (Ward, Balt. Sun, 8/20/64)
e FAA’s publication       “General Aviation Aircraft Owners Survey-
    1962” showed more than 20% increase in number of general aviation
    airplanes since 1957, approximate increase of 32% in hours flown, and
    38% in miles flown. (FAARelease T 64-43)
August 21: A basic principle in bearing technology, discovered by NASA
    Lewis Research Center engineers, was hailed in 53rd Annual Report of
    the Fafnir Bearing Co. as “carrying bearing technology a step beyond
    conventional upset forgings.” The underlying principle was first re-
    ported by the LRC engineers in 1957; now the principle was developed
    into a manufacturing process. Walter T. Olson, assistant director of
    Lewis, said this was one instance where results from exploratory research
    had been adapted to production techniques, an important aim of NASA.
     (LRC Release 6 7 6 )
e NASA announced revision of its patent policy and regulations for waivers
    of commercial rights to inventions resulting from space program work.
    Effective September 28, the revised patent waiver and related procure-
    ment regulations implemented Presidential patent policy statement of
    last October which established guidelines for a more unified approach
    among Federal agencies regarding allocation of patent rights to inven-
    tions produced in performance of Government contracts. The new
    regulations also reflected more than three years of intensive study,
    including public hearings, on ways to improve NASA patent policies.
    NASA ofEcials anticipated that they would encourage and accelerate con-
    tractors’ efforts to identify and report technological advances, thereby
    increasing the flow and dissemination of technical information derived
    from the space program. (NASA Release 64c209)
294             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

 August 21 : USAF announced it had launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster
      from Vandenbergm. (AP,         8/21/64)
 August 22: SYNCOM 111 was in near equatorial orbit over the Indian Ocean,
      with mean altitude of 22,395 mi. and y 4 O inclination to the equator,
      while drifting westward at the rate of about 3” per day. On ground
      command, the satellite ejected two bursts of steam, correcting its posi-
     tion to 21,890 mi. mean altitude (22,540-mi. apogee and 21,240-mi
     perigee) and inclination of less than loto the equator. It then began
      drifting eastward; the drift would be halted by onboard control jets,
      fired by ground command, once SYNCOM 111 reached the International
      Date Line. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/23/64; NASA Release 66193 81
     Press Conf. Transcript)
* U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS xu, COSMOS XLII, and COSMOS XLIII
     earth satellites into orbit, the last two with a single rocket booster.
      COSMOS XLI was in initial orbit of 39,855-km. (24,775-mi.) apogee,
      394-km. (245-mi.) perigee, 1 hr. 55 min. period, and 6LE” inclination
                                    1
     to equator. COSMOS XLII and XLIII were in initial orbit of: 1,099-km.
      (683-mi.) apogee, 232-km. (144-mi.) perigee, 97.8-min. period, and
     49” inclination to equator. (Izvestia, 8/25/64,6, ATSS-T Trans.)
August 23: Democratic Party Platform completed, containing space plank
     which stated:
         “In four vigorous years we have moved to the forefront of space
     exploration. The United States must never again settle for second place
     in the race for tomorrow’s frontiers.
         “1. We will continue the rapid development of space technology
     for peaceful uses.
         “2. We will encourage private industry to increase its efforts in
     space research.
         66
            3. We will continue to ensure that any race in space is won for
     freedom and for peace.’’ (Text, AP, Balt. Sun, 8/24/64)
* In videotaped interview broadcast on NBC-TV, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson
     was asked to name those accomplishments of her husband of which
     she was most proud. The First Lady named, in the following order,
     the President’s work on behalf of a TVA-type project for Texas in the
     1930’s, the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, and the Civil
     Rights Act of 1957. (NASA Memo)
August 24: MSC Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney said it was doubtful that
     there would be a manned space flight this year. The two-man Project
     Gemini flight ( G T 3 ) had previously been planned for late 1964.
     However, lightning damage at Cape Kennedy where Titan I1 launch
     vehicle was being prepared for GT-2 unmanned flight would cause mini-
    mum delay of three weeks in GT-2, Haney said. Length of time GT-3
    would be delayed would depend upon how long GT-2 would be de-
    layed. (UPI, NYT, 8/25/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 8/25/64) -
0 SYNCOM 111 might be in position to relay television pictures from Japan

    as soon as the first week in September, NASA said. The satellite was
    drifting eastward on the equator at rate of a b u t 483 miles per day.
     (AP, Balt. Sun, 8/25/64)
0 NASA announced it would purchase 102 additional J-2         rocket engines
    for Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles at cost of about $165 mil-
    lion. Contract would be negotiated by NASA Marshall Space Flight
    Center with Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. (NASA
    Release 64-211)
                                                                           295
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

                                                     announced Sylvania Elm-
August 24: NASA Goddard Space Flight C
    tronics Systems-East had been selected to negotiate $1.8 million contract
    for transportable ground station (“Advanced Technological Satellite
                                        .
    Transportable Ground Station”) Sylvania would design, fabricate,
    install, test, and check out the system, which featured two-zxtremely low
    noise amplifiers: one a maser and the other a parametric amplifier.
    These amplifiers operate at temperatures in the range of -440’ F and
    prevent spacecraft signals being overshadowed by heat-induced noise
    generated inside the receiver. (GSFC Release G-2344)
  NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in an
    address before Veterans of Foreign W r ,
                                          a s Cleveland:
        “Today, because of vigorous United States space effort, the early
    Soviet leadership has been largely overcome. We now must demon-
    strate our determination to drive ahead toward unchallenged and
                                       ...
    enduring pre-eminencein space.
        cc
           To be secure in the world today a great nation must maintain a
                           ...
    posture of strength.
        L6
           Space research and national security are also intertwined because
    of the potential uses to which the fruits of our research can be put.
    Because the consequences of nuclear war are potentially so disastrous
    for the human race, economic competition has assumed increasing im-
    portance as a measure of the strength of competing ideologies. More-
    over, scientific and technical research and development have become
                                             ...
    the basic elements in this competition.
        ...
        6
        .
        f
                for nations which are today still floundering amidst conditions
    less tolerable than those of Colonial America, great hope for more rapid
    progress lies in the new ideas, techniques and methods which are arising
    from our research and development in space.
        “If we can employ the scientific knowledge and technical ideas devel-
    oped in our space program to help the impoverished nations help
    themselves, and thus reduce their requirement for direct financial aid,
    how much better for them and for ourselves.
        L6
           Our greatest hope for national security, of course, lies in achieving
    in the world a degree of international amity which can lead to enduring
    peace. Here, again, the exploration of space offers great promise, for
     in the acceptance of this greatest of all challenges, man can join in
     shooting rockets into space, instead of shooting them at each other.
         ac
            Our national leaders have recognized that if we are to arrive at an
     understanding with the Soviet Union which will permit the exploration
     of space to become a mutual project, for the benefit of all mankind, we
     must maintain a driving national effort in space to insure a technological
                                              ..   .” (Text)
     balance that will make this possible.
* Dr. O n E. Reynolds, Director of NASA Biosciences Div., told
     Missiles and Rockets that it probably would be 1971 or 1973 before
     US. landed Automated Biological Laboratory (ABL) on Mars: “I think
     it would be awfully optimistic to think that we could fly a fully integrated
     labordory system to the Martian surface in 1969. I would like to hope
     such a mission would be feasible in 1 7 , and the 1973 launch window
                                             91
     would also provide a good opportunity.” Other unnamed NASA officials
     were said to have considered launch of ABL with Saturn V booster in
     1971 as improbable, citing the high cost and “problems with sterilization
     methods which have to be solved.” ABL missions would be part of the
     voyager planetary program. (M&R, 8/24/64,15)
     propulsion systems:
        .. , Space propulsion using nuclear energy offers a capability for
       CC

     accomplishment of high energy increment, high payload missions in
     space beyond the capability of the chemical combustion propulsion
     systems when considering practical operating limitations. Work now
     underway in the United States indicates that nuclear rockets can be
     anticipated for earliest use in the space program. Reactor tests being
     conducted during this year should provide a firm technical basis for
     system development. Electric propulsion using the nucIear reactor
    energy source offers promising storable propellant performance if
    light-weight, long-life power supplies can be developed. Technology
    investigations are now underway to evaluate the feasibility of achieving
    the required performance. This work will simultaneously provide the
    information that is required to provide large amounts of electric power
    for non-propulsive purposes in space. Beyond these systems, a host
    of new and advanced concepts have been proposed. These are not well
    enough defined or evaluated to assure that their high performance
    potential can actually be achieved. Some research work is underway on
    these systems.” (Text)
Augmt 25: NASA launched EXPLORER xx scientific satellite into orbit from
    Western Test Range, Calif., using Scout booster rocket. Initial orbit:
    625-mi. apogee, 540-mi. perigee, 104-min. period, and 80” inclination
    to the equator. The ionosphere Explorer satellite, nicknamed “Topsi,”
    immediately began mapping the ionosphere and sending data back to
    earth. The findings of this satellite would be compared with those ob-
    tained by ALOUETTE, the Canadian-developed “topside sounder.” (NASA
    Release 66207; Wash. Post, 8/26/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 8/26/64;
    Av. V . 8/31/64,25)
          k,
e Team of NASA space scientists and engineers, including Astronaut Walter
    Cunningham outfitted in a pressurized spacesuit, began weekdong mo-
    bility tests at McKenzie P s lava area in central Oregon’s Cascade
                                 as
    Mountains, where they investigated man’s ability to perform on sur-
    faces thought to resemble that of the moon. (AP, Balt. Sun, 8/26/6d)

                                                           viet astronomer


                                           ng time. He cited two develop
                                            years ago which deserved spe-
                                             with use of rockets to carry
                                                                       297
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    instruments beyond the earth’s atmosphere; and discovery that at
    least some galaxies have cores that seem to have tremendous mass
    and a nature unlike stars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8 / 2 6 / a )
August 25: USAF XB-70A aircraft made fourth of series of taxi runs at Palm-
    dale, Calif., reaching for first time the planned ground sped of 140mph.
    Flight tests of the 185-ft. experimental bomber would be made after
    one or two more taxi checkouts down the runway. (AP,Balt. Sun,
    8/31/64; Av. Wk., 8/31/64?,25)
August 25-27: Highlights of Democratic National Convention in Atlantic
    City, which selected Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey as Presi-
    dential and Vice Presidential candidates, were broadcast to 15 countries
    in western Europe’s Eurovision network via TELSTAR 1 communications
                                                             1
    satellite. (AP, r a s h . Post, 8/19/64?)
August 26: X-15 No. 3 was flown by John B. McKay (NASA) to altitude of
    87,000 ft. and speed of 3,716 mph (mach 5.58), in flight near Edwards,
    Calif. During the flight, heat transfer and noise level measurements
    were made on the aircraft’s skin. (NASA X-15 Proj. O f ; AP, NYT,
                                                               f.
    8/27/64)
0 NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Island, Va.,

    reached 95.3-mi. altitude in satisfactory flight to measure ambient
    electron density, measure ion densities, and monitor solar ultraviolet
    radiations. Instrumented payload, provided by NASA Goddard Space
    Flight Center, contained CW propagation experiment, probe with
    Gerdien condenser, planar ion trap, and planar secondary emission
    detector. Another objective of the flight was to test efficiency of the
    12.267 mcJs shroud antenna at D-region altitudes; one of the antennas
    performed unsatisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Radio Corporation of        America announced receiving $27-million con-
    tract from NASA to build 19 ground computer systems for checkout and
    launch of Saturn IB and Saturn V space boosters. (AP, Wmh. Post,
    8/26/64)
August 27: Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, visit-
    ing NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said extended manned exploration
    of the moon “does make considerable sense” as follow-on program to
    Project Apollo. He said such a program was one of several which NASA
    would present as possible post-Apollo goals to the President “in a p
    proximately a month’s time.” Other possibilities would include such
    programs as landing unmanned spacecraft on other planets. (Maloney,
    Houston Post, 8 / 2 8 / a )
  Venus was found to be rotating backward with a period of between 248
    and 258 earth days, Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill of Cornel1 Univ. reported
    at IAU assembly in Hamburg. The new value was a refinement of one
    made in late 1962 by JPL studies, which indicated a rotation of between
    239 and 293 (266 mean period) and was obtained by radarastronomers
    using new l,OOO-ft.-diameter antenna at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. (Hines,
    Wash Eve. Sar, 8/27/64; Sullivan, NYT, 8/28/&)
  Hurricane Cleo battered Cape Kennedy rocket launching site with gale
    winds up to 65 mph. Technicians dismantled second stage of Titan I1
    for GT-2 Gemini flight and stored it in hangar, lashed first stage of
    the Titan I1 to the pad. No damage was done to the Titan I1 or other
    lashed-down rockets. ( Wmh. Post, 8/28/&&; AP,Balt. Sun, 8/29/64?)
     768-898
298              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

August 27: NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said in address
      at dedication of North American Aviation, Inc., Science Center,
      James Howard Kindelberger Memorial Laboratories, Thousand Oaks,
     Calif. :
        “The whole complex activity of exploring spwe is important not
      only because the many private and governmental organizations con.
     tributing to space flight are continually uncovering new facts, new
      products, and new processes which bring immediate benefits to man
      kind. These benefits are only the beginning. Looking beyond them,
      we see vast unknown frontiers opening up, with unguessable dis-
     coveries yet to be made. Step by step we are conquering the hostile
     environment of space. We are accumulating new knowledge about the
     heavenly bodies, and disproving old beliefs about them.
        “I would emphasize several points about the space program:
        “First, it is here to stay;
        “Second, it promises a profitable return on investments in basic
     research ;
        “Third, it will be an expanding activity, with no finite limits to its
     potential;
        “Fourth, it will enhance our national security, stimulate our accumu-
     lation of knowledge, improve our standard of living, and further the
     chances of world peace. . . .” (Text)
August 28: NASA’s       NIMBUS I meteorological satellite was launched into
     polar orbit from Western Test Range with Thor-Agena B launch vehicle,
     and on its sixth orbit began transmitting weather photographs which
     were called “the best pictures ever” from space. Orbit of the 830-lb.
     satellite had been planned as circular 575-mi. altitude orbit; Agena B
     engines burned for only .a       sec. instead of the 3.8 sec. expected for
     injection burn, so the satellite was orbiting with 578-mi. apogee, 252-mi.
     perigee, 98-min. period, and 81” inclination to the equator. NIMBUS I,
     unlike the Tiros meteorological satellites, was earth-oriented and sta-
     bilized in all three axes. It contained Advanced Vidicon Camera System
     and Automatic Picture Transmission System, both of which operate
     during daylight portion of each orbit; High Resolution Infrared Ra-
     diometer, first to be flown on NASA meteorological satellite, provided first
     high resolution night-time cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top tempera-
     tures taken from a satellite. About 62 APT stations, including those in
     12 foreign countries and 4 owned privately, participated in NIMBUS I
     picture reception. The APT system was designed for Nimbus and was
     first tested-successfully-on TIROS VIII launched last December. Rep.
     George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said at NIMBUS I news conference: “. . .
     This much is certain: We are way ahead of the rest of the world. I
     am certain that if nothing came out of the space effort but the com-
     munications satellite, the weather satellite, and the navigational satellites,
     which will soon be flying, in a limited number of years, it would more
    than pay back all of the investment that has been made in space.”
     (NASA Release 64-195; GSFC Press Briefing Transcript; Wash. Eve.
    Star, 8/29/64; NASA R&SC Div.)
  Firing of hydrogen peroxide gas jets aboard SYNCOM III communications
     satellite changed its drift rate from 7” east per day to 3.3” per day.
     (NASA Release@-217)
* NASA presented RANGER VII press briefing, essentially the same presentation
    as that planned for the IAU three days later, in which refined flight data
                                                                        299
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    were announced.
    6 mi. of the plann
    the crator Tycho; Dr. Eugene
    expressed opinion that the c
    stated the impact area was not typical of the lunar su$ace. Of the
    RANGER VII lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper revealed that the photographs
    resolved objects down to 10-15 inches, and the resolution was considered
    1,000 times better than the very best earth-based observation and 5,000
    times better than routine earth-based observation. 200 more of the lunar
    photographs were released.
       On the question of the nature of the lunar surface, no fr conclusion
                                                               im
    was drawn. D . Kuiper, who estimated erosion on the moon to be
                     r
    about 5 ft., said it was “purely a guess” that there was “fairly solid
    stuff there.” He added that it was not possible to obtain such data as
    surface bearing strength from the RANGER VII photographs. Dr. Harold
    Urey, whose paper was read in his absence, also expressed his belief
    that the photographs did not answer the question of surface strength;
    however, he said that a “spongy,” “fairy castle structure” could be
    prevalent many feet down. Dr. Shoemaker, who expressed view that
    moon loses more material than it gains, suggested erosion could be
    on the order of 50 ft. He said US. Geological Survey was converting
    the photographic data into topographic profiles, and the results were
    showing that moon’s surface was “smoother than I had ,dared hope.”
    He said average slope in the area being studied did not exceed 10”
    and pointed out that this was reassuring for Project Apollo, whose
    Lem spacecraft had been designed to land safely on slope of 15’. (NASA
    Press Conf.; Finney, NYT, 8/29/64?; Toth, Wash. Post, 8/29/6$;
    Watson, Balt. Sun,8/29/@)
August 28: U.S.S.R. announced launching of COSMOS XLIV earth satellite into
    the following orbit: 860-km. (534-mi.) apogee, 618-km. (384rmi.)
    perigee, 99.5-min. period, and 65” inclination to the equator. The
    satellite was said to be carrying on the Cosmos program announced
    March 16, 1962. (Tass, Pravda, 8/29/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
* NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex.,
    reached 110-mi. altitude in experiment to collect data on celestial x-ray
    sources. Despite slight underperformance of the rocket, preliminary
    experimental results were considered good. American Science and
    Engineering, Inc., provided instrumented payload consisting of four
    Geiger counters, one photoelectric detector, two scintillation counters,
    and two star sensors. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* First Apollo spacecraft preflight acceptance test station was declared
    operational. Built by GE Apollo Support Dept. with associate con-
    tractors Control Data Corp. and Radiation, Inc., the station would be
    used at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., facility in ApoUo
    preflight testing. Three others would be located at Grumman Aircraft
    Engineering, Bethpage, N.Y. ; NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston,
    Tex.; and MSC Florida Operations,                  d, Fla. (NASA Release
300            ASTRONAUTICS AND AIRONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    the liquid hydrogen capacity of the Jackass Flats, Nev., facility.
     (SNPO; Ymh. Post, 8/29/64)
August 28: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
     space Flight, said at Apollo electronics panel, 1EEE western Electric
     Show and Convention, Los Angeles :
        “The United States is now completing the first decade of the explora-
    tion of space. During the last five years major strides have been made
     in exploring, understanding, and exploiting space. Today we have allo-
     cated almost half the resources needed to carry out the greatest adventure
     in the history of mankind-the manned lunar landing which is the goal
     of the Apolb Progam. This goal could not have been conceived, much
     less achieved, without the amazing growth of knowledge, techniques, and
     technology in the field of electronics which has been ever accelerating
     since the last war. Communications, guidance, power, control, display,
      all these have passed and surpassed the maximum expectations of a dec-
     ade ago.
        “In the Apollo Program we are developing a set of capabilities which
    will provide for manned exploration, understanding man’s proficiency
    in space and the vicinity of the earth. This is a capability which can
     be extended to meet the needs of this Nation for science or technology,
     for transportation or observation, for defense or commerce.
        “Although the end is manned exploration of space, the means, including
     the production of space vehicles, is being created here on earth. It
     is based in large measure on the expansion and growth of the electronics
     industry. It depends on that electronics industry to meet and exceed
     new goals for reliability and quality as well as performance in their
               ..    .” (Text)
     products.
August 284eptember 7: In conjunction with Cleveland’s Parade of Progress
     exhibit commemorating opening of new Cleveland Convention Center,
     NASA exhibited Centaur space vehicle, full-scalespacecraft such as Ranger
     and Mariner, Sert spacecraft, RANGER VII moon pictures, Gemini two-man
     spacecraft, and other exhibits. Space lectures and motion pictures were
     presented. NASA Lewis Research Center coordinated the display. (LRC
     Releases 64-72, -73, -75, -79, and -80)
August 29: Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev expressed his pleasure with
     success of U.S. lunar-photography probe RANGER w, in letter to President
     Johnson replying to letter and photographs sent to him by Mr. Johnson.
      (Tass; Reuters, NYT, 8/30/64)
  USAF announced launching four-stage Blue Scout, Jr., rocket combination
     from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., with undisclosed payload. (UPI, NYT,
    8/30/64)
August 30: FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriation Bill containing
     $5.250 billion NASA appropriation, was signed into law by President
    Johnson.
        NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement on the effect
    of the appropriation, saying that NASA would “maintain the basic mo-
    mentum and direction of the program as presented to Congress but will
    make a number of adjustments to meet the Congressional reduction of
    $195 million, to effect those specific changes directed by Congress, and
    to take advantage of experience gained from operations conducted during
    the nine months since the budget was submitted.
        “Although these adjustments will affect launch schedules and program
    milestones, Dr. Dryden, Dr. Seamans, and I are convinced that it is
                                                                        301
               ASTRONAUTICS ANI, AERONAUTIC%, 1964

    best to make a maximum effort to gain operational leadership in manned
    space flight and that the manned lunar landing should continue to be
    targeted within this decade. This will stretch NASA and its contractors
    to the limit, but we have advised the President that we are not at this
    time willing to give up this goal which is so challenging and which is
    so important as a focus for the efforts we must continue t make in all
                                                                 o
                      ..
    our programs. .
       “The target date is only five years away. Our assurance that it can
    be met is less than under President Johnson’s budget, but we still hope
    that with hard work, dedication, continued successes, and continued
    support we can meet it. We are going to make a hard try.
       “This decision does not involve the transfer to manned flight of funds
    from space science and applications programs or advanced research and
    technology programs. These programs will require some adjustments,
    but will not be drastically reduced as would be necessary if funds were
    reprogrammed to benefit manned space flight.
       “In the program for unmanned planetary exploration, the combination
    of a heavy workload at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the short lead
    time available, and the importance of applying our resources to a major
    advance beyond the limited Mariner make it unwise to undertake a
    Mars mission in 1966 with the current Mariner-type spacecraft. The
    development of a spacecraft with much greater scientific promise for
                                              . . .”
    launch to Mars in 1969 is being initiated.          (NASA Release 64-221)
August 30: NASA announced Franklyn W. Phillips would be Assistant Di-
    rector for Administrative Operations at NASA’s Electronics Research
                                                     new
    Center, Cambridge, Mass., effective Sept. 1. A veteran NACA-NASA ex-
    ecutive, Phillips had been serving as Director of NASA Northeastern Ofc,
                                                                         fie
    which would be absorbed within the new Center. As Assistant Director,
    Phillips would be responsible for administrative matters, including pro-
    curement, personnel affairs, management analysis, administrative sup
    port, and technical information. (NASA Release 64-218)
 Library of Congress announced it was creating Science Policy Research
    Div. within its Legislative Reference Service, to advise Congress and
    congressional committees on scientific and technological developments.
    This step was seen as first significant action by Congress to establish
    advisory apparatus in R&D subject area, a topic of growing concern
    and debate. (Finney, NYT, 8/31/64)
August 31: RANGER VII team of scientists presented lunar photographs to
    UU in Hamburg, Germany, and discussed data obtained from them.
    Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., known as an outspoken proponent of
    the “fairy castle” theory of lunar surface structure, said there was
    nothing in the RANGER vn photographs that would give him reason to
    revise his hypothesis. Dr. Gold also disputed hypothesis of Dr. Gerard
    P. Kuiper, of Univ. of Arizona, who identified what he interpreted as
   lava flows on the moon (crater rays, essentially) ; Dr. Gold stated none
    of the photographs showed evidence of volcanic lava on the moon.
    (NYT, 9/1/644
 Placing a 100-in. telescope in orbit by 1975-1980 for studying
   the stars was “not an unreasonable goal,” Dr. Leo Goldberg told IAU
   in Hamburg. The Harvard Univ. astronomer summed up arguments
   for telescope in space by saying that he could not agree with those “who
   prefer to look at the universe through a hazy, dirty, semi-opaque atmos-
   phere.” Cost of such a project could be justified, he said, only if
302              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICB, 196 4

    expected lifetime of such an instrument was long. However, he cited
    Soviet and US. progress toward space rendezvous techniques and
    expected increases in rocket booster power, and said: ‘The future looks
    terribly exciting.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/1/64)
August 31: Labor Dept. said industry employed 885,ON engineers and sci-
    entists in 1963, about 4% more than in 1962. 715,000 of the 885,000
    were engineers and 170,000 were scientists. (AP, NYT, 9/1/64, 22)
During August: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received five Northrop T-38
    aircraft on loan from USAF for use as space-flight readiness trainers to
    maintain proficiency of astronauts. (Av. Wk.,8/31/64, 25)
* Douglas Aircraft Go. Missile and Space Systems Div. received nine-month
    study contract from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to study methods
    of uprating Saturn IB space vehicle and S-IVB Saturn stage. (Av. Wk.,
      8/31/64, 23)
           Administrator James E. Webb said in article on NASA and USAF rela-
    NASA
       tions in The Airman:
          “At a time when possible military missions for manned spacecraft
       have not yet been clearly defined, the NASA Gemini and Apollo programs
       and the Air Force MOL program are developing American manned space
       flight technology and operating experience at a rapid rate.
          “We believe that the progress called for in the Gemini, Apollo, and
       MOL wl enable us to demonstrate clear superiority over the Soviet
              il
       Union in manned space flight capabilities during this decade.
          bb
            Our accomplishments in these three programs will prepare us much
       better for whatever further steps may be necessary to meet our national
                                  . .”
       defense needs in space. .         (Airman, 8/64, 6-11)
    Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at NASA Marshall Space
9

       Flight Center and AIAA Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aero-
       nautics editorial:
          “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion
       meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember
       that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satel-
       lite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial
       atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and
       must be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into
       space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided
       to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate
       means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method
       of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that
       of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development
       should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.’’ (A&A, 8/64,
       14-15)
    B. K. Heusinger of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center said in Astronautics
       & Aeronautics article about present and future improvements in Saturn
       launch vehicle propulsion:
          “First and foremost, the Saturn-I testing program has already made
       possible an additional payload capability of approximately 4300 lb.
       without major redesign efforts. A substantial portion of this gain
       has come from altered operational and procedural techniques developed
       during the normal course of static and flight testing. The impact of
       major redesigns will not be felt, as a result of the lead times involved,
                                                .
       until the first of the Saturn-IB vehicles. . .’, (A&A, 8/fj4,/ 20-25)
                                                                           303
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64,

During A u p s t : J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and S p e Digest article on
    the future of aviation:
        “Aeronautics in the 1970s and 1980s promises to eclipse anything
    of the past in both scope and the performance of individual aircraft.
    Although missile and space systems will continue to furnish strong
     competition for national support, aviation activity in the decades
                                                                           ...
    ahead will be much more extensive and important than it is today.
        “The revolutionary effect of the new technology on future aircraft
    can be best illustrated by discussing two key areas. One is propulsion.
    The other is materials. Light, more powerful engines, and li&ter,
    stronger structures always have been key design objectives. This is
               ..    .”
    stilltrue.
        He quoted Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air
    Force for Research and Development: ‘‘ ‘It is possible today to begin
    the development of lightweight gas-turbine engines with a thrust-to-
    weight ratio of better than 10 to 1.’ Dr. Flax points out that installed
    thrust-to-weight ratios apparently can rise to higher than 20 to 1 on
    the second generation of future engines.
        “Ten years ago such a statement would have got him laughed out
    of most scientific and engineering meetings. A few people may still
    argue that the estimate is high. But the main argument now is over
    how best to achieve this truly stunning performance rather than over
    the possibility of achieving it.” He detailed some of the R&D areas with
    great potential for future aircraft, then said:
        “Technical evidence abounds to prove that an aeronautical revolution
    is at hand and that the first step in that revolution can have great
    economic importance. It clearly is time for more resolute action. Brit-
    ain and France, and possibly the Soviet Union, have approximately
    the same opportunity as the US to capitalize on what is known now.
    In western Europe, at least, engine and materials technology is well
                . . .”   (AF Mag., 8/64)
    advanced.
* Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller criticized DOD for failure to proceed
    with flight-testing the nuclear-powered Low Altitude Supersonic Ve-
    hicle (LAW). Speaking at Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright-
    Patterson AFB, Dr. Teller said: “For the sake of an economy that amounts
    to less than 1%of the Air Force budget this has been canceled. I believe
    this is the biggest mistake we have made since the years following
                                                            ..   .” (Av. Wk.?
    World War 2 when we failed to develop the ICBM.
    8/17/64,65)
  DOD established 22 information analysis centers to supply specific answers
    to technical questions asked by managerial, scientific, and engineering
    personnel employed by DOD and by DOD contractors. (M&R, 8/10/a,
    10; Missile/Space D d y , 8/5/64 and 8/6/64)
  AFSC was conducting research with quick-setting plastic to provide “instant
    landing sites” for V/Stol aircraft. (Aviation Daily?8/10/64?)
* Terence Prittie said in Atlantic Monthly article that the “Egyptians, with
    the vital help of German and other foreign scientists and technicians,
    have been working on a crash program for the production of long- and
    medium-range rockets at their Factory 333 at Heliopolis, a few miles
    east of Cairo.” He described the three main types of rockets being
    developed : A1 Zafar (“the Victor”) single-stage liquid-fuel rocket;
    A Kahar (“the Conqueror”) single-stage liquid-fuel rocket; and Al
      I
    Raid (“the Explorer”) two-stage rocket. (Atlantic, 8/6p)
                         September 1964
September 1 : NASA Electronics Research Center was formally activated in
       Cambridge, Mass., and Dr. Winston E. Kock took the oath of office as
       Director. Electronics Research Task Group from NASA Hq. and NASA
      North Eastern Office in Cambridge were absorbed in the new Center to
      form initial nucleus of 80 personnel. Design and construction of the
      facility would begin late this year and be completed in four or five
      years. (NASA Release 64-219; NASA Announcement 6&189; NASA
      Circulars 320, 321)
   USAF launched Titan 111-A space booster from Cape Kennedy, and the
      first two stages burned perfectly; however, because transtage engines
      shut down prematurely, the Titan 111-A fell slightly short of orbiting its
      3,750-1b. dummy lead payload. AFSC’S Brig Gen. Joseph Bleymaier
      said preliminary investigation showed malfunction of onboard helium
      pressure valve was to blame for the shortened burn time from pro-
      gramed 406 sec. to about 391 sec. He also said the test was 95%
      successful-all primary objectives and most secondary objectives had
      been met. (DOD Release 625-64; M&R, 9/7/@, 11; Av. Wk.,          9/7/64,
      32)
* Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached
      96.5-mi. altitude in successful flight to measure brightness of stars in
      the ultraviolet. Experiment instrumentation for the NASA rocket was
      provided by Space Astronomy Laboratory of the Univ. of Wisconsin
       (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  General William F. McKee (USAF, Ret.) was sworn in as Assistant Ad-
     ministrator for Management Development, NASA. In this position,
      General McKee would be responsible for review and development of
     recommendations concerning major management matters and would
     report directly to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. (NASA Release
     64c216; NASA Announcement 64-190)
* MSFC Michoud Operations began mass movement of about 5,000 contractor
     personnel and supplies and equipment from temporary quarters in the
     New Orleans area to the Michoud facility. About 4,400employees would
     move into the new Engineer and Office Building, and about 600 would
     move into existing administration and engineering buildings. Being
     performed after normal working hours, the move was to be completed
     by Nov. 1. (MarsMl Star, 9/2/64, 1, 12)
  In honor of RANGER VII, the International Astronomical Union meeting in
     Hamburg, Germany, designated the region where the lunar probe im-
     pacted on the moon as “Mare Cogniturn.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/2/64., 14)
  USAF Captains Albert R. Crews and Richard E. Lawyer emerged from two-
     week stay in simulated-space cabin at GE Space Technology Center,
     Valley Forge, Pa. Officials said test showed that man can perform more
     tasks in extended space flight than previously supposed. (Wash. Post,
     9/2/64)
      304
                                        AERONAUT1




     neering. (DOD Release 6364%)
  U.S.S.R. disclosed it had succeeded in producing first nuclear-reactor sys-
     tem to convert atomic energy directly into electric power, small enough
     to fit aboard a spacecraft. Report was made to Third International
     Atoms-for-PeaceConference in Geneva. (L.A. Times-Wash. P s Serv.,ot
     Louisville Courkr-Journal, 9/2/643)
September 2: At press conference. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials
     said NIMBUS~Imeteorological satellite was peiformini successfully and
     sending back cloud cover photographs of unexpectedly good quality.
     First nighttime pictures of cloud cover, made with the satellite's infrared
     sensor, were comparable in quality and resolution to the TV pictures
     made by Tiros meteorological satellites. Unplanned orbit-eccentric
     rather than circular-reduced the satellite's earth coverage from 100%
     every 24 hours to about 70%. (GSFC Press Conf. Transcript; Finney,
     NYT, 9/3/a, 13)
          SYNCOM 11 and SYNCOM 111 crossed paths at the equator about 22,000
  NASA's
     mi. above the Pacific Ocean at about 162" east longitude. SYNCOM 111,
     launched into synchronous equatorial orbit Aug. 19, was drifting toward
     International Date Line,at rate of 3.3" per day; SYNCOM 11, launched into
     orbit July 26,1963, was moving in figure-8 pattern 33" north and south
     of the equator. (NASA Release 64-217)
  DOD a n n o & e d $5,550,012 contract for integrated navigation systems for
     three Project Apollo tracking ships had been awarded by Naval Bureau
     of Ships to Sperry Rand Corp. (DOD Release 6 3 M )
September 3: NASA-modified Arcas sounding rocket, launched at wallops
     Island, Va., carried white rat in specially designed, instrumented payload
     compartment in nose cone of the rocket to 114OOO-ft. altitude, where
    the payload separated from the booster, a parachute deployed, and the
     container floated down to the surface of the ocean. Package was re-
     covered by helicopter a few minutes later about 20 mi. offshore, and
     the rat was returned to NASA Wallops Station for observation and anal-
     ysis. During the flight, biomedical data such as heartbeat and body
     temperature of the rat were telemetered to ground stations. Launch
     was part of Bio-SpaceTechnology Training Program. (Wallops Release
      64-65]
    Reorientation maneuver was made with SYNCOM 111 communi-
e
      cations satellite, high above the Pacific Ocean, to align the commu-
      nications antenna atop the spacecraft for optimum coverage of the
       earth. This positioned                  along a north-south axis per-
      pendicular to the orbita                  effect of this maneuver, plus
                                            , was to reduce the eastward drift
      an orbital adjustment ma
      rate from 3.6" per day to less than 3" per day. (NASA Release 64-230)
    X-15 No. 3 flown by Milton 0. Thompson (NASA) to altitude of 7 , 0  700
      ft. and speed of 3,543 mph (mach 5.37), the flight studying heat
      transfer rates and boundary layer noise on specially installed surfaces
      on the bottom of the aircraft. (NASA X-15 Proj. Of; FRC Release)
                                                             f.
306             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIC@, 19 6 4

September 3: Three NASA astronauts began flights in T-33 trainer jets simu-
     lating approaches to the lunar surface. Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt.
     David R. Scott, and Elliott M. See, Jr., sent their planes into dives from
     altitudes of about 15,000 ft. toward the large, rugged lava flow in
     southern Idaho; cameras in the planes recorded the spproaches, and the
     astronauts made their own observations of the surface. Planes were
     leveled out at about 3,000-ft. altitude. (Houston Post, 9/3/@)
* NASA announced agreement had been reached by Malagasy Republic and
     US. on the relocation and expansion of NASA tracking station on
     Madagascar. Previously located at Majunga, the station was being
     relocated near Tananarive and expanded to include instrumentation
     for Project Gemini monitoring and communicating and for scientific
     satellite tracking and recording data. (NASA Release 6 6 2 2 2 )
  Lockheed Constellation “crashed” near Phoenix, Ark., in test conducted
     for FAAby Flight Safety Foundation. The airliner, with 21 passenger
     “dummies” and several thousand pounds of cameras and measuring
     instruments onboard, traveled down the runway at 115 mph to crash
     into barriers of wood, earth, and steel; it slid another 500 ft. and
     stopped with its fuselage upright but cracked in two places, one wing
     sheared off, and the other wing twisted. Aircraft remained in such
     good condition that passengers apparently would have survived the
     crash, unlike similar test of DC-7 Iast April, in which the aircraft hit
     the barriers at 160 mph and was destroyed. (Clark, NYT, 9/4/@, 53)
September 4: NASA’s      OGO I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) was
     launched from Cape Kennedy by Atlas-Agena B rocket booster into
    highly elliptical orbit (92.721-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 621S-hr.
     period, and 31” inclination to the equator). The huge 1,073-lb.
    satellite carried 20 experiments, inaugurating new “space bus” series
     of standardized observatories capable of conducting many related space
    experiments simultaneously in space. However, one of OGOI’S long
    booms, one short boom including the omnidirectional radio antenna
    did not deploy. This resulted in abnormal operation of the automatic
    control system, and most of the control gas was used in attempting
    to lock the satellite into its earth-stabilized orbit. Project officials
    attributed the satellite’s inability to lock onto the earth to the fact that
    its earth-seeking sensor was obscured by one of the undeployed booms.
    Scientists decided not to attempt turning on experiments for several days
    while calculating contingency operations for a spin-stabilized satellite.
     (NASA Release 64-213; GSFC Release 6-26-64; AP, NYT, 9/6/64, 26;
    Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/@)
  EASA announced signing of nine-month contract extension for Project
    Apollo spacecraft with North American Aviation’s Space and Infor-
    mation Systems Div. The $496-miuion extension called for five addi-
    tional command and service modules, three additional flight boilerplate
    spacecraft, a full-scalemockup, and nine adapter sections to house Lunar
    Excursion Modules. (NASA Release 64-227)
  NASA issued supplemental list of technology utilization publications, de-
    signed to acquaint the public with useful innovations from space re-
    search. (NASA Release 641-225; TU List)
  Cornel1 Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold said in Science article that
    absence of surface rock outcroppings in RANGER vu close-up lunar
                                                                           307
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAKJTIOS, 19 6 41

     photographs supported his thesis that the moon is covered with dust.
     Erosion of the moon’s surface at rate of one micron (1/25,000 in.)
     per year would be enough, “over geological time,” to smooth out a
     once-rocky surface. This erosion, caused by cosmic dust and energetic
     solar particles, would have deposited dust in low areas had gradually
     filled them. However, Dr. Gold said that even if in the crate= and
     seas the dust were a mile deep, it was no cause for concern; dust on the
     moon, like that on earth, would not necessarily be loose and powdery
     at depths below the surface. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/4/M)
September 5: President Johnson announced in his news conference that
     Polaris A-3 missile “will soon become part of our strategic missile
     force. The new A-3 will be deployed for the first time aboard the
     nuclear submarine uss Daniel Webster when she begins her first patrol
    later this month.
        “The A-3 missile, which was put into accelerated development in
     1 9 a , has a range of 2500 nautical miles, some 1000 nautical miles
                                                                         ..   .”
     greater than that of the A-2 and more than double that of the A-1.
        The President also announced that AEC and DOD were “proceeding
     with the development of a new, high-powered, long-lived reactor, which
                                                             ...
     constitutes a major step forward in nuclear technology.
        “Two of these reactors could power an attack aircraft carrier as
                                                                         . . .”
     compared with eight reactors required for the uss Enterprise.
     (Transcript, rash. Post, 9/6/64)
0 Lunar photographs made by RANGER VII and interpretations of their find-

     ings were discussed in Saturday Review by Science Editor John Lear:
        “The net sum of the evidence here recited is that the Congress
    and the people have been misled about the true significance of the
    Ranger VI1 mission. The pictures sent back home by the ingeniously
    constructed robot dragonfly contain no more assurance of the safety
     of a manned landing on the moon than existed before Ranger VI1 took
    off. On the contrary, one sure danger has been discovered that had
    not been suspected before. The apparent disappearance of the sup-
    posed danger of impenetrable dust is accompanied by the equal danger
     of a landing surface that may be as fragile as a tea biscuit. Ranger
    VI1 couldn’t possibly have seen what matters most of all when human
    expeditions of the moon are being weighed: the bearing strength of the
    lunar face. Given man’s present limited knowledge of soil physics, no
    photograph could tell whether the moon’s surface will hold a spaceboat
                          . . .”  (SR, 9/5/@, 35-43)
    or even a lone man.
  USAF’S START (Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Test) pro-
    gram was discussed by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in I o u r d of the Armed
                                                                           ...
    Forces. START, according to Haggerty, “appears to be more than
                                              ...
    an expansion of the ASSET program.             START involves a dozen or
    more areas of investigation in the general field of re-entry. It could lead
    to development of a manned re-entry vehicle for use with the Manned
    Orbital Laboratory, one which could make a maneuvering re-entry to a
    landing field, as opposed to the ballistic flight path of the Gemini space-
    craft which will be the original MOL re-entry vehicle. Looking farther
    down the road, START technology could provide the basis for eventual
    development of a large ferry vehicle for shuttling men and supplies to
                                         ..  .”
    and horn an orbiting space station.
308             ASTRONADTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

         First contract for this new type of spacecraft was awarded recently to
     Martin Marietta Corp. for ablative-type re-entry body, designated SV-5,
     capable of maneuvering during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere at
     hypersonic-transonic speeds. SV-5 was said to be only one portion of
     broad START program, which would investigate a aumber of other re-
     entry body shapes, possibly even lifting body types such as M-2 and
      HL-10 being investigated by NASA. (]/Armed Forces, 9/5/64,5)
September 5: More emigrating scientists and engineers settle in the US.than
      in any other country, according to Dr. Charles V. Kidd, Associate Di-
      rector for International Activities of National Institutes of Health,
      writing in UNESCO publication. From 1949 through 1961, 43,000
      scientists and engineers (average of 3,350 per year) immigrated to US.,
      reaching peak of 5,800 per year in 1957. (O’Kane, NYT, 9/6/64,20)
September 6: NASA announced ECHO I balloon satellite had been used this
     summer by French National Geographic Institute to accurately locate
      satellite tracking stations being built for France and ESRO across Europe
      and Africa. According to reports, French National Geographic In-
      stitute photographed ECHO I simultaneously from precisely located
     cameras in France and Algeria, in order to join the triangulation sys-
     tems of France and Algeria. Its aluminum-coated mylar skin wrinkled
     and misshapen, ECHO I was no longer useful in radio-reflecting communi-
     cations, but it was still clearly visible in the nighttime sky after more than
     four years of orbiting the earth. (NASA Release 64-226)
September 7 : NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists, via Rosman, N C ,   ..
     tracking station, succeeded in turning on 14 of the experiments onboard
     OGO I and received scientific data transmitted from the satellite. Power
     level in the NASA “space bus” was said to be satisfactory. OGO I was
     obtaining less than half the power it needed for full-time operation
     of its 20 experiments, because it was spinning slowly in space instead
     of having its solar panels constantly aimed at the sun. (Hines, Wash.
     Eve. Star, 9/8/64; AP, NYT, 9/8/64,31)
* NASA announced 39 new international fellowships in space science had
     been granted for one year’s graduate study at universities across the
     U.S. Initiated in 1961, program was administered by National Academy
     of Sciences-National Research Council, with NASA providing university
     costs and travel within the US. So far, 34 fellows had completed US.
     studies under the program and 17 countries had participated. (NASA
     Release 64-223)
  General DyfiamicsJAstronautics received $6 million contract from USAF
     for additional standardized Atlas space launch vehicles. Atlases pro-
     duced under this contract were said to be for sending lunar-orbiting
     probes on photographic missions. (SanDiego Union,9/8/64)
September 7-12: 15th Congress of the International Astronautical Federa-
     tion (IAF) held in Warsaw. Reported that 700 scientists and engineers
     representing 40 countries attended; largest delegation ( 100 persons)
     from the US., while 60 representatives from the U S S R was largest
     Soviet delegation ever to attend such a conference. 180 papers were
     given. The Polish Government issued an IAF stamp in honor of the
     Congress, while Pravda referred to Warsaw as the “space capita1 of
     the world.”
         Congress opened with statement by President Edmond A. Brun
     (France) that deliberations “should undoubtedly contribute towards in-
                                                                          309
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 41

    creasing international cooperation in the field of astronautics.” First re-
    port to the entire Congres was on the lunar mission of RANGER MI by JPL
    Director William Pickering and Harris Schurmeier. RANGER w movie
    was shown five times during the week to packed audiences. Informative
    U.S. papers on progress on comsats, weather satellites (including NW-
    BUS I photographs), manned lunar landing program, and bioastronau-
    tics, as well as Consideration o the idea of a Lunar International
                                       f
    Laboratory, appeared highlights of the 15th IAFCongress. (NASA Hist.)
September 7: IAF paper by Soviet bioastronautics expert N. M. Sissakian,
    read for him in his absence, stressed conviction that artificial gravity
                                                                “. . .   We see.
    must be created in spacecraft for long manned flights:
    the need for a new field of research called gravitational biology that would
    determine the general laws relating acceleration and body function.”
    Dr. 0. Gazenko and P. K. Isakov reported Soviet cosmonauts’ space
    flights of up to five days raised the questions of whether prolonged
    weightlessnesswould: cause loss of body calcium and softening of bones;
    affect the inner ear and deteriorate man’s ability to concentrate, or
    damage the brain; weaken body systems such as heart muscle so that
    they would be destroyed upon sudden re-entry into earth‘s gravitational
    force. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/64; AP, NYT, 9/8/64, 11; L.A.
    Times, P‘ash. Post, 9/8/M)
September 8: Hurricane Dora with her 125-mph winds approached the US.
    Atlantic coast from Cape Kennedy to Myrtle Beach, S.C., and workers
    at the rocket launching center dismantled five of the six rockets being
    prepared for launch this fall. Only the Saturn I SA-7 rocket was secured
    in its gantry ;removed were Titan I1 (for GT-2 Gemini launch), Atlas-
    Agena (for Mars probe launch), mor-Delta (for Imp launch), Atlas-
    Centaur (launch vehicle development launch), and Atlas for USAF re-
    entry test. (UPI, NYT, 9/9/64, 1; Witkin, NYT, 9/9/64,23)
  Soviet scientist Prof. A. G. Kuznetsov told IAF that U.S.S.R.
    had conducted tests of cosmonauts spending 25 days in sealed chamber
    with helium-oxygen atmosphere. He said in one test, although there
    were no adverse effects on the subject, slight changes were noted-
    quickened pulse and respiration rate, faster blood circulation, and higher
    voice pitch to 7/1Oth of an octave. Prof. Kuznetsov noted that the
    manned Vostok spacecraft used mixture of nitrogen and oxygen; he did
    not disclose whether that mixture affected cosmonauts adversely, but
    he said that “helium offers a possible substitute for nitrogen that might
    prove more suitable for spacecraft requirements.” Helium might reduce
    toxicity and provide a more hygienic atmosphere, he said.
       Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of NASA, cochairman of the bioastronautics
    session, said US. had not pressed development of helium system for
    three principal reasons: (1) helium’s tendency to alter voice pitch; (2)
    helium’s leak qualities, which make it difficult to contain in enclosure;
    and (3) helium’s high thermal conductivity, which might pose possible
    astronaut heating problem. “We still feel strongly about nitrogen. We
    presently see no advantage to helium that would cause us to change.
    However, we will continue to study the possibility of using it in case
    we encounter some unforeseen nitrogen difEculty,” Dr. Koneoci said.
     (Vmh.Post, 9/9/64; AP, BaIt. Sun,9/9/64)
  Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Re-
     search, in paper delivered at ZAF in Warsaw, examined man’s possible
     roles in space flight. As a transmitter, receiver, or control mechanism,
310             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

      he said, man’s capacity and speed are limited as compared with a
      machine’s. Boredom, he said, makes man ineffective “in tasks that call
      for long periods of relative inactivity.” However, he said, man “is the
      only available computer which can solve problems by logical induction,
     although unfortunately he cannot keep emotions out of this thought
      process. He can make sense of fragmentary information.” (NASA Re-
     lease 64-229)
September 8: Communications Satellite Corp., authorized two years ago by
     law as a private corporation to establish a global commercial comsat
     system, was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Incorporated
     Feb. 1,1963, ComSatCorp had offered 10 million shares at $20 each, five
     million to communications common carriers and five million to the
     general public. (ComSatCorp Release)
* Sen. Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) said in the Senate that “one of the out-
     standing accomplishments of this Congress is the action taken to solve
     the problem of obtaining professional advice on scientific and technologi-
     cal questions involved in the legislative process. The appropriation
     of funds to establish a Science Policy Research Division of the Legis-
     lative Reference Service of the Library of Congress is the latest in a
     series of steps taken by the Congress to improve the effectiveness of
                ..
     itsstaff. .
        ‘‘I join other Members of the House and Senate in hopeful anticipa-
     tion that the new Science Policy Research Division of the Legislative
     Reference Service, will develop successfully under the direction of Dr.
     Edward Wenk, Jr. Dr. Wenk’s experience in both the legislative and
     executive Branches of the Government is invaluable in meeting his
     new responsibilities of advising Congress on science, engineering, and
     public policy.?’ The division would begin operation Sept. 28. (CR.
     9/8/64,21030; M&R, 9/14/64,15)
September 9: NASA’s SYNCOM III synchonous-orbit communications satel-
    lite was 178.12’ east longitude and 0.03” north latitude at noon, and
    was traveling along the equator drifting eastward at the rate of 2.8”
    per day. It was expected to reach the International Date Line (180’)
    tomorrow. SYNCOM 1x1 was inclined 0.081” to the equator, and its orbit
    ranged in altitude from 21,690-mi. perigee to 22,509-mi. apogee. Con-
    trol maneuvers would be signaled tomorrow to decrease the satellite’s
    apogee and increase the perigee, thus giving it a more nearly circular
    orbit. (NASA Release 64-230)
* Cape Kennedy, prepared for the onslaught of Hurricane Dora by advance
    warnings including photographs by NIMBUS I satellite, escaped the second
    hurricane in a month with virtually no damage. (AP, 9/9/64)
* Permanent Hall of Science was dedicated at World’s Fair, New York City.
    Participating in dedication ceremony, NASA Administrator James E. Webb
    said the Hall of Science would “contribute to the understanding of
    those many disciplines which comprise modern scientific under-
              . .”
    takings. .         Robert Moses, World’s Fair president, noted particu-
    larly the “extraordinary public interest in space exploration” in his
    remarks. (Webb Text; NASA W R III/172-78; NYT, 9/10/@)
  At IAF, NASA’s Eugene B. Konecci, cochairman with a Soviet delegate
                   Dr.
    of space medicine sessions, said: L‘Forthe first time, the Russians are
    giving us technical laboratory data on their space research. We are
    quite encouraged by this exchange on a scientist-to-scientist basis.”
     (AP, Denver Post, 9/9/64)
                                                                          311
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

September 9: British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced at ban-
     quet of Society of British Aerospace Companies the government’s decision
     to develop Black Knight rocket as an experimental satellite launcher.
     The new rocket, designated Black Prince, would be a three-stage con-
     figuration using hydrogen peroxide and kerosene in the first two stages
     and a solid-propellant spin-stabilized third stage. The first stage would
     be powered by a cluster of eight engines. Also announced were plans
     to accelerate research on an ocean-going hovercraft to fill a naval role.
      (AP, 9/9/64; A&A, 11/64, 116)
September 10: Kiwi M E reactor, operated at nearly full power for eight
     minutes Aug. 28, was restarted and run for a second time at power level
     nearly identical to that achieved during the first experiment. Test lasted
     abou‘t 2.5 min. and reactor performance was excellent. This demonstra-
     tion of capability to rerun reactors came much earlier in the NASA-AEC
     nuclear rocket program than had been anticipated ; officials considered it
     a significant step toward economical development of nuclear propulsion
     technology. Harold B. Finger, Manager of NASA-AEC Space Nuclear
     Propulsion Office, said: “We have proved that nuclear rockets can give
     the kind of performance that is needed for advanced space missions.
     We could use essentially this type of reactor for experimental flights in
     the early 1970s and have an operational system by 1975.” Test marked
     final one planned for Kiwi. (SNPO; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64)
* NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials successfully made the first
     of two final corrections in the orbit of SYNCOM 111 communications satel-
     lite, raising the satellite’s perigee closer to perfect circle 22,289 mi.
     above the earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/10/64)
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists conducted interrogation of
     OGO I satellite through Rosman, N.C., tracking station, and 15 experi-
     ments were turned on to confirm their operation. Signals were weaker
     than previously received, because OGO 1’s solar panels were not locked
     onto the sun; the satellite’s solar panels were successfully commanded to
     turn 42” into a more favorable sun angle, thus ensuring satisfactory
     power levels. As of this date, 19 of the 20 onboard scientific experi-
     ments had been turned on and had transmitted data, which were being
     evaluated by experimenters. (NASA Release 66232; GSFC Release
     6.26-64)
* In Warsaw at the luncheon of the International Academy of
     Astronautics (IAA) , Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) , Chairman of
     House Committee on Science and Astronautics, expressed the intent of
     the US. to engage in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes as
     instituted in National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and imple-
     mented by NASA. Prof. C. Stark Draper of MIT was re-elected as
     president of IAA for the coming year.
        In Missiles and Rockets interview while in Warsaw, Rep. Miller said
     that “the US. would be happy to open up negotiations with Poland on
     space projects.’’ A possible means of such cooperation, he said, might
     be incorporation of Polish scientific experiments on U.S. satellites and
     sharing of data they would acquire, a program such as U.S. already
     conducts with U.K., France, and Italy. (NASA Hist.; M&R, 9/14/&,
     16)
* NASA announced it had assigned management responsibility for
     Zarge solid rocket motor development to its Lewis Research Center.
312             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

     The 260-in. solid motor development was formerly a program o the     f
     Department of Defense. Under its FY 1965 budget, NASA assumed
     funding responsibility for the program; it would begin management
     responsibility for it next July. Two contracts f a r the program, with
     Aerojet General Corp. and Thiokol Chemical Corp. and initiated by
    the Air Force in June 1963, had been transferred to NASA. Smaller,
     156-in. solid motor program continued under Air Force development.
     (NASA ReIease 64-231)
September 10: Joint Navigation Satellite Committee (JNSC) established by
     agreement between Depts. of Treasury, Defense, Interior, Commerce;
     FAA; and NASA. JNSC would evaluate requirements for a nonmilitary
     satellite system for air-seanavigation, traffic control, emergency and res-
     cue operations, and related functions. If JNSC found navsat system to be
     the most advantageous means of providing these services, it would
     recommend appropriate program to develop the satellite system.
     (Agreement;NMI 2-3-39)
  Sen. Hubert Humphrey (D.-Minn.) introduced in the Senate a joint reso-
    lution providing for establishment of a President’s Advisory Staff on
     Scientific Information Management (PASSIM), to “deal forthrightly with
    the problem of evaluating, developing, and operating properly struc-
                                                                           ...
    tured information management and decision-aiding systems.
    Positioned at the Presidential level the staff of PASSIM will be permitted
     to necessary overview of information management practices within
     Government, and will be better situated to develop and organize data
     and decision-aiding systems on an interdisciplinary and interagency,
                                                                  . .”
    intergovernmental, interindustry, or intersector basis. .              (CR,
    9/10/64?, 21281)
* Findings of survey on distribution of Federal research and development
    funds, conducted by Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Develop-
    ment of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, were made
                                                                              .
    public by subcommittee chairman Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.)
    Said to be first definitive, Government-wide survey of this subject,
    survey showed that during FY 1963 California received 38.4% of the
    total $12 billion spent by the Government on R&D, New York received
    9.2%, and Massachusetts, 4.6%. Nine states accounted for 70.9% of
    the total, and the 41 remaining states had less than 2.5% each. Re-
    gionally, Pacific Coast states received 41.8%; Middle Atlantic states,
    15.7%; Mountain region, 8.7%; South Atlantic, 8.5%; East North
    Central, 6.6%; New England, 6.1%; West South Central, 5.5%; West
    North CentraI, 3.6% ; and East South Central, 2.8%. (Finney, NYT,
    9/11/64?)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in address at Midwest Governors’
    Conference, Minneapolis:
        cc
           In many ways, it seems to me that at least a part of the answer
    to the problems of the Midwest can be found in further development
    of your great universities and finding new ways through which they
    can work with industry in ways that wilI speed up the process of
     utilizing the technology that builds rapidly on the scientific base
    of university research.
       bC
          The success of the national space program to date has stemmed
    directly from cooperation between industry, government, and universi-
    ties. We are convinced that the maximum advance can best be achieved
                                                                        313
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

    by close cooperation between these segments of our society. We believe
    that this cooperation is most fruitful when it is broadly based or
              . .”
    regional. .         (Text)
September 10: U.S.S.R.’s Ivan Cheprov, speaking at symposium on interna-
     tional space law held in Warsaw in conjunction with IAF congress, criti-
     cized the planned global communications satellite network being or-
     ganized by Communications Satellite Corp. He said it appeased “that
     the very use of new communications channels by other nations would
                                       ...
     depend on the whims of Comsat.           The right to participate in the
     management of the space communications system is denied those who
     are not willing to subsidize and to perpetuate a monopoly in the sphere
     of producing communications satellites and running space communica-
                    ..   . The other participants merely form a chorus for
     tions business.
     approving any decisions dictated by Comsat.” He said the U.N. and
     the International Telecommunication Union could organize an inter-
     national communications system “on the basis of equality.” (Reuters,
      Wash.Post, 9/11/tX)
* Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) , speaking at Midwest Governors’ Con-
     ference in Minneapolis, recommended establishment of a national
     technology commission to award Federal research projects to promote
     nationwide economic development. Rep. Karth said concentration of
     Government R&D contracts to industries and universities on East and
     West coasts showed that “the broad national economic development is
     not being served.” (Higgins, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/11/64)
  Jet-propelled back-pack, part of a Modular Maneuvering Unit (MMU) for
     Gemini astronauts, was described by AFSC, whose Aero Propulsion
     Laboratory conceived the device. The unit would enable astronauts
     to fly outside their Gemini spacecraft for up to an hour and travel as
     far as 1,OOO‘ft. from the spacecraft, although the first flight would be
     made with astronaut on a 200-ft. tether to send the astronaut forward,
     backward, up, and down. In addition to the back-pack, MMU consisted
     of a chest-pack, furnished by NASA, which the astronaut would use when
     leaving and entering the spacecraft, before donning and after discarding
     the back-pack. First flight test of the unit on Gemini mission was
     planned for mid-1965. (AFSC Release 47-22-113; MSC Roundup,
    1/16/64,5)
* Col. John M. Stapp          said at IAF congress in Warsaw that pigs and
                       (USAF)
    bears had been used in tests to determine best position for astronauts
    to be in when Apollo spacecraft returning from the moon kits the earth.
    Human volunteers were used in 146 test runs, but anaesthetized bears
    and pigs were used in tests which were considered too dangerous for
    human subjects. Results: safest position would be landing backwards
    at 45” angle to the line of impact. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 9/ll/a)
* Rep. William Miller (R.-N.Y.) , Republican Vice Presidential candidate,
    said he felt recent successful RANGER VII lunar flight had “no political
    implications” and was “completely a scientific effort, outside the realm
    of politics.” Upon questioning, he said the success showed US. is
    ahead of U.S.S.R. in space technology and added US. had never been
    behind U.S.S.R. in accumulation of space data. (Sci. Serv., S.F.
    Chronicle, 9/10/64l)
314             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4.

 September 11 :SYNCOM III was positioned into near-perfect stationary orbit
      over the Pacific Ocean. Final corrective maneuvers were completed, and
      the communications satellite appeared to hang motionless in space
      above the equator and International Date Line, where it could
      transmit radio and television signals between Japan and California
       (AP, Wash. Post, 9/13/64)
 * 1964 would be a year of development test on individual systems which
      provide capability to carry out Project Apollo lunar landing, according
      to Dr. Joseph Shea, Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at
      NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. He cited the test of Apollo launch
      escape and earth landing systems at White Sands Missile Range last May
      and launch of Apollo boilerplate aboard Saturn I (SA-6) also last
      May as two important development flight tests-milestones marking the
      gradual transition of Project Apollo to flight test phase. “However,
      there is still much ground testing to be done.” (NU S&ID Skywriter,
      9/11/64,4)
   Dr. Harrison Brown, Cal Tech geochemist, said in Science article that as
      many as 2,000 earth-like planets capable of supporting life may exist
      in the nearest corner of the Milky Way Galaxy. Based on studies of this
      portion of the universe-volume of 10,000 cubic parsecs-Dr. Brown
      theorized: “Virtually every main sequence star should have a planetary
      system associated with it.” He calculated there were approximately
      1,000 such stars in the region and 60,000 dark bodies of Mars’ size or
      bigger, or an average 60 “dark companions” to each of the stars. He
      determined a typical star should have four such planets, and of these
      “on the average some two planets per visible star might provide suitable
     environment for the emergence of life processes which are based upon
     chemical systems similar to those on earth.” Dr. Brown’s paper pro-
     pounded higher probability of life in the universe than previously
     theorized. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/11/64)
* At 15th IAF Congress in Warsaw, delegates from six nations in panel
     session discussed possibilities of building a Lunar International
                       .
     Laboratory (LIL) It was agreed such a laboratory could be estab-
     lished in the 1975-85 time period if U.S. and U.S.S.R had conducted
     thorough preliminary lunar explorations by that time. (Wash. Post,
     9/13/64; M&R, 9/21]64,16)
* FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby said in London that he had urged
     U.K. and France to conduct sonic-boom studies such as those the FAA
     had sponsored in Oklahoma City this year. He said the six-month
     test program had shown that a serious problem existed in sonic booms.
     U.K. and France were developing supersonic transport “Concorde.”
     NYT, 9/12/64,38)
* “Highlights of Recent Space Research,” by Robert Jastrow and A.G.W.
     Cameron of Goddard Institute for Space Studies, NASA, appeared in
     Science. The article presented highlights of recent space research in the
     physical sciences: geodesy, meteorology, the upper atmosphere, mag-
     netosphere, magnetopause, atmosphere of Venus, exploration of the
     moon, solar physics, x-rays and gamma rays. (Science, 9/11/64,
     GSFC Reprint)
* USAF announced it had retired two squadrons of Atlas ICBM’s wouldand
     inactivate more Atlases and Titans. Total of 105 of the liquid-fueled
     missiles would be retired, rendered obsolete by more modern, better
                                                                        315
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4.

     protected missiles such as Minuteman and Polaris. (AP, Wash. Post,
     9/12/a)
September 11 :Awards at 1964. Air Force Association national convention
     included H. H. Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E. LeMay (USAFCofS) ,
     who was named “Aerospace Man of the Year” for his “enlightened and
     aggressive leadership in behalf of the status and welfare of the military
     man”; David C. Schilling Trophy to Major Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58
     pilot, for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theo-
     dore von Kiirmiin Trophy to Clarence L. Johnson, Vice President (Ad-
     vanced Development Projects) of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., for designing
     the YF-12A (A-11) aircraft.
        Among the citations of honor: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secre-
     tary and Acting Chairman, NASC, was cited for his “broad under-
     standing and vigorous pursuit of aerospace goals.” Maj. Gen. Samuel
     C. Phillips (USAF) ,deputy director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., was
     cited for his contributions to Minuteman ICBM program in previous
     assignment with AFSC/BSD. Chief M/Sgt. Frank M. Davis (USAF) and
     Capt. Joseph H. Engle (USAF) were named outstanding airman and
     outstanding officer of 1964 by AFA. Davis was cited for leadership in
     desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among
     other citations. Engle was cited for “his active and aggressive” role as
     an X-15 test pilot. (AF Mag., 10/64, 33; Vmh. Post, 9/12/64)
0 Soviet astronomer Nikolai Barabashov said Kharkov Univ. observatory

     ultraviolet photographs might show surface of Venus. Tass quoted
     Barabashov as saying a lar e dark spot appeared on the planet in pictures
                              %
     taken before dawn, and e believed this indicated a clearing in the
    clouds normally covering Venus. ‘‘The position of the spot on the
     disk warrants the assumption that we have here a glimpse of a part
     of the surface of Venus, the closest neighbor of the earth.” He added
    that further studies and analyses would be made. (AP,      Houston Post,
     9/12/64.)
September 12: At closing plenary session of 15th IAF Congress in Warsaw,
    Dr. William Pickering, Director of Cal Tech‘s Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
    was named new IAF president.
        At the IAF banquet, Dr. Leonid I. Sedov (U.S.S.R.) said: “When we
    tell people we can land on the Moon by 1971, they say to us ‘why so
     long, what is holding you up?’ ” Also at the banquet, Dr. Wallace 0.
    Fenn, thirty-five years prominent in biological sciences and Dept. of
    Physiology of Univ. of Rochester Medical School, and Secretary General
    of International Union of Physiological Sciences since 1959, was
    awarded the IAA’S Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for
     1964. ( V a h . Post, 9/13/64; M&R, 9/21/64, 16; IAA Annual Rpt.
     1%3-64)
  Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications conducted its
    first TV test with SYNCOM III communications satellite from ground
    station at Kashima, receiving return picture with satisfactory
    resolution. Purpose of test was to investigate parameters of the station.
    Transmission tests to Pt. Mugu, Calif., via the comsat were planned for
    early October. (Av. Wk.,    9/21/64., 30)
September 13: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS XLV into orbit, carrying scientific
    equipment to continue the space research program begun in March 1962.
     Initial parameters reported for the satellite’s orbits: apogee, 327 km.
316             ASTRONAUTIC8 AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

     (203.067 mi.) ; perigee, 206 km. (127.926 mi.) ; period, 89.69 min.;
     inclination, 64”54‘. (AP, NYT, 9/14/64; FonF, XXIV, 313)
September 13.- Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.) was quoted in World Book
     Encylopedia Science Service article as saying NASA’s        Apollo three-
     man spacecraft could be modified for military missions to: orbit earth
     for two-to-three months with more than 2j/z tons of weapons or recon-
     naissance equipment by 1967; move from equatorial orbit to polar
     orbit, surveying earth every 24 hrs.; survey a single strategic portion
     of the globe from a stationary 24-hr. orbit; carry six 500-lb. rocket
     packages, adaptable to containing nuclear weapons. “If we do not
     succeed in developing . . . [such] military potential for Apollo, it will
     be because of lack of funding and direction, and not because of technical
                           “. . .
     problems,” he said.          our ability to defend ourselves in the future
     and thus our whole future is tied up in space.” (WBEsciServ, Houston
     Chrun., 9/13/64)
September 14: NASA announced the next U.S. manned space flight, Project
     Gemini GT-3, had been delayed into 1965 because of time lost as result
    of lightning damage to GT-2 launch vehicle and removal of the rocket
    from launch pad during hurricanes Cleo and Dora. Dr. George E.
    Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight,
     said GT-2 unmanned suborbital mission would be made in last quarter
    of 1964. GT-3, with Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young
     as crew members, was scheduled for first quarter of 1965. (NASA
     Release 64-233)
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin
     Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25
    through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted
    the bands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt
     continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one
     was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half
     of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to
     the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 1O:OO p.m., when the
     men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue
     band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 1 : O     1O .
     Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in
     October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astron-
     omer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson,
    Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63)
* USAF launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload
    from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/641, 11)
* President Johnson presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom, highest
     U.S. civilian award, to Clarence L. Johnson, designer of U-2 and A-11
     aircraft, and 29 other distinguished Americans in White House cere-
    mony. (AP, NYT, 9/15/64, 26)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in New Orleans that progress
    in development of vehicles for manned lunar flight was “very good.”
    He predicted: “If things work well, we’ll be there by late 1969. This
    would not be possible if it were not for Michoud [NASA Michoud Opera-
           .”
    tions]      At present, he said, 11,505 persons were employed at Michoud
    Operations and $927 million worth of contracts had been let there since
    it opened. Mr. Webb was in New Orleans to meet with former members
    of NASA New Orleans Coordinating Committee, formed in 1961 to assist
                                                                          317
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

                                                      (N.O. Times-Picayune,
     NASA in establishing Michoud Operations.
    9/15/64)
September 14: Communications Satellite Corp. stock had more than doubled
     in price since being issued to the public in June and was continuing to
     rise. Michael Getler, in analysis of the situation, attributed rapid price
     rise to “basically an amazing scarcity of shares for daily +rading-in
     combination with some rather short-sighted short-selliig of the issue
     based in large measure on early, perhaps overly pessimistic, views of
                             .
     its likely performance. . .” He quoted security consultant George P.
     Edgar: “ ‘The instinct of the public, in this case, has operated better
     than that of Wall Street. For the most part, professionals have missed
                                                        . .”
     ComSat and the public took the ball and ran.’ .              (Getler, M&R,
     9/14/64, 18)
  Rep. Melvin Price (D.-Ill.) , speaking before International Convention of
     Military Electronics in Washington, criticized cancellation of Pluto
                                                      “. . .
     nuclear-powered, low-altitude missile project:           Repeatedly, we in
     Congress were told that it would constitute an outstanding weapons
     system and would supplement our ballistic missile system, but that the
     main problem in the Pluto concept was proving the feasibility of the
                                        ..
     reactor portion of the system. .
         “We know of nothing that has happened in the last few years to
     change or eliminate the original requirement for Pluto. If the need
     for Pluto disappeared years ago, the project should have 9 n promptly
     stopped; if the need still exists, the project should be carried through to
                    .
     completion. . .” (Finney, NYT, 9/15/64, 10)
* President Johnson presented 1963 Harmon International Aviator’s Tro-
     phies to: Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, for piloting FAITH 7 Mercury
      spacecraft to 22 orbits and a safe return; Aviatrix Betty Miller, for
     making first east-to-west transpacific solo flight by a woman, flying
     Piper Apache from Oakland, Calif., to Sydney, Australia; and to Lt. Col.
     Fitzhugh L. Fulton (USAF) ,for piloting B-58 Hustler bomber to 85,318-
      ft. altitude with payload of more than 11,000 Ibs. (rash. Post,
     9/15/64)
* Space-General Corp. was building new five-ton rocket vehicle for USAF to
     use in testing recovery and re-entry parachutes at El Centro, Calif.,
     Missiles and Rockets reported. Vehicle, called “Hi-Dive,” would be
     dropped from aircraft at 45,000 ft., slowed down by stabilization para-
     chutes for firing of rockets to speed it up to mach 5. Test parachute
     would deploy at 30,000 ft. Delivery was expected next spring. (M&R,
     9/14/64, 11)
* 25th anniversary of Igor Sikorsky’s flight in the first practical helicopter
     in the Western Hemisphere. (Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of UA)
  Accidental explosion involving liquid hydrogen demolished small building
     at NASA Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Facility; there were no
     injuries. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 9/15/64)
September 25: President Johnson, in impromptu visit to John F. Kennedy
     Space Center, inspected Saturn SA-7 space booster being prepared for
     launch and space probes being checked out for interplanetary flights,
     received briefing by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., on two-man
     Gemini spacecraft, and made two brief speeches to space program person-
     nel. “As long as I am permitted to lead this country I will never accept
     a place second to any other nation in this field,” the President said. “I
318             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

     am proud of the long, wandering road we have traveled and I look
                                                    .
     forward to more productive days ahead. .            We cannot be second
     in space and first in the world.” The 90-min. visit was his first at C a p
    Kennedy since he became President. (Yerxa, NYT, 9/16/64, 11)
September 15: Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) submitted in Congressional Rec-
     urd “An Accounting of Stewardship 1961-1WF which included sum-
     mary of US. accomplishments in space:
        “Since 1961 the United States has pressed vigorously forward with
     a 10-year, $35-billion national space program for clear leadership
     in space exploration, space use, and all important aspects of space
     science and technology.
        “Already this program has enabled the United States to challenge
    the early Soviet challenge in space booster power and to effectively
    counter the Soviet bid for recognition as the world‘s leading nation
                                ..   .”
     in science and technology.
        Among the achievements listed: Saturn I rocket’s successful flight;
     Saturn IB and V development; mastery of liquid hydrogen as rocket
    fuel; six manned Mercury space flights; Gemini spacecraft and Titaq
     I1 launch vehicle test-flight; Apollo spacecraft development; first closed
    up observations of another planet (Venus) with MARINER 1 and pictures
                                                               1
    of the moon with RANGER MI; orbiting observatory program initiation;
    Tiros weather satellite operation; and ComSatCorp establishment.
        “In short, the United States has matched rapid p2ogress in manned
    space flight with a balanced program for scientific investigations in
    space, practical uses of space, and advanced research and technological
    pioneering to assure that the new challenges of space in the next decade
    can also be met, and U.S. leadership maintained.” (CR, 9/15/64,
    21498)
  FAAAdministrator Najeeb E. Halaby said in Washington news conference
    that U.S. manufacturers had not submitted any satisfactory design pro-
    posals for the small transport aircraft designed to replace the DC-3,
    and FAA would not award the planned $100,000 design development
    contracts. A Iikely substitute prospect was French-built Nord 262.
    On subject of supersonic transport, Halaby said US. was proceeding
    “very deliberately,” but he hoped that FAA would be able to select the
    best design by Nov. 1 (AP, Wash. Post, 9 / 1 6 / a )
                           .
* Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was reported to have told visiting Jap-
    anese legislators that U.S.S.R. had developed a new “terrible weapon”
    capable of destroying mankind. Two days later, however, Mr. Khru-
    shchev clarified *hisremark, denying he had said that the weapon could
    destroy mankind. “I said that scientists had shown me the terrible
    weapon, which shows what mankind can do. We did not say anything
    about unlimited power.” He also said the weapon was not a nuclear
    bomb. He blamed the earlier report on having been “misinterpreted”
    in translation from Russian to Japanese and then to English. (NYT,
    9/16/64; Shabad, NYT, 9/18/@)
  NASA Astronaut Donn F. Eisele dislocated his left shoulder during weight-
    less flight training a Wright-Patterson AFB in KC-135 jet aircraft, and
                          t
    was placed on limited duty for about three weeks. (Houston Post,
    9/17/69! 1
                                                                         319
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIW, 19 6 4

September 15: Two NASA-USAF memoranda of understanding providing for
     exchange of technical management and scientific personnel became ef-
     fective. Signed by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L Dryden and
                                                                .
     USAF Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, t e agreements were based on rec-
                                            h
     ommendation by joint USAF/NASA Military Requirements Review Group.
     Previously no NASA personnel had been assigned to USAF; under the
    new terms, NASA would assign personnel to USAF on a “when-needed”
     basis. NASA personnel would be GS-13’s and above, and USAF officers
     assigned to NASA would be majors or higher unless “the position
     offers exceptional opportunity to the Air Force,” according to agree-
     ment. Under basic agreement dating from 1959, about 100 USAF
     officers were now on duty with NASA, including 13 astronauts, not af-
    fected,by the agreement, and 40 recent ROTC graduates. About 40 more
     senior officers were scheduled for assignment to NASA in the near future.
     (NASA Release 64-234; DOD Release 671-64)
* Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of NASA Langley Research Center, said
     in speech before National Space Club in Washington that the problem
     of maintaining radio communications with astronauts during atmos-
    pheric re-entry may have been solved. He said L ~ R C research in
     Project Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) showed that ejection
     of small amount of liquid into the air “provides an effective means of
    dealing with radio blackout,” the liquid apparently preventing buildup
     of an ionized sheath that cannot be penetrated by radio waves. While
     it may not be the “completely workable answer, it looks like a very
    promising method of dealing with the problem.” (NSC Release)
0 General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. was receiving two contract actions,

    DOD announced: (1) a $15,551,509 increment to existing contract for
    Atlas space boosters; and (2) a $1,100,000 increment to $94,4&8,904
     contract for work on design and development of a standard space
    launch vehicle. (DOD Release 666-64)
* Personal and scientific papers of Dr. Robert H. Goddard had been given
    to Clark Univ. by his widow, Clark president Howard B. Jefferson an-
    nounced. (AP, Houston Post, 9/16/64)
September 16: NASA Flight Research Center announced award of $82,000
    contract to General Electric Go. for study of flight instrumentation for
    use .on a research ramjet to be carried on the X-15A-2 aircraft. Major
    portion of the instrumentation would be thrust/drag measuring device
    and appropriate sensors to measure net thrust or drag transmitted to
    the X-15 aircraft from the ramjet. Design of this device also would
     provide capability to jettison the ramjet from the aircraft. (mc
    Release 21-64)
0 OGO I satellite probably would obtain 5O%-and          perhaps as much as
     7 5 % - 0 f planned scientific data, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
     Director Dr. Harry J. Goett said at Washington news conference. The
     satellite was still not locked onto the earth but was spinning at rate of
    5 rpm. All 20 experiments had been turned on and had transmitted
     data, but only 17 were sending back useful information. Although OGO I
    was “crippled,” Dr. Goett said, “we have quite a vigorous cripple.” For
    example, the satellite was transmitting 10 times morc data bits than
    ever received from the most advanced Explorer-class scientific satellite.
     (NASA Transcript)
320              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

September 16: Rep. Joseph M. Montoya (D.-N. Mex.) said Aug. 28 test of
     Kiwi P I A nuclear reactor was “the culmination of seven previous
                    begun in 1959. The Kiwi project has had as its basic
     tests--first
     objective the development of basic graphite nuclear rocket technology.
     With the completion of the Kiwi project, Los Alamos [Scientific Labora-
     tory] will be directing its future nuclear rocket eBorts to development
     of advanced, higher power, graphite reactor technology under the
                                ...
     projectname,Phoebus.
         “In a great sense the groundwork for nuclear space propulsion has
     been laid through the success of the Kiwi project. We are on the brink
     of witnessing a great event-the beginnings of the nuclear space age.
     We might even compare the success of the Kiwi project in the space
     age with the combustible engine and its profound effect on the motorcar
     industry.
         “It is altogether fitting that this revolutionary accomplishment in the
     space age took place in Los Alamos-the Kitty Hawk of the nuclear
                                                           . . .”     (CR, 9/16/64,
     age. And the birthplace of the atomic.bomb.
     A4719-20)
9 Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of         Research Projects Laboratory, NASA
     Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the Hermann Oberth Medal
     by the West German Association for Rocket Research Technique and
     Space Flight at annual meeting of West Berlin’s Scientific Association
     for Air and Space Flight. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/17/64)
                          EXPLORER xvn~
September 17: NASA’s                        (IMP-I) satellite, silent since last June
     because of low power levels, resumed data transmission; it had reached
     a more favorable sun angle and was able to operate on power directly
     from its four solar panels. Data received from the satellite, based on
     preliminary analysis, were described as “good.” (NASA Release 66242
     Addendum)
e President Johnson said in Sacramento, Calif., speech:
         “To insure that no nation will be tempted to use the reaches of space as
     a platform for weapons of mass destruction, we began in 1962 and
     1963 to develop systems capable of destroying bomb carrying satellites.
         “We now have developed and tested two systems with the ability to
     intercept and destroy armed satellites circling the earth in space. I
     can tell you today that these systems are in pIace, they are operationally
     ready, and they are on alert to protect this Nation and the free world.
         ‘‘Our only purpose still is peace. But should another nation employ
     such weapons in sp’ce, the United States will be prepared and ready
               . . .”
     toreply.
         The President also disclosed U.S. had produced “over-the-horizon”
                                                                               ...
     radar, which would “literally look around the curve of the earth
      [and] give us earlier warning than ever before of any hostile launches
     against this country.” (Text)
e In its first five years of powered flight, the X-15 aircraft amassed total of 17
     hrs., 52 min., 7.1 sec. of flight, of which 4 hrs., 8 min., 16.8 sec. was pow-
    ered flight. The rocket-pwered research aircraft accrued 4 hrs., 13 min.,
     11 sec. of flight at speeds above 2,000 mph (mach 3), far more flight
     time at mach 3 than any other aircraft. It achieved a total of 2 hrs., 39
     rnin., 47.4 sec. at mach 4 (about 2,700 mph) , a speed impossible for
     any other manned aircraft; 40 min., 45.1 sec. above mach 5 (about
     3,400 mph) ; and 11.6 sec. above mach 6 (about 4,000 mph). The
                                                                           321
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    X-15 was built for top speed of 4,000 mph and altitude capability of
    250,000 ft. Piloted by Joseph A. Walker (NASA), the X-15 set unoffi-
    cial world speed record a 4,104, mph and unofficial world altitude record
                             t
    of 354,200 ft. It held current official FAI world altitude record of 314,750
    ft., set July 17, 1962, with Maj. Robert M. Rushworth (USAF) as pilot.
    The No. 2 aircraft, modified to provide longer engine burp time, was
                                                           as high as mach 8
    expected to attain much higher speeds-possibly
     (more than 5,000 mph). In its first five years the X-15 made 116
    flights. It was expected that the three aircraft would bring the total
    to twice that many within about five more years. (NASA Release 64c265)
September 17: NASA selected Brown and Root, Inc., with Northrop Corp. for
    negotiation of contract to provide operational and maintenance support
    services at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Cost for first year: about
    $2.5 million. Two-year extension options to the contract were contem-
    plated, and total cost requirements for three years would be about $10
    million. (NASA Release 64-235)
e Sen. John Tower (R.-Tex.)        said in Houston he favored continuing ex-
    ploration of space and landing a man on the moon as soon as possible,
    thus differing with Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry Gold-
    water. Sen. Tower said: “I believe,knowledge is needed for the sake
                    ...    I would continue space expenditures at their present
     of knowledge.
    level.” (HoustonChron., 9/17/64)
e Vladimir Kotelnikov, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences, proposed
     one-year radio search of the universe for signals from extraterrestrial
     civilizations, according to Tass. He proposed that network of antennas
    be assigned to “listen to” specific target points in space. The antennas
    would be connected to a central multichannel receiver. U.S. radio-
     astronomers at National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank,
    W. Va., had conducted similar experiment in 1960 (Project Ozma)
    without detecting messages. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/18/64)
  Communications Satellite Corp. held its first stockholders’ meeting and
     elected its first Board of Directors-six representing public shareholders
    and six, communications carriers. (Finney, NYT, 9/18/64, 45)
September 18: Saturn I SA-7 two-stage rocket was launched from Cape
     Kennedy, placing in orbit a nearly37,OOO-lb. payload consisting of
    boilerplate Apollo spacecraft command and service modules, instrument
     unit, and spent S-IV stage, The orbit (145-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee,
    88.6-min. period) was similar to the interim orbit for future three-man
    Apollo lunar missions. All major test objectives were met: final devel-
     opment testing of Saturn I propulsion, structural, guidance and flight
    control systems; development testing of ApolIo spacecraft structure and
     design during flight through the atmosphere; and demonstration of
    physical compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft and test-jettison-
     ing of spacecraft launch escape system. Except for minor changes in
     Saturn I vehicle, test was similar to Saturn I S A 4 (May 28, 1964).
     For third time, elaborate system Df eight motion picture cameras and
     one TV camera was mounted in S-I stage to record such flight events
     as S-IV stage separation and ignition of S-IV engines. The eight
     motion picture cameras were ejected following S-I powered flight, but
     Hurricane Gladys was located about 300-mi. from camera impact point,
     SO the recovery ship had to leave the area the previous day and recovery
     was not attempted. (NASA Release 64-228; UPI, NYT, 9/19/64, 11;
     Marshall Star,9/23/64,1; MSC Roundap, 9/30/64,1)
        one of the systems was operated by the Army and used Nike-Zeusmissile;
        other system was operated by USAF and used Thor missile. In tests both
       systems had “intercepted satellites in space, their missiles passing so
        close as to be within the destruction radius of the warheads.” Army
       system became operational Aug. 1,1963, and USAF system May 29,1964.
        (DOD Release 673-64)
   Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, said in address at Com-
       mercial Museum, Philadelphia: “It takes a certain type of ability to
       manufacture plausible-sounding myths, and unfortunately such ability
                                                                     .
       has been working overtime regarding the space program. . .” He
       examined “several of these confusing rumors”: n a t i o d securdy-
       “The critic who belittles what is being done in space to strengthen
                                                                              ..
       the nation’s defense is either ignorant, irresponsible, or both. .
       Progress of a substantial nature is being made in strengthening our
       national security through space competence”; crash program-“Crash
       programs have unlimited funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel ap-
       proaches to the end objective. None of these aspects applies to the
                                                            .”;
       space program or even to the lunar project . .             either/or phil-
       osophy-“Actually     investments stimulate other investments; they do
                      ..    . What is more, decreased spending in education,
       not deter them.
       for example, does not automaticalty increase the funds available for
                                        .
       space exploration, or vice versa . .”; and slowdown--“such an ap-
       proach would be of great benefit to the Soviets as it would make it easier
       for them to increase their lead in some aspects of space and attain the
       lead in others. Do not think for a moment that they are not trying
       hard to do just that. So far this year, the USSR has put more than
       twice as many spacecraft into orbit as they had put into orbit by this
                                                                             ...
       time last year. In a sense, they are doubling their space effort.
       To slow down a carefully planned project, such as Apollo, would be to
                                                                         .
       increase its cost and reduce its likelihood of timely success. . . Those
       who propose the stretchout or slowdown in the space program are in
       fact arguing for inefficiency and higher costs as well as delayed accom-
       plishments.” (Text)
’ Appointment of Charles W.Harper, authority on simulation and aircraft
      flight research at NASA Ames Research Center, as Director of Aero-
      nautical Research, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Tech-
      nology, was announced by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate
      Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. (NASA Release
      64-239)
’ Dr. Alan T. Waterman, physicist and former director of National Science
      Foundation, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E.
      Webb. He is also a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee.
       (NASA Release 64-24)
’ IU.SA MsC’S Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, announced Astronaut M. Scott
      Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., USN) would serve as his executive assistant. Dr.
      Gilruth called this a “convalescent assignment,” because Astronaut Car-
      penter still had minor injuries from a motorbike accident several months
      ago. Also announced was selection of Carpenter for promotion from
      Lt. Cdr. to Com         r. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/18/64)
                                                                         323
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

September 19: Static test-firing of NASA-USAF 120-in.-diameter solid-fueled
     rocket motor was successful at Aerojet-General facility south of Miami,
     Fla. The motor produced about 600,000 lbs. of thrust, met its major
     objective of proving the design concepts, materials, and processes to be
     used in building 260-in.-diameter motor. Initiated by WAF in 1963,
     program was being directed by joint NASA-USAF team under existing
     contracts until the end of this fiscal year, with project management
     responsibility assigned to NASA Lewis Research Center. (LRC Release
     68-87; Lewis News, 10/9/@, 1)
September 19-20: About 5,000 persons attended Third Annual Open House
     at NASA Wallops Station, which featured the base and launch sites as
     well as special exhibits of rocket models, satellite models, and other
    space hardware. (NASA Announcement 66206; Wallops Release
    64-66)
September 20: Editorial in Washington Sunday Star:
        “There can be little doubt that President Johnson has been politically
     motivated in revealing that the United States today has in operation
    weapons systems capabIe of intercepting and destroying armed satel-
     lites orbiting the earth at very high altitudes. . . .
        “In effect, with the support of guarded detail from Defense Secretary
     McNamara, Mr. Johnson has lifted the lid on classified information in a
                                                                         ...
    way that tends to make the Republican candidate look a bit silly.
        “Our presidential campaigns result in too much talk about things that
    might better be kept under wraps in an age as deadly as the present.
              .
        “Still, . . it is reassuring to be told that our country is equipped
    with devices designed to counter the most advanced Soviet weaponry,
    including rockets which Nikita Khrushchev claims can ‘hit a fly in the
     sky.’ Judging from the President’s remarks, we appear to be at least
    as good as the Russians, if not better, at that Buck Rogers’ game.”
     (Wash. Sun. Star, 9/20/64+)
September 21: USAF XB-70A aircraft took off from Palmdale, Calif., on its
    first flight in extensive test program. The aircraft flew about one hour,
     attaining 16,000-ft. altitude and subsonic speed, then landed at Edwards
    AFB, Calif. Despite trouble retracting the landing gear, loss of one
    engine’s power, and blowout of two tires on left main landing gear, test
    was considered a “highly productive’’ first flight. (DOD Release 676-64;
    Witkin, NYT, 9/22/M, 1)
’ At White House news conference, President Johnson announced his three
    appointees to the board of Communications Satellite Corp.
        “I have appointed Mr. Frederick Donner, who is chairman of the
                                                          ..
    board of General Motors, and has been since 1958. .
        “I have bfr. George Meany, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. I will
    have Mr. Clark Kerr, president of the University of California. Those
    are the three Presidential appointees.
        “This has required a good deal of study and discussion, and I feel
    very pleased that these men have indicated their willingness to make a
    sacrifice to lend their peculiar and unusual talents to the direction of
    this great adventure between government and free enterprise.
        “Needless to say, all of them have a good many duties at the present
    time, but because I pointed out the need for their experience and their
    broad knowledge, they accepted membership.” (Transcript, NYT,
    9/22/64)
324             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

September 21 :NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Aviation Week &
     Space Technology that US. space program had “entered a whole new
     period,” in which US. was faced with exploring all the practical appli-
     cations of knowledge suddenly gained through the space effort. “My
     view is to create stability, and the satellite may be one of the most
                                                                     ..
     important tools yet developed to create stability in the world. . In
     this effort, modern technology is going to play a very important role.
     The balance of technological power may be more important than any
     other form of power balance in the next decades ahead.” He said NASA
     was developing a broad technological capability to conduct missions
     with vast international application. “This will enable our nation to
     say to other nations of the world, ‘Join with us and we will undertake
     these missions together.’ ”
         “Overt expression” of this new focus of national space program
     planning would be expressed in forecast report NASA was completing for
     President Johnson, the article continued. Report would emphasize
     broad range of general space capabilities available in the future and
     describe specific possible post-Apollo missions-such as manned lunar
     base, earth-orbiting space stations, Mars probes-stressing that selection
     of such a goal should be a national decision. (Av. Wk.,      9/21/64, 22)
* Editorial in Aviation Veek by Robert Hotz:
           “he hardware for the second generation of US. space systems is
         66


     already in the flight test stage and its feasibility already demonstrated.
     This is why it is necessary now to organize a new type of national
     space program based not on the simple concept of overtaking the Soviets
     but on utilizing the new riches of space technology to serve domestic and
                                       ..
     international goals of U.S. policy. .
        “A whole new spectrum of power has been created, ranging from
     the three tons of thrust per second of the huge liquid-fueled boosters
     through electric, nuclear and ionic power down to systems whose power
     can be calibrated in micromouse burps and can function for years with-
     out servicing. Harnessing these new energy sources for earth as well
     as space applications may be one of the most technically significant
    developments of the next decade.
        (6
           NASA is picking an excellent time, aside from the election implica-
    tions, to inventoiy the achievements of space technology and project
    them into a future format that will give the national space program a
    focus and purpose beyond the Apollo lunar landings. For the develop-
    ment of space technology will continue to open new vistas for man and
    his universe that cannot yet be perceived from this point in time with
    our vision still clouded by the earth‘s atmospheric sheath.” (Av. Wk.,
    9/21/64,17; CR, 9/23/64, A4823)
  Rep. Hale Boggs (D.-La.) said on the floor of the House: “It was just a
    short 3 years ago when Mayor Victor H. Schiro [of New Orleans] made
    the first announcement about the reactivation of the Michoud plant [for
    production of NASA space boosters]. At that time few of us realized
    that this program would constitute the single most important industry
    that has come to south Louisiana since we were admitted into the
    Union in 1812. . . .” Rep. Boggs had served on the NASA New Orleans
    Coordinating Committee, formed in 1961to help NASA establish Michoud
    operations. (CR,     9/21/64, A 4 7 a )
                                                                           325
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

September 21: Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., USAF) was presented the
     Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Air Force Secretary Eugene
     M. Zuckert, at the National Geographic Society, Washington. Award
     cited Major Cooper for “the most outstanding contribution to the Na-
     tion’s progress in aerospace during 1963,” orbiting the earth 22 times in
     Mercury spacecraft in May 1963. (Wash. Post, 9/22/64b
0 Information about the Van Allen radiation belts, obtained from USAF

     satellite about a year ago, was reported by Dr. Ludwig Katz, of USAF’S
     Space Physics Laboratory:
        ‘’These low energy particles are not a serious hazard to men in space.
     Over a period of time, however, they could affect the performance of
     electronic equipment carried aboard a satellite.
        “The instruments carried aboard the satellite were of six types: a
     proton detector, plasma probe, electron detector, electrostatic analyzer,
     geiger counter and magnetometer. The data were gathered from more
     than 100 orbits.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/@)
0 Editorial in Washington Evening Star said postponement of              manned
     Gemini space flight into 1965 came as “scant surprise,” since “as long
     ago as last Christmastime a ‘space forecast’ story in the Star made the
     prediction that this would be the case, and for several months the ‘last
     quarter of 1964’ target date has been hardly more than a tongue-in-cheek
                                      ..
    fiction at NASA Headquarters. .
        “Of course, it is far better to delay the flights than to run the risk of
    tragic failure due to haste or carelessness. Wouldn’t it make sense to
    forget about phony schedules-and phony excuses for not keeping
    them-and just carry on with the space program as fast and effectively
    as possible?” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
September 22: Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft with attached burned-out Saturn
    S-IV stage, launched into intentionally low orbit Sept. 18 by Saturn
    I SA-7, re-entered earth‘s atmosphere over the Indian Ocean. The
    orbiting package was in its 59th orbit and had been in flight for three
    days, 19 hrs., 37 min. (NASA Release 64-250)
  NASA announced the details of U.S. geodetic satellite program, designed to
    provide more precise mapping of the earth’s surface and its gravita-
    tional field. Program was based on recommendation of NASA-DOD-
     Dept. of Commerce Geodetic Satellite Policy Board and involved three
    types of satellites: Beacon Explorer, equipped with reflectors to reflect
    laser beams from earth and with Doppler transmitter to measure effect
    of irregularities in earth’s gravitational field; Geodetic Explorer
     (instrumented to conduct more experiments than the Beacon Explorer) ,
    containing flashing lights, variety of electronic beacons, optical reflec-
    tors, and when possible radar reflectors; and passive geodetic staellite,
    sunlight-reflecting 100-ft.-diameter Echo-type sphere. (NASA Release
    66236)
  Engine for Apollo service module fired for one second in programed 10-sec.
    test. Automatic cutoff device shut down the engine because of excess
    vibration due to unstable combustion. NASA spokesman called the test
    a “minimal successYy’ results were “not entirely unexpected. The
                             said
    engine had been fired three times previously in acceptance tests, but
    it wasn’t fired in as complete a form as it was today.” ( AP, L.A. Times,
    9/23/64)
326             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

September 22: NASA and Univ. of Texas signed contract for %-in. optical
    telescope to observe the moon and planets. NASA would provide $2.1
    million to build the telescope, and the University would provide $759,000
    observatory building and $1.2-million associated shop buildings. Schedg
    uled to be operational in 1968, the telescope would be fifth largest in
    the world. (M&R, 9/28/a, 13)
* Team of geologists and astronomers at Cal Tech made significant tempera-
    ture measurements of planet Jupiter, using heat-sensitive detector fitted
    to Mt. Palomar 200-in. telescope and discovered that: apparent tem-
    perature of Jupiter’s atmosphere increases more than 100’ in areas
    darkened by shadows of its moons (average temperature of atmosphere
    is -230°F in sunlight but only 7117OF in shadows, as penetrations
    go deeper, atmospheric temperature rises; and the moon Callisto seems
    to radiate about twice as much heat as might be expected. (Korman,
     CTPS, Chic.Trib.,9/23/64)
  Electron microscope with new television attachment, 10 times more power-
    ful than any previous microscope, was demonstrated by RCA. The sys-
    tem magnified objects by two million times. (AP, NYT, 9/23/64, 41)
September 23: NASA announced SYNCOM 111 synchronous-orbit communica-
     tions satellite was now in such a precise orbit that its rotational speed
     was only five seconds slower than that of the earth. Positioned over the
    equator at 22,300-mi. altitude, SYNCOM ID drifted less than 1/1OOth of
     a degree per day. Orbital parameters: 22,311-mi. apogee, 22,164-mi.
    perigee, 1,436.158-min. period, and .095” to the equator. Same day,
    spokesman for Communications Satellite Corp. announced SYNCOM III
    was successfully relaying test pictures across the Pacific and their quality
     was “much better than expected.” The experimental transmissions
     between Kashima, Japan, and Pt. Mugu, Calif., had begun Sept. 21.
     (NASA Release 64-241; Finney, NYT, 9/24/64, 13)
  USAF launched Atlas-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg AFB with
     an undisclosed payload. (M&R, 9/28/64,9)
  NIMBUS I experimental weather satellite ceased operating, after producing
     more than 27,000 remarkably sharp weather photographs. As result
     of several days’ buildup of friction in motor that turned satellite’s solar
    paddles, the solar paddles locked, preventing them from rotating toward
    sun. Lacking adequate solar power t,o recharge batteries, the sateIlite
     control system, three camera systems, and associated electronic equip-
     ment could no longer function. NIMBUS I surpassed all expectations both
     as a research spacecraft and as a storm-spotter. During its 380-orbit
     lifetime it provided the first satellite pictures of nighttime cloud-cover
     and photographed Hurricanes Dora, Ethel, and Florence, Typhoons Ruby
     and Sally. (NASA Release 64-243)
  Attempted flight s X-15 No. 3, with Capt. Joseph H. EngIe (USAF) as
                      f
     pilot, was aborted 10 min. before scheduled launch from EL52 mother
    craft because of problems with cabii pressure. (NASA X-15 Proj. Of.)    f
* Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
     Flight, said in speech before Professional Group on Antennas and Prop-
     agation of the IEEE, Kennedy Airport International Hotel: “In the
     development of national [space] capability, NASA is carrying forward
     the work begun a half-century ago by its predecessor agency, the Na-
    tional Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Like the NACA, the space
     agency is concentrating its efforts on research and development. The
                                            also carries out operations in
                                            ds of operation as well as the




                                               . . .”   (Text)
     strate the capability of transatlantic flight.
September 23: Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, made
     up of representatives from each of the 94 industrial firms that would
     be disclocated by location of NASA Electronics Research Center on
     Kendall Square site, announced it would wage a legal battle to prevent
             obtaining the site. Committee said implementation of NASA’s
     NASA’s
     plan would “disrupt the jobs of 4,000 employees within this area,”
    contended it would cost some of the industries $200,000 to $400,000 to
     relocate although maximum renewal funds available for business reloca-
     tion were only $25,000. (Lewis, Boston Globe, 9/23/64)
e Five surviving men among the eight Army Air Service pilots who took part
     in the first flight around the world Po years ago were honored by Ex-
     plorers Club at dinner in Beverly Hills, Calif. A week later, the men
     were honored in ceremonies at AFSC Hq., which also honored Donald W.
     Douglas, Sr., designer and builder of the four Douglas World Cruiser
     open-cockpit biplanes. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/21/64)
September 24: NASA’s     astronomy program was topic of background briefing
     for the press at NASA Hq., by astronomy program chief Dr. Nancy
     Roman. Dr. Roman disclosed at the briefing that NASA was studying
     concept of a manned orbiting telscope. The 100-in. telescope would
     operate in space automatically, but man would have to make final adjust-
     ments in its focus, change auxiliary instruments from time to time for
     varying the experiments, collect photographic film, and make repairs.
     NASA had invited members of the astronomical community to propose
     studies basic to the Mot concept. Several NASA centers and Hq. offices
     were supporting related engineering studies. Dr. Roman said design
     studies for a Radio Astronomy Observatory were “pretty well com-
     pleted.” Not yet an approved program, Rao would have four 750-ft.
     antennas extended in two V’s to receive radio emissions from space.
      (NASA Transcript; ATPH)
  U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of COSMOS XLVI into earth orbit:
     apogee, 271 krn. (168 mi.) ; perigee, 215 km. (134 mi.) ; period, 89.2
      min.; inclination to the equator, 51.3”. (Tass, Krasnuya Zvezda,
     9/26/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
328             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

September 24: DOD announced $2,6441,430 contract to Akwa-Downey Con-
     struction Co. for construction of NASA test buildings at John F. Kennedy
     Space Center, NASA, Merritt IsIand Launch Area (MILA). Contract was
     awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. (DOD Release 688-64)
  USAF Minuteman I1 “%ew according to the book” ,in its first flight-test,
     USAF announced. The ICBM was launched from silo at Cape Kennedy
     to target site about 5,000 mi. downrange. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/25/64)
  President Johnson awarded Robert J. Collier Trophy, US. aviation’s
     highest honor, to Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer
     and developer of A-11 aircraft. (NAA Release)
  Redeye guided antiaircraft missile was publicly tested in series of four
     launches against drone craft, and performance was declared “technically
     successful.” Smallest known guided missileweighing only 28 lbs.
     including bazooka-like hand-held launcher-Redeye was being developed
     jointly by US. Army and USMC. (Witkin, NYT, 9/25/64)
September 25: DOD announced Chaney and James Construction Co., Inc.,
     was being awarded $3,884,955 contract for test facilities at NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center. Army Corps of Engineers awarded the
     NASA-funded contract. (DOD Release 695-64)
* James J. Kramer, research scientist at NASA Lewis Research Center, was
     named Project Manager of large (260-in.1 solid-propellant rocket motor
     demonstration project at LRC. (Lewis News, 9/25/64, 1)
  DOD announced Aerojet-General Corp. was being obligated $1,109,000 incre-
     ment to previously awarded contract for development and fabrication of
     Titan I1 propulsion system for Project Gemini. AFSC/SSD awarded the
     cost-plus-incentive-feecontract. (DOD Release 695-64)
* US.Army awarded one of its largest single contracts, worth nearly a third
     of a billion dollars, to Western Electric Co. for continued development
     and testing of Nike-X missile defense system. The cost-plus-incentive-
     fee contract for $309,664,200 was to cover work on the system from
     Oct. 1, 1964, to Sept. 30, 1965. (DOD Release 694-64)
September 26: NASA launched second modified Arcas sounding rocket with
     white rat as part of the payload, the rocket carrying the rodent to 21.4-
     mi. altitude where payload separated from booster and parachuted to
    ocean surface. PayIoad was recovered by helicopter a few minutes
    later about 27.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va., launch site. Total flight
    time was 24.5 min. Purpose of this launch and the previous one Sept. 3
    was to demonstrate feasibility of using Arcas to familiarize scientists
    with technological problems associated with space flight studies on small
    animals. (Wallops Release 64-67)
  NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with University of Pittsburgh
    and NASA Goddard Space Night Center instrumented payload was
    launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 74.5-mi. altitude. Primary ob-
    jective of flight was to obtain propulsion and environmental data on the
    Aerobee 150A. New severance techniques also were employed. Addi-
    tional experiments included low-energy gamma-ray measurements, study
    of yellow radiation from sodium vapor, Dovap transmitter studies for
    tracking rockets, nuclear emulsions for cosmic-ray studies, and attitude
    control system employing new techniques for pointing. Rocket per-
    formance was good, and excellent propulsion and environmental data
    were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Sept


    ricated and assembled. (NASA Release 64-238)
* MSC Gemini Project Director Charles Mathews, asked about prospects of
    lengthening first manned Gemini flight, was reported as saying: “We
     are re-examining the possibility of a day-long mission but the prob-
                                                                          . .”
     ability is that it will stay three orbits [4;1/2 hours] as planned. .
     Question was prompted by Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom’s having stated
    publicly a few days ago that he wouId Iike to have the flight pIan ex-
    tended up to as many as 18 orbits and was trying to persuade project
    officials to lengthen it. (AP, Hartford Courant, 9/27/64)
0 U.K. supersonic TSR--P aircraft was test-flown for the first time in 14-min.

    flight from Boscombe Down, the reconnaissance-bomber performing
    satisfactorily. Aviation Minister Julian Amery said the TSR-2, to be
    operational in about three years, would be “a formidable addition to
    Britain’s power.” (Feron, NYT, 9/28/64)
September 28: X-15 No. 3 flown by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (USAF) to
    97,000-ft. altitude and 3,820-mph speed (mach 5.69) from Edwards
    AFB, Calif. During the flight, a new protective coating on underside
     of plane’s tail was tested for aerodynamic heating, for possible future
                                            X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post,
    application in X-15 No. 2. (NASA
    9/29/64; M&R, 10/5/64,11)
0 NASA instituted revised patent waivers and related procurement regula-

    tions in accordance with the late President Kennedy’s directive for a
    more uniform patent policy among Federal agencies. New regula-
    tions gave contractors greater chance to obtain patent rights to their
    commercially applicable inventions made in the course of work on
    Government contracts. Announced Aug. 21, the new regulations were
    expected to accelerate contractors’ efforts to identify and report tech-
     nological advances, thus enhancing technology utilization from the
    space program. (NISA Release 64-209; Av. Wk., 10/5/64, 26)
  USAF launched four-stage Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River,
    Utah, for a partially successful flight. Flight was aborted automatically
    before third-stage ignition because of an inverter malfunction. (M&R,
     10/5/64, 11)
  DOD announced $1,245,601 contract award to B. B. McCormick and Sons,
    Inc., for road work at Merritt Island Launch Area, John F. Kennedy
    Space Center, NASA. The NASA-funded contract was awarded by Army
    Corps of Engineers. (DODRelease 699-64)
  Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) spoke on the Senate floor on general
     aviation (“all aviation activity except the airlines and the military”) :
        66
          Three observations about general aviation are worth sharing.
       u
          GeneraI aviation has greatly expanded our horizons for recrea-
                              government              atively small but potent
                               of people.             so for many more.
                              as sharply i           the pace of business and
    political competition. By reducing the unproductive travel time of
    costly personnel, the airplane, particularly in general aviation, has
    acted as a labor creator rather than as a labor saver. By making it
       7M-598 0-65-22
330            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

     possible to do more things, the airplane has forced people to do more
     things to keep ahead of the competition.
         “General aviation in the rest of the world suffers under an oppres-
     sive load of regulatory restriction to so great an extent that it barely
     exists. We must guard against burdening US. general aviation with
     similar controls producing the same result.” (CR, 9/28/64, 2224143)
September 28: U.S.S.R. was believed to be using over-the-horizonradar simi-
     lar to type that US. was installing (Sept. 17). Aviation Week &
     Space Technology reported U.S.S.R. claimed that the basic technique
     in over-the-horizon radar-back-scattering      of high-frequency radio
     waves from the ionosphere-was first discovered by Soviet Prof. Nikolai
     Kabanov and Soviets termed it “Kabanov Effect.” (Au. Wk., 9/28/64,
     19)
0 USN launched its first submarine equipped with Polaris A-3     missiles, the
     U.S.S. Daniel Webster,from Charleston, S.C. (Sehlstedt, NYT, 9/29/64)
0 Office of Naval Research was studying submarine-based antisatellite missile

     system, according to Avicction Week & Space Technology. System
     would use Polaris fleet ballistic missile to supplement existing Army
     and Air Force weapons. (Av. Wk., 9/28/@, 18)
September 29: USAF launched final Minuteman I test ICBM from Cape
     Kennedy. First-stage flight was satisfactory, but second stage veered
     out of control and had to be destroyed by range safety officer 165 sec.
     after launch. In launches from Cape Kennedy, the missile scored 38
     successes, 8 partial successes, and 8 failures. From Vandenberg AFB,
     it scored 60 successes, 4 partial successes, and 2 failures. (AP, Balt.
     Sun, 9/30/64; M&R, 10/5/64, 11)
  President Johnson sent nomination of Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., to
     Senate for promotion to full colonel (USMC) in recognition of his
     <c
        many accomplishments while in the service of his country.” Former
     Astronaut Glenn said the news came “as quite a surprise” to him, since
     he had previously expressed his intention to retire from USMC and had
     requested that he not be considered for promotion. ( AP, NYT, 9/30/64?,
     16; Houston Post, 9/30/64)
* NASA announced it would negotiate with Sandas Associates, Inc., for pur-
     chase of seven display systems to be used with computers for checkout
     and launch of Saturn V launch vehicles. Three of the systems would be
     used at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and four at Kennedy Space
     Center, NASA. Cost of the cost-plus-incentive-fee type contract may
     exceed $5 million. (NASA Release 66249)
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Univac Div.,
     Sperry Rand Corp., for negotiation of contract for Message Multiplexer
     communications processor systems. Final contract would call for Univac
    to supply, install, check out, program, and document two complete mes-
     sage handling systems to be installed in NASA communications switching
     centers at London and at an undetermined site in Australia. Contract
                ted to amount to about $1.3 million. (GSFC Release ( 3 6 2 8 )
     was
  Sen. Gay ord Nelson (D.-Wis.) spoke in the Senate about the pattern of
     Federal R&D expenditures which he said was “having an unfavorable
     effect on the Midwest, home of many of our greatest industries and our
                           ..   . We cannot pursue a policy, even uninten-
     greatest universities.
     tionally, which has the effect of wasting the industrial and intellectual
                                             . .”
     potential of the American heartland. .         He pointed out that “not
                                                                          331
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 5 4

     all the blame for lack of Federal research and development activity can
    be attributed to the Government. The industries and universities of
    the Middle West have not in all cases been as aggressive as they should
    have been in seeking Federal contracts.” (CR, 9/29/64,22355-58)
September 30: X-15 No. 2 flown by Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) to
    maximum altitude of 98,000 ft. in flight that reached 3,511 mph (mach
     5.19), from Edwards AFB, Calif. (NASA X-15 Proj. O f ; M&R,    f.
     10/5/64,11)
0 Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Observatory at

    Univ. of Arizona and chief experimenter on RANGER w lunar-photo-
     graphing probe, said at MIT conference that much of the moon’s surface
     is naked lava. RANGER VII photographs showed that dark regions of the
    moon, particularly its seas, were of volcanic origin. Dr. Kuiper said
    other recent photographs of the lunar seas in various wavelengths, in-
    cluding infrared, showed sharp relief features in the lunar seas that
    were lava flows. “There cannot ever be one millimeter” of cosmic
    dust on the surface, he stated. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/1/64)
0 156-in. solid-propellant motor was fired by Lockheed Propulsion Co., pro-

    ducing about 1.2 million lbs. of thrust in burn time of two min., 35
    sec. This was second firing of the motor and was rated “successful in
    all respects” by AFSC/SSD officials. It produced 30% more thrust than
    first firing May 28 because it contained about 30% more propellant.
    The test was particularly significant because it proved out a new nozzle
    concept; spokesman said the test showed “that we can get rid of the
    graphite now and use graphite tape-meaning that essentially we can
    go to a plastic nozzle.” (M&R, 10/5/@, 11-12)
  Lockheed A-11 (YF-l2A), fastest known jet aircraft, was displayed
    for first time at Edwards AFB, where the plane was flown at only 450
    mph for the spectators. Also unveiled was air-to-air interceptor missile.
    USAF spokesman said the new aircraft-missile combination represented
    a “tremendous increase” in ability to intercept hostile aircraft. In an-
    nouncing the aircraft last February, President Johnson had said it had
    been tested at speeds exceeding 2,000 mph and altitudes exceeding 70,000
    ft. (Witkin, NYT, 10/1/64,1)
  Senate confirmed President Johnson’s nominations to Board of Directors
     of the Communications Satellite Corp. : Frederic G. Donner, George
    Meany, and Clark Kerr. (NASA LAR III/187-88)
  NASA announced New York Univ. and Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn
    would receive grants for construction and renovation of space-related
    research facilities. NASA grant to NYU would amount to $582,000 and
    to Brooklyn Tech, $632,000. (NASA Release 64-255)
  Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.), speaking in the House, refuted con-
    tention of Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) in June issue of Science and
    Mechanics that “ ‘all manned space research should be directed by the
    military, with national security and control of the access to space as
    primary goals.’
        6
        ‘
          To turn all man              over to the military would be contrary
                                      ation established even before the begin-
    to the purposes and
    ning of the space age. It is so contrary it can be considered reason
                               ..  .
    for the greatest of alarm.
        “[It] would violate the very spirit as well as the underlying principles
    of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. To cause a change
332             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    in such control would create distrust throughout the world about our
                 ...
    intentions.
        “If we suddenly announce a change in our goal of conquering space
     for peaceful reasons to one of military reasons I am convinced we
                                ..
    would lose a number of .            [our tracking stations]. Even more im-
     portant we would lose the confidence of the world in our stand that we
                                ..     .” (CR, 9/30/64,22454)
     are a peace loving nation.
September 30: Stanford Research Institute was being awarded %1,409,346
     contract for study and evaluation of Nike-X system’s potential effective-
    ness, DOD announced. Nike-X project at Redstone Arsenal, Ala.,
     awarded the contract. (DOD Release 708-64)
  Report of Aviation Human Resources Study Board, created by FAA last
     February and chaired by Dan A. Kimball, was released by FAA. Study
     showed that career planning and manpower training were deficient
     for meeting needs of civil aviation for the next 20 years. Com-
    paratively few people under 30 were now learning to fly. Enrollment in
     aviation courses had declined, number of schools offering aviation
    training was decreasing, and only a few military trained airmen were
    seeking professional aviation careers. Number of professional pilots
    needed by airlines and general aviation was estimated at 3,650 in 1965,
     4,300 in 1970, 5,700 in 1975, and 6,300 in 1980. Report urged ex-
    pansion of on-the-job and apprenticeship training programs, scholar-
    ships, extensive career motivation programs, and other measures. (FAA
    Release 64-89)
September 30-October 1: FAA sponsored National Aviation System Sym-
     posium in Washington, which was attended by leaders of airlines and
     aircraft manufacturing and officials in other Government agencies. In
     address at the symposium FAAAdministrator Najeeb E. Halaby discussed
    current national air space system and forecast the future of aviation.
     He outlined some aviation goals:
        “It is in the national interest to see the products of our entire aviation
                                                        .
     industry sold to the other nations of the world. . . [Also, we must]
    promote the use of our concepts, techniques and procedures of manag
     ing an airspace and an airport system.
        “In my opinion, our most important domestic goal is the establishment
     of a truly effective air transportation system. In terms that the traveling
    public can understand, this means the connection of any two population
     centers within the United States by a door-to-door travel’time of not
                         ..     .
    morethan8hours.
        “Finally, there is an over-riding goal which must be uppermost in the
    minds of everyone. None of the accomplishments I have already
     discussed will be possible if they are not accompanied by improvements
     in air safety and, here, primary reliance must be on the aviation
                        . .”
    community itself. .            (Text, CR, 10/2/64,2304346)
During September: After DOD installed small ground station in Saigon, mili-
    tary communications experiments using SYNCOM 11 communications
    satellite began between Saigon and Hawaii. Limited experiments also
    were made with SYNCOM 111, which was in a position to relay messages
    from Saigon to Camp Roberts, Calif. SYNCOM 11 was being used on
    a virtually 24-hour basis. DOD had been experimenting with SYNCOM
    1 for months-before         installation of Saigon station, when SYNCOM 11
      1
    relayed messages between Manila and points in the US., and even
                                                                          333
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    earlier, when the satellite relayed military communications over the
    Atlantic Ocean. (Bus.WFC.,9/12/64; Finney, NYT,9/29/64,4)
During September: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administra-
    tor for Advanced Research and Technology, described use of nuclear
    ener in space propulsion and electric-power generation :
       ‘‘E    have observed repeatedly how a given technology has been ad-
     vanced By the military requirements and how this technology is later
     borrowed for consumer products. However, these underlying tech-
     nologies may be catalyzed with equal effectiveness by significant peace-
     time objectives set by the President, as exemplified by the Nation’s space
     program.
        6G
          Therefore, the nation must support activities during peacetime which
     have as their purpose large-scale technological goals separated from
     commercial and military needs. The application of nuclear energy to
     space exploitation offers such a goal-one which can provide enormous
     subsidiary benefits in addition to opening the gateway to deep space.”
      (GE Forum, 7/9/64,15-17)
e USAF Missile Development Center reported seven-ft. monorail sled reached
     record ground speed of 4,200 mph in test at Holloman AFB. (M&R,
     9/21/64,9)
* U.S.S.R. had developed nuclear reactor for space applications, according
     to technical supplement of Pravda. Nicknamed “Romashka” (“Daisy”),
     it used enriched U-235 and had output of 500 watts, 88 amps, through
     direct control of reactor heat with beryllium reflectors. It weighed
     about 500 lbs., was comparable to US. 950-lb. SnaplOA power source
     in its power levels. Soviets claimed to have run it continuously 400
    hrs. without failure. (M&R, 12/14/64,21)
  Aerospace industry sales for second quarter of 19fXrose to $4.006 billion
     from $3.808 billion in preceding quarter, Securities and Exchange Com-
     mission-Federal Trade Commission reported. (Av. Wk.,          9/21/64,34)
e U.S.S.R. began series of long-range missile tests from Siberian launch site
     to impact point in the Pacific Ocean near Christmas Island. The mis-
     siles had range of more than 7,000 mi. This series would last until
     Nov. 1, and a second series would extend the tests to Dec. 30, to target
     area near Howland Island. (Hughes, Miami Herald, 9/14/64)
  Interview with General John P. McConnell (USAF), Vice Chief of Staff,
     USAF, in The Airman. General McConnell gave his opinion of USAF’S
     future role in space: “First, to augment the existing defense capabilities
     of the US. land, sea, and air forces by using space systems for such
     things as better communications, weather reporting, and navigation.
     Second, to develop a military capability for protection of US.interests
     in space.
        “I think the Air Force, by virtue of its overall mission and experience,
     as well as its Dowassigned responsibilities for space developments and
     boosters, must seek to obtain space Capabilities for our defense as quickly
     as they become economical and practical.
        “Our role to support the national goals of both the scientific explora-
     tion and the high-priority defense projects should continue.
        “I also visualize that in the long run, future manned vehicles will play
     an increasingly vital role. It is essential that the Air Force vigorously
    pursue space research and development as well as operations.” (Air-
     man, 9/64,12-15)
334            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

During September: Writing in U S . Navd Institute Proceedings, Capt. R. C  .
    Truax (USN, Ret.) described early naval rocket development work at
     Engheering Experiment Station, Annapolis. Captain Truax was in
    charge of all rocket propulsion work for USN Bureau of Aeronautics
     from 1946 to 1949. (US.     Naval Inst. Proc., 9/M, 82-108)
0 Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board of AT&T, was named recipient

     of the 1965 John Fritz Medal by United Engineering Trustees, Inc., for
                                                               . .”
     “leadership in the pioneering of space communications. .            (Av.
     Wk.,  9/14/64,23)
* William J. Schulte, Assistant Administrator for General Aviation, FAA, was
    named 1964 winner of National Business Aircraft Association Award
    for meritorious service to aviation. (Av. Wk.,    9/14/M, 23)
e General Accounting Office told Congress that DOD was making only “neg-
    ligible’’ progress in its program to standardize electronic parts. GAO
     blamed the Services’ failure “to take appropriate and timely action to
    complete itern-reduction projects initiated under the Defense stand-
    ardization program” as well as lack of DOD “authoritative direction
     and control.” (Av.Daily, 9/24/64)
                          October I964
October 1 : Sixth anniversary of NASA. In Headquarters ceremony honoring
    the first NASA Administrator, President T. Keith Glennan of Case Insti-
    tute of Technology (Aug. 1958-Jan. 1961),and the first Deputy Admin-
    istrator, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden (Aug. 1958--present), official portraits
    were unveiled. Administrator James E. Webb made informal remarks
     on the role of NASA in fulfillment of the American concept of power and
    purpose in human &airs. He read a letter from President Lyndon B.
    Johnson which said, in part :
        “We must be first in space and in aeronautics to maintain first place
     on earth. The accomplishments of this past year show clearly that
    we are making rapid progress to achieve and maintain that position.
        “Significant as our success has been, it is but indicative of the f a r
    greater advances that mankind can expect from our aeronautical and
    space efforts in the coming years. We have reached a new threshold
     of competence in the air and beyond it in space which opens to US the
    widest possibilities for the future.’’
        Associate Administrator Dr. Robert Seamans ( l%%present) re-
    viewed the personal contributions of Drs. Glennan and Dryden in the
    initiation and progress of the US.civilian space program. Friends and
     relatives of those honored and official NASA guests attended the cere-
    mony. (Program; Letter)
  NASA successfully launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to 89-mi. altitude
    from White Sands, N. Mex. Purpose was to map photon-emitting night-
    sky sources. Gas-filled proportional counters were used to detect and
    measure energy of the x-rays. The rocket performed well and ex-
    perimental results were good, but 10-2076 of desired data were lost
    because yo-yo despin mechanism failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA and DOD began implementing agreement on a single new system to
     improvB communication and coordination of research and technology
    information between the two agencies. The agreement abclished cer-
     tains forms and procedures which the two agencies had used independ-
    ently for reporting on research and technology data, and instituted a
    new standard reporting form for common use. After the changeover
     is completed (July 1, 1965), all research and technology work of NASA
     and DOD will be covered on the new form, and any scientist or staff
     member from NASA or DOD will be able to obtain full information by
     fast machine processing on any given type of work. Signed by NASA
     Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director of
     Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown, the agreement was
     worked out in a series of conferences over a period of more than one
     year. It was sponsored by and would be continued under the Sup-
     porting Space Research and Technology Panel of the Aeronautics and
                                               .
     Astronautics Coordinating Board (AACB) (NASA Release 64-258)
                                                                    335
336             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 4

October 1: Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper told MIT conference on earth sciences that
    continuing research had verified Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to allow
    spacecraft to land by parachute. Density of Martian atmosphere, ac-
     cording to Dr. Kuiper, had been found to be less than two per cent of
    that at sea level on earth. The new measurement was made by spectro-
    graphic studies. (Abraham, Phil. Ewe. Bull., 10/1/64)
* NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Reeves Instru-
    ment Co. for negotiations of $2.5 million contract for three 30-ft.
    Unified S-Band Antenna Systems. The antenna systems would be in-
    stalled in tracking ships for Project Apollo. (GSFC Release -4-29)
* NASA announced award of three-year contract to Bendix Field Engineering
     Corp. for launch support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center,
     NASA. Contract was expected to cost about $2.8 million for the first
     year but could amount to as much as $17 million for the three-year
    period. (NASA Release 64-256)
0 NASA announced appointment of Gilbert W. Ousley as NASA European Rep-

    resentative for NASA Office of International Programs. With GSFC since
     1959, Ousley would be stationed within US. Embassy at Paris, where he
    would handle NASA relations with European organizations. (NASA
    Announcement 64-225; NASA Release 64-252)
  After examining Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. ( USMC) ,US.Air Force doctors at
     San Antonio said the former astronaut was on the way to “virtually
     complete recovery” from his inner-ear injury resulting from accidental
    fall last February. (AP, NYT, 10/2/64,62)
* P e s reported that US. tracking network had “detected two important
   rs
     Soviet space failures within a month,” according to “authoritative
     sources in Washington.” (L.A. Herald Examiner, 10/1/@)
  FAA Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby discussed “aviation in 1975” before
    National Aviation System Symposium in Washington. He referred to
     “the coming revolution in aviation technology,” a technology “just now
                                            ..
     on the threshold of developments. .         Innovations in aerodynamics,
     improved propulsion systems and fuel properties and the development
     of new metals and other materials will produce performance charac-
    teristics and operating economies which wl allow aviation solutions to
                                                 il
     entire ranges of problems where aviation has never been a factor be-
           . . .”
    fore.           (Text)
* Fifteen years ago Eastern Test Range was activated at Long Range Proving
     Ground. Hq. were established at Patrick AFB, then still the Banana
     River NAS, some 18 mi. south of Cape Kennedy (then Cape Canaveral)
     rocket launch site. (A&A, 191540;AP, Tulsa Daily World, 10/1/64)
October 2: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center conducted tests of astronauts
     floating in model Gemini spacecraft in the open seas, simulating astro-
    nauts awaiting recovery after splash-down from space flight. MSC
    project engineers considered the tests successful, despite the fact that
     the two astronauts became ill while the enclosed spacecraft pitched and
     rolled in the rough Gulf of Mexico waters. The astronauts considered
     the heat in the spacecraft to ‘be cause of sickness. Tests were ended
     after 16 hrs. rather than lasting the planned 36 hrs. because of approach-
     ing Hurricane Hilda. Astronaut participants: Lt. Alan L. Bean (USN)
     and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (USN). (Maloney, Houston Post,
     W3/W
                ASTRONAUT1




    Projects Agency (ARPA). The Titan I1 was launched by a SAC crew
    on routine training mission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/3/&; M&R, 10/12/
    6410)
* John Driscoll, Chairman of Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, met with
     James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, “to assure him we are ready, will-
    ing, and able to discuss with him and to negotiate with NASA for our
    turnpike location [of NASA’ EIectronics Research Center in CambridgeJ
    in the event the Kendall-Sq. site is not selected.” After the meeting Mr.
    Webb repeated that the Kendall-Sq. location “better meets the require-
     ments” of NASA than any other proposal. Meanwhile, in Boston, Dr.
     John J. Brennan, Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation o           f
    Cambridge Industry, said in press conference that the committee would
     use every available legal means to prevent location of the NASA center
    in Kendall Sq. (Boston Globe, 10/2/64)
* Sen. Everett Dirksen (R.-Ill.) ,minority leader in U.S. Senate, filed in the
    Congressional Record his report o the 88th Congress’ activities. The
                                         f
       ortion dealing with US.space program stressed “what priority should
    Be applied” to Project Apollo lunar landing program: “Republican con-
     cern over the program is engendered by the belief that f a r too much of
     our national technical talent and scientific intellect is devoted to this one
    project while other, more needed and worthy programs are permitted to
                                                                ...
     flounder for lack of competent, imaginative direction.
                           ...   [isJ not whether man will ultimately reach
        “The controversy
    the moon and beyond, but rather, how shall it be done, and whether other
     aspects of human needs should Be bypassed or overlooked in the one
                                                            ..    .” (CR, 10/2/
     spasmodic effort to achieve a lunar landing at once.
     a,   23061-68)
  First meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee, with rep-
     resentatives of 15 nations, adjourned after four days. In its session,
     the committee approved rules o procedure, appointed Committee Chair-
                                      f
     man (John A. Johnson, ComSatCorp vice president for international
     affairs), and heard progress reports on development o global commer-
                                                                f
     cial communications system. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 10/4/@,
     74)
                              AGARD, Frank E. Rom of NASA Lewis Research
  In presentation to NATO’s
     Center discussed fast and moderated low-power, lightweight nuclear
     reactors and their applications. Both one- and two-stage nuclear
     rockets had significantly superior performance over the best chemical
     rocket systems, Rom said. Further, he said, “The development of a
     low-power nuclear rocket would be the quickest and least costly way
     to achieve a practical nuclear powerplant for space use. Since early
     use of these smaller powerplants would be possible, operational and
     flight experience would aid in the development of larger nuclear rockets.”
      (LRC Release 64-88)
  AFSC announced its Research and Technology Div. had completed tests
     on most effective method of heating high-pressure air to simulate aero-
     dynamic conditions of earth’s atmosphere. Wind-tunnel arc air heater
     produced direct power current of 5.1 megawatts [previous high was 4.2
338             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     megawatts]. During the 5.1-megawatt run, 3 8 megawatts were con-
                                                      .5
     tained in the gas, representing ihigher efficiency than had been predicted.
     New designs based on the test would extend the probable lifetime of a
     projected 50-megawatt heater to be used in electrogas-dynamic facility
    being built at Wright-Patterson AFB. Both AFSC’S Arnold Engineer-
     ing Development Center and NASA Ames Research Center would use
     data from the test program for their work with similar heaters. (AFSC
     Release 4.24%-119)
October 2: AEC exploded nuclear device of low-intermediate yield in under-
     ground test at Nevada site, the 16th weapons-related nuclear test an-
    nounced by AEC this year. (AP,       NYT, 10/4/64, 34)
October 3: President Lyndon B. Johnson said in his news conference that
    Federal nondefense agencies had reported savings o “more than $178
                                                             f
    million on an annual basis” as result o management improvements and
                                              f
    cost reductions initiated in July and August. “These savings are in
     addition to the $100 million reported last April, and to the $140 million
    reported in July.” He listed NASA w t the second-largest amount
                                                ih
     saved in July and August: $44 million. (Transcript, Wash. Post,
     10/w4)
0 USAF successfully Aew Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River,

    Utah, to target area at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. USAF said
    that “some test objectives were achieved.” Launch was said to be
    second time in five launches that the four-stage missile completed the
    357-mi. course. (AP,     Phil. Inq., 10/4/64)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Young Presidents’ Or-
    ganization Eastern Area Conference in White Sulphur Springs, W.
    Va.: “AS the national space program moves into its seventh year, the
    United States has reached the halfway point in the broad-based accel-
    erated program for the present decade, a program that was planned and
    has been carried forward by the three Administrations.
        “The National Space Program is creating for the United States new
    resources for whatever use the national interest may require, whether
    that interest is in maintaining national security, international relations,
     stimulating education, or implementing scientific and technological
               .. .
    progress.
        “In writing the Space Act of 1958, Congress stressed that the scientific
    and technical knowledge acquired as the national program moved ahead
                                                            ..
    should be shared promptly with all who could use it. .
        “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged
    to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the pur-
    pose of the NASA’s    Technology Utilization Program, the first national
                               . . .”
    undertaking of its scope.
        He detailed how the program works and enumerated outstanding ex-
    amples, then concluded:
        “NASA’S major contribution here has been to provide a vital com-
    munications link between activities where information is developing and
    areas where it may be utilized.
        “We are convinced that NASA’s     Technology Utilization Program will
     be of increasing benefit to the American economy. It is the mechanism
    through which the discoveries made in space science and technology
     can pay substantial dividends to American business and industry.”
     (Text)
                                                                           339
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

October 3 col. Martin L. Raines (USA, Ret.) was named manager of NASA
          :
    MSC’S facility at White Sands Missile Range, Director Dr. Robert R.
    Gilruth announced. ( M , Tulsa Doily World, l0/4/64)
  Rep. F. Bradford Morse (R,-Lowell) of Massachusetts said he had written
    letter to NASA Administrator Jame E. Webb recommending NASA abandon
    plans to locate Electronics Research Center in Cambridge and, instead,
    select another site in a nearby community. In his letter, he said: “It
    is difficult to understand why the administration [NASA] persists in lo-
                                                                  . . .”
    cating in Cambridge when there is such intense opposition.              (Bos-
    ton Sun. Globe, 10/4/&%)
  James J. Haggerty, Jr., space editor of Journal of the Armed Forces, dis-
    cussed the Agena rocket stage, calling it “a highly reliable, extremely
    versatile piece of hardware which serves triple duty as an orbital injec-
    tion vehicle for satellites, as an upper stage booster for lunar and
    planetary probes, and as a spacecraft. From the standpoint of fre-
    quency of usage, Agena is far ahead of the field. In the seven years
    since Sputnik I went up, there have been about 290 spacecraft sent into
    earth orbit or deep space trajectory; Agena, in various versions, has
    been in on 142 of them-almost half. It is currently being employed at
    the rate of about 30 shoots a year and it will figure in some very im-
    portant upcoming projects. . . .”. Haggerty descrihed Agena con-
    tributions, notably its remarkable accuracy in sending RANGER VII on
    its course to the moon. (JJAnned Forces, 10/3/64, 8 )
  Hand-held, photoelectric sensor that vibrates when it senses changes in
    environmental terrain had potential as an aid to the blind, AFSC an-
    nounced. Developed by Santa Rita Technology under USAF con-
    tract, the environmental sensor detects changes in light values, feeds the
    data to photo resistor which changes value according to amount of
    light, then passes it to oscillator, which creates pulse vibrations against
    the user’s hand. AFSC said research also was underway on device trans-
    mitting speech through tactile transducer. (AP, NYT, 10/4/64, 46)
  The 84th Congress adj.ourned without acting on S. 1278, bill instructing
    National Bureau of Standards to study practicability of U.S. adoption
    of the metric system. (Library of Congress)
October 4: NASA EXPLORER XXI scientific earth satellite (IMP B) was launched
    into orbit from Cape Kennedy with a Thor-Delta rocket booster. On-
    board instrumentation was working excellently, but the satellite’s orbit
     (59,400-mi. apogee; 120-mi. perigee; 34-hr., 57-min. period; 33”53’
    inclination to the equator) fell far short of the intended deep-spacepath
    which would have enabled the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform to
    measure magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and solar winds in interplanetary
    space. Planned apogee was 161,000 mi. Robert H. Gray, Director of
    Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission
    success was about 97,750 mi. As in launch of EXPLORER XVIII (IMF A ) ,
    the Delta rocket used higher-thrust third-stage motor, the X-258, to
    give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection. Preliminary track-
    ing data indicated this stage had not provided the required thrust.
    Designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, EXPLORER XXI
    contained nine experiments. Five of these were provided by GSFC re-
    searchers and four by experimenters at Univ. of Chicago, Univ. of Cali-
    fornia, NASA Ames Research Center, and MIT respectively. (NASA
    Release 64-242; AP, Balt. Sun, 10/5/M; UPI, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64;
    M&R, 10/12/64,%)
340              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

October 4: Seventh anniversary of the Space Age--orbiting of SPUTNIK I
    by the U.S.S.R. on Oct. 4 1957. Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin said
                              ,
    in Trud interview that U.S.S.R. was preparing a manned space flight:
    “We are working and making studies and are preparing for a new
    launching. It is not our custom to advertise, but I’ll tell you that new
    and more complicated research work is in store for us.” (UPI, Chic.
    Trib.,10/5/6LE)
 In recent interview Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Ex-
    perimental Station, had complained: “American military radar is se-
    riously interfering with our studies of the universe.” In the 41 -0
    megacycle band, he said, radar signals were interfering with Jodrell
    Bank radiotelescope’s listening to radio waves from distant points in
    the universe. The interference had Been occurring over the past 9-12
    months, and “we’ve had to stop one program because of it.” Sir Ber-
    nard and other astronomers indicated the 406-410 megacycle band was
    “the only relevant band” for studying quasi-stellar objects (“quasars”).
    US. Government officials acknowledged receiving similar complaints
    from astronomers at Cambridge Univ. However, according to William
    E. Plummer, acting chief of frequency management in US.telecommuni-
    cations coordinating office, “No radar of any kind is authorized to oper-
    ate on that Band.” (Toth, L.A. Times,10/4/64)
October 5: USAF launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket from Vandenberg
    AFB with unidentified satellite payload. (UPI, NYT, 10/7/64+, 19;
      HHN-48)
    Addressing Oklahoma Frontiers of Science Foundation in Oklahoma City
      during ceremonies celebrating its tenth anniversary, NASA Administrator
      James E. Webb pointed out that “some of our NASA projects in educa-
      tion and in the transfer of space technology to the general economy owe
      much to the philosophy and concepts threshed out in the early days of
                       ..   .” (Text)
      the Foundation.
    Second flight-test of XB-70 aircraft was conducted at Edwards AFB, Calif.,
      with pilot Alvin S. White (North American Aviation, Inc.) and co-
      pilot Col. Joseph Cotton (WAF). The aircraft reached 600 mph instead
      of planned 700 mph and attained 28,000-ft. altitude instead of planned
      35,000 ft. It was forced to land prematurely because of hydraulic sys-
      tem problems. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/6/a; Av. Wk.,10/12/64, 29)
    Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,Chairman of Senate Committee on
e
      Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said Rift program should be reacti-
      vated because “mechanical difficulties which impeded early work on the
      nuclear propulsion reactor for space have largely been Qvercome.”
      He said success o recent nuclear reactor test for Nerva strengthened
                          f
      his view that NASA and AEC receive funds in the coming fiscal year (‘so
      that we can develop in a properly phased development program an
      operational nuclear propelled rocket.” He pointed out the need for
      <C
        proper consideration to nuclear energy in planning new space mis-
      sions. It is obvious that this is a necesaary step and one that will re-
                  ration of target dates for an actual flight test of a nuclear
                     .” (SBD, 10/5/64, 179; M&R, 10/12/64,17)
    USAF announced an ion rocket would be tested in 90-day orbital flight
      next spring, using Agena vehicle. Electrical power to operate the
      engine would be provided by Snap 1OA reactor, the first test combining
      an electrical propulsion engine and a nuclear reactor in space. Spokes-
                                                                          341
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    men said similar rocket h - d been succest+fdlytested in August in sub-
    orbital flight from Pt. Arguello, Calif. The new engine, developed by
    Electro-Optical Systeme, was said to have “developed the unheard-of
    specific impulse level of 7,800 seconds-roughly 20 times greater than
    the best chemical rockets of today.” (Wmh. Post, 10/6/64; Hines,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/64)
October 5: NASA Director of Personnel Robert J. Lacklen said in Aviation
    Week he had ordered a “complete re-write” of NASA Management
    Manual section dealing with employees’ acceptance of gifts and gratui-
    ties from aerospace industry representatives. “The same thing has
    jumped us of on a re-write &at caused the Defense Dept. to issue its
                  f
    new orders. That is the continuing appearance of NASA names on con-
    tractor entertainment lists.” ( A v . Wk., 10/5/64,18)
  US. airmail stamp honoring Dr. Robert H. Goddard was released at Ros-
    well, N. Mex. Stamp was first US. stamp with rocket motif since Fort
    Bliss stamp o 1946. U.S. stamps also had been issued for Project Echo
                  f
     (1961) and Project Mercury (1962). (NASA Historian)
a Article in US. News & World Report assessing impact of Project Apollo
    on US. industry quoted unnamed US. space official: “ ‘Project Apollo
    is the biggest single job in history. In terms of manpower used, it
    dwarfs the building of the pyramids ‘by three times. It is five times
    greater in cost than the wartime crash program to build the first atomic
    bomb.’
       “Over-all price tag on moon exploration in this decade is 20 billion dol-
    lars. Ten billion of that has been s p e n t - o r will be spent-on prelimi-
    nary programs such as Projects Mercury and Gemini and for new facili-
                                                                         .
    ties, Government payrolls, tracking stations, communications. . .
       “At a time when Pentagon spending on missiles and rockets is going
                                 ..
    down, higher spending by . [NASA] comes as a shot in the arm to
                          ...
    thousands o firms.
                f
       “Apollo is now entering a critical phase, one entrusted almost soIely
    to U.S. industry. At the peak of the industrial pyramid are four major
    aerospace firms, supported by 66 other major companies holding NASA
                                                        ...
    contracts of more than halfa million dollars each.
       “What is bound to impress anyone is how the big companies have
                                                 ..
    been pulled together on this vast project. . To people in industry,
    working together in peacetime on a ‘national goal’ is new and satisfying.
    Explains one official: ‘The amazing thing is that industry is finding that
    space is not only good business-but it is a real adventure for us, too.’ ”
     (US.  News, 10/5/64)
October 6: U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of COSMOS XLVII artificial
    earth satellite “for the further investigation of cosmic space.” Orbital
    data: apogee, 413 km. (256 mi.) ; perigee, 177 km. (110 mi) ; period,
    90 min.; and inclination to the equator, 64.77O. COSMOS XLVII de-
    orbited Oct. 7. (Tass, Pravda, 10/7/64, l, ATSS-T Trans.; GSFC SSR,
    10/15/64)
* Final S-I booster in Saturn I rocket program was static-fired at NASA
    Marshall Space Flight Center for its second and final time. The 156-sec.
    test was “entirely satisfactory.” This S-I stage, the second one built
    by Chrysler Corp. for NASA, would power the last (SA-10) Saturn I
    launch vehicle. First Saturn I booster was static-fired at MSFC in April
     1961. Today’s firing ended about three-and-a-half years of testing in
342             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    which R&D and flight vehicles underwent a total of 55 firings for cumula-
    tive timeof 3,867 sec. (Marshall star, 10/14/64,1)
October 6: USAF launched Thor-Able-Star rocket toward polar orbit from
    Vandenberg AFB, Calif., but did not disclose payload or mission. It
    later was revealed that the Thor-Able-Star placed three satellites in orbit.
     (UPI, NYT, 10/7/64+ 19; SBD, 10/8/64,202; HHN-48)
  NASA announced appointment of Jennings Pemble Field, Jr., as Director
    of Gemini Program Control in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight.
    In this position Field would be responsible for Gemini program costs
    and budget. Field was an executive of IMC Industries, Inc.; from 1954
    to 1963 he was with Bendix Corp., and from 1940 to 1%4$he was a
    commissioned officer in US. Navy. (NASA Release W257)
0 Soviet Government had rejected the space agreement negotiated in Geneva

    by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet Academician Anatoli Blagonravov
    last June, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. After the
    negotiators had returned to their respective countries, Simons reported,
    U.S.S.R. notified US. in July that it chose to reject the agreement.
    NASA officials had no comment on the report, but other sources (un-
    named) said the tentative agreement had called for exchange of infor-
    mation and publication of a book about space medicine and bioscience
    by Soviet and US. experimenters. U.S.S.R. refusal was based on in-
    sistence that topics be covered by either US. or Soviet author, although
    Blagonravov had agreed to US. proposal that each topic be covered by a
    Soviet and a US. author. This was said to be first instance of exercis-
    ing the usual option to reject the space agreement reached by negotiating
    teams. (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/6/64)
0 NASA Administrator James E. Webb remarked at Univ. of Notre Dame

    that the establishment of its new Aero-Space Science and Engineering
    Department placed Notre Dame “in a vigorous and growing group of
                                                   ..  .
    the nation’s leading educational institutions.
       6L
          What is happening this fall at this university is in some ways sym-
    bolic of what is happening all over the nation. For the space program
    has been a catalyst to science, to engineering, to research, and to educa-
    tion at all levels. The power of the modern rocket has given man a
    new, and in many ways, an unlimited tool for probing the mysteries of
                   .
    the universe. .. .” (Text)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in address at Annual Manage-
    ment Banquet of the National Management Association, in South Bend,
    Ind., that the “most important trend in NASA’s       procurement activity
    today . . . is our effort to use more incentive contracts.
       cc
          Three years ago we had no incentive contracts. Today we have
    52 totaling more than half a billion dollars. And we expect to raise
                                                   ...
    that to one billion before the end of this year.
       bC
          So far we have experimented with a new type of incentive contract
                             ...    So far our experience with this type of
    called the award fee.
    incentive contract has been good; and efficient contractors who appear to
    he saving the government money have. earned extra profits for them-
    selves. The award fee contract is especially applicable to service con-
    tracts where targets are difficult to fix. We feel that the award fee has
    motivated contractors to perform better, to cut costs, and to make quick
    corrections when they have been deficient. Contractors, in turn, have
                                                             . . .”
    expressed their satisfaction with this new procedure.          (Text)
                                                                         343
                                 AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

octo


    ducted within 15 min. of
    ionospheric current system
    methylaluminum vapor trail up to 107-mi. altitude, and the bluish-white
    cloud was visible for several hundred miles. Payload also contained
    instruments to measure electron temperature and density. Second ex-
    periment carried 5&lb. payload of instruments to measure earth’s mag-
    netic field. The experiments were conducted at dusk and would be
    followed by two similar ones at dawn the next day. (Wallops Release
    6 4 ~ 7 0 NASA Release 64-260)
              ;
  NASA Argo D 4 launch vehicle launched from Wallops Island, Va., carried
    instrumented payload to altitude of about 625 mi. in 18-min. flight ter-
    minating in impact in the Atlantic Ocean. Designed and built for
    NASA by Lockheed Missile and Space Co., the experiment measured com-
    position and density of positive ions as a function of altitude Erom about
    150-mi. altitude to peak. (Wallops Release &71; NASA Release 64-
    260)
* Inauguration of SYNCOM III communications link from Tokyo via ground
    station at Kashima, Japan, and SYNCOM 111 hovering above the Pacific,
    to receiving station at Pt. Mugu, Calif., for transmission to US. televi-
     sion stations. Special program featured pre-taped appearances by
    President Lyndon B. Johnson, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Foreign
     Minister Etsusaburo Shiina of Japan, and Communications Minister
    Zitsuzo Tokuyasu of Japan. President Johnson called the new wmsat
    link an opening of “new vistas of friendship and understanding in the
     fields of education, cultural exchange, business and entertainment.”
     ComSatCorp officials were said to be pleased with quality of reception.
     Opening ceremonies of 1W Olympic Games Oct. 10 were scheduled for
     transmission via the comsat link. (ComSatCorp Release; VS],10/
     8/a)
* American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (MU) announced
     nomination of Richard E. Horner, Senior Vice Prmident of Northrop
    Corp., as AIAA president for 1965. Mr. Horner served as the first Asso-
     ciate Administrator of NASA (June 1959-July 1960) and before that as
     Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development.
     (NYT, 10/8/64)
* One-year program of general orientation for 60 recent university gradu-
     ates beginning thdr professional careers at NASA Langley Research Cen-
    ter began with ceremony presided over by LaRc Director Dr. Floyd L.
    Thompson. (LaRC Release)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in his remarks in Grand Rapids,
     Mich.: “We have a fighting chance to maintain our schedules for the
     manned lunar exploration mission in this decade. By so doing, we will
     increase our ability to operate in space for any mission the national
     interest may require. And we will be using space for p c e , discourag-
     ing those with other ideologies from political propaganda or military
             . . .”
     threats.         (Text)
                   ,attorney for the seven NASA Mercury astronauts, r vealed
                    aut John H Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., USMC) had t r 4 down
                              .                                   un
                                                               (St. Lou& Posh
     a $l,OOO,OOO contract with private industry in 1963.
    Dispatch, 10/7/64)
344              ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 1964

October 7 : Celebrating its 15th anniversary, East Germany displayed two
    tactical surface-to-surface missiles apparently comparable to U.S. 300-
    mi.-range Sergeant missile. (Balt. Sun, 10/8/M)
October 8: NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets with instru-
    mented payloads from Wallops Island, Va., sending them aloft 1 min. 1
    apart. The first payload ejected sodium vapor trail up to 99-mi. alti-
    tude, to measure upper atmosphere winds. The pink vapor cloud was
    visible for several hundred miles. Second experiment carried 58-lb.
    payload of instrumentation to 87-mi. altitude to obtain measurements
    of earth’s magnetic field. Experiments were launched closely together
    so experimenters could study possible correlation of ionospheric current
    systems and wind shears; they were similar to two experiments launched
    at dusk the previous evening. (Wallops Release 64-71 ; NASA Release
    &260)
* USAP Atlas-Agena D space booster was launched from Vandenberg AFB,
    Calif., with undisclosed payload. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/9/64,; ~ ~ ~ - 4       81
  Full-scale metal mockup of Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) for Project
    Apollo was review by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center officials at Grum-
    man’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Mockup’s appearance was highlight of
    week-long analysis of the mockup design with a critique aimed at defin-
    itizing the LEM design. (MSC Roundup, 10/14/64, 1)
* Apollo program review was presented in special day-long session of five-
    day national meeting of Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) in Los
    Angeles. Another highlight of the meeting was emphasis on in-flight
    maintenance problems associated with long manned space flights. Gen-
    eral Dynamics/Astronautics reported its design philosophy of eliminat-
    ing need for hand tools in spacecraft maintenance and repair. In
    address to the group, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Sea-
    mans, Jr., said that “virtually none” of US. space flight projects had
    been “successfully completed within their originally estimated resources
                                                 .
     and on their originally laid out schedules . . historically, schedules
    have often stretched out to nearly twice their length and costs have some-
                                                  ..
    times grown by factors of three or four. . [However] we don’t
                                                            ..    .” He pre-
    accept that management can’t do something about it.
    dicted fewer new projects would be initiated unless industry “can show
    real evidence of having overcome the point of view that says R&D cannot
                    ..  .” (NAA S&ID Skywriter, 10/2/64+, M&R, 10/12/
                                                             1;
    be controlled.
    (34, 18; Av. Wk., 10/19/€4,32)
* NASA Administrator James E. Webb said before National Security Indus-
    trial Association meeting in Washington that many achievements had
    been made “in that area where science and technology are indivis-
          ..   . Many of the most significant technological advances, for
     ible.
    example, have been made in NASA’s science effort.
                                          space
        “Outstanding among them are our proven abiIity to launch payloads
    from earth orbit to deep space with consistent success; and the compzn-
    ion ability to make the necessary mid-course corrections far out in
            ..  .” (Text)
    space.
* Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said
    in address at centennial convocation luncheon, Worcester Polytechnic
    Institute:
        “The new era promised by the Space Age perhaps connotes a return
    to what was once called natural philosophy. The unifying element of
                                                                         345
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    these developments of the space program is a general spirit of inquiry
    into the nature of the external physical worId. It represents a re-direc-
    tion of interest away from the increasingly narrow specialization which
    has characterized the physical sciences in the last decades.
       “The second distinguishing feature of the scientific research in space
    is the fact that the various scientists have only been able to make their
                         .
    observations .. . by virtue of the hardware developed by the engineer.
    This is in distinct contrast to the biologist who could invest in a good
                                                             .
    microscope and do research comparable with the best. . . Generally,
    the engineer exploits and puts to practical use the knowledge acquired by
    the scientists. But in space, the scientist seems to be particularly de-
    pendent on the engineer to develop new devices and techniques. Engi-
    neering, in this context, has become a more creative and trail-blazing
    profession.
       “The third and possibly most imposing challenge of the space age is
    the potential feed-back of its developments into the civilian economy.
    In the long run, the justification of our space budget must stand on this
                 . .”
    ‘fall-out.’ .       (Text)
October 8: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was criticized by Mili-
    tary Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations
    Committee in report on military communications satellite. Subcom-
    mittee said his concern with economizing had resulted in “overmanage-
    ment and underperformance” in the comsat area. “We do not believe,
    however, that economizing efforts should throttle programs essential to
    the national security. Satellite communications is one of the most vital
    and relatively less costly of our major defense programs.” Subcom-
     mittee said Secretary McNamara’s proposal last October for joint
    military-civilian comsat system was “ill-advised, poorly timed and
                             ..
    badly coordinated. . Valuable time has been lost. Had the de-
    partment moved ahead according to plans and policies laid down two
    years ago by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a system could have been operating
    now. . . .” Subcommittee also recommended DOD begin comsat pro-
    gram using Atlas-Agena satellite booster instead of Titan III-C experi-
    mental launch vehicle. (Finney, NYT, 10/9/64, 1, 16; M&R, 10/12/
    64,lO)
  Judge Charles Fairhurst issued temporary restraining order preventing
    Cambridge City Council from voting on application for $663,000 in
    Federal funds for survey and planning the proposed area for NASA
    Electronics Research Center. Judge Fairhurst granted the order after
    six Cambridge firms requested declaratory decree that Kendall Sq.
    “cannot and does not legally qualify as a valid subject for an urban
    renewal project.” (Boston Globe, 10/8/@)
e NASA Astronaut Coordinator Donald K. Slayton said in World Book
    Encyclopedia Science Service feature article that physical training of
    US. astronauts differed greatly from that of his Soviet counterparts.
    He pointed out: “There is a basic difference in philosophy between
     Soviet and United States flight crew selection and training. The
    Soviets select and train bodies as biological specimens for space experi-
    ments. The United States selects and trains engineer-pilots as integral
    operators of spacecraft. Our emphasis is on intelligence and skill as
    opposed to physical prowess.” (WBE Sci. Serv., Znd. Star, 10/8/64)
     7tM-698 %65----2B
346             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

October 8: DOD announced SR-71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft would be
     assigned to SAC at Beale AFB, Marysville, Calif, SR-71 was scheduled
     to become operational in 1965. (DOD Release 7 2 6 4 % )
October 9: NASA launched EXPLORER XXII ( BE-B) beacon-explorer satellite
     with four-stage Scout launch vehicle from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.
     Orbital data: 669-mi. apogee, 549-mi. perigee, 104.7-min. period, and
     80” inclination to the equator. EXPLORER XXII was last of five satellites
     in first phase of NASA’s ionosphere exploration and first of five satellites
     in NASA’s  geodetic satellite series. Ionosphere experiment involved sat-
    ellite’s transmitting radio signals down through the ionosphere.
     Ground stations around the world acquiring the signals measured elec-
     tron distribution by the Doppler shift method and the Faraday rotation
     method, The international scientific effort with EXPLORER XXII was the
     most extensive ever for a US. space project. Network of more than 80
     ground stations was being operated by some 50 scientific groups in
     32 countries. Geodetic experiment involved laser beams sent from
     NASA Wallops Station to the satellite, on which were mounted 360
     one-inch “cube-corner” reflectors to return the light. In addition a
    small supporting experiment, electrostatic probe, measured electron
     density and temperature in immediate vicinity of the satellite. (NASA
     Release 64-237; NASA News Conf. Transcript)
* NASA launched second re-entry experiment for AEC, designated Reentry
     Flight Demonstration-2 (RFD-z),       on a Scout booster from Wallops
     Island, Va. Nonradioactive mockup of nuclear isotopic generator was
     sent to 800-mi. altitude by three-stage Scout, before the payload re-
     entered atmosphere on its ballistic trajectory and impacted about 250
     mi. southeast of Bermuda. Primary objective of RFD-2 was to acquire
     data on generator disassembly and fuel capsule burnup rate for use in
     advanced generator designs. In previous flight test (RFD-1 May     in
     1963),nonradioactive model of Snap-1OA nuclear reactor was tested in
     atmospheric re-entry; RFD-1 demonstrated that space reactors can be
     designed to melt down and disassemble upon re-entry. The nonradio-
     active mockup in RFD-2 was a model of an isotopic-thermoelectricgen-
    erator. Earlier testing had shown that heat created during reentry
    could be used to burn up isotopic generator, leaving very minute
     particles which then would be dispersed at high altitudes to eliminate
    any radiation danger. (Wallops Release 64-72)
  Four consecutive full-duration F-1 engine test firings at new Rocket
     Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif .,demonstrated the operational readi-
    ness of the site, which was officially accepted by NASA Marshall Space
     Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun from the Army Corps
    of Engineers. In the ceremonies, Dr. von Braun assigned site operation
     responsibilities to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc.,
    which would use the site for qualification firings of F-1 rocket engines.
     (Marshal2Star, 10/14/64, 10; NASA Release 64-259)
  First major test of revamped NASA worldwide tracking network, part of
    preparation for manned earth-orbital space flights in Project Gemini.
    During nine-day drill, simulated flight missions were conducted which
     involved Goddard Space Flight Center, Mission Control Center, and
    eight sites in the worldm*de tracking network. ~ ( M S C Roundup,
    10/14/64,1; Goddard News, 10/19/64, 1)
                                                                     347
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

October 9: DOD issued rebuttal to report issued the day before by Military
    Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Commit-
    tee criticizing DOD plans for a military communications satellite system.
    DOD said:
       “The Defense Department is being operated to provide the highest
    degree of combat readiness at the lowest possible cost. This policy is
    being followed in the development of communications satellites. As
    a result, the defense establishment will have a better satellite communi-
    cations capability than originally foreseen at anticipated savings of
    $75-100 millions.” (Finney, NYT, 10/10/64,1,14)
October 10: Opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Tokyo were tele-
    cast live in US. via ComSatCorp’s communications link using NASA’s
    SYNCOM 1 1 satellite. Telecast was deIayed on West Coast and taped
               1
    for later showing by NBC, which said it was avoiding interference with
    commercial programing. Japan was reported to have expressed dis-
    appointment to US. State Dept., and State Dapt. in turn was said to be
    “deeply concerned” over the procedure. NBC confirmed that future
    coverage of Olympic Games would be taped or filmed. (ComSatCorp
    Release; Gould, NYT, 10/11/a, 1,25)
  NASA Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock announced
    appointment of James T. Dennison as Director of Technology Utilization,
    ERC. Dennison joined NASA in May 1963 as a consultant and had been
    serving as acting director of Technology Utilization Div., NASA Hq.
    Appointment was effective NOV.1. (NASA Release &244+)
* Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary
    Laboratory, charged that John Lear’s article in Saturday Review (Sept.
    5 ) on RANGER VII’S findings was “an insidious mixture of reasonably
    correct quotations, his own gross extrapolations, unfair allegations and
                     .    .
    personal peeves.
       “One implication of Mr. Lear’s article seems to be that I have given
    him information to the effect that scientists are under pressure to make
    statements that are favorable to the continuance of large government
                                        ..    .” (SR, 10/10/64, 32)
    projects. This is complete fantasy.
* Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. preliminary study o a manned Mars
                                                            E
    mission, called Project Deimos, was described by James J. Haggerty, Jr.,
    in Journal of the Armed Forces. Conducted by Douglas engineers
    J. L. Woodworth, G. A. Ursini, and Phil Bono, the study was based on
    six-man crew making 830-day round trip. Key to study was chemical-
    fuel rocket booster of 18,000,000-lb.-thrust power capable of placing
    800,000 lbs. in earth orbit. Reusable booster would be fueled in orbit
    (by other reusable boosters making 10 trips) before sending spacecraft
    into Mars trajectory. (J/Armed Forces, 10/10/64,8)
October 11: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
    Space Flight, appointed William B. Rieke, president of Lockheed Air-
    craft International, Inc., as his deputy. Rieke would succeed George M.
    LOW, who had become Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft
    Center. (NASA Release 66261)
* Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.-Minn.) , Vice-presidential candidate, told
    rally in Washington, D.C., that the Administration would form a study
    group to seek “the appropriate mechanisms of development and resqarch“
    by US. industry. (Pomfret, NYT, 10/12/64,15)
348            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

October 11 :Comparison of science in US. and U.S.S.R. was subject of arti-
    cle by Prof. Robert E. Marshak, Univ. of Rochester. Distinguishing
    between “pure science or basic research and applied science or technolog-
    ical development,” he said US. was “doing exceedingly well in basic
              ...   The striking American performance in pure science in
    science.
    recent years results from a combination of fortunate circumstances. A
    primary factor is that the openness, freedom and emphasis on individual
    initiative that characterizes the American way of life provide a favorable
                                              ..
    climate for the practice of pure science. .
       “On the other hand, in applied science the U.S.S.R. has demonstrated
    its capability of organizing large team undertakings whose favorable
    outcome depends as much on careful mobilization of material and human
                                             . . .”    (NYT Mag., 10/11/64,
    resources as on scientific brainpower.
    59)
October 12: U.S.S.R. launched into orbit VOSKHOD I spacecraft with three-
    man crew: pilot-cosmonaut, Eng. Col. Vladimir Mikhailovich Koma-
    rov ; scientific co-worker cosmonaut, Candidate of Technical Sciences,
    Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov; and physician-cosmonaut,Boris Boris-
    ovich Yegorov. This was history’s first multi-manned space flight and
    marked the entry into space of a scientist and a physician. Initial orbit
     (as given by Tass) : 4Q9-km. (254-mi.) apogee, 178-km. (110-mi.) peri-
    gee, 90.1-min. period, and 65” inclination to the equator. Tass an-
    nounced purposes of the space flight were to :test new multiseat manned
    spacecraft ; investigate work capability and interrelationship, in flight,
    of a group of cosmonauts consisting of specialists from various branches
    of science and technology; conduct scientific physico-technical research
    under actual spaceflight conditions; continue study of effects of space-
    flight conditions on human organism; and conduct expanded medico-
    biological investigations under conditions of prolonged flight. Tele-
    vision photographs of the cosmonauts, wearing lightweight woolen suits
    rather than spacesuits, were received in U.S.S.R. and transmitted both
    taped and live by TV stations during the day. On its eighth orbit, as
    the spacecraft passed over US., the crew radioed greeting: “From
    aboard the spaceship VOSKHOD we convey our best wishes to the indus-
    trious American people. We wish the people o the United States peace
                                                     f
    and happiness.” (Tass, Krmmya Zvezda, 10/13/64,1, ATSS-T Trans. ;
    Tanner, NYT, 10/13/64,1)
  Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, Soviet space official, said in Zzvestia interview that
    success of VOSKHQD I “opens up new horizons” in space. It now made
     realistic any plans about building an “orbiting space platform, a flying
    space institute,” which could serve as a “springboard for further inter-
    planetary expeditions.” And Lt. Col. Pave1 Popovich, Soviet cosmo-
    naut, said in Tass interview that flight of VOSKHOD I was of great sig-
    nificance “because our aim is to send space stations to distant planets.”
     (Tanner, NYT, 10/13/64, 1,18)
  Yuri M. Vorontsov, Soviet delegate to U.N. Legal Sutcommittee of the
     Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,said orbiting of three-
    man VOSKHOD I spacecraft represented “a great achievement of Soviet
    science and the Soviet people ‘on behalf o all mankind.’” Dr. N. M.
                                                f
     Sissakian, member of presidium of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in
    Paris that U.S.S.R. hoped to present scientific results of VQSKHOD I space
    flight to international symposium on manned space flight in Paris next
    June. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/13/M; Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
    British Labor party leader Harold Wilson said Soviet VOSKHOD I space-
       craft was forerunner of missile-launching satellites that would make Po-
       laris missile obsolete. Such space-basedweapons, he said, “would mean
       that the all-American deterrent on which Sir Alec Douglas-Home hases
       his defense argument will soon be made obsolete by space missile devel-
       opment.” British election was three days away. (CuPhane, Balt. Sun,
       10/13/64)
    Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,
       said in Gatlinburg, Tenn., speech to NASA-AEC-USAF symposium on radi-
       ation protection that “not too far in the future huge nuclear-propelled
                                                                           ..  .
       spacecraft will take crews of men on long voyages deep into space.
          “The problems of man-made radiation connected with these space
       ships will prove far more challenging in the long run than those of the
                                  .
       natural radiation in space. . .” (NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
    First test patterns had been sent over special cable link between Suitland,
      Md., and MOSCOW, exchange of meteorological data, according to
                            for
       US. Weather Bureau. The link was considered operational, could be
       used .any time US. and U.S.S.R. agreed on scheduling and other details
       of the cooperative exchange. The cable was result of cooperative space
       agreement reached in 1962 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L.
       Dryden for the US.and Academician A. A. Blagonravov for the U.S.S.R.
        (Gustaitis, Wash. Post, 10/13/64)
    First meeting of Joint Navigation Satellite Committee, composed of rep-
0

       resentativSs from NASA, FAA, and Departments of Commerce, Defense,
       Interior, and Treasury. Committee would evaluate requirements for
       improved navigation, tr&c control, and search-rescue services, then
       determine whether navsat system could meet these requirements and at
       what costs. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 64-253)
    USAF XB-70A research bomber achieved 740-mph speed and 35,000-ft.
0

      altitude in its third flight test. Pilot Alvin S. White said it hit super-
       sonic speed three times during the 1 hr., 35 min. flight near Edwards
      AFB, Calif. (Wash. Post, 10/13/64; AP, NYT, 10/13/64, 31)
    Details of Phoebus-powered nuclear rocket engine, as described by Harold
0

      B. Finger, Director of NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion O f c , in
                                                                       fie
      series of Iectures sponsored by NATO Advisory Group for Aeronautical
       Research and Development (AGARD) : The second-generation nuclear
      rocket would have 250,000-lb. thrust, using 5,000-megawatt Phoebus
      reactor. In clustered formation, the engines could launch manned space-
      craft out of earth orbit on Mars trajectory. Ground-test firings of first-
      generation (low-power) Phoebus would be conducted in 1965-66, and
      tests of the heavier Phoebus reactor in 1967. (M&R,10/12/64, 17)
                                             sevenfold since 1959, William W.
    Safety of jet airliners had impr
      Moss told 17th in                     fety seminar of the Flight Founda-
                                 .Moss, a Pan American World Airways*pilot,
      tion in New York.
      said there was average of one fatal accident per 690,000 flying hours
      in first nine months of this year, whereas there was one per 85,000 flying
      hours in 1959. (NYT, 10/13/64,74)
350                               AND                    19 6 4
                ASTRONAUTICS            AERONAUTICS,

October 12-14: Entry Technology Conference sponsored by AIAA was held
    in Williamsburg, Va., and NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Va.
    Among the papers presented at the conference was review of Project
    Fire by Richard C. Dingeldein, of Langley’s Flight Re-entry Programs
    Office. He reviewed results obtained from first Project Fire experiment,
    which achieved re-entry velocity of nearly 38,000 fps. (LaRC Release;
    AIAA Bulletin)
October 13; U.S.S.R. announced three-man VOSKHOD I spacecraft had landed
    safely after orbiting the earth for 24 hrs., 17 min. (16 orbits). All
    three crewmen were reported to. be in good condition after VOSKHOD I
    landed at the “pre-arranged spot.” Indications were that the men re-
    mained inside the craft to completion of landing. O5cial announcement
    asserted that VOSKHOD I had completed its task before landing and
    w s landing according to schedule. Soviet news report indicated the
     a
    crew had requested permission to continue the flight “for another 24
    hours,” but Chief Designer had replied that “we shall stay within the
    program.” (AP, 10/13/64; Tanner, NYT, 10/14/64,1, 18)
* Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics
    and Space Council, said U.S.S.R.’s successful orbiting of three-man
    VOSKHOD I spacecraft “shows they are actively in the race with manned
    spacecraft.” He noted Soviet emphasis on liie sciences in their space
    program. “They have done more in this field, I believe, than we have.”
    Asked about U.S. chances for landing a man on the moon before
    U.S.S.R., he replied: “We have a 50-50 chance of getting there first.”
    But, he added, U.S.S.R. might be first with a circumlunar flight. Citing
    buildup of Soviet space program, Dr. Welsh said ratio of their space-
    craft launchings in 1964 to comparable portion of 1963 was about 3-
    to-1. He described VOSKHOD I as a-”logicalfollow-on from a very rapidly
    stepped-up space program.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun,10/13/64)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in interview that Soviet three-man
    VOSKHOD I was a “significant space accomplishment.
       “It is a clear indication that the Russians are continuing a large
    space program for the achievement of national power and prestige.”
       He observed that Saturn V rocket, while not yet available, represented
    U.S. bid for space supremacy. “It is still a good bid and our policy is
    to proceed rapidly to the flight stage although it is still two years away.”
     He said Saturn V was “ a vehicle that can put 240,000 pounds in orbit
    as against the 10,000- to 15,000-pound class the Russians have been
    flying.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64; Houston Post, 10/13/64)
  Speculation about why Soviet VOSKHOD I space flight was terminated after
    24 hours was proferred by experts around the world. U.S. space engi-
    neers generally indicated Soviets operated according to plan by terminat-
    ing flight when they did. However, officials of other Western countries
    speculated VOSKHOD I was brought down prematurely, for reasons vari-
    ously given as illness among the crew, faulty radio transmitter, and im-
    proper orbit. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,Chairman of Sen-
    ate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said, “We knew the
    shot was coming and we had information it would involve a week-
    that’s why they had the doctor along.” He suggested technical problems
    had caused premature ending of trip. Some sources pointed to Soviets’
    own announcement the previous day, which referred to “conditions of
                                                                           351
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4,

    prolonged flight” At least one press analysis, in retrospect, said VOSK-
                                           th because of political events in
    HOD I was perhaps ordered back to
    the Soviet Union-Soviet Premier Ni       Khrushchev was being removed
    from office by Presidium of the Communist Party Central Committee, an
    occurrence not made public until Oct. 15. (Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trib.,
    10/14/68; Simons, Wash. Post, 10/14/64; Time,10/.30/64,37)
October 13: Unnamed NASA official quoted by Howard Simons in Wash-
    ington Post as saying there was “increasing evidence” that U.S.S.R.
    was building powerful new rocket booster. However, it was not used
    in launching three-man VOSKHOD I spacecraft. U.S. Government officials
    were said to believe VOSKHOD I launched by “old, reliable space boost-
           ..
    ers .     mated into a multistage rocket.” (Simons, Wash. Post, lo/
     1ww
* Analyzing impact of                  flight, John Finney said feeling of U S .
                         VOSKHOD I
    Government officials was that VOSKHOD I “probably was the prelude to
    a longer flight sometime soon and to the unveiling of a more powerful
    rocket for launchings.” In itself, VOSKHOD I flight was considered of
    more psychological than technical significance. (Finney, NYT, 10/
    14/64, 18)
 Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R.-Ark) , Republican Presidential candidate,
    said in Topeka, Kans.:
       (6
          The entry of the Soviet Union into such a commanding position in
    near-space [VOSKHOD I flight] also requires an urgent and full time
    consideration by all concerned branches of the Federal Government
    and, of course, the President.
       “Near space, the area in which orbital flight takes place, is the key
    to the military use of space. The nation that commands near space
    could, after developing proper weapons and maneuverable space craft,
    dominate the earth.
          I have pleaded for years for a realistic emphasis on research in this
       <L

    area. Instead, this Administration has dedicated billions of dollars and
    the virtual entirety of its space efforts, to a moon shot.
       “The military possibilities of space have been downgraded by this
    Administration, as, indeed, has most research into the advanced weapon
    systems which we so urgently need to keep the peace in the face of Soviet
    advances scientifically,and Soviet threats politically.
       “Again, this is a full time and a full-scaleproblem requiring immediate
    attention. We need a major redirection of our space research efforts.’’
     (Text, SBD, 10/14/64, 236)
 Washington Star was informed of VOSKHOD 1’s safe landing 25 min. before
    Soviet Government ma& the official announcement, when Edward Bas-
    kakov of the newspaper Soviet Russia called from Moscow for a reaction
    to the flight. “Beat” of the Star was based upon their editorial on
    SPUTNIK I in 1957. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/64)
 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials announced they believed they
    had successfully “hit” EXPLORER XXII satellite with laser beams fired
    one-per-second across more than 500 miles. Whether the. hits were
    definitely achieved or not would await further analysis. (AP, Balt. Sun,
    10/14/68; Wash.     Post, 10/14/64)
October 14: U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of COSMOS XLVIII satellite
    into orbit, with the following parameters: 295-km. apogee (183-mi.),
    203-km. perigee (126-mi.), 89.4-min. period, and 65.07”-inclination to
    the equator. (Tass, Krasnuya Zvezda, 10/15/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
352            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

October 14: NAS                         ght Center
    contract mo                          Co., prime
    first stage (S-IC) : $2,918,418 modification for design,
                        of components for S I C stage umbilical connection
                       ware; and, $11,836,000 modification for structural
    static-load testing program on S I C to assure structural integrity of
    the 7.5-million-lb.-thrust rocket stage. These modifications increased
    total value of the S-IC contract to $516,206,009. (Marshal2 Star, 10/
    1 4 / a 9)
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced two firms would negotiate
    to provide three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems
     (STARS):Beckman Instruments, Inc., and Electro Mechanical Research,
    Inc. Negotiations with the two firms would lead to final selection of
    single contractor for $2.5-million award. (GSFC Release 6-30-64)
  Three Soviet cosmonauts spent the day undergoing medical checks and
    post-flight examinations, following their 24-hour orbital space flight.
     (Clymer, Balt. Sun,10/15/64)
0 Soviet geophysicist Academician Yevgeny Fedorov said in Izvestiu that

    VOSKHOD I space flight proved Soviet space program was more advanced
    than that of US., adding: “I am sure that in the future, both Soviet and
    American cosmonauts will meet on the moon.” Pravdu editorial writer
    Victor Mayevsky said on Moscow TV that the flight of VOSKHOD I was
    a “Pearl Harbor in space for America.” (Tanner, NYT, 10/15/@, 8;
    UPI, Chic. Trib., 10/15/@)
* Speculation that U.S.S.R. timed their three-man VOSKHOD I space flight
    “to take the edge off the Chinese atomic demonstration which is expected
    very soon” was offered by Max Lerner in New York Post. (Lerner,
    N.Y. Post, 10/14/641)
* Discovery of a sixteenth meson particle in the atomic nucleus, named
    66
      epsilon,” by scientists led by Dr. Bogdan C. Maglic at the European
    Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) , was announced. (NYT,
    10/15/64)
October 15: X-15 No. 1 flown by John B. McKay (NASA) to 2;932 mph
     (mach 4.44) and 82,000 ft. near Edwards, Calif. This was first flight of
    No. 1 since it was modified for high-altitude flight research (wing-tip
    pods containing micrometeoroid and dust collectors, spectrometer, and
    densitron; new inertial guidance system originally designed for use in
    USAF x-20).      Purpose of this flight was operational checkout of new
    equipment and evaluation of flight characteristics with the wing-tip
    pods added. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; FRC Release)
  MSC conducted partially successful mt of parasail landing system in Galves-
    ton Bay, using dummy Gemini spacecraft. (AP, 10/16/64)
* Eighty-three scientists, engineers, and operating groups received medals,
    citations, and cash awards totaling $7,900 for outstanding contributions
    to US. civilian space program, in NASA’s Annual Honor Awards
                                                  6th
    Ceremony. Recipients of awards for exceptional scientific achievement:
    William R. Lucas, MSFC; Ernst StuhIinger, MSFC; Frank B. McDonald,
    GSFC; and Daniel G. Mazur, GSFC. Recipients of award for outstanding
    leadership: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, KSC; Dr. Harry J. Goett,
    Director, GSFC; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, MSFC. Group
    achievement awards were accepted by Dr. Debus for KSC and by Dr.
                 for MSFC. Recipients of awards for exceptional service:
                 arrick, Oran W.Nicks, and Leonard Jaffe of NASA Hq. ;Hans
                                                                           353
                                                          19 64
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

     F. Gruene of KSC; and Wesley L. Hjornevik of MSC. Public service
     awards went to Bernie P. Miller, of RCA, and Harris M. Schurmeier and
     Allen E. Wolfe, of JPL, for their work on RANGER VII lunar-photography
     mission. Special award was presented to Newton W. Cunningham, Hq.,
     for his work on RANGER vn. Cash awards for inventions and contribu-
     tions were presented to personnel from Ames Research Center, Lewis
     Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Jet Propulsion Lab-
    oratory. Personnel from Hq., FRC, L ~ R C ,LRC, MSC, and MSFC received
     Presidential citations for contributions to economy and efficiency in
     Government. (Program; NASA Release 64-263)
October 15: 22,000-lb~hrustrocket engine for Project Apollo service mod-
     ule, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at
     Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun,10/16/64)
0 USAF version of F-111 tactical fighter plane, designed for use by both USAF

    and USN, rolled out of General Dynamics’ Fort Worth, Tex., plant, in
    ceremony attended by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Sec-
     retary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Navy
    Paul H. Nitze, and other officials. Secretary McNamara said: “For
    the first time in aviation history, we have an airplane with the range
     of a transport, the carrying capacity and endurance of a bomber and
                                                 . .”
    the agility of a fighter-pursuit plane. .          The technology of the
    variable-geometry wing configuration was developed at NASA Langley
    Research Center. (DODRelease 719-64; Witkin, NYT, 10/16/64,1, 11;
    Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/64; Av. Wk., 10/26/64, 32)
0 Soviet newspaper Trud science writer Leonid Byshko said flight to the

    moon was “one of the most immediate problems of cosmonautics.”
    After lunar flight, he said, next goal would be flights to other planets
    in the solar system. “For this purpose, new rocket carriers based on
                                     .
    atomic energy are needed. . . There are no difficulties in principle
    for creating such nuclear rockets. Only a certain time is required for de-
    signing, building and testing.” (UPI, Wash. Post, 10/16/64)
  U.S.S.R. announced Nikita Khrushchev had been “released” of all his
    official duties for reasons of “age and deteriorating health.” His suc-
    cessors were named: Leonid Brezhnev as Secretary of the Communist
    Party, and Alexei Kosygin as Premier of U.S.S.R. (AP, Wash. Post,
    10/16/64)
* Craig Breedlove bettered his own world land-speed record at Bonneville
    Salt Flats, Utah, driving his three-wheeled jet-propelled vehicle at an
    average of 526.28 mph, then survived crash when the racer veered off
    the course and, its braking gear failing, skidded through shallow mud
    before finally halting in lS-ft.-deep pond. (UPI, NYT, 10/16/64, 48)
  NRX-A2 Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) experi-
    mental reactor, run at full power Sept. 24, was restarted in test of reactor
    system in the low-power, low-flow region of operation. Analysis of
    data from this run confirmed design predictions and indicated no
    unusual start-up or control problems. Test was conducted by Aerojet-
    General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations for NASA-AEC Space
    Nuclear Propulsion Qffice. (SNPO ; NASA Press Conf. Transcript,
    11/12/64)
October 15-16: NASA’)s RELAY n communications satellite was used to trans-
    mit television coverage of election events in Britain; it was joined by
    RELAY I on the 16th. (NASA Release 64-254)
354             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

October 16: NASA announced the first electric-rocket engine space flight (July
     20) had been so successful that a second test would not be necessary.
     In Sert I (Space Electric Rocket Test), electron-bombardment engine
    using mercury propellant produced an ion Beam developing .W55lb. of
    thrust. (NASA Release 64-264; LRC Release 64-93)
 NASA Langley Research Center announced that a foam generator devel-
    oped for poss2ble use in recovery at sea of instrument packages r e
    turned from space had been patented. Attached to instrument pack-
    ages, generator mixes chemicals to produce almost instant plastic foam
    as it parachutes to water landing, filling a bag which keeps the payload
    floating on the surface awaiting recovery. ( LaRC Release, 10/16/M)
  US.-Japan telecommunications cable ‘broke at the peak o traffic from the
                                                              f
     Olympic Games in Tokyo, including sound track for films telecast from
    Tokyo and sent via SYNCOM 111 communications satellite. Japanese
     officialsestimated earliest repair date as Oct. 23. (NYT, 10/17/64,13)
  NASA received patent for life preserver carried by Mercury astronauts on
     all orbital space flights. Invented by MSC engineers Mathew I. Rad-
     nofsky and Glenn A. Shewmake, life-preserver was called “Ram’s Horn”
     because of its shape: main part fits acrosa wearer’s chest and hook-like
     ends fit over the s4oulders. (Jones, NYT, 10117164, 35)
  Hovercraft, also known as GEM’S (ground effect machines) , probably will
     be regulated by Coast Guard, Civil Aeronautics Board, and Federal
     Maritime Commission, according to tentative positi’on statements re-
     leased jointly by nine Government agencies. (AP, NYT, 10/17/6$, &;
    M&R, 10/26/641,45)
  Archeological relics dating as far back as 3,500 B.C. were being uncovered
     at future site of man’s rocket launchings to the moon-Merritt Island,
     Fla. (NASA Space Sheet, 10/16/64)
  Communist China announced it had detonated its first nuclear device.
     Three minutes before the nuclear detonation an earthquake occurred
     in Mongolia, precluding the possibility of detecting the nuclear explosion
     by AFCRL’S four automatic seismic stations in northeastern US. (OAR
     Review, 1/65,15; Reuters, NYT, 10/17/64+, 10)
October 17: USAF launched Thor-Agena D space booster with unidentified
     satellite payload, from WTR. (HHN-48)
e Under Secretary of the Air Force Brockway McMillan said in Journal of
     the Armed Forces article: “The Department of Defense and the Air Force
     in particular must provide every reasonable means of support to NASA
     and I know of no high official in DOD or the Air Force who does not share
                     . . .”    He pointed to “a conviction shared by both DOT)
     this conviction.
     and NASA that there must be a maximum of cross-pollination between
     respective programs. To do anything less would be short sighted and
     wasteful and would certainly indicate that we had failed to grasp the
                                                            . .”
     essentiality of the national space effort as a consensus. .      (.I/Armd
     Forces, 10/17/64+, 16-17)
October 18: National Aeronautics and S ace Council Executive Secretary and
     Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C.d l s h said on “From the People” radio
      program that US. has “at least a 5 0 5 0 chance of getting to the moon
                           ..
      ahead o [USSR.].            , I’m talking about landing on the moon and
              f
     taking off from the moon and returning safely to earth. I’m not talking
                                                             I)




      about a [circumlunar] shot around the moon which they might be able
     to do even with this [present] equipment.” Discussing Soviet’s three-
                                                                        355
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

    man VOSKHOD I space flight, he said the fact that the cosmonavts did
    not wear spacesuits was “probably one of the most significant aspects
    of the whole flight.” (AP, Houston Post, 10/19/64)
October 18: NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in interview with John
    Finney on the subject of U.S. and U.S.S.R.’s space programs:
       “The significance [of VOSKHOD I flight], it seems to me, is the clear
    indication that manned flight in large spacecraft is important to the
    Russians, and offers opportunities for them for the future that justifies
    the investment clearly required.”
       Asked if VOSKHOD I flight meant U.S.S.R. had “extended its lead over
    the United States in manned space flight,” Mr. Webb replied:
       “This is hard to answer categorically but if I had to give a quick
                               ’’
    answer, I would say ‘Yw.’
       Asked when U.S. would overtake U.S.S.R. in manned space flight,
    Mr. Webb said:
       “Well, first I think we must always keep in mind that our program
    including the developmental flights on the Saturn IB and the flights out
    to a quarter of a million miles with Saturn V are designed to meet United
    States needs for an operational capability out that f a r in space.
       “If the flight capability of the Russian craft is extended to include
    these additional capabilities, then we will have a serious problem in
    catching up in the next few years. If their capability does not extend
    to the booster power necessary for the full range of operations out to
    the moon, then we will pass them in this decade, provided our present
    program is adequately funded and no unknown or unanticipated diffi-
    culties show up.” (Interview, NYT, 10/18/64, E5)
* Soviet space scientists Dr. Vladimir Lebedev and Dr. Oleg Kuznetsov,
    writing in Soviet Air Force magazine, discussed US. Astronaut L. Gor-
    don Cooper’s sightings of houses and other objects from space as he
    orbited over Tibet in May 1%3. The scientists noted that some U.S.
    experts had attributed Major Cooper’s sightings to hallucinations caused
    by spaceflight conditions. However, the Soviets said, their own ex-
    periments with men in soundproof, dark chambers simulating spacecraft
    led them to conclude that Major Cooper’s olbservations were “an illu-
    sion of recognition caused by insufficient information.” (AP, NYT,
    10/19/64+, 3)
October 19: NASA launched four-stage Javelin (Argo M) sounding rocket
    from Wallops Island, Va., with sixth payload of Japan-US. experiments
    in cooperative program to investigate properties and characteristics of
    the ionosphere. Psyload was sent to 521-mi. altitude before impacting
    in Atlantic Ocean 848 mi. from launch site. Telemetry during flight
    was intermiwent, so preliminary results of the experiments were incon-
    clusive. For the cooperative experiments, Radio Research Laboratory,
    Tokyo, supplied radio frequency (RF) resonance probe and NASA God-
    dard Space Flight Center supplied Langmuir probe. (Wallops Release
    64-75)
  Rally in Moscow’s Red Square celebrated homecoming for the three Soviet
    cosmonauts who orbited Oct. 12-13 in VOSKHOD I spacecraft: Vladimir
    Mikhailovich Komarov, Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov, and Boris
    Borisovich Yegorov. This was first public appearance of new U.S.S.R.
    leadership, and principal address was given by CPSU First Secretary
    Leonid Brezhnev, who said:
356             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

         “The Soviet Union has still further outstripped the United States of
                                  .. .   [We] do not regard our space research
    America in the ‘space race’.
     as an end in itself, as some kind of ‘race.‘ In the great and serious
    cause of the exploration and development of outer space, the spirit of
     the frantic gamblers is alien to us. We see in this cause part and parcel
                                                                    ...
     of the tremendous constructive work of the Soviet people             in con-
     formity with the general line of our party in all spheres of the economy,
     science and culture in the name of man, for the sake of man. . . .”
      (Tanner, NYT,10/20/64,1,2; AP,10/19/64)
October 19: NASA announced Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator
     for Manned Space Flight, assumed the role of acting director of Project
     Gemini. George M. Low, former Deputy Associate Administrator for
     Manned Space Flight at Hq. and since February 1964 Deputy Director
     of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had served as acting director of
     Gemini since last November. (NASA Release 64-247)
* NASA announced three-month expedition at sea using converted Navy air-
     craft transport to launch sounding rockets would be conducted next
                                                                .
     year as part of International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY) 40 or more
     scientific experiments would be carried by Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun
     sounding rockets as well as Arcas and Hasp weather rockets to areas of
      the upper atmosphere and the ionosphere that cannot be reached by
     land-based rockets. Exact locations of the launches had not yet been
     determined, but it had been decided that a number of experiments would
      be made in region of the magnetic equator in eastern portion of the
      South Pacific Ocean. NASA Wallops Station was assigned project man-
      agement of the expedition and Goddard Space Flight Center was re-
      sponsible for coordinating most of the scientific experiments, being
      provided by universities, other Federal agencies, and NASA field centers.
      Project was under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and
      Applications. (NASA Release &246; Wallops Release 64-73)
 * NASA began recruiting 10-20 scientistdastronauts for future manned space
      flights. Qualified applicants-with doctoral degree or equivalent ex-
      perience in natural sciences, medicine, or engineering-would be
      screened and evaluated according to standards established by NASA and
      ad hoc Committee on Scientific Qualifications of Scientist-Astronauts
       of the NAS Space Science Board. Before iinal selection as astronauts,
      applicants would receive training in a limited space-simulationprogram
       designed to familiarize them with space environment and test their
      ability t9 withstand physical stresses of space flight. Departing from
      previous requirement that astronaut candidates be experienced jet pilots,
       NASA said selected astronauts not already qualified pilots would be
       given individual flight training to qualify them as pilots of high-per-
      formance aircraft and helicopters. (NASA Release 64-248)
   Maj. Edwin Aldrin, Jr., from the newest group of NASA astronauts, already
      was qualified as a scientist-astronaut, holding a doctorate in astronautics.
      Two other astronauts were nearing completion of doctoral studies: R.
      Walter Cunningham (physics) and Russell L. Schweikart (aeronautics/
       astronautics). (Houston Post, 10/20/64)
   Astronaut Russell L. Schweikart began week-long test of qontinuous living
       in a Gemini spacesuit. Before donning the spacesuit at Edwards AFB,
       he had biosensors attached to his body. Among his activities for the
       test: experiencing weightlessness in F-104B aircraft, going through
    that he had predicted in 196

     manned spacecraft on a lunar-orbiting mission-“and this might still be
     attempted soon.” He added: “Nothing that occurred during the recent
    three-man flight has caused me to deviate from the prediction I made in
     1961.” (Chic.Trib., 10/20/64)
* IPL analysis of portion of last lunar rface photographed by RANGER VII
     found that median slope was about 1.6’ over 30-ft. distance, not con-
     sidered a problem for Appollo’s Lunar Excursion Module (LEM).
     (Av. Wk., 10/19/64,23,30)
  Editorial by Robert Hotz in Aviation Week summarized significance of
     Soviets’ VOSKHOD I three-man space flight:
        “It establishes clearly that the Soviets have not abandoned their goal
                                 ..     .
     of a manned lunar landing.
          It establishes the scientific validity of the Soviet manned space pro-
        4L

     gram and should convince even dullards that this venture has sound
                                                   ..
     purpose far beyond its propaganda value. .
         “It indicates clearly that the Soviets are prepared to continue with
     their own across-the-board space exploration program and will not be
     dependent on any cooperative ventures with the United States. . . .
         “It also confirms the widening Soviet lead in space medicine, which
                                                        ..
     is the key to all manned space flight operations. .
         “It spotlights the ultra-conservatism shown by the US. military ap-
     proach to manned space flight in starting to do now what the Pentagon
                                                             . .”
     planned to begin on a lesser scale in three years. .             (Av. Wk.,
     10/19/64,21)
  NASA announced appointment of Charles F. Yost, assistant director of DOD’S
     Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) since 1960, as Director of
     Office of Technology Utilization, NASA Hq., effective Nov. 1 (NASA .
     Release 6p-245)
  Reported that NASA was considering University Explorer program, under
      which universities would design and build their own scientific satellites
     with NASA funding. The satellites would be launched from Wallops
      Island with Scout boosters. (Av.Vk.,        10/19/64, 35)
   Univ. of Chicago president George W. Beadle said at National Electronics
      Conference in Chicago that communication of scientific information
      among industry, Government, and universities was too slow. He said
      two main things should be done: “(1) academic people must do better
      at translating their discoveries and (2) industry and government apply-
      ing this basic research must do better at keeping up on new develop-
      ments so they can take advantage of them.” (Chic. Trib., 10/20/64)
358             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

October 19: Royal Crown Cola Co. president W. H. Glenn announced Lt.
    Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut, had been elected a direc-
    tor of the company. (Hammer, NYT, 10/20/6d, 49)
* Ekplosion-fire of fuel for USAF XB-70 aircraft at Eawards AFB, Calif.,
    caused four injuries and one death (Ivan W. Mayo of North American
                    .    (UPI, Wash. Post, 10/21/64)
    Aviation, Inc.)
  Republican six-man study group headed by former Secretary of Defense
    Neil H. McElroy released report charging that Kennedy-Johnson Ad-
     ministration had neglected research and development of new weapon
     systems. In reply to the charges, DOD issued statement saying it was
     Sbpursuing a vigorous and effective research and development program

                                                              . . .”
     designed to keep this nation the strongest in the world          and citing
     more than 200 major new projects initiated since 1961. (AP, NYT,
     10/20/64l)
October 20: U.K. successfully launched its second Blue Streak rocket booster
     from Woomera, Australia, in development test. Blue Streak was slated
     to serve as first stage of ELDO’S multistage launch vehicle. (M&R,
     10/26/64,11)
  USAF space medicine team, in paper delivered to seminar at Brooks AFB,
     reported on experiment with 12 volunteers committed to “absolute bed
     rest” for four weeks, in attempt to simulate conditions of extended space
     flight. After the period, subjects showed marked increase in tendency
     toward fainting, but when protected with antigravity suits this tendency
     nearly disappeared. Heartbeat rates were faster in stand-up test after
     the bedrest than in similar test before it. High gravity loads in centri-
     fuge did not adversely affect the subjects after their long rest. The
     volunteers lost about one-fifth of a gallon of their total blood volume,
     and increase in calcium loss was apparent, but was not considered
     hazardous. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
  Rear Adm. Francis D. Boyle, Deputy Director of Defense Communications
     Agency’s Communications Satellite Project Office, told National Space
     Club in Washington of DOD plans for a military comsat system. He
     said Titan 1114 launch vehicles would orbit up to 24 comsats during
     the first six months of 1966, placing six to eight satellites in orbit each
     launch. Orbiting at more than 22,000 mi., the satellites would be “ap-
     proximately synchronous.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
  Lt. Col. John D. Peters (USAF), engineer at Arnold Engineering Develop-
     ment Center, said in §an Antonio that the four-legged landing gear
     designed for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Nodule (LEM) was “needlessly
     risky” and should be replaced by an inflatable “doughnut” to cushion
     the LEM’S landing. Tube at LEM’S base could be inflated just before
     landing, would allow a safe landing even if exact nature of lunar surface
     is unknown. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/64; SBD, 10/22/64l, 283)
  Communications Satellite Corp. requested bids from 15 companies for re-
     search data and consultant services for defining design and performance
     requirements of ground terminals for global comsat system. (ComSat-
     Con, Release)
October *21: Astrobee 1500, most powerful of US. sounding rockets, was
                                  Wallop Island, Va, launch site, its second
     flight-tested from NASA’s
     stage carrying 156-lb. instrument package to 1,212-m‘. altitude before
     impact in the Atlantic Ocean 1,326 mi. from launch site. This was sec-
     ond flight test of the solid-propellant rocket ; adequate performance data
                                                                          359
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4




    tion, temperatures, and pressures, and from preliminary examination
    the test appeared successful. (Wallops Release 64-76)
October 21 :Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences,
    said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD I
    spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit
    any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said VOSKHOD I was first of
    a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-
    tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard VOSKHOD I, revealed he had made
     astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aero-
    navigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary
    flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously
     on board the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed VOSKHOD 1’s atti-
    tude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described
    VOSKHOD 1’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the space-
     craft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after para-
    chutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft
    landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp
     movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of gen-
    eral discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/
     22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 1OJ22JM; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/M)
  Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third
     Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I.
     Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the
                                               ...
     moon “may be somewhat commonplace.                 The moon will also be
                                                                          ...
     serving ,as an important scientific station for radio astronomers
                                              ...    We may be maintaining
     [and] many other kinds o scientists.
                                  f
                                         ..
     sizable installations on the moon.
        “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been
     made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . .
     In space stations o*biting above the earth we shall likely be fabricatirrg
     space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic
     trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one conti-
                      ...
     nent to another.
        “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It
     seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move
     throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory
     expeditions to the outermost reaches. We w i l l be considering the ex-
     tension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am some-
     what doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of
     energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man.
        “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established out-
     posts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that
     we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I
     doubt that t h i s w          ace on the moon, unless the moon turns out


     cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not likely
                           . .”
     to be accomplished. .      (Text)
360             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

October 21 :FAA announced new series o about 600 sonic-boom tests late this
                                           f
    year over White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., creating sonic boom
    pressure ranging up to 30 psf above normal atmospheric pressure to
    measure effects on stxuctures. NASA and other agencies would also par-
    ticipate in the research preparatory to development of a US. supersonic
    transport. (Clark, NYT, 10/22/M)
  Nomadic Lapps in northern Sweden had registered complaints about
    ESRO’s rocket launching plans from new base being built about 100 mi.
    northeast of Kiruna. Beginning in 1966, ESRO would fire 50 rockets
    per year 120 mi. into the ionosphere every year for eight years. But
    the Lapps, living in the target area for the rockets, were fearful for the
    safety of themselves and their reindeer. (Reuters, NYT, 10/21/64+, 26)
  NASA issued a Tech Brief describing new type of adhesive bonding tech-
    nique in structural assembly, using epoxy resins as an adhesive which
     leaves no voids or air pockets between the two surfaces joined together.
     (NASA Release 64-262)
0 Dr. Dwight F. Gunder, 61, gpecial adviser on rockets and missiles to Navy

    Bureau o Ordnance, died in Loveland, Colo. Dr. Gunder had re-
                f
     ceived citation which said he “provided the guide lines for the Polaris
     missile’s development.” (AP, NYT, 10/23/64+, 34)
October 22: AEC detonated five-kiloton nuclear device 2,700 ft. underground
    in the Tatum Salt Dome, in southern Mississippi. Called Project Sal-
    mon, the test was designed to evaluate performance of seismographic
     equipment in detecting underground nuclear explosions. Officials =ti-
                                                 cavity in the salt dome. (AI?,
     mated the lblast created 120tO-ft.-diameter
    N.Y. Her. Trib., 10/23/64+)
                                                                        “. . .  I
  Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said in news conference:
     do not anticipate any significant increase in the Defense budget for the
                                                                  ...    , I feel
     next fiscal year as a result of last week’s events. In fact
     quite confident that the budget will decline as a percentage of the gross
     national product, while supporting what is recognized as the strongest
                                   . .”
    military force in the world. .            (WD Release 76.54%)
  John L. Sloop, Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research
     and Technology, NASA, said in lecture to Santa Clara County Science
     Teachers, a NASA Ames Research Center:
                  t
        “On the momentous day of the first flight to the moon’s surface, the
     three astronauts w i l l be using the results of almost a decade of concen-
     trated effort which include knowledge, skills, and equipment of 30,000
     people in ten NASA Centers and over a quarter of a million people in more
     than 5,000 companies. They will have flight experience in space 100
     times longer than the total time logged in Mercury. They will have
     the knowledge gained by dozens of unmanned satellites that have
     probed space about the moon and beyond. They will have the result
     of Ranger photographs of the lunar surface plus more detailed surveys
                                                                  .   .” (Text;
     made by lunar orbiting and the Surveyor lunar lander.
     NASA msc Div.)
October 23: NASA launched Javelin (Argo D-4) sounding rocket from Wal-
     l o p Island, Va., with 90-lb. payload containing instrumentation to
     measure low-level cosmic radio noise. The experiment was timed to
     coincide with passage of EXPLORER xx (fixed frequencg topside sounder
      satellite), which also was being used to investigate cosmic noise source
                                                                        361
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    at wavelengths which do not penetrate to earth because of shielding
    effect of ionosphere. The Javelin was sent up through the region of the
    satellite about 15 min. after EXPLORER xx had passed through the area
    at about 650-mi. altitude. During the flight 18 min. of scientific data
    were telemetered from rocket payload, which reached 660-mi. altitude
    before impacting in the ocean 650 mi. from launch site. Preliminary
    analysis indicated flight results were good. (Wallops Release 64-77)
October 23: Gemini Titan GT-2 spacecraft was mated with the Titan I1
    launch vehicle at Launch Complex 19, Cape Kennedy, preparatory to
    unmanned ballistic flight later this year. ( MSC Roundup, 10/28/64,3)
* USAF Atlas-Agena D satellite booster combination was launched from Van-
    denberg AFB, Calif., with unidentified payload. It was later disclosed
    that three satellites were orbited. (AP, NYT, 10/24/64; HHN-48)
* Test of parasail spacecraft recovery system for manned space flight was
    conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center over Trinity Bay, Tex.
    Unmanned boilerplate Gemini spacecraft canying parasail system in
    stowed position was dropped from (2-119 aircraft at 11,000-ft. altitude.
    Parasail deployed properly and landing rockets reduced impact to 10
    fps, but because of rigging error in parachute installation the spacecraft
    descended straight down instead of making programed turn. MSC’S
    John Kiker said everything functioned in proper sequence and the
    test was considered successful. (Av. Wk.,12/14/64, 61)
* Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research
    Div. in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology since July
     1962, resigned from NASA to join staff of the National Aeronautics and
    Space Council. Dr. Walton L. Jones, Jr., head of Human Research
    Branch, was assigned as Acting Director of the Biotechnology and
    Human Research Div., effective Oct. 26. Dr. Jones joined the division
    May 5, previously had been Director of Aviation Medicine Technical
     Div. of USN Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. (NASA Release 64-268)
0 NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in Tyler, Tex., that the US.,“in

     the short space of three years, has more than tripled its industrial,
     scientific, engineering, and governmental space capability. This was
     accomplished through the close cooperation of what might be called the
     ‘triad’ of government, industry, and the university community, in carry-
     ing out the largest peacetime research and development effort in all
     history. Management techniques developed in coordinating this com-
     plex endeavor are beginning to find their way into business and indus-
    trial executive prucesses. Experience has been gained that may prove
                                                                          . .”
     useful in solving other difficult national and international problems. .
     (Text)
* NASA announced preliminary negotiations had begun to lease Convair 990
     jet transport, with option to buy, from Convair Div. of General Dy-
     namics Corp. The aircraft would be based at NASA Ames Research
     Center. Stripped of passenger accommodations, the aircraft would
     be used as a flying laboratory for research in aeronautical technology
     and the space sciences. (NASA Release 64-269)
* Rep. Hale Boggs (D.-La.) asserted that top management personnel would
     be moved from NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., to
     Michoud Operations, Louisiana, quoting NASA Administrator James E.
     Webb as saying that NASA was analyzing the situation. Mr. Webb told
     Huntsville Times of difficulties in hiring and keeping top executives for
      768498 O-@g---2A
362              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 96 4

    the Alabama installation, added: “There’s nothing in this situation that
    can’t be corrected, but it has to be worked out.” (AP,              Wash. Sun. Star,
    10/25/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/26/64)
October 23: French National Assembly approved 1965 funds for U.K.-France
    Concorde supersonic transport. (NYT,                10/24/64)
  Dr. Bruno Bettelheim, professor of educational psychology at Univ. of
    Chicago, said in address before symposium on American Women in
    Science, at MIT, that women’s “specific genius for nurtuTing, humanizing,
    and preserving” should be made use of in all spheres of living, in science,
    engineerihg, architecture, medicine, and all other professions. (Leland,
    Boston Globe, 10/23/64)
October 24: U.S.S.R. announced launching COSMOS XLIX artificial earth
    satellite into orbit: apogee, 490 km. (304 mi.) ; perigee, 260 km. (162
    mi.) ; period, 91.83 min.; and inclination, 49’ to the equatorial plane.
    Onboard equipment was said to be operating normally and ground track-
    ing station was processing incoming data. (Tass, Kra.snuya Zvezda,
    10/25/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
  President Johnson announced US. and U.S.S.R. had reached final agree-
    ment on exchange of meteorological data, tentatively reached in the
    Second NASA/SOViet Memorandum of Understanding of June 6, 1964,
    and approved by U.S.S.R. Oct. 23. Exchange of conventional data via
    the special telecommunicationslink would proceed soon. Formal terms
    of agreement would be made public next week at meeting of U.N.
    Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. (UPI, Wush. Post,
     lo/%/@; NASA f.of Int. Pro.)
                       Of
* Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics recommended steps to be taken to
    distribute Federal funds more widely throughout the country: confer-
    ence of representatives of Government and industry to explore methods
     of wider distribution; study by President’s Office of Science and Tech-
    nology to identify institutions with greatest growth potential; addition
     of NSF funds “for the specific purpose of insuring the existence of at
    least one center of exceUence in research and technology in each appro-
    priate region of the Nation”; development of long-range programs hy
     the Administration to be carried out at under-used science centers.
     (Simons, Wmh.Post, 10/25/64)
  Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry M. Goldwater issued report
     on science prepared by his Task Force on Space, Science, and the Atom,
     in which he had this to say of Project Apollo :
        “Man should indeed explore the moon, but I see no good reason
     why we must incur the large unnecessary expense of a crash program.
    The first man on the moon will probably not gain for us any vital military
     advantage.” He proposed instruments be sent to the lunar surface,
    emphasis be concentrated on efforts to assure the “security of near-
     space.” (Wash. Post, 10/25/64, A9)
  According to NOW Commander-in-Chief Gen. John K. Gerhart (USAF) ,
     manned Soviet satellites have passed over North America 44 times. He
              “. . .
     added:         strong modern aerospace defenses are indispensable; they
     are a vital part of d e t e r r e n e t h e y are essential to survival and they are
     our insurance to victory.” (J/Armed Forces, 10/24/64,6]
                                                                         363
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

October 24-25: Employees’ Open House at NASA Lewis Research Center,
    with employees and their families touring the facilities and exhibit
    areas. Estimated 8,000 persons visited the Center. (Lewis News, lo/
    30/64,1)
October 25: Soviet aircraft designer Artem I. Mikoyan, brother of Soviet
    President Anastas I. Mikoyan, remarked in M e o w : “Whatever secrets
    surround the earth’s nearest neighbor, they will be solved by man. And
    one would like to believe that the first man on the moon will be our
    Soviet cosmonaut. We are confident of this. Confirmation of this may
    be seen in the flight of the spaceship ‘sunrise’ [VOSKHOD].” (AP,
    Wash. Post, 10/26/64)
                      EXPLORER xx topside-ionosphere sounder satellite was
October 26: NASA’s
    providing new information on “the arrangement of ionospheric irregu-
    larities” and “the structure of plasma resonances,” according to Central
    Radio Propagation of National Bureau of Standards. (M&R,
    10/26/@, 23)
* NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N.
    Mex., to 119-mi. altitude in successful flight to collect data on celestial
    x-ray sources. American Science and Engineering, Inc., provided pay-
    load instrumentation, which included four Geiger counters, one photo-
    electric detector, two scintillation counters, and two star sensors.
    Rocket and instrumentation performance were considered good. This
    was the 500th launch of an Aerobee liquid-propelled sounding rocket,
    the booster that carried first U.S. rhesus monkeys into space on high-
     altitude flights in 1951 and 1952. Aerobee was outgrowth of rocket
    program begun in 1946 by what is now Aerojet-General Corp., which
     was then engaged in jet-assisted takeoff (Jato) research. (NASA Rpt.
     SRL; Wash. Eve. Shr, 10/28/@)
* NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Missiles
    and Rockets interview that NASA was tentatively planning to initiate pro-
     gram definition of Apollo-X spacecraft in FY 1965. He stressed,
     however, that NASA manned space station of from six-months to one-year
     lifetime would receive no hardware funding until the 1970’s. He also
     said NASA’s  Apollo-X study did not compete with USAX Manned Orbiting
     Laboratory (MOL) program: “MOL is important for the military as a
     method of determining what opportunities there are for men in space.
     It is not suitable to fulfill NASA requirements to gain scientific knowl-
     edge.” (M&R, 10/26/64 ,la)
* Dr. John J. Brennan, Jr., speaking for Committee to Preserve Cambridge
      (Mass.) Industries, said he would petition court to decide that proposed
     Kendall Sq. site for NASA, Electronics Research Center did not meet urban
     renewal standards. Dr. Brennan said he received reply from White
     House to his letter of protest in which Presidential aide Kenneth O’Don-
     nell said Kendall Sq. would have to meet all legal requirements?
     urban renewal before NASA could locate there. (Boston Globe,
     10/26/64)
 * Astronaut Russell Schweickart removed spacesuit at NASA Ames Research
     Center, where he had undergone three rides on centrifuge. Schweickart,
     who had celebrated his 29th birthday in the spacesuit, had worn it con-
      stantly since Oct. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/27/a)
364                              AND   AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 4
               ASTRONAUTICS

October 26: Soviet astronomer Nikolai S. Kardashev, writing in U.S.S.R.’s
     Astronomical Jcrurnal, proposed that two sources of strong radio emis-
     sions-CTA-2 1 and c~~-io2-were possible beacons from intelligent
     civilizations. First observed in 1960, the optically invisible “objects”
     are unique among recorded sources in that their radiations emit at peak
     intensities of about 900 megacycles. Kardashev said 900 megacycles
     would be optimum frequency for interstellar communications, since
     it is the frequency where back ound noise-cosmic noise and quantum
     noise-is at a minimum. (Susr‘y,,, NYT, 10/26/64,1,36)
* Republican National Committee Chairman Dean Burch said in open letter
     to President Johnson that NASA Administrator James E. Webb was en-
     gaging “in the most blatant and transparent politics by suggesting he
     will shift the top space scientists and executives from Huntsville, Ala.,
                      ...                                               .
                             This is political blackmail, pure and simple. . .”
     to New Orleans.
      (CTPS, Chic. Trib., 10/27/64+)
   European Space Research Organization (ESRO) announced plans to build
     research center at Noordwijk, the Netherlands. Center would employ
     800-man international st&, would include laboratories, proving
     grounds, and other facilities. (NYT, 10/27/64,5)
0 London betting house of William Hill Ltd., announced odds of 100-to-1

     against manned lunar landing by U.S.S.R. before Jan. 1, 1971 and
      150-to-1against manned lunar landing by U.S. before same date. Sev-
     eral weeks later the firm improved their odds by changing date to
     Jan. 1,1968. (AP, &It. Sun, 10/27/@; SBD, 11/12/64+)
October 27: USAF Project Asset space glider was launched from Cape Ken-
     nedy with single-stage Thor booster to 31-mi. altitude before returning
      downward at 8,800-mph speed and impacting 900 mi. southeast of the
     launch site in the Atlantic Ocean. USAF said the spacecraft temperatures
     had reached about 2,000° in the 25-min. flight, which was termed “very
      successful.” (AP, Wash. Post, 10/28/64; M&R, 11/2/64,8)
0 Red spot on the moon was observed from 12:18 a.m. to about 1:00 a.m. by

      three lunar observers in Port Tobacco, Md. Using 16-in. telescope, the
      astronomers described the spot as a “red, pinkish glow” which was
      “located on the base of the central peak in the Crater Alphonsus.” This
      was said to be eighth sighting of such a spot on the moon in the last
      six years and the first in Alphonsus since the discovery of the phenome-
      non by a Russian scientist in 1958. The three observers, associated with
      Trident Engineer Associates of Annapolis, Md., were using equipment
      specially developed for detecting the red spots, in lunar observation
      project for NASA. (Wash. Sun. Star, 11/1/64; NASA Release 64-2783
 0 Maj. Gen. Samuel C Phillips (USAF),
                        .                    Apollo program deputy director in
      NASA Hq. since last January, was appointed director of the Apollo pro-
      gram. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr.
      George E. Mueller had been acting Apollo director for the past year.
       (NASA Release W 2 6 7 )
 0 Balloon launched from Holloman AFB, Tex., carried telescope and instru-

      mentation to 86,OOO-ft. altitude, where it focused on the planet Venus
       for more than three hours. Finpced by USAF contract, the experiment
      was second such study of Venus this year by Johns Hopkins Univ. team
      headed by Dr. John Strong. Scientific results would be aniiounced later
      this year (see Dec. 7). (Fenton, Balt. Sun, 12/7/64; Sullivan, NYT,
       12/8/64)
                                                                         365
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4
                                                  6




    up to a thousand miles to an accuracy within 30 meters. Nine unknown
    points were expected to be located in the Pacific during the first year
    of operations. (DOD Release 776-64)
* Writing about development of Vostok and Voskhod spacecraft, Soviet
    Lt. Gen. N. Kamanin disclosed:
        “The space flights of the six ‘Vostoks‘ became important landmarks
     in the history of mankind, having pointed out and illuminated the paths
     into the unknown worlds of the universe. The first spaceship-satellites
     began to be launched in 1960. At that time, Soviet science had already
     progressed to a systematic preparation for manned space flights. Many
     difficultiesblocked the way. It was necessary to have a dependable space-
     craft that could be launched successfully into the stellar fastnesses and
     could assure the safety of a cosmonaut’s flight including return to
              ..
     Earth..
        “The flight of the ‘Voskhod’ spacecraft demonstrates that the time
     is drawing near when man can penetrate far into outer space and can
     realize the ancient dreams of flights to the Moon, Mars, Venus and to
     even more remote depths of the universe. Mankind has entered a new
                                                                           ..
     epoch in revealing the secrets of nature hidden in the depths of space. .
         “The ‘Voskhod’ has increased reliability, improved equipment and
     an expanded program. We still do not know what the next spacecraft
     will be named. We can already say with certainty, however, that it will
     be a further step along the path of progress. Just as aviation became
     the means for mass transport of passengers over the airways, the space-
     ships will become the connecting link between the planets of the solar
             ..    .” (Krasnaya Zuezda, 10/27/64, ATSS-T Trans.)
     system.
e Communications Satellite Corp. re-emphasized to FCC its need to own and
     operate initial satellite terminal stations in US. I=omSatCorpwas reply-
     ing to statements filed with FCC by communications common-carriers
     which requested FCC to deny ComSatCorp’s request, originally filed Aug.
     14. (ComSatCorpRelease)
* Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), received his colonelcy from President
     Johnson in White House ceremony. Since the Senate had not gotten
     to the promotion list prior to adjournment, the President, after consulta-
     tion with members of Congress, had made a recess appointment for
     Glenn. (UPI, NYT, 10/28/64, 38; BaIt. Sun, 10/28/64)
* Art Arfons set new world land-speed record of 536.71 mph.in his jet-
     powered car at Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah. (AP, NYT, 10/28/64,58)
October 28: U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of COSMOS L satellite into the fol-
     lowing orbit: apogee, 150 mi.; perigee, 122 mi.; period, 88.7 min.;
     inclination to the equator, 51.3’. (Tass, Krasnaya Zuezda, 1 / 0 6 E 1,
                                                                    03/L,
     ATSS-T Trans.)
* Titan I1 rocket booster for fi manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was
     turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore
      plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini roject manags of NASA Manned
     Spacecraft Center, said parachute lanjing system and spacecraft’s ejec-
      tion seats were all that remained to be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was
October 28: U.S.and U.S.S.R. began exchanging weather data over special
    teletype, Weather Bureau spokesman said, although some operating de-
    tails had not yet been worked out. Spokesman said U.S. was not yet
    sending to U.S.S.R. any data gathered from meteorological satellites.
       (AP,
          NYT, 10/29/64,58)
    Brig. Gen. Benjamin G. Holzman (USAF,Ret.) was sworn in by Dr. Ray-
0

      mond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Re-
       search and Technology, as consultant to NASA for planning and admin-
       istration of its advanced research and technology program. General
      Holzman would work on staff organization and formation of a program
       for NASA Electronics Research Center. (NASA Release 64-271)
    Post-Apollo possibilities ‘being considered by NASA were listed by NASA
      Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer
       E. Newel1 at luncheon meeting of Institute of Electrical & Electronic
       Engineers’ Professional Technical Group on Nuclear Science,
      Philadelphia :
          “Adaptation of Gemini as an earth orbiting laboratory.
          “Adaptation of Apollo as an earth orbiting laboratory.
          “Extension of Apollo capabilities to create a six-man (or so) earth
              orbiting station.
          (6
             Creation of an earth orbiting station to accommodate a score or
                           ...
              morepersons.
          b<
             Creation of an earth orbiting astronomical observatory in association
              with a manned orbiting station.
          “Ektended manned exploration of the moon.
          “Extended unmanned exploration of the moon.
          ‘‘Establidunent of a manned lunar base.
          “Establishment of a lunar astronomical facility.
          “Establishment of a lunar radio astronomy facility on the far side of
              the moon.
          “Unmanned exploration of thesolar system.
          “Manned exploration of the planets.
          “Advanced solar studies.
          “Advanced weather satellite system.
          $6
             Advanced communications satellite system.
          “Navigation satellite system.
          “Data collection satellites.
          LL
             Nuclear power.


                                                          of the National Acad-
                                                                       367
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    to a large-scale follow-on of the current manned lunar landing progam
    or to manned earth orbital missions. This, I believe, reflects the gen-
    eral opinion of the scientific community, and is an important factor
    to weigh with all the other $actors that must be considered in deciding
                   ..    .” (Text)
    on what next.
October 28: NASA Lewis Research Center announced contracts for construc-
    tion of facilities at LRC’S Plum Brook Station: $1,160,000 contract to
     Roediger Construction, Inc., and $1,386,000 contract to Mosser Con-
    struction Co. (LRC Release 64-100)
  FAITH 7 Mercury spacecraft, in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper made
    22 orbits of the earth in final space flight of Project Mercury, went on
     display at NASA Hq., Washington. Nov. 2 the spacecraft would resume
    its tour of the 50 state capitals. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
October 29: Nobel Prize in Physics awarded to Dr. Charles H. Town- (MIT)
    and two Soviet physicists, Aleksandr M. Prokhorov and Nikolai G.
    Basov, for research in quantum electronics leading to production of
    oscillators and amplifiers for lasers. Dr. Townes was Chairman of
     NASA Manned Space Flight Advisory Committee. (NYT, 10/30/64,1)
e Captive flight of X-15 No. 3 was made with Milton 0. Thompson as pilot.
     (NASA X-15 Proj. Of) f.
* NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Huntsville Industrial Expansion
     Committee, meeting at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center :
                        ...
        “we have given          [MSFC] the job of managing the contractors
     who will assemble, test and launch giant boosters, and much of this
     work is handled here in Huntsville.
        “We have placed this management job with the Marshall Center be-
     cause the management of industrial development contracts involving
     hundreds of millions of dollars per year requires the daily support by
     scientists and engineers intimately familiar with the many-faceted de-
     velopment problems. And we want to keep this arrangement. As this
     very large program progresses, it will be good business, and in the
     interests of efficiency and lowered costs, to move part of the contract
     management functions near our Michoud Assembly Facility at New
     Orleans or our industrial stage assembly plants in California.
        “We have done this in the past and we will undoubtedly do more of
     it in the future. The extent to which we may have to move more of
     these management functions out of the Huntsville area will directly de-
     pend on our ability to improve our record of attracting senior execu-
                                                          ..   .” (MurshaU
     tives from industry to the Huntsville installation.
     Star, 11/4/a, 4)
0 Weber Aircraft Co. of Burbank, Calif., demonstrated the astronaut escape

     system that it had developed for NASA. System was designed to boost
     astronauts out of their 6emini spacecraft and open escape parachutes
     in 10 sec. if a spacecraft malfunction should develop. (Macomber,
     Sun Diego Union710/30/64)
0 ,Minuteman I1 ICBM flight test from Cape Kennedy marked second success

     in as many launchings. USAF said the advanced missile achieved all
     test objectives. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
October 29-30: Conference on New Technology held at NASA Lewis Research
     Center. Part of NASA’s   Technology Utilization program, the conference
     was a means of disseminating new technology developed from aerospace
     research to other segments of the U.S. economy. (LRC Release 6 6 9 5 )
368                                                       19 64
                ASTRONATSTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

October 30: X-15 No. 3 was flown by Milton 0. Thompson to maximum
    altitude of 82,000 ft., the rocket-research aircraft attaining 3,051 mph
    (mach4.62). ( N A S A X - ~ ~ O f )
                                  Proj. f .
  NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., in
    successful flight to collect solar spectral data in the x-ray and ultraviolet
    regions, to test adaptation of solar spectrometer designed for Oso-C
    satellite, and to measure ionospheric electron density. Rocket reached
    117.5-mi., altitude and data were collected in all experiments during
    the flight. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker flew Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV)
    at NASA Flight Research Center. Total free-flight time in this first test
    was less than one minute, the LLRV rising 10 ft. (M&R, 11/16/64, 8)
  NASA announced selection of scientific satellites, IMP-D and IMP-E, that will
    be placed in orbit around the moon in 1966-67 to study interplanetary
    phenomena and earth-sun relationships in cislunar space. The eight ex-
    periments selected for the Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms were
     designed mainly to measure magnetic fields, solar plasma, micrometeor-
     oids, and energetic particles in the vicinity of the moon. (NASA Re-
    lease 64-270)
* NASA announced appointment of Francis J. Sullivan as Acting Director of
    Electronics and Control Div., NASA Hq. The position was formerly held
    by Dr. Albert J. Kelley, who became Deputy Director of NASA% new
     Electronics Research Center. Sullivan was Deputy Director of the divi-
    sion since November 1963. (NASA Release W 2 7 6 )
* Appointment of Lt. Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF) as Special Assistant to
     Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight announced by NASA.
     Appointment would become effective shortly after his retirement from
     USAF Oct. 31. General Bogart would be concerned with industry rela-
    tionships and special management problems of program control and
     contracting. (NASA Announcement 64-255)
0 US. Army’s Redstone rocket, developed by NASA Marshall Space Flight

     Center team when it was formerly part of Army Missile Command, was
     officially retired from active military operation in ceremony at Army
     Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Ala. Dr. Wernher von Braun,
     MSFC Director, spoke on Redstone’s contributions to U.S. space explora-
     tion, including serving as launch vehicle for first and second US. manned
     space flights. Redstone was replaced as military missile by Army’s
     Pershing. (Marshall Star, 10/4/64,10)
* Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
     Flight, gave address at dedication of Magic Mountain Laboratory of the
     Marquardt Corp., Van Nuys, Calif.:
        “There is a considerable degree of misunderstanding of the overall
     purposes of our national space program. Many people seem to believe
     that a landing on the moon is our paramount objective. This is not so.
        “Our principal goal is to make the United States first in space. The
     Apollo mission milestones-manned flight in earth orbit, into deep
     space, and to the moon and back-provide a focus for the development
     of the total capability that will enable the United States to compete in
                         .
     theraceforspace. . .” (Text)
                                                                              369
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 4,

October 30: Editorial in North American Aviation’s Space 8i Information
     Systems Skywriter:
        “The company’s XB-70 has now completed four test flights acquiring
     millions of items of information, in a highly significant beginning of
     its test program.
        “So far, the airplane has flown at altitudes up to 45,000 feet, at speeds
     up to Mach 1.4; with the wing tips deflected and up, and through
     various yaw, flutter and stability tests.
        “In 34 days, during which test flights were accomplished, the XJ3-70
     has flown at supersonic speeds for 55 minutes. Performance at takeoff,
     liftoff, climb out, and angle of climb has coincided almost exactly with
                                   . . .”
     flight simulator estimates.              (NAA%ID Skywriter, 10/30/64, 1)
  DOD announced award of $1,413,890 NASA-funded contract to Smith and
     Sapp Construction Co. for construction of launch equipment shop at
     Launch Complex 39, Merritt Island Launch Area, Fla. (DOD Release
     783-64)
  It was announced that in the first two-man Gemini flight, set for Feb. 1965,
     Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom might become the first man in space to alter
     the orbit of his own spacecraft. The change would be after about 90
     minutes of flight in the first orbit over Guaymas, Mex. Major Grissom,
     the command pilot, would be sitting on the left side of the spacecraft and
     Lt. Cdr. John Young, pilot, would be sitting on the right side. (AP,
     Sunday Oregonian, 11/1/64)
* Colonel John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC),           was declared fully recovered from
     inner-ear injury by USAF doctors in San Antonio, T x The former
                                                                  e.
     NASA astronaut was expected to resign from USMC and become an active
     director of Royal Crown Cola Co. (UPI,NYT, 10/31/64,11)
* Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice-president of Aerojet-General and director
     of Solid Rocket Operations, announced the firing of a small solid pro-
     pellant motor which successfully started and stopped more than six
     times. In the test, Aerojet used a 4-in. motor with 6 Ibs. of propellant.
      (M&R,11/23/64,9)
  Dr. Alvin Radkowsky, Navy nuclear scientist, received patent for design
     of large breeder reactor which AEC and California were proposing to
     use in 525-kilowattsteam-electricpower plant. (Jones, NYT, 10/31/64,
     35)
* West Germany’s Ministry of Scientific Research said estimated 4,300 West
     German scientists had left to work in U S between 1949 and 1961, and
                                                   ..
     number was expected to increase. (Reuters, NYT, 10/31/64,8)
October SO-November 1 : Inventors’ Congress and Space Symposium held
     in Little Rock, Arkansas. NASA Administrator James E. Webb spoke
     on American progress and goals in space. He described “the Southern
     Crescent of the space p r o g r a m ” 4 a p e Kennedy, Fla. ; MSFC, Huntsville,
     Ala. ; Michoud Operations, LaJMississippi Test Facility; and MSC,
     Houston, Tex.
         “One of the central facts about this great complex of space activi-
                               ity that many varied research, development and
                                 gravitate in this direction. This is made likely
                                  d of convenience.
         u
          By and large, these will be activities that require heavy contributions
     from science and technology, and Arkansas and the other states of the
     South are now in a           on to get ready to take full advantage of the
370             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     prospect. Arkansas must be able to advance in such areas as electronics,
    in the development and use of new materials, in medical research related
    to the sever6 requirements of space, and the like. It must not only
    make provisions for suitable working and living conditions for scientists
    and engineers, it must also be farsighted in training its people as techni-
    cians and skilled workmen, for these are as essential in this kind of ac-
                                          . . .”
    tivity as the scientists and engineers.         (Text)
October 30: Morris Forgash, president of United States Freight Co., gave
    his predictions of transportation in the year 2000, in address at Na-
    tional Defense Transportation Association conference in Frankfurt, Ger-
    many. Among his predictions: “By the year 2000 the hydrofoils will
    be the buslines of the oceans”; “people and things will be transported
    between a l the more distant points on earth by rocket-powered craft.”
               l
    He concluded :
        “Before you mark off anything that I have predicted for the next
    three and a half decades look back on the startling developments of the
     recent past. The breaking of the sound barrier. Space travel. Sub-
     stitution of a cushion of air for the ageless wheel. The broadcasting of
    a message of good will to the world by a President of the United States
     not by cable, phone, or radio, but from a satellite circling around the
     globe in outer space-then the erasure of the message and substitution of
     another while the satellite was in orbit. The Olympic games in Tokyo
     brought into the homes o people on the far side of the earth through the
                                f
     medium of a relay station in space. Multiply these miracles of science
     by the rate of change which is being constantly compounded and see if
     my predictions do not come out on the modest side even to the point of
     reticence.
        “I believe the most important fact for us to understand is that trans-
     portation, though it opens new worlds and changes old concepts of time
     and distance, will not shape the world of 2000 A.D. Transportation
     is the servant of the people-the genie which makes their dreams come
     true-the magic carpet of their future-the mobility of their desires,
                                             ..   .” (Text, CR, 1/7/65, A70-
     their aspirations, and h e i r resources.
     74)
October 31 : Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (Capt., USAF) was killed when
     his T-38 jet trainer crashed near Houston. The former experimental
     test-flight instructor was among third group of NASA astronauts, selected
     last October, and was first US. astronaut to lose his life. (AP, NYT,
     11/2/64)
  Second anniversary of orbiting of ANNA IB first satellite designed for use
     in measuring size and shape of the earth. Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied
     Physics Laboratory, builder of the satellite, said ANNA IB was still flash-
     ing its beacon and relaying radio signals to earth upon command.
      (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
  Report prepared for Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry M.
      Goldwater by Adm. Arthur Radford (USN, Ret.), Gen. Nathan Twining
      (USAF, Ret.), and Gen. Arthu’r Trudeau (USA, Ret.), charged the
     Administration with misrepresentation in its disclosure of two antisatel-
     lib defense systems last September. Republican Task Force said the
     systems were “situated on test sites” and “manned by test crews.” It
     claimed all components of the systems were initiated in the Eisenhower
     administration. DOD retaliated to the “unfounded charges’’ and reiter-
     that the program has stimulated a level of space activity abroad which
     might not otherwise have been achieved. Purely as a by-product, then,
     cooperative space projects have created limited markets for American
                                          ..
     know-how and hardware overseas. .” (Aerospace, Fall 1964, 10-15)
* The French Government reported two successful firings of its four-stage
     Berenice rocket, a mach-12 re-entry test vehicle, from the Ile du Levant
     testing center in the Mediterranean. Tests were conducted by the Office
                                                                        .
     National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales ( ONERA ) The
     Berenice project was designed to supply re-entry data for use in France’s
     strategic missile program. (Av.Wk.y12/7/64,25)
* Interviewed in Data, Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), director of
     Apollo program in NASA Hq., replied to question about “all-up” concept
     of testing in the Apollo program.
        “The general test policy requires that all-up testing will be the basic
     approach to the flight test program. This requires that where prac-
     ticable, all flights will be scheduled as complete space vehicles using all
     live stages and as much of the lunar mission flight hardware as can be
     made available. This policy results from the recognition that true
     operational suitability of the flight hardware can only be obtained by
     operating the systems in the space environment and that the total number
     of development flights and total elapsed time can be reduced by making
     all flights as fully representative of the operational configuration as
     possible.” (Data, lO/M, 7-13)
* William C. Schneider, Gemini program deputy director, NASA Hq., dis-
     cussed flight readiness of Gemini launch vehicles and spacecraft in
    Datu interview:
        “The launch vehicle is leading in flight readiness and this is as it
     should be. The Air Force Titan I1 has been under development for over
     four years, and 33 flights have been made in the program. NASA has
     benefited fully from the results of this extensive qualification flight




                 nson,          Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Pro-
                         NASA
    grams, was interviewed in D d a on Centaur launch vehicle.
372            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERQNATJTICS, 19 04

       “At this point in the Centaur development program, the major por-
    tion of the ground tests have been completed, and three development
    flights have ‘ h e n accomplished. Three more devlopment flights remain
    before the vehicle will be considered operational in a single-burn con-
    figuration in early 1965. The two-burn capability will be certified by
    two additional development flights providing a proven operational two-
    burn capability in 1966. I would like to note, however, that lunar flights
    can and will be accomplished by single-burn Gentaurs in 1965 and 1966,
    and perhaps also in future years during those lunar opportunities that
                                    ..   .” (Data, 1O/M, 27-31)
    allow single-burn trajectories.
During October: Lt. Cdr. M. Scott Carpenter was awarded special gold medal
    by International Association of Man in Space, commemoratingAstronaut
    Carpenter’s Project Mercury orbital space flight. (Dryden, Ltr. to
    Carpenter, 11/5/@)
  Dr. Wolfgang Priester, after a year’s work at Goddard Institute for Space
    Studies as a senior research scientist, returned to Bonn Univ. to become
    Director of its Institute of Astrophysics and Space Research. (Goddurd
    News,11/2/64’ 8)
* At two meetings of European Conference on Satellite Communications in
    Geneva, representatives proposed plans for regional comsat network
    independent of the US., while not ruling out participation with U.S.
    in global network. (M&R, 11/9/64,12-13)
                        November 1864
November 1 : NASA launched NikeApache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill,
    Canada, with instrumented payload to obtain comparison of electron
    density profile with wind profile and to measure electron temperature.
    Sodium vapor ejected as scheduled and Langmuir probe functioned well.
    Launch was to have been one of four spaced through a single night, but
    high winds and subsequent cloud cover forced cancellation of the other
    three. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Experiment conducted by National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio
    Propagation Laboratory had found that nitrogen molecules rather than
    oxygen molecules destroy helium ions in the earth’s atmosphere. Chief
    experimenter E. E. Ferguson explained that the results meant helium
    concentration in upper atmosphere was increasing, upsetting steady-
    state theory based on helium-ion-oxygen molecule reaction. However,
    Ferguson said, recent samplings of upper atmosphere by sounding rockets
    did not uphold the laboratory findings: 100-to-1,000times less helium
    was present than would have been expected if helium had been con-
    tinuously increasing. (Simons, Wash. Post, 11/1/64)
November 2-4: RELAY I and RELAY 11 communications satellites were used to
    broadcast election week previews and results to Europe. Total broad-
    cast time amounted to slightly less than two hours. SYNCOM 11 syn-
    chronous communications satellite, stationed in the Pacific, relayed
    nearly eight hours of U.S. Presidential election returns to the Far East.
    Voice of America transmitted the radio signals. (Goddard News, 11/
    16/6d, 3 ; NASA Release 64-279)
November 2: WAF announced launch of Thor-Agena D booster combination
    with unidentified satellite payload, from Vandenberg AFB. (UPI, NYT,
    11/3/64, 53; H H N - 4 8 )
  FAA announced that the two airframe and two engine manufacturers
    participating in US. supersonic transport program had submitted sec-
    ond-round design proposals for evaluation by Government and airlines.
     (Airframe companies, Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; en-
    gine companies, General Electric Co. and Pratt & Whitney Div. of
    United Aircraft Corp.) 120-member joint Supersonic Transport Eval-
    uation Group, comprised of specialists from FAA, NASA, USAF, CAB, and
    USN, would conduct Government evaluation, with aerodynamic studies
    of wind tunnel models submitted by airframe contractors being con-
    ducted at NASA Langley Research Center. Both Government and air-
    line evaluations were scheduled for completion Nov. 30. Basis of the
    Lockheed design was still a delta wing with a small delta at front of
     fuselage, but the company said that a larger, thinner wing, aerody-
     namically “cleaner” design, and engines with 25 per cent more power
     gave it “major advances” in range and passenger-carrying ability, with
     a profit potential o 30 per cent return on investment. Three different
                         f
     fuselage lengths, with capacity for 170 to 250 passengers, were offered.
                                                                  373
374             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

      T e Boeing Co., which initially offered two versions, said that its new
       h
    design could match the economies of current jets over long ranges and
    would seat 200 to 250 passengers. (FAA Release 64c101; Clark, NYT,
    11/4/64,52)
November 2: Four-man panel of former DOD R&D directors, under auspices
    of Scientists and Engineers for Johnson and Humphrey, responded to
    Republican charges that Democratic Administration had “neglected and
                        ..  .” Panel said:
    stifled innovation.
       “We favor maintaining a substantial base of defense research and
    development which is essential if we are to maintain the flow of new
    ideas and new devices. But support of R&D does not mean the innova-
    tion of a large number of operational systems without regard for mili-
    tary requirements or without ample attention to technical and opera-
    tional feasibility. Senator Goldwater and his advisors have ignored
    the fact that many of the projects cancelled during previous adminis-
    trations had proved unfeasible or too expensive in relation to the mili-
                                    . . .” (SBD, 11/2/68,5)
    tary benefits they would yield.
* Soviet members of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
    Space visited NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. They were Prof.
    0. G. Gazenko, Prof. Yu. D. Kalimin, and Mr. I. V. Milovidov. (God-
    dard News, 12/14/64, 2)
* Aviation Week editor Robert Hotz took U.S. intelligence experts and NASA
    officials to task for the “considerable disgruntlement [that J has been
    generated in the U S . manned space flight program” since Soviets’
    VOSKHOD space flight.
        “All o this does not mean that the US. manned space flight program
              f
    should be slowed, diminished, or abandoned, as a variety of critics
                        ..
     have suggested. .       It means that the US. manned space flight pro-
     gram is not overtckbg the Soviets at its present pace and must be
    .accelerated, expanded to yield better scientific results and aimed at
                                                            ...
     some longer-ranging goals beyond the lunar landing.
        “We always have been convinced that this nation has the technical
     resour- to accelerate its pace and achieve the eventual leadership in
     man’s exploration of space. What we seem to lack is the political
     leadership and management organization that will enable this complex
     partnership of taxpayer, government and industry to proceed at the
     pace of which it is capable toward goals that will surpass its competi-
     tion. For a nation that grew to its present greatness on the strength
     of its competitive surge, we are coming extremely close to losing this
     legacy in space.” (Av. Wk.,    11/2/6411)
November 3: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by USN from the
    White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carried a spectrograph payload
    prepared by Princeton Univ. to 78.8-mi. altitude before the payload re-
    turned to earth by parachute. Primary objective of studying ultra-
     violet radiation of three stars in the constellation Orion was achieved.
     Payload w s recovered in good condition and the film extracted and
                a
     developed. Princeton said it lbelieved this was the first time any uni-
     versity had attempted to study the atmosphere and composition of
     stars by means of equipment contained in a rocket. (NASA Rpt. SRL;
     NYT, 11/17/6& 72)
  NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding roaket from Wallops Island to an
     altitude of 76.8, with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind,
                                                                             375
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4,

    density, and pressure measurements. Experiments were provided by
    Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) scientists. Rocket performance
    was excellent but instrumentation performance was unsatisfactory since
    grenades did not eject or explode. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
November 3: NASA announced signing Memorandum. of Understanding with
    Norwegian Space Research Committee and the Ionospheric Research
    Laboratory of the Royal Technical Institute of Denmark to extend joint
    sounding rocket program of investigations of the ionosphere. Tentative
    schedule of new series called for two Nike-Apache launches this year and
    two more early next year from Norway’s Andoeya Range and two
    Nike-Apache launches from US. facilities. Scandinavian groups would
    purchase the four sounding rockets to be launched in Norway, fund
    their own experiments, and operate Andoeya Range. NASA would sup-
    ply two sounding rockets to be launched in US., fund its experiments,
     and provide use of its Wallops Island, Va., range. There had been 11
    successful launchings in this program since 1962. (NASA Release 6
    274)
* Appointment of Brig. Gen. David M. Jones (USAF) as NASA Deputy As-
    sociate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Dec. 15, was
    announced by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight
    Dr. George E. Mueller. Gen. Jones would be primarily concerned with
     major development problems in Gemini and Apollo programs, plan-
    ning for advanced missions and all mission operations. His most recent
     assignment had been as Deputy Chief of Staff (Systems), AFSC. (NASA
    Release 6277)
  Gerald0 de Carvalho Silos told the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses
     of Outer Space that Brazil would establish a rocket center near Natal
     and would seek U.N. sponsorship for the facility. The U.N. had been
     asked to sponsor a similar international facility at Thumba, India.
     (NYT, 11/4/64,39)
* DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual
     vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-I1 facility at Seal
    Beach, Calif. (DOD Release 7 8 8 4 % )
Nouember 4-6: The AIAA/NASA Third Manned Space Flight Meetingwas held
    in Houston, Tex.
        Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission
     Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major
     phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station
     with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for
     long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine
     exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on
     this concept have shown that the basic station module should have
     a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous
     ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text)
        Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of
     the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards ban-
     quet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a
     vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do
     not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life.
     The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is
     willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits
     to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the
376              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

      greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revital-
      izing &ect upon our whole economy-our whole educational system-
      our whole attitude towazd the future. Let us use all our power of per-
      suasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the
      pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military yossi-
      bilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the
      four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the DOD
      totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that
      is 1961 through 19M, the DOD spent about $8.6 billion on its space
      responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually
      spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and develop-
      ment. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observa-
      tion, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation,
      command and control techniques, interception, and manned and un-
      manned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next
      year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the
      coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by
      an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying
      heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He
      said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the
      seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the
      balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from
      Tyuratam range at the 65” inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites,
      these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks
      in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was
      “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text;
      A&A, 11/64,116; Dr. Edward C. Welsh)
         Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics
      and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights,
      said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by
      this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least
      81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192
      were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were
      injected into escape trajectories, and % listed as failures. (Text)
                                                    I
                                                were
         Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy
      for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory
      and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload ca-
      pacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan
      111, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE
      study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission
      objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-
      biter were launched as two separate Titan I11 payloads, rather than as a
      combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk.,        11/9/64,27)
         AIAA made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter
      C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems
      Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1 9 a NASA Deputy Associate
      Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding
      and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems opera-
      tions”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C.
      Innis, USAF pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.,
      for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to
      Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council,
                                                                         377
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

   until Oct. 19M NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research,
   for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col.
   Robert C. Miller (USAF) ,Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on
   turbulence. (Av.Wk.,      11/16/64,19; MSC Roundup, l l / l l / M , 1)
      Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA% Flight Research Center,
   described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle ( LLRV 1.
   Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and check-
   out flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965.
   The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total
   free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of
   approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and
   did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control
   rockets were operated briefly.
      The LLRV was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically
   regulated to counterbalance five-sixths of the vehicle’s weight to com-
   pensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth.
   This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forth-
   coming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable
   of delivering from 100 to 500 Ibs. thrust each, would be used to regulate
   lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study
   the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases
    of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar
   take-off. (FRC Release 2 m )
       Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. 0. Tischler, Director of NASA
    OART Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of MSFC
   Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-
   propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The
   authors reported that the F-1 engine represented “the largest thrust
    engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-1 engine has been
    under development for six years. Five F-1’s will be used in the first
    stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000
               ...
   pounds.
       “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than
                                                            ..
    15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. .
       (6
        [Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have
    produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated
                                                                 . .”
    almost as much test time as in the previous five years. .           (Text)
November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA’s        Associate Administrator for
    Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned
    Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the
    past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von
    Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile
                                       ...
    program on a top-priority basis.          The second decision a year later
    was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort,
                                                               ..   . The third
    completely separate from the ballistic missile program.
               ..
    decision . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space
                 ..
    Act of 1958. . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s
    1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.”
    Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of
    space. “AS sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space,
    as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role
    of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize
    on his presence in space.” (Text)
      7 W 9 8 0--85----25
378             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

November 4: us& launched Thor-Agena D space booster from WTR with
     unidentified satellite payload. (HHN-48)
0 Minuteman ICBM was successfully fired from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., by

     a Strategic Air Command crew from Malmstrom AFB, Mont. The mis-
     sile traveled 5,000 mi. down the Western Test Range. (M&R, 11/9/64+,
     10)
0 Capt. Theodore 6. Freeman (USAF) was buried with full military honors

     in Arlington National Cemetey, Va., with the entire astronaut team
     attending the services. (MSC Roundup, 11/11/64,1)
* Controller General Joseph Campbell said that the Federal Government could
     have saved $60 million by buying rather than leasing electronic data-
     processing systems for use on Government contracts. He recommended
     that a central management office be set up with authority to decide on
     the least expensive methods of obtaining data-processing equipment.
     (NYT, 11/4/64+)
November 5: MARINER 111 (Mars 64) was launched into interplanetary orbit
     from Cape Kennedy with an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle, but space
     craft communications failed when fairing did not jettison, preventing
     solar panel deployment. The Agena stage pushed the MARINER III into
     a parking orbit around the earth and coasted to the proper position for
     injection into a Mars trajectory. The Agena again ignited 32 min.
     after launching and sent the spacecraft toward Mars.
         Tracking data indicated that the second-stage Agena D booster shut
     down four seconds early on the second burn. MARINER 111’s four solar
     panels, designed to use power from the sun to recharge the spacecraft’s
     batteries, were prevented from deploying by failure of nose fairing to
     jettison. Further, the spacecraft did not align itself properly with the
     sun so that the communications antennas would be properly pointed.
         In addition to TV equipment for taking pictures of the Martian sur-
      face, MARINER 111 carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and
      magnetic forces near Mars and in unmapped space after swinging past
     the planet. This launch marked the first use of the USAF’S new Agena D
      upper stage and also the first U S space mission requiring a second
                                        ..
     igniting of the Agena D. (NASA Releases 266, 288; KSC Release 206-
     64; MSC Roundup, l l / l l / M , 7; Sullivan, NYT, 11/6/6d, 16; Chic.
      Trib., 11/6/64; Bak. sun, 11/6/64,1; HHN-48)
0 NASA launched a 110-lb. instrumented payload to measure upper atmos-

     pheric da glow emissions from Wallops Station, Va., aboard a four-
      stage solilpropellant Javelin (Argo D-4) sounding rocket. Dayglow
      studies were extended to higher altitudes than previous observations and
     tests of instrumentation being considered for future orbital missions
     were conducted. The payload, containing a spectrophotometer, ultra-
      violet photometers, and a rotating filter wheel photometer, was carried
      to an altitude of 548 mi. as scientific data were telemetered to ground
      receivers for 17 minutes. Impact occurred in the Atlantic 930 mi. from
      the launch site. (Wallops Release 6p-79; EASA Rpt. SRL)
 0 NASA successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill,

      Canada, to an altitude of 522 mi., with instrumented payload to measure
      the earth‘s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude.
      Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from
      a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. This was the
      first Javelin launched from the Churchill Research Range. (NASA Rpt.
                                                                       379
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

November 5: Lockheed-GeorgiaCo., Dawsonville, Ga., announced completion
    of the nation’s first facility for subjecting space hardware to the simul-
    taneous exposure of atomic radiation and extreme cold. The company
    planned to produce extreme cold through the use of liquid hydrogen
    which would be at -427” F. Equipment would consist of an insulated
    1,000-gal. liquid-hydrogen tank mounted on a railroad flatcar that could
    be rolled by remote control into the nuclear reactor radiation target
    area. (AP, NYT, 1     1/8/@, 26)
  Air Force Office of Scientific Research and Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
    nology announced jointly that scientists at the National Magnet Lab-
    oratory, using a giant water-cooled magnet, had produced the strongest
    continuous magnetic fields generated by man to date-up to 255,000
    gauss. Maximum fields were maintained for periods of a minute.
     (AFOSR Release, 11/64,2S)
0 George H. Arthur, Deputy Director of the International Telephone and

    Telegraph Aerospace Laboratory at Nutley, N.J., prcdicted that the Rus-
     sians would go to the moon before 1970 and make a manned circum-
    lunar mission in two and one half years. He said the United States
    would also be able to get to the moon by 1970 if it had as much success
    with its developmental program in the Saturn IB and Saturn V as it had
    with Saturn I. (Balt. Sun,11/5/64)
  Abraham S. Bass, Chief of the Technical Assistance Branch in NASA’s
    O5ce of Manned Space Flight, speaking at the Liquid Missile Pro-
    pellants Symposium in Hershey, Pa., pointed out that development and
    operation of the prime and auxiliary rocket engines required by NASA’s
    manned and unmanned space exploration programs would push pro-
    pellant production in the U.S. to unanticipated heights. NASA’s liquid
    hydrogen requirement was expected to rise to 14 million lb. per quarter,
    or 28,000 tons/year, during 1967. (Av. wh.,11/23/64, 64; NASA
    Proj. Off.)
* Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Special Assistant for Science
    and Technology, arrived in Moscow with a six-man group that would
    make a two-week tour of scientific and industrial institutions in Moscow,
    Leningrad, Minsk, and Novosibirsk to study Soviet methods of planning
    and coordinating scientific research. (NYT, 11/6/64,19)
  Navy Secretary Paul H. Mitze formally approved the retirement of Marine
    Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. The retirement was set for Jan. 1. (N.Y. Her.
    Trib., 11/5/64; NYT, 11/5/64,11)
November 5-6: NASA launched four grenade-bearing sounding rockets over
    an 18-hour period for meteorological studies in the upper atmosphere.
    Launched from Wallops Island at about six-hour intervals, the Nike-
    Apache two-stage solid-propellant rockets carried payloads containing
     12 special explosive charges which were ejected and detonated in the
    four flights at altitudes ranging from 25 to 59 miles. The series of
    flights was designed to provide information on variations in wind
     directions and speeds, atmospheric densities, pressures, and tempera-
    tures over a 24-hr. period. (Wallops Release 6 M O )
* NASA launched four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets within 18 hours from
    Wallops Island, Va., with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind,
     density, and pressure measurements up to 55.9 mi. All rockets and
    instrumentation performed excellently. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
380            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

November 6: NASA launched 295-lb. EXPLORER xxm (S-55~) meteoroid de-
    tection satellite from Wallops Station, Va., aboard a Scout vehicle. The
    satellite was a cylinder 24in. in dia. and 92 in. long. Its orbital ele-
    ments: apogee, 614 mi.; perigee 286 mi.; inclination to equator, 52';
    period, 99 min. EXPLORER M U ~ Iwas expected to have a useful lifetime
    of one year. Its primary purpose was to provide accurate knowledge of
    penetration capabilities of meteoroids and the resistance of various
    materials to penetration, thus facilitating design of spacecraft.
        The payload contained primary sensors (pressurized cells) designed
    to record the rate o meteoroid penetration in two different thicknesses
                         f
    o stainless steel; a capacitor-type penetration detector to determine
      f
     effects of high-energy radiation; cadmium sulphide cells to record the
    size of impacting meteoroids; impact detectors capable of detecting
     three levels of meteoroid momentum; two separate telemeter canisters
     for storing experimental data and relaying it to ground stations. Also
     onboard the Scout rocket was an experiment to measure air loads on
     the structure during its ascent through the atmosphere between 25,000
     and 40,OOO ft.
        The spacecraft was the successor to EXPLORER XVL (S-55b) ,launched
     Dec. 16, 1962, which made the first statistically significant sampling
     of meteoroids in near-earth space. (NASA Release 6 2 7 2 ; Wallops
     Release 64-81; Marshull Star, ll/ll/a, NYT, l l / 7 / a , 9; M&R,
                                                 1;
     11/16/64+ 33)
* NASA successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill,
     Canada, to an altitude of 444 mi., with instrumented payload to meas-
     ure the earth's geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak alti-
     tude. Data from this experimmt would be combined with that obtained
     from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. (NASA
      Rpt. SRL)
    X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay             in planned captive flight.
                                           (NASA)
       (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.)
*   NASA Nike-Apache sounding    rocket with French sodium-vapor payload
    was launched from India's Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude
    (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium
    vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric
    winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA Langley Research Center announced that power supply capability
    tests were being conducted on two huge magnet coils at the Space Radi-
    ation Effects Laboratory. In vperation, the magnet coils would be
    capable of creating a pulling power greater than 3,500 tons. m e
    magnet coils were part of the 600-million electron volt synchrocyclotron
    which NASA would operate to study the effect on spacecraft and their
    systems of the particle radiation streaming from the sun or trapped in
    the earth's magnetic field. (L ~ R CRelease)
* NASA announced that space scientists had adopted a new analytical method-
    neutron activation analysis-to help them determine the presence and
    quantity of oxygen in alkali metals. General Atomics Div. of General
    Dynamics Corp. undertook this oxygen-identification problem under a
    contract from Lewis Research Center. (LRC Release 64-102)
* First successful flight of a fully instrumented four-stage Athena re-entry
     research vehicle was achieved. Launched by USAF and USA from Green
     River, Utah, the payload covered approximately 417 mi. and impacted
                                                                           381
                                                                     ex.   (UPI,

                                                      Vandenberg AFB. It was
No
                                                      base. (AP, Wash. Eve.
     Star, 11/5/64)
  Air Force Systems Command‘s Research and Techology Div. reported
     the High Power Facility at the Rome Air Development Center (RADC)
     was operational. It was designed to evaluate high-power transmitting
     tubes and radio frequency components, and would support research in
     plasma physics and engineering where brute force was needed in direct
     current and pulse radio frequency. (AFSC Release 44-128-139)
  Italy’s largest private monitoring center said it had recorded radio signals
     indicating a new Soviet space launch. It speculated that the Russians
     might have placed a satellite in parking orbit around the earth as a
     base for a Mars launch. (Phil.     Znq., 11/7/64)
* The U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space took the follow-
     ing actions: (1) it invited the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee
      to study and submit a report on “the possibility of establishing a civil
     world-wide navigation satellite system on a non-discriminatory basis”;
      and (2) it decided to establish a working group to examine “the de-
      sirability, organization, and objectives of an international conference
      or meeting to be held in 1967 on the exploration and peaceful uses of
      outer space.” (NASA Qff. of Int. Aff.; U.N. Doc. A/57-79; NYT, 11/
     8/64,12)
November 7 : NASA successfully launched an Aerobee 150 to 132-mi. altitude
      from White Sands, N. Mex. Purpose was to measure absolute intensity
      of the stars in the ultraviolet with 50 Angstrom resolution. Payload
      was recovered about 65 mi. from the launch site. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Celebrating the 47th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, leaders of
     the Communist world watched a display of the Soviet Union’s newest
      and most powerful missiles. An antimissile missile, shown among six
      other rockets for the first time, appeared to be of greatest strategic
      significance. A four-engine missile, 60 to 65 ft. long, enclosed in a
      cigar-like tube about eight ft. in diameter, it was believed to be capable
      of reaching very high altitudes. (Clymer, Balt. Sun, 11/8/64; Tanner,
      NYT, 11/8/64, 1)
  West Germany’s Scientific Research Ministry proposed a three-point plan
      to stem the flow of German scientists to the United States. The plan
      would seek modernization of West German research institutes, higher pay
      for scientists, and quicker access to the top of the academic ladder for
      young scientists. (Reuters, NYT, 11/8/28; Shabecoff, NYT, 11/15/
      64,141
November 8: Pravda disclosed that the three crew members of the spaceship
      VOSKHOD I never used seat straps during their 24-hour flight except
      during the launching and landing stages. These men also said that their
      craft was equipped with a new con            stem that made it possible to
                                         as        on the dark side of the earth.
      orient the vehicle even w
       (Shabad, NYT, 11/9/64
  GAO complained NASA had spent money unnecessarily by producing four
      basically similar films on &e flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on
      the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project,
      two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    in the space program. The cost of the fls ranged from $216,000 for
                                               im
    one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on
    Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT,11/4/64,40)
November 8: Dr. Thomas B. Weber, formerly at Aerospace Medical Center,
    Brooks AFB, Tex., and now manager of advanced research for space
    engineering at Beckman Instruments, Inc., Fullerton, Calif., said that
    all spacecabin simulation experiments so far have had to be called off
    within a few days because of accumulation of toxic elements in the closed
    atmospheres. “This may be the reason Russia’s recent three-man space
    flight, which was expected to last several days, ended after only 24
    hours.” Dr. Weber continued, “Unless an answer is found, this is a
    definite threat to our own plans for a manned orbiting laboratory and
    it could delay the Apollo program to land men on the moon.”
       Working under USAF contracts, Dr. Weber had devised instruments to
    collect and identify more than 400 contaminants given off by the human
    body and by space cabin equipment. So far he had found that 20 were
    potentially lethal, including highly explosive hydrogen given off by water
    used in cooling systems; ozone, given off by eleotrical equipment; and
    ammonia, acetone, and alcohol found in breath, perspiration, and body
    wastes. “None of these occurs in dangerous amounts in a normal en-
    vironment,” Dr. Weber said, “but in a small cabin they build up to
                                                     ...
    lethal concentrations in short periods of time.         Our longest space
    flight so far lasted less than two days, but even on that one we ran into
    trouble filtering out the carbon dioxide exhaled by the astronaut.” (AP,
    Denver Post, 11/8/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64)
* In the Letters to the Editor column of the New York Times, Dr. Martin
    Summerfield, AIAA Vice President for Publications, took issue with
    sources quoted by NYT to the effect that Communist China would not
    be able to produce military nuclear-tipped rockets for another decade
    or even a generation. “As for rocket secrets,” he said, “there are none,
    either in theory or design. All one needs is a reading knowledge of
    English, French, or German, and a good collection of recent technical
    journals.” He said it was a serious underestimate to believe that the
     Chinese could not plan and execute an efficient research, development,
     and production program for practical missiles of medium range and a
    further underestimate to believe they were not close to their objective.
     (NYT,   11/8/64; A&A, 12/64,10)
NwemBer 9: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor
    payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km.
    altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed
    sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of at-
    mospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,Chairman of Senate Committee on
    Aeronautical and Space Sciences, recommended in letter to President
     Johnson that USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) and NASA
    Apollo-X programs be merged. Jointly operated national space station
     program would best utilize US. resources, according to his letter which
    Aviation Week cited in its Dec. 7 issue. Senator Anderson argued that
     $1 billion could be saved over‘five-year period if MOL were canceled
     and USAF funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. (Av. Wk.,
     12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
                                                                         383
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 41

November 9: NASA officials told Missiles and Rockets that Phase I of the
    floxed Atlas development program, which was to end this year, would
    be continued until mid-1965. Also delayed was the decision whether
    to move on to Phase 11, which called for development of flight hardware
    and two flights in the 1966-67 period. (M&R, 11/9/64,9)
* A scheduled flight of the X-15 rocket ship to test star-tracking cameras
    was canceled when rain soaked lakebeds used as landing fields for the
    plane. No new date was scheduled. ( r u s h . Post, 11/10/64)
  United Press International ( UPI) reported that the Air Force would attempt
    pickaback launch o a secret satellite (OV-1) next month from Vanden-
                         f
    berg m with hopes of proving a method which would save the tax-
    payers $370,000 per launch. The 300-lb. satellite, carrying its own
    rocket motor, would ride into space on the side of an Atlas missile
    making a re-entry test. Near the Teak of the Atlas’ flight, OV-1 would
    spring away, coast for a few seconds, and be launched into orbit by its
    own rocket. The Atlas would continue on its mission. (UPI, NYT,
    11/10/64,34)
  Air Force Systems Command announced that Air Force pilots would fly
    a high-altitude Lockheed U-2 aircraft in a research program directed
    by the Research and Technology Div.’s Air Force Flight Dynamics
    Laboratory, to measure and predict high-altitude clear-air turbulence
              .
     (Hi-Cat) The U-2 would gather Hi-Cat data at altitudes above 55,000
    ft. for developing a worldwide statistical model showing occurrence of
    clear-air turbulence. (AFSC Release 47-30-144)
* Physicists at Columbia University had produced a “photon echo” effect
    in a synthetic ruby crystal by shooting two successive flashes of light at
    it, Physical Review Letters reported. A ruby laser was the light source.
    The phenomenon, which scientists had not been sure was physically
    possible, was described as appearing as though a light flashed into a
    dark, empty closet received, after a pause, an answering wink of light.
    Authors of the research were Dr. Sven R. Hartmann, Norman A. Kurnit,
    and Dr. Issac D. Abella. The photon echo effect would seem potentially
    valuable in designing computers because it occurred at 186,000 mi./sec.,
    the speed of light, and because the nature of the effect would seem readily
    adaptable to computer use. (Schmeck, NYT, 11/9/M)
  Air Force Systems Command announced plans to orbit an experimental
    fuel cell able to produce both electricity for space power and pure drink-
    ing water for space crews. The fuel cell would be orbited from Vanden-
    berg AFB early in 1965. (AFSC Release 43-11-145; NYT, 11/10/64,34;
    Houston Post, ll/10/64)
* California Institute of Technology radio astronomers Glenn Berge and
    David Morris announced that Jupiter’s radiation belt is centered 30,000
    or more miles from the center of that 85,000-mi.-diameter planet, making
    the zone of intense radiation lopsided. Berge and Morris said they
    couldn’t explain their finding but that it did help to explain the origin
                                                      may result when Jupiter’s
                                                      oper angle to beam radia-
                                            T i m s Picayune, 11/9/64)
                                 (AP, N.O.
* ComSatCorp anno             ix companies had made summary proposals to
    provide research data and consultant services for ground terminal sta-
                 rican Telephone & Telegraph Co.; ARCS Industries, Inc.;
384             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

    Daniel, Mann, Johnson & Mendenhall; Hughes Aircraft Co.; Page Com-
    munications Engineers, Inc. ; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Of these,
    one or more contractors would be selected. ( ComSatCorp Release)
November 10: NASA launched its first pair of ship-to-shore sodium vapor
    cloud experiments aboard Nike-Apache sounding rockets, one at 5 :25
    p.m. EST from a launcher on the deck of the USNS Croatan, located
    &ut 75 mi. off shore south of Wallops Island, Va., the second at 5:28
    p.m. EST from a pad on Wallops Island. The payloads ejected sodium
    vapor trails up to an altitude of approximately 123 mi. Purpose was to
    study variations in wind conditions occurring at different altitudes and
    locations and to test shipboard equipment and procedures. Ground
    cameras photographed dispersion of the sodium trails, permitting scien-
    tists to measure wind velocities and directions from the photographic
    records. (Wallops Release 64A3; NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA NikeApache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was
    launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about
    119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor
    released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds,
    turbulence, and diffusivity. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  At the conclusion today of a test in which four men whirled for five days
    in a centrifuge, Dr. Bernard D. Newsom, Chief of Aerospace Medicine at
    General Dynamics/Astronautics in San Diego, Calif., announced that
     they had adapted so well it appeared there may be no human problem
    in spinning future spacecraft to create artificial gravity. “We are ex-
    tremely encouraged with the results,” he said, but he cautioned that more
     research is necessary before decisions could be made on the basic goal
     of the experiment-to determine if spacemen can adapt to live and work
     for long periods in a rotating environment. ( L A . Times, 11/11/64;
     Wash.Post, 11/11/64)
0 Speaking at the dedication of a monument at Cape Kennedy honoring

    Project Mercury and the nation’s seven original astronauts, Dr. Edward
    C. Welsh, Acting Chairman and Executive Secretary of the National
    Aeronautics and Space Council said: “Mercury served to lift the self-
    respect of our nation when it badly needed such a boost. I know that
    we still have widespread public support of our national space programs
    in spite of the criticism of some short-sighted individuals.” (NYT,
      ll/ll/w    48; AP, Balt. Sun, 11/9/64; Rossiter, UPI, Miami Herald,
     11/11/64)
November 11: The second set in a series of three dual ship-to-shore sounding
    rocket launchings was conducted at 5:24 p.m. EST from the USNS Croatan
    and at 5:27 p.m. from Wallops Island, Va., about 200 mi. apart. Sodium
     vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apaches from about 25 mi. up to an alti-
    tude of approximately 125 mi. The reddish-pink clouds were visible
    for several hundred miles along the East Coast. (Wallops Release 64,
    84; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, told
    the Radio and Television News Directors Association that television
     viewers would be able to watch the first astronauts land on the moon
     from the comfort of their living rooms. Television cameras carried by
    the astronauts would beam a signal back to earth which could be relayed
    to the majo? TV networks. The astronaut on the lunar surface would
     also take pictures as he walked along. All of these would be relayed
                                                                       385
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 04

    back to eaxth, Haney said. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/12/64; Maloney, How-
          Post, 11/12/649)
November 11: Institute for Satellite and Space Research scientists in Bochum,
    W. Germany, reported monitors had pioked up both radio signals and
    voice broadcasts on the same frequency used by thR Soviet Union for
    manned spacecraft. No manned space launch had been announced by
    U.S.S.R. (Sci. Ser., Wash. Daily News, 11/13/64)
November 12: The third and final set in a series of dual ship-to-shore sound-
    ing rocket launchings was conducted at 5:53 a.m. EST from the USNS
    Croatan and at 5:56 a.m. from Wallops Island, about 300 mi. apart.
    Sodium vapor was ejected by the NikeApache launched from the ship
    up to an altitude of approximately 141 mi.; sodium vapor failed to eject
    from the payload launched from Wallops Island. (Wallops Release
    64-85; NASA Rpt. sm)
e Harold B. Finger, Manager of NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office,
    commented in NASA Hq. nuclear rocket background briefing that the
    Kiwi and NRX power reactor tests conducted during 1964 “constituted
    the largest advance in rocketry and in rocket performance that has been
    made since [Robert] Goddard started flying his pump liquid rocket
                                        ..   .” (SNPO; NASA Press Conf.
    systems in the ’20’s and ’30’s.
    Transcript)
  Air Force Systems Command announced first successful demonstration of
    internal thrust from a “scramjet” (supersonic combustion ramjet) en-
    gine. The test was one in a series to demonstrate that scramjet engines
    could be developed for very-high-speed vehicles and was conducted
    under the direction of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Test
    conditior,. in the 30-in.-long scramjet engine simulated a speed of ap-
    proximately mach six over a brief burning period. Frontal area of the
    engine was approximately three-by-four inches. Scramjets differed from
    conventional engines in that they had moving parts only in the fuel feed-
    ing system and produced thrust by burning fuel in a supersonic air
    stream. (AFSC Release 4940-141)
  Institute for Strategic Studies, an international organization for research
     on defense, security, and disarmament, reported US. had increased its
    strategic superiority over U.S.S.R. The report warned, however, that
     cc
       this may be the last year in which the western superiority in long-
     range striking power is so marked.” By early next year the US. would
    have 925 intercontinental ballistic missiles, compared to U.S.S.R.’s 200.
    American superiority in fleet ballistic missiles had increased to four to
     one over U S S R . % less advanced counterpart of the Polaris. Soviet
     Union had maintained her superiority in submarine strength. (Cerutti,
    Chic. Trib., 11/13/64)
* In a report to Parliament, France disclosed plans to build up the French
     nuclear force for the next five years, including supersonic bombers, a
     Polaris-type submarine, and tactical atomic weapons for the army. Esti-
     mated cost of the program, which would extend over a five-year period
      (1965-70), was $11 billion. (Wash. Post, 11/13/64)
0 The National Academy of Sciences’ Panel on Astronomical Facilities pre-

    sented a 10-year program that would approximately double the
     nation’s ground-based astronomical facilities. Specific recommenda-
     tions were contained in a 105-page report, Ground-Based Astronomy-
     A Ten-Year Program. The total cost for construction and operation
386             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    of the new facilities outlined by the panel was estimated at $224 million
    over the 10-year period, the maximum annual expenditure of $26 mil-
    lion occurring during the fourth and fifth years of the program. The
    panel found, in analyzing “the present serious situation” with respect
   to ground-based astronomy: “Nearly every phase of observational astro-
    physics is hampered today because the rate of growth of new astro-
    nomical facilities had not kept pace with the increasing demand for
    fundamental data.
         “If astronomy is to progress, major new facilities are required.”
     (NAS-NRC Release, 11/12/64)
November 12: Dr. Robert L. Sproull, Director of DOD Advanced Research
    Projects Agency (ARPA), speaking at the dedication of the Xerox Cor-
    poration’s new research and development laboratory in Rochester, N.Y.,
    cautioned that the “spillover” from the Federal Government’s own de-
    velopment programs would in the future be less beneficial to industry
    than it had in the past. Dr. Sproull explained that this would come
    about because of increased efficiency in Federal research programs and
    (6
       good management will focus funds and attention ever more precisely
    on the specific mission and that mission is not the stimulation of Ameri-
    can industry.”
         Dr. Sproull offered two suggestions to fill the gap created by the dis-
     appearance of Federal “spillover”: (1) that a governmental extension
     service be set up to channel the university-scientificeffort into businesses
     unable to provide their own basic research; (2) that there be more
     encouragement of industry-research institutes such as the one main-
     tained by the textile industry at Princeton, N.J. (Frost, NYT, 11/13/64,
    47)
November 13: NASA announced that further analysis of results of the first
     experiments to use the laser beam for satellite tracking indicated that
     scientists had accompIished precision tracking of a satellite with a laser
     device. Tests were conducted on 10 passes of the EXPLORER XXII satel-
     lite since the first success on Oct. 11. (NASA Release 6 6 2 8 5 )
* NASA’s   Marshall Space Flight Center announced that two barnacle-encrusted
     capsules, each containing 100 ft. of color motion-picture film in good
     condition, were found, one on a beach at Eleuthera Island in the Ba-
     hamas, the other near a beach in San Salvador in Central America. The
     capsules had heen ejected from Saturn I SA-7 booster rocket launched
     Sept.’18, 1964, from Cape Kennedy. (UPI, NYT, 11/14/64, 24)
  NASA9S h w i s Research center announced that it was testing a gas bearing,
      designed as a research tool, in a vacuum simulating space environment
     ,above 100 miles. Suspended from the top of a 6O-ft.-long, 15-ft.-dia.
     tank, the bearing would provide complete freedom of motion to any
      payload attached to the bearing. A suspended payload would have
      three-axis mobility with a 10” swing in both pitch and yaw. The bear-
      ing, designed to carry an ,average 350-lb. payload, would enable scien-
      tists to evaluate low-thrust systems for attitude control or station-
      keeping in on-the-groundtests. (LRC Release Sa-105)
* United Technology Center’s lZO-in.-dia., solid-propellant motor for Air
      Force’s Titan 111-C booster was static-fired successfully for more than
      110 sec. with a new ablative nozzle-throat which probably would be
      sabstituted for the carbon throat previously used in test firings. (Av.
      Wk.,11/23/64,34;    UTC)
                                                                            387
                                                           1964
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

November 13: D . George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for
                   r
    Manned Space Flight, at the National Editorial Writers’ Conference in
    Cocoa Beach, Ha., said: “The Apollo development schedule is conserva-
    tive. The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a time scale four years
    longer than the Mercury spacecraft, two years longer than the B58
    Bomber, and one year longer than the X-15.”        (Text)
* UNESCO decided to convene an international meeting of scientists in Paris
     late next year to study the use of space satellites in mass communica-
    tions media. No exact date was set for the meeting. (NYT, 11/14/64,
    29)
* Harry F. Guggenheim, president of the Daniel and Florence Guggenheim
    Foundation, was named by NAA as the recipient of the Wright Brothers
    Memorial Trophy for 1964. (AP,         NYT, 11/14/64,31)
November 14: NASA successfully launched an Aerobee 150 to 128-mi. altitude
    from White Sands, N. Mex. Primary purpose was to measure absolute
    intensity of the stars in the ultraviolet with 50 Angstrom resolution.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* President Johnson appointed a national commission to study the impact
    of technological changes on American life. Howard Bowen, an econo-
    mist and president of the TJniv. of Iowa, was nominated chairman of
    the 14-member panel which would submit a report to Congress and the
    President on four areas: the role and pace of technological change,
    both past and future; the impact of technological change during the
    next ten years on the Nation’s economy and social structure; unmet
    community and human needs to which modern technology might be
    effectively applied; the most effective means for channeling technology
    into promising directions. (Wash. Post, 11/15/64, A6)
  Wolfgang Cartellieri, West Germany Research Ministry state secretary,
    announced that preparations had begun for a space satellite program
    involving small research and telecommunications satellites. (UPI, NYT,
    11/15/64,56)
November 15: Astronomers at San Miguel Observatory near Buenos Aires,
    Argentina, reported seeing a red-colored, unidentified flying object,
    traveling at four and a half times the speed of an ordinary man-made
     satellite, cross the sky from west to east at 8:30 p.m. local time, from east
    to west five minutes later, and then from west to east at 9:05 p.m.
     (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/16/64)
November 16: NASA launched its first Project Luster payload from White
     Sands, N. Mex., on an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket. Primary objectives
    of flight were to evaluate engineering performance of Luster micro-
    meteoroid-sampling instrument and to collect meteoritic debris during
    the peak of the Leonids meteor shower. The Aerobee 150 reached 97-
    mi. altitude, and performance of both the rocket and the instsumentation
    was considered “very good.” Nose cone did not fully retract, so the
     data collected during the flight were lost in re-entry heating and at-
    mospheric contamination. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va.,
     to an altitude of 117 mi. The payload contained three experiments, the
     most important of which involved the measurement of the composition
     of the neutral atmosphere in the altitude region of 62-155 mi. All three
    experiments operated satisfactorily. (NASARpt. SRL)
388            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

November 16: X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (NASA) in planned c a p
    tive flight. ( N A S A X - ~ ~ O f )
                             Proj. f .
          Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston divulged that its post-Apollo
  NASA’s
    study emphasis would be on a Y-shaped 36-man National Multipurpose
    Space Station that could be launched by Saturn V and be the primary
    space scientific and technical experimental center for at least five years
    in the mid-1970’s. (Av. Wk.,11/16/64, 51)
* An MSC investigative board announced that a snow goose, weighing about
    eight lbs., with a wingspan of more than 24 in., caused the fatal crash
    of Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (USAF) on Oct. 31. The bird struck
    the left side of the airplane canopy causing both engines to flame-out
     on impact. Captain Freeman, however, still had control of the aircraft
    and attempted to make a landing at Ellington. He flew a looping pattern
     over the Gulf Freeway and lowered his landing gear as he approached
    the field. When he apparently realized that a landing was not possible,
    he veered to the left into an open field, probably to avoid buildings at
    Ellington. Seconds later, at slightly under 100-ft. altitude, he ejected,
    too late for his parachute to deploy fully. (MSC Roundup, 11/25/64)
* Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA7S newly created Electronics
     Research Center, said in an interview with Missiles and Rockets that ERC
     would issue between 35 and 40 contracts, averaging about $50,000 each
     for a total of $2 million, within the next four months. Most of the
    contracts were expected to run for one year. (M&R, 11/16/&$, 10-11)
  The Sprint antimissile missile was partially displayed for the Association
     of the United S a e Army in Washington. Only the exterior shell was
                     tts
    shown-a coneshaped missile 27 ft. long and 4% ft. wide at its base.
     Sprint, combined with the Nike X, was designed to take off from below
     ground and intercept ICBM’s matter of seconds. (Watson, Balt. Sun,
                                  in a
     11/17/64)
  An announcement issued by the AEC said: “The United States today
     recorded seismic signals from an event in the Soviet nuclear test area
     in the Semipalatinsk region.” This was the first apparent Soviet under-
     ground nuclear test noted by the United States since the treaty banning
     all but underground nuclear tests was signed in August 1963. (NYT,
      11/17/64,3)
  The report that the White House might establish a “space czar” cabinet
     post to direct DOD and NASA space programs was discounted. The White
     House was against it, as were Secretary of Defense McNamara and NASA
     Administxator Webb. (M&R, 11/16/M, 7)
  Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC) , said during the career guidance clinic
     held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that thcre was a need for a na-
     tional information center to make new space knowledge available to
     educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/M)
 November 16-18: The Third International Symposium on Bioastronautics
      and the Exploration of Space, sponsored by the Aerospace Medical Div.
      of AFSC and organized by the Southwest Research Institute, was held in
      San Antonio, Tex.
         Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were
      named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have
      been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years.
      After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no
      serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar
      flares.”
    Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astro-
nauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation
for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts
to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr.
Firor said. (Maloney, Howton Post, 11/17/@; Sullivan, NYT,
11/17/641,16)
    Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory
 ILIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris,
said: “The principal justification for the operation o a manned center
                                                       f
on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.”
He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology,
it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth
to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much
as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL’ were begun
before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going
to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post,
12/19/64)
    Soviet scientists reported that the entire VOSKHOD I space flight was
conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space
physiologist, Dr. 0. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made
 it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly
 on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were meas-
urements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalo-
gram, eye movements, and seismocardiogram.
    Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that VOSKHOD preliminary
 results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the
 effects of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that
 significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new,
 spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had
 only 6een duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces,
 such as &OOO g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent
 phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring
 during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry.
390               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

      helium would eventually *beused as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmos-
      phere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on a l Soviet space
                                                                    l
      shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy
      in t!he U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium
      at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 1615)
         At a press conference, Dr. 0 G. Gazenko reiterated that the VOSKHOD
                                       .
      crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the
      Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would
      both be manned.
         “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the
                                                                               ...
      feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space.
      It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers
      were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from
      the Library of Congress.
         Dr. Gazenko, giving an *oralsummary of his much longer paper, said
      medical results of seven Russian manned space flights had not shown
      any insurmountable*barriers space flight.
                                     to
         “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned
      orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially
      selected ,and trained, can satisfactorilytolerate all orbital flight stresses,”
       Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material,
      important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special
      attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selkction and training,”
      he said.
         He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true
      long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the
      United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these prwb-
       lems. (HoustonPost, l l / l 8 / a )
         Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research
      Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards AFB, Calif.,
      called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits.
      “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a
      problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64)
         Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a ‘hew approach” in devel-
      opment of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the
      pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to opera-
      tions in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there
      is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation
      of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely
      about the cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64;
      Houston Post, 11118/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24)
         Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (WAF), Chief of the Comparative Psychol-
      ogy Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB,
      N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost
      total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum
      caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be
      plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan,
      NYT, 11119/64,19)
         Dr. C r l Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center,
               yi
      told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer
      to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by
       an inspdion of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.”
       (HowonPost, 11/17/64,)
                                                                            391
                                       D AERONAUTICS, 1 964

                                     two sounding rocket launches from USNS
NW
                                    d, Va., to determine whether or not ship’s
                                ized-mylar spheres with s&cient accuracy to
                                      data. Both payloads, each consisting of
                                       were provided by Univ. of Michigan.
                                      ,reached 136-mi. altitude and two spheres
     ejected and inflated, but ship’s radar did not acquire track. Land-based
     radars did obtain sphere trajectory data. The second rocket, a Nike-
     Cajun, reached 92.6-mi. altitude, its spheres ejecting and inflating as
     planned but deflating earlier than expected. Ship’s radar provided
     questionable position data which would have to be analyzed further.
     (Wallops Release 64436; NASA Rpta SRL)
0 The National Academy of Sciences released a statement from its Space

    Science Board recommending that unmanned exploration of the planet
     Mars, involving both physical and biological investigations and ex-
     pressly the search for extraterrestrial life, be made the primary objec-
    tive of the Nation’s space eftort in the ten to fifteen years following the
     Project Apollo manned lunar landing (197145). Such a program
     would be planned to (1) capitalize upon each stage of technological
    capability, (2) yield gangible, meaningful results at appropriate inter-
     vals with no potentially critical gap, (3) secure environmental data
    essential to manned ventures, and (LE) provide time for proper develop-
     ment of extended manned activities in space. (NAS-h%C Release
     11/17/64,; Text, 10/28/M)
  NASA Langley Research Center issued requests for proposals for the con-
    ceptual and preliminary design of a hypersonic ramjet research en-
    gine to be used in the Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project an-
     nounced by NASA last June. Since the project would ultimately include
     flight research with the en ‘ne mounted on the X-15 No. 2 aircraft, the
                                K:
     guidelines included a weig t limitation of 800 Ibs. for the final research
    engine, including necessary flight-test instrumentation and dimensions
     compatible with mounting the engine near the lower aft fuselage of the
    X-15. ( L ~ R CRelease)
  US. Army announced that the X V S A lift-fan jet V/Stol had made its first
     full transition flight, successfully converting to conventional flight after
     a vertical take-off. Tss were conducted at Edwards AFB, Calif. The
                             et
     XV-SA was said to have two big advantages over other types of vertical-
     flight planes: (1) it was much more economical in fuel consumption;
     ( 2 ) because the downward flow of air from the fans was relatively cool
     and gentle, the aircraft would have no trouble operating from unpre-
     pared dirt surfaces. (Witkin, NYT,11/18/64,17)
 James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, told the Council on World Affairs
392             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    pride or prestige. In the view of other nations, the relative effectiveness
    of the American system of free enterprise is, in a very real sense, being
    tested in space.” (Text)
November 17: Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., reported that it had devised a
    high temperature, ultra high-vacuum thermionic electron emission mi-
    croscope that can pictorially record critical problems associated with
    metal phase and grain growth change in missiles and hypersonic air-
    craft. The instrument was developed under contract to NASA. (L.A.
    Her& Examiner, llJ17/@)
  Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Demler, Commander, Research and Technology Div.,
    AFSC, speaking at the Seventh Hypervelocity Impact Symposium, said:
    “Another example of advanced development hypervelocity in nature if
    you will, is the ASSET Program. ASSET stands for Aerothermodynamic/
    Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests, and involves the flight
    verification and demonstration of aerodynamic and structural design
    concepts for the lifting re-entry class of aerospace vehicles. Three
    ASSET vehicles have been launched to date of which two were quite
    successful. The ASSET Program was originally conceived and conducted
    by the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory and has now been turned
    over to the Systems Command’s Space Systems Div. program for even
    more advanced vehicles.” (Text, AFSC Release)
  Army announced it had asked industry to submit proposals for a study of
    an advanced aerial vehicle for use as a weapons platform which might
    eventually replace current armed helicopters. The vehicle was con-
    ceived as an integrated aerial fire support system to include armament,
     avionics, and fire control equipment. (DOD Release 811-64)
* NASA announced award by Langley Research Center of $2.5 million con-
    tract to Boeing Co. for dynamic flight simulation work for the super-
     sonic transport program. The Boeing 707 prototype would be modified
     by installation of major control and computer equipment to permit
     complete simulation of a wide variety of supersonic transport types.
     (NASA Release 64-286)
November 18: A Thor-Agena D booster was used by USAF to launch an un-
    identified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 11/23/M, 8
      HHN-48)
* Flights to study the effects of sonic booms on structures and “to obtain
    preliminary data on sleep disturbance” began at White Sands Missile
    Range. The flights would be made through Dec. 17 and from Jan. 5
    through Fsb. 4 under the direction of the Federal Aviation Agency, as
    part of the program to develop a supersonic transport aircraft. (Clark,
    NYT, 11/13/64,58)
* The Hermann Oberth Award, presented annually by the Alabama chapter
    of AIAA, was awarded posthumously to Hugh M. Taylor, former special
    assistant to the Chief of the Guidance and Control Division, NASA Mar-
    shall Space Flight Center. Taylor, who had worked at Redstone Arsenal
    since 1951, was killed in a plane crash July 9 near Newport, Tenn.
    (Marshdl Star, ll/ll/M, 1, and 11/25/M, 1)
November 19: NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops
    Island, Va., to an altitude of 78 mi., to test the prototype Nike-Cajun
    grenade payload produced by Zimney Corp. Instrumentation perform-
    ance was satisfactory, except for failure of 12th grenade to explode.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
                                                                         393
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTLCS, 1964

November 19: NASA conducted two sets of experiments with Nike-Apache
     sounding rockets launched from the flight deck of the USNS Croatan:
      (1) an experiment to measure pressure, temperature, and density in the
     region of about 20- to 75-mi. altitude for the Univ. of Michigan; (2) ex-
     periments to measure electron density in the ionosphere for the Univ. of
     Illinois. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA Lewis Research Center undertook supervision at Lockheed Missiles
     and Space Company, Sunnyvale, Calif., of the design and development of
     a metal shroud section to replace the fiberglas section in Mariner 4. In-
     vestigations had indicated that the fiberglas fairing of MANNER 1 1     1
     probably had structural failure when exposed to the flight environment
     and that this prevented shroud separation from the spacecraft. (KSC
     Release 206-64,)
* In press interview during Third International Symposium on Bioastronau-
     tics and Exploration of Space, in San Antonio, Major Duane E. Grave-
     line, a USAF doctor who examined each of the Project Mercury astronauts
     after their flights, said there was no doubt that even brief forays into
     space created a certain physical debilitation. “What prolonged space
     flights, with the constant state of weightlessness and no gravity as we
     know on earth might do to the human body, we don’t know yet. We
     know that the Russian cosmonauts have suffered from the effects o pro-
                                                                         f
     longed weightlessness, and that U.S. astronauts Walter Schirra and L.
                                                                    ..
     Gordon Cooper had temporary debility for the same reason. . What
     we must do now is determine how to condition man for long-duration
     manned orbital missions and journeys into the universe. Frankly, we
     don’t have the answers yet.” (Macomber, Copley News Service, Sun
     Diego Union,11/19/fX)
  Cornell Univ. announced that scientists at the Ionospheric Observatory
     at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, bounced a radar signal off the planet Mars
     while it was about 138,000,000 mi. from earth today. Cornel1 said this
     was the farthest distance at which Mars had been detected by radar.
      (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/20/64)
* NASA announced that Francis J. Sullivan had been appointed Acting Direc-
     tor of the Electronics and Control Div., Office of Advanced Research
     and Technology. The position formerly was held by Dr. Albert J.
     Kelley, who became Deputy Director of the Electronics Research Center,
     Cambridge, Mass. (NASA Announcement 64-274)
  Dr. J. Allen Hynek of Northwestern Univ. said that he and his colleagues
     would submit a p-oposal to NASA for a 24-in. telescope to be landed
     on the moon Isy the mid-70’s. Such a telescope might double the
     size of the optically observable universe from its present radius of about
     5 billion light years to perhaps 10 billion. It would also “see” radia..
     tions from deep space that are totally excluded by earth’s atmosphere.
      (Schmeck, NYT, 11/20/64)
* Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced the closing of Atlas E,
     Atlas F, and Titan I missile installations. The inactivation would save
     $116.9 million annually. McNamara said he took the action because
     of “our now sizeable inventory of Titan I1 and Minuteman missiles which
     have far greater capabilities and can be operated and maintained at a
     fraction of the cost of the earlier models.” (SBD, 11/20/6LE; DOD Re-
     Iease 822-64)
      758
       -9    o--.g5---26
394             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

November 19: The Soviet Union marked Rocket Day, a new observance,
     by warning the West of the “stupendous power,’’ great range, and pin-
     point accuracy of its missiles. Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, chief of the
    rocket farces repeated the Kremlin’s claim that it had antimissile mi%
     des. (UPI, NYT, 11/20/64,27)
* A Commerce Dept. reprint of a Russian scientific article indicated that
     Soviet satellite COSMOS v had detected and reported a high altitude explo-
     sion of US. nuclear weapon over Johnston Island in the Pacific on July 9,
     1962. (NYT, 11/20/64)
* A Pershing missile, fired from an Army range north of Fort Bliss, Tex., by
     an artillery unit from Fort Sill, Okla., as part of a training exercise,
     crashed 4 mi. off course somewhere in the mountains near Creede,
                0
             It was not armed with explosives. (A€’, Sun, 11/23/@)
     Colo.                                              Balt.
November 20: General Creighton W. Abrams, Jr. (USA), presented the D s      i-
     tinguished Flying Cross to four of five Army pilots who recently broke
     ten world records for helicopters, including two records previously held
     by the Russians. The recipients were: Capt. William A. Welter, Jr.;
    Capt. Michael N. Antoniou; cwo Emery E. Nelson; and cwo Joseph C,
     Watts. The fifth pilot, Maj. John A. Johnston, was absent on an over-
     seas assignment. The records were for speed, distance, and time-to-cliib
     in class E-1, E-lD, and E l E helicopters. With official recognition of
     the new records, the U.S. would hold 26 marks (52%), the U.S.S.R. 14
     (28%), France 9 (18%), and Czechoslovakia 1 (2%). (DOD Releases
     793-64 and 8 2 M ; NYT, 11/7/64r, 53)
0 After analyzing atmospheric debris from Communist China’s nuclear test,

     nmlear physicist Seitaro Nakamura of Tokyo Univ. Institute for Nuclear
     Physics said China was nearer to detonating her first hydrogen bomb
     than France was. Quantities of U-238 and U-237 found in atmospheric
     samplings O t 17-25 over Japan suggested detonation had been a “mod-
                 c.
     erator test” of the type often made shortly before a hydrogen (fusion)
     test. ( S t h t , 11/20/64$481)
November 21 :Two NASA Satdi-EXPLORER           XXnr and EXPLORER XXV-were
     successfully launched into orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., aboard a
     single four-stage Scout rocket. This marked the first time NASA had
      orbited dual spacecraft with a single booster. The double payload was
     designed to provide more detailed information on complex radiation-air
     density measurements.
        EXPLORER XXIY (Air Density satellite) was a 12-ft.-dia., 19-lb. polka-
     dotted sphere identical to EXPLORERS IX and XIX. It was covered with
     aluminum foil to reflect both sunlight and radio waves; approximately
     4,000 white spots on the surface provided temperature control. EX-
                    would provide three types of global comparative measure-
     PLORER X X ~ V
     ments: (1) high-altitude air density; (2) sources of atmospheric heat
     through comparison of data with Injun and other satellites; and (3)
     density and temperature variations of the atmosphere as a function of
     latitude. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,550 mi.; perigee, 327 mi;
     period, 116min.; andinclination. 81”.
        EXPLORER xxv (Injun-B) , a 2-ft.-dia., %lb. metal satellite bearing
     16 radiation sensors to measure protons and electrons in various ranges
     of energy, was roughly spherical in shape with 40 ffat surfaces, 30 of
     them studded with solar cells. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,548
     mi.; perigee, 326 mi.; period, 116 min.; and inclination, 81”.
                                                                           395
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

        Tracking data after one complete orbit indicated that the satellites were
     close to planned orbit with all instruments operating. (NASA Release
     64-284; Goddard News, 11/30/64)
November 21 : Univ. of Pennsylvania announced a team of archeologists,
     using a rubidium magnetometer intended for outer space, had found
     what may be the 2,500-year-old ruins of the fabled Greek city of Sybaris.
     (AP,  Omaha Vorld Herald, 11/22/64)
  Vice Adm. Hyman G. Rickover (USN) was selected as recipient of the 1964
     Enrico Fermi Award for his contributions to development of nuclear
     power for submarines and power-generating plants. Rickover was the
    first engineer-administrator ever to receive the award. (Phil.     Inquirer,
     11/22/64).
Novembdr 22: Breene M. Kerr, who had been NASA’s      Deputy Assistant Admin-
     istrator for Technology Utilization, became Assistant Administrator for
     Technology Utilization. He thus took over part of the duties of Dr.
     George L. Simpson, who would function as Associate Deputy Adminis-
     trator and Assistant Administrator for Policy Planning. (NASA Release
     64-291)
  Dr. Thomas P. Murphy became NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for
     Legislative Affairs. Dr. PAurphy joined NASA in November 1%1 as a
     Staff Assistant to the Administrator and from July 1963 was Assistant to
     the Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Plan-
     ning. (NASA Release 64-292)
November 23: NASA successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket
     to an altitude of 110.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Experimental
     objectives were: (1) to measure daytime ion and electron densities and
     solar ultraviolet f u in the region from 31-124 mi.; (2) to test efficiency
                        lx
     of loop antenna section for extending CW propagation measurements to
    “D” region dtitudes. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA announced that USNS Croatan had completed its successful shakedown
     cruise off the Virginia-North Carolina coast during which a number of
     sounding rockets were launched for NASA. Electronic equipment and
     operational procedures were checked out in preparation for using the
     USNS Croatccn as a mobile launch platform early in 1965. During this
    three-month NASA expedition, forty or more scientific experiments would
     be launched from the USNS Croatan as part of NASA’s  sounding rocket pro-
                                                                          ,
     gram in connection with the International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY) 1964-
     1965. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Release 6 2 9 4 )
* USAF announced selection of the first six astronauts for its manned orbiting
     laboratory (MOL) program. An additional six would be named in early
     1965. Following a six-month basic training course, the crewmen, all
     graduates of USAF’S Aerospace Research Pilot School, would be assigned
     specialty areas. (Av. Wk.,    11/23/64,25)
* Paul P. Haney, Public Affairs Officer at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center,
     asserted that the bulk of 550 communications regarding NASA scientist-
     astronauts had to be classified as letters of interest. Swmty-five per
     cent of this number, or 412, were lacking some detail and about 100 had
     been eliminated altogether. The number of applications was ahead of
     the number received for other classes of astronaut, he said. These fig-
     ures clarified figures given by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Adminis-
     trator for Public Affairs, who had said on Nov. 22 that only 20 applica-
396             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 64

     tions had been received and that only nine of these applicants qualified.
      (Houston Post, 11/24/64)
November 23: Aviation Week reported that Soviet space-medicine spe-
     cialists were considering bacterial compatibility in their selection of
     cosmonaut teams for the three-man Voskkiod spacecraft. This was an
     important consideration because of the difficulty of preventing communi-
     cation of bacterial floxa, which might be harmless to one man and dan-
     gerous to another, in a closed-cabin environment. It was not known
     whether persons with similar metabolic processes would be selected for a
     single crew or whether those with extremely different ones might not
     compensate each other, nor had it been determined whether the VOSKHOD
     I flight crew was selected for bacterial compatibility. (Av. Wk,
     11/23/64,59)
November 23-24: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center was host at the jointly
     sponsored Goddard-IEEE Short Term Frequency Stability Symposium to
     some 310 scientists and engineers from across the country, England,
     Canada, and Switzerland. The symposium was the first of its kind to
     study problems associated with generating stable frequencies in the micro-
     wave region for the control, guidance, and tracking of launch vehicles
     and satellites. (Goddurd News, 11/30/64, 1)
November 24: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of
     Beckman Instruments Corp. to negotiate final contract for three Satellite
     Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (Stars) at slightly more than
     $1,000,000. The contractor would be responsible for manufacture, in-
      stallation, and maintenance of the system as well as training of Goddard
     ptxsonnel. This second phase of the Goddard Stars project would pro-
     vide a highly automated method of preparing large quantities of data for
     later analysis by the scientific community. (GSFC Release 6-33-64)
* At the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio,
      four college men completed a test in which they lived on astronaut food
      for 28 days in a spacecraft type of capsule and 14 more days in hospital
     isolation. They ate what was called “freeze dehydrated foods” that came
     in one-in. cubes of beef, chicken, etc. Liquid was distilled water, tea, and
      fruit juices. No ill effects were apparent. (NYT, ll/27/64,31)
0 Canada announced the completion of negotiations for building a 150-in.

      optical telescope at Mt. Kobau, B.C., in commemoration of the recent visit
     to Canada of Queen Elizabeth 1 . (Shaw, CSM, 11/24/64)
                                        1
* Izvestia, the Soviet governrnent newspaper, announced the death of Y. A.
     Korovin, a leading Soviet authority on international and space law.
      (AP, Galveston Tribune, 11/25/64)
November 25: James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, and Allen Fairhall,
      Australian Minister for Supply, announced jointly that a tracking station
      to support the Apollo manned lunar flight would be established near Can-
      berra, Australia, as a part of the worldwide unified S-band Apollo track-
      ing network. The station would be equipped with an 8543. diameter
     parabolic reflector antenna to support the lunar phases of A p l l o mis-
     sions. (NASA Release 64t-290)
   The Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV),piloted by Joseph A. Walker
                  Flight Research Center, attained an altitude of 30 ft.-the
     of NASA’s
     highest point in five brief flights-and landed safely. Walker said he
      was highly pleased with the crafi’s performance. The flight was con-
     ducted at Edwards AFB, Calif. (AP,        NYT, 11/26/64, 9)
                                                                           397
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

November 25: Launch of Stratoscope 11 balloon was delayed at least 4 hours
                                                                        8
     when a tube used to fill the 300,ooo-C~. balloon with helium slipped
                                                ft.
     and punctured the plastic skin. Another balloon was to be sent to the
     Palestine, Tex., launch site from the G. T. Schjeldahl Co. in Northfield,
     Minn. (M&R, 11/30/6p, 29; NYT, 11/26/64,34)
* In a speech to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., NASA’s      Direc-
     tor of Advanced Manned Ear& Orbital Missions M. J. Raffensperger
     said: “Our limited flight experience to date indicates that any deleterious
     effects of space flight can be controlled, but man’s reaction to longdura-
     tion space missions is not yet quantitatively understood. Thus, the bio-
     medical and behavioral areas must receive major attention in the earlier
     extended duration earth orbital flights.” Other areas that Mr. Raffen-
     sperger felt showed promise in providing beneficial returns to humanity
     were “research and observation of meteorology from a manned space-
     craft” and “earth mapping and survey.” (Text)
* NASA announced it had awarded 33 supplementary or new research grants
     and contracts totaling $2,418,634 to 26 colleges, universities, and private
     research institutions. (NASA Release 64-295)
November 26: A Thanksgiving Day message from President Johnson was
     broadcast ‘by RELAY I, RELAY 11, and SYNCOM II communications satellitm
     to American armed forces all over the world. (Day, Phil. Eve. BulL,
     11/%/6p)
  The ground station at Rao, Sweden, about 225 mi. southwest of Stockholm,
     joined the world network of communications satellite ground stations
     and would receive taped television messages via NASA’s    RELAY I satellite.
     The station was the joint effurt of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden.
      (M&R, 11/30/64r, 20-22)
* USN announced $36,000 contract with the Convair and Electric Boat divi-
     sions o General Dynamics Corp. for analytical and design studies of a
             f
     flying submarine-a small craft capable of flying to and submerging for
      operations in relatively closed waters. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/27/64)
November 27: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for
     Manned Space Flight, announced that about 100 of the 1 personnel
                                                                   M
     in the Kennedy Space Center Launch Support Equipment Engineering
     Div. would move from Marshall Space Flight Center to KSC by Aug.
      1%5. (NASA Release 64c298; NYT, 11/28/64,16)
* The European Space Research Organization (ESRO) Council approved its
     program for 1965, which would include setting up tracking and tele-
      measuring stations in Belgium, the Falkland Islands, and Alaska. The
     program would also include 41 experiments during 28 rocket firings,
      four experiments with the polar ionospheric satellite Esro 1 to be fired
      in September, and six experiments with the Esro 2 satellite for the study
     of cosmic rays. Payment o $17.2 million was voted and contracts
                                     f
      worth $34.6 million were authorized. (AP,      NYT, 11/29/64, 20)
   President Johnson named Dr. Charles Stark Draper, head of Dept of
      Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
      as a recipient of the National Medal of Science. Dr. Draper, a leader
      in developing aeronautic and astronautic instruments and controls, was
      one of 11 scientists to be so honored. (NYT, 11/28/6p, 16)
November 28: NASA MARINER N Mars probe was successfully launched into
      interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy, ma., by an Atlas-Agena D
      launch vehicle. The Agena D separated from the Atlas 115 mi. up and
398             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     injected itself into a parking orbit around the earth. It then reignited
     and injected itself into a Mars trajectory. MARINER IV was detached
     and locked onto the sun for solar power and stabilization on one axis
     and opened its solar panels. Later, the probe would lock on the star
     Canopus for second-axisstabiliation-the first time a star would be used
     for an attitude reference on a long space mission. In addition to equip-
     ment for televising the Martian surface, MARINER IV carried instruments
     to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near earth, Mars
     and in deep space. The trajectory as presently calculated would carry
     MARINER IV within 151,000 mi. of Mars by mid-July. (NASA Releases
     266, 288; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/64; NYT, 11/29/64; Miles,
     Wash. Post, 11/30/64)
November 28: USAF Athena missile was destroyed in flight over south-
     eastern Utah when high winds threatened to force it off course. The
     Athena was used to test re-entry procedures for ICBM’s. UPI, St. Louis
                                                                    (
     Post-Dispatch, 11/28/64)
0 At his news conference in Johnson City, Tex., President Johnson spoke of

     Vice President-elect Humphrey’s prospective duties. “I know he has
     demonstrated an intense interest in our space activities, and under the
                                                                         . . .”
     Space Act he will be the new Chairman of the Space Council.
      (Transcript, UPI, Vush. Post, 11/29/64)
November 29: Carbon 13 was observed in the comet Ikeya in about the same
     proportion as it occurred on the earth by Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein of
     the Mount Wilson and Palomar Observatories and Dr. Antoni Stawi-
     kowski of the Nicolaus Copernicus University of Poland working at
     Pdomar Observatory. “This lends credence,” said Dr. Greenstein, “to
     the theory that comets, and there may be millions of them, were formed
     in about the same region of the solar system as the earth and were blown
     into their present, vast, elliptical orbits. The fact that the carbon isotope
     ratio is similar for Ikeya and the earth argues against the theory that
     comets are captured, interstellar wanderers that were formed beyond
     the solar system. If comets were born elsewhere, one would expect them
     to be unlike earth.” (NYT, 11/30/64,11; AFOSR Release 11-64-3 9”)
  It was announced that a new ultraviolet radiation spectrograph had been
     developed at NASA Goddard §pace Flight Center in an effort to solve the
     mystery of “airglow.” The spectrograph would be carried aloft by a
     rocket and would be expected to reveal the constituents and mechanisms
     of the airglow. (NANA, Sun Diego Union, 11/29/64)
November 30: NASA and Pan American Airways announced that a scheduled
     Pan Am flight operating between San Francisco and Honolulu had suc-
     cessfully received error-free teletype messages for one hour from NASA’s
     communications satellite, SYNCOM 111, which was in stationary orbit
     over the mid-Pacific. NASA said that the relay of communications to
     an aircraft in flight from a station on the ground was another “first”
     for SYNCOM III. (NASA Release 64-297)
  MARINER IV Mars probe finally locked its sensor on the star Canopus after
     fixes on three wrong stars. Jet Propulsion Laboratory 05cials noted
     that picking up wrong stars was not critical in the early stages of the
     flight. If the MARINER IV had not dropped these wrong fixes of its own
     accord, the action could have been commanded from the ground. Only
     if Canopus were in the sensor’s sights would the TV camera be aimed at
     the Martian surface when MARINER rv flew past the planet 79$$         months
                                                                         399
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    from now; only with Canopus in view would scientists know the space-
    craft’s attitude with the precision needed for a midcourse rocket firing of
    maximum accuracy to refine the course of the trajectory and bring the
    MARINER IV within about 8,600 mi. of Mars instead of the presently antici-
    pated distance of 151,000 mi. (Miles, Wash. Post, 11/30/64; Witkin,
    NYT, 11/30/64, 1; National Observer, 11/30/64; Witkin, NYT,
    12/1/64, 1 ) .
November 30: NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands,
    N. Mex., with experiment to obtain optical spectra of night ultraviolet
    airglow. Rocket attained 113.5-mi. altitude, and the attitude control
    system kept the two fast spectrographs pointed accurately at the horizon,
    permitting four-minute exposure of the faint molecular oxygen Herz-
    berg bands. Also included in payload was a Nikon camera to obtain
    star-field backgrounds for aspect determination. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched in U.S.-Pakistan project from Son-
    miani reached 124cmi. altitude. Sodium vapor trail ejected during
    ascent was photographed by ground cameras to measure atmospheric
    wind directions and speeds. Launch was part of cooperative program
    between NASA and Pakistan’s Space and Upper Atmosphere Research
    Committee. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* The Soviet Union launched ZOND 11probe in the direction of the planet Mars.
    The purpose of the launching was said to be trying of the station’s sys-
    tems under actual conditions of prolonged space flight and gaining of
    practical experience. Scientific investigations in interplanetary space
    would be carried out simultaneously. The probe was proceeding along
     a trajectory close to the computed one. (Taw, Krasnaya Zvezda,
    12/2/64 1, ATSS-T       Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/2/64; Clymer,
    Balt. Sun, 12/2/68)
* X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John B. MuKay (NASA) to 86,000-ft.
    altitude at maximum speed of 3,000 mph (mach 4.54). The flight con-
    tinued checkout of the revised landing gear system on the No. 2 aircraft
    and checked modifications made to prevent nose gear from coming down
    prematurely. Total engine burn time was 76 sec. and tests performed
    were successful. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.)
* The National Center for Atmospheric Research postponed the launching of
     a huge balloon equipped to carry a 36-in. telescope 15 mi. into the
     stratosphere to photograph Jupiter and star clusters. (UPI, NYT,
     12/1/64, 2)
* Dr. Nancy Roman, Chief of NASA Astronomy programs, told Space
     Business Daily that her o f c had a program under consideration
                                   fie
    for a 50-55-in. telescopic mirror manned orbiting observatory which
    might orbit in the mid-1970’s. Although she emphasized that all plans
    were in the “thinking stage,” Dr. Roman said the 50-55-in. configuration
    would provide another interim link between the unmanned Orbiting
     Astronomical Observatory series and the manned 100-in. configuration
     being considered for launching in 15 to 20 years. “The 50-55-in.
     interim configuration should be such,” she said, “that it could be used
     either manned or unmanned. But it will have as its principal objective
    the proving of man’s ability as an orbiting astronomer.’’ (SBD,
     11/30/64, 132)
  NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s deadline for industry proposals to
     design a lOO-lb.-thrust rocket engine for manned space systems. Desig-
400             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

   nated “C-1,” the engine would be powered by monomethylhydrazine and
   nitrogen tetroxide, which would be hypergolic and storable. The engine
    could be employed for attitude control, maneuvering, and ullage control
    purposes. (A&A, 12/64,75)
Nmember 30: Results of five public opinion surveys conducted in 12 cities
    over 14 months for Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Grumman Aircraft En-
    gineering Corp. were announced. Findings indicated that most Ameri-
    cans supported the national goal of landing men on the moon by 1970
    but they felt no sense of urgency about achieving it. One third of those
    interviewed thought spending should be reduced. (NYT, 11/15/64,66)
 Gen. Thomas S. Power (USAF) retired as Commander-in-Chief of the Stra-
    tegic Air Command (SAC). He was succeeded by Lt. Gen. John D. Ryan,
    formerly SAC Vice Commander-in-Chief. Ryan would be made a four-
    star general. (NYT, 12/1/@, 46)
 Canaveral District of the Army Corps of Engineers announced award
    of $19,055,953 firm-fixed-price contract to the George A. Fuller
    eo., for construction of Pad B of NASA’s Saturn v complex 39 at Merritt
    Island, Fla. The contract also provided for building a two-mile section
    of crawlerway for transporting launch and arming towers to the pad.
     (DODRelease 84a6LE; M&R, 11/30/64,22)
November 30-December 3: James T. Ramey, a commissioner of the Atomic
    Energy Commission, analyzed the use of cost-effectiveness techniques
    in a speech to the Atomic Industrial Forum in San Francisco. He said:
    LG The cost effectiveness technique assumes end-applications or require-

    ments, and then figures out the costs of alternative systems of achieving
                                      ..
    equal or greater effectiveness .      it would seem that the requirements
    system, and the cost effectivenesstechniques, tend to favor the status quo
                                                       .
    in technology, if not in economics or politics. . .
        “This leads me to the conclusion that the underlying problem is really
    whose judgment and recommendations should receive most weight in
    determining which development programs and projects should go for-
    ward. Should these decisions be made by the science advisors and co-
    ordinators, and budget specialists who have no direct programmatic re-
    sponsibility and are not accountable for failure to carry out the directives
    of the President and the Congress? Or should the judgment of the
    developmental agency which has the statutory responsibility for the pro-
    gram and the technical depth and experience receive the most
                  .
    weight? . . I have a certain affinity for giving considerable weight
    to the judgment of the development agency, which, in regard to atomic
    energy, would be the AEC and its laboratories. In regard to nuclear
    energy in space, it would be AEC and NASA, and to some extent the Air
             ..  .
    Force.
        “I am quite optimistic about achieving the great possibilities of atomic
    energy in space. I firmly believe the atom will provide the means for
    the propulsion and servicing of manned space ships for moon missions
                                                        .”
     following Apollo, and to and from the planets . .      ( A v . Wk.,1/11/65,
    111
During November: NASA’s       Flight Research Center completed a series of
    wind-tunnel tests of X-15 models with canard stabilizers mounted on the
    nose to determine if a canard’surface would permit the X-15 to re-enter
     the atmosphere at higher angles of attack. Tests were carried out in a
    Jet Propulsion Laboratory tunnel. (M&R, 11/9/64,, 9)
                                                                           401
                     ONAUTICS AND AER




    the smaller star. The two stars revolve about a common center so fast-
    &out every 81% min.-that they should radiate gravitational waves,
    if such waves exist. (NYT, l Z / l / a , 31)
* General Curtis E. LeMay, USAF Chief of St&, was interviewed in General
    Electric Forum and discussed aerospace power’s contribution to national
    security. “In recent months, the area of direct technical concern to the
    Air Force has Ibecome much broader. For example, wemust now press
    for technical superiority not only in aircraft but also in missiles, space
    systems, and command and control systems that are responsive to the
    compressed time scale of military operations. We cannot afford to fall
    5ehind in any of these fields, because the potential enemy can be expected
    to exploit all of the important technical gaps that might appear.”
    LeMay said that “chiefly because of the cost factor, we are not exploiting
    anything like the total amount of technology that we think might be
    useful. Certainly we would like to do more, but our R&D outlay already
    comprises 18 percent of the Air Force’s total budget and must be balanced
    against other needs.” (GE Forum, 10-12/64+, 1P-17)
  Linde Division of Union Carbide has “grown” a new solid-state
     laser material for use by scientists in laser research at the Marshall
     Space Flight Center Astrionics Laboratory. The new material was
     yttrium aluminum garnet doped with neodymium. It supported solid-
    state continuous-wave laser action, with common tap water as the only
     coolant. Toughness of the garnet was comparable to that of ruby laser
     rods. (Marshall Star, 11/18/64,2)
* In an editorial in Astronautics and Aeronautics, H. H. Koelle said: “Sup-
          ...
    pose         that a space station could be made available with working
     area in the station and a round-trip ticket purchased by individual coun-
    tries for their scientists, and that an advanced aerospace transportation
    system will be developed anyway as part of the US. space program.
    Analysis o such an operation indicates that an international research
                f
     station of this kind could be built in the late 1970s, and that the price of
     a three-month field trip to the station might well be kept in the order of a
                                                    ...
    million dollars a person. Many countries              would be able to pay
     this price and would enthusiastically participate in the project. During
                  ..
     the 1980s, . the charges should be reduced considerably, thus
0
402             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTKCS, 1964

    building new centers of science and technology when existing facilities
    in research-concentrated areas become obsolescent. The Subcommittee
    also called for the White Home to convene a Government-industry con-
    ference to study such problems. (M&R, 11/16/64+,       11)
During November: A tern from Lockheed Propulsion Co. visited NASA
    M a d a l l Space Flight Center to brief scientists there on possible use of
    156-in. soIid motor as a strap-on for the first stage of both Saturn IB
    and Saturn V. (M&R, 11/23/64+, 7)
0 Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2,017,400 contract to Granite

    Construction Co., Houston, Tex., for construction of a vehicle component
    supply building and a hazardous materials storage building at its Saturn
    rocket production plant (NASA Michoud Operations) in New Orleans.
     (Marshall Star, 11/18/64,4)
  North American Aviation, Inc., announced Fy 1964 sales of $2,189,-
     594,000, the largmt annual total ever recorded by a company predomi-
     nantly in the aerospace business. (Av. Wk.,     11/16/64,29)
                         December 1964
December 1 : First full-power static firing of the hydrogen-fueled Saturn
    S-IVB stage was achieved at the Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div.,
    Sacramento, Calif., Test Center. The J-2 engines were operated at full
    200,000-lb. thrust for ten seconds as planned. This marked the first use
    of the new NASA Test Complex Beta, consisting of two 150-ft.-high steel
    and concrete stands capable of holding down rockets with more than a
    million pounds thrust. Primary objectives of the ten-second test were
    to achieve engine start, advance to full thrust, stabilize main-stage oper-
    ation for the duration, and shut down on schedule. (Marshall Star,
    12/9/641,9; M&R, 12/7/64,9; DMSSD Apogee, 12/64)
  USAF launched a new Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System experimental nose-
    cone (Abres) from Vandenberg AFB 5,000 mi. down the WTR on an
    Atlas-D ICBM. The nosecone tests were being conducted to develop more
    effective re-entry systems for America’s intercontinental ballistic missiles.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/64; Houston Chron., 12/1/64)
0 Nike-Cajun sounding rocket successfully launched from the Argentine

    launch range at Chamical to study the ionosphere. Payload contained
    continuous wave propagation, electron temperature, and ion density
    experiments. This was first rocket launched by a South American
    country under a cooperative arrangement with NASA. Project was
    administered jointly by the Argentine National Commission of Space Re-
    search ( C ~ I E )and NASA. Argentina built the payloads and part of the
    ground station, while NASA trained Argentine technicians and engineers
    and provided some ground support equipment. Argentina purchased
    two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets in the US. No exchange of funds
    took place between the two agencies. (NASA Release 66304; NASA Rpt.
     SRL)
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached 124-mi. altitude in US.-Pakistan
    experiment from Sonmiani. Sodium vapor trail from the rocket was
    photographed by ground cameras to measure direction and speeds of
    upper atmospheric winds. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Soviet Union announced that the spacecraft, ZOND n, headed for Mars in an
    apparent race with MARINER IV, had run into difficulties. The Soviet
    report said that in the first few radio contacts between ZOND 11 and the
    ground “the power supply on board the space station was about half of
    the expected level.” Position information indicated the probe was 25,OqO
    mi. from earth. (Witkin, NYT, 12/2/64, 1; Simons, Wash. Post,
    12/2/64)
* Robert G. Deissler, NASA Lewis Research Center, received the Heat Transfer
    Division Memorial Award of the American Society of Mechanical En-
    gineers in New York City. (LRC Release 6 6 1 0 8 )
  Dr. J. E. Geake of the Manchester College of Science and Technology said
    that undamaged material on the moon brought to the surface by the
    impact of a meteorite or by possible volcanic activity could account for
                                                                      403
404             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    patches of red light observed &ere. He suggested that if the impact
    were in a region of luminescent material, the rocks would emit light when
    hit by charged particles. The impact could have occurred 10,000 or
    even 100,000 years before the luminescence was observed. (Sci. Serv.,
    NYT, 12/1/64,19)
December I :Former NASA astronaut Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. ( USMC) , com-
    pleted 15-day assignment at El Toro, Calif., MCAS, where he was on TDY
    for flight refresher training. (J/Anned Forces, 11/28/64,5)
December 2: Henry 0.       Slone, Snap8 project manager at NASA Lewis Research
    Center, reported a successful 76-hr. test of Snap-8’s turbine alternator
    assembly (TAA) using mercury as the working fluid. “This test dem-
     onstrated operational capability and machine performance up to 80%
     of its rated power,” Slone said. Snap-8 (System for Nuclear Auxiliary
     Power) was designed to supply electric power onboard a spacecraft and
     would use nuclear heat to produce 35 kw. of power. When fully devel-
     oped, it would have the capability to operate unattended in space for
     10,000 hours. (LRC Release 64-111; M&R, 12/14/64,10)
0 NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded contracts totaling almost $1mil-

     lion: Garrett Corp., with a $384,665 contract, would develop a portable
     life support system to be worn on the astronaut’s back when he would
     leave his capsule in space, or for moon exploration; Boeing Co. was
     awarded a $299,746 contract for a feasibility study of placing a labora-
     tory capsule on the Apollo spacecraft; the US. Naval Air Equipment
     Center, Philadelphia, was given $45,000 to evaluate the dependability of
     the water-cooled undergarment to be worn by astronauts in space flight
     and lunar exploration. (AP,       Balt. Sun,12/4/64)
0 An F-104       aircraft participating in sonic boom tests for supersonic trans-
     port program, at Alamogordo, N. Mex., inadvertently created a boom
     20 times as great as those expected from the proposed airliners and 10
      lbs. psf greater in pressure than the 30-lb. upper limit planned for these
      tests. The incident occurred during a demonstration for newsmen and
      recorders on measuring instruments in test structures were not turned
      on. (Clark, NYT, 12/3/a; Time, 12/11/64)
  The Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), following up Defense Secretary Mc-
      Namara’s announced deactivation of 19 airfields, called attention to the
     procedures by which surplus military airfields could be transferred to
      state or local public agencies for development as civil airports. The
      procedures were established by the Surplus Property Act of 1944 and its
      amendments. More than 600 airports had been transferred to state and
      local agencies under this statute since the end of World War 11. (FAA
      Release W108)
   Four USAF Tactical Air Command F 4 (Phantom 11) jet fighter aircraft
      landed at MacDill AFB, Fla., after completing an 18-hr. flight of almost
       10,000 mi. The Phantoms refueled several times from KC-135 jet
  -   tankers. Flight, which set a new unofficial endurance record for jet
       fighter aircraft, was made to evaluate the capabilities of the F 4 C air-
       craft during sustained, ultra-long-range flight and to evaluate the physio-
       logical and psychological effects on the crews under these conditions.
        ( DOD Release 8 5 2 4 ; Wash. Post, 12/3/64)
   USAF Electronic Systems Division announced award of $1,350,000 fixed-
       price contract to Space-General Corp. for design, fabrication, and testing
       cif satellite payloads. (DOD Release 8 N 4 )
                                                                          405
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

December 2: The New York Stock Exchange banned stop orders in shares
     of the ComSatCorp., hoping to prevent aggravated price swings in
     ComSat shares. ComSat had finished as the third most active issue
     for the day, having traded as high as 52%. (Vartan, NYT, 12/3/64,
     69)
* Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced
     Research and Technology, spoke on “New Technology-Its Selection
     and Development” before the Atomic Industrial Forum conference in
     San Francisco. His address made the following points: (1) pre-
     eminence in space demands that a program of development of new tech-
     nology be continuously supported; (2) the formulation of a responsible
     requirement requires the existence of an underlying body o technology;
                                                                  f
      (3) the development of a new branch or extension of a branch o tech-
                                                                         f
     nology should be directed at a related class of requirements rather than
     a single requirement; (4) development of a new technology requires the
     existence of a focal point in the form of advanced hardware; (5) short
     and long-term goals must be related to the Nation’s policies and plans;
      (6) our goals must be continuously assessed; (7) our work must be rele-
      vant to the goals which have been set; and ( 8 ) better processes of pro-
     gram management must be devised. He said in conclusion: “A balance
      of technologies in our favor will, however, require wisdom in the selec-
      tion of new technologies in which to invest our resources and resolution
      in their development.” (Text)
 December 3: Speaking at Georgetown Univ.’s 175th anniversary convocation,
      President Johnson said: “For almost the first time the interdependence of
      nations is not a remote goal or a ringing slogan. It is a fact which we
      neglect at our peril.
         (6
            Communications satellites, atomic rockets and jet transports have
      made distant capitals into close neighbors. Our challenge is to trans-
      form this reality into an instrument for the freedom o man.
                                                            f
         “Today the cost of failure to communicate is not silence or serenity
      but destruction and dissolution.” (Text, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/64)
 * President Johnson directed that contracts of engine and airframe manu-
      facturers working on a projected supersonic transport plane, which
      expired Nov. 30, be extended. Four firms were affected: the Boeing Co.,
      and Lockheed Aircraft Corp., which had airframe contracts; and the
      General Electric Co., and the Pratt & Whitney Div. of the United Air-
      craft Corp., which had engine contracts. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/4/64)
 * A joint British-American group of communications engineers was pre-
      paring recommendations for a communications base in the Seychelles
      Islands, northeast of Madagascar. Station would fill a wide gap between
      Atlantic and Pacific stations in the present worldwide chain of receiving-
      transmitting stations for satellites. Existing network, set up by the US.
      Navy, had to rely on shipboard stations for Indian Ocean coverage.
      British responsibility would be limited to the real estate involved while
      the US. would build and equip the station and furnish most of the

* Ei                      le
       Michoud Operations as part of a Life magazine-sponsoredvisit of space
       facilities across the country. They were briefed by Dr. Wernher von
                                  Marshall Space Flight Center, and Dr. G. N.
       Braun, director of NASA’s
       Constan, Michoud manager. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/4/64)
406             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 04

December 3: Alamogordo, N. Mex., sonic boom test site for supersonic air-
     liner program was repaired 24 hours after it was battered by the boom
     from an F-104. A spokesman for the FAA said: “The damage was not
     as extensive as we first feared. We are still on schedule, and should
     complete the tests as planned in February.” (Av. Wk.,12/14/64, 31)
* USN nuclear submarine Stonewall Jackson passed its first missile-firing test
     by shooting a Polaris A-3 more than 2,000 mi. to an ocean target area.
     The firing was the 18th success in 19 A-3 training launchings from sub-
     merged submarines. (UPI, NYT,12/3/64,83)
* It was announced that President Johnson had designated December 1964
     as United States International Aviation Month to commemorate the 20th
     anniversary of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) , a
     didsion of the United Nations. The ICAO was responsible for making
     the international rules and setting international standards for all civil
     aviation activity, including the field of general avaiation. (NAA Release)
December 4: USAF launched Atlas-Agena D from WTR with unidentified satel-
     lite payload. ( H H N ~ )
* Nike-Cajun sounding rocket reached 85-mi. altitude in launch from Cham-
     ical, Argentina. Instrumented payload apparently obtained good data
     in measurement of electron density, electron temperature, ultraviolet
     and solar x-radiation flux. Test was second of two Nike-Cajun launches
     by NASA and Argentina’s National Commission of Space Research. (NASA
     Rpt. SRL)
* The Athena rocket was successfully fired by USAF from Green River, Utah,
     to a target area in the White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. (M&R,
      12/14/64, 10)
  NASA awarded 19 supplementary or new research grants and contracts total-
     ing $914,889 to 17 universities, colleges, and private research institu-
     tions. (NASA Release 64-305)
  Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $8,079,003 (NASA funds)
      fixed-price contract to Malan Construction Co. of Koppers Co., Inc., for
     construction of a rocket engine test stand at the NASA Mississippi Test
      Operations. (DOD Release 851i-64)
  AFSC Space Systems Div. announced that Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.
      would receive a $3,180,000 increment to a previously awarded contract
      for work on the Gemini program target vehicle system. (DOD Release
      856-64)
* Joseph A. Darr, Jr., and John Reeves of NASA Flight Research Center re-
    ceived plaques from President Johnson for their dollar-saving contri-
    bution to the X-15 research rocket airplane. Darr and Reeves were
    cited for the design and construction of a portable engine inspection
    cart that was used to check the systems operation of the LR-99 rocket
     engine which powered the X-15. Use of the cart saved 500 man hours
     and about $150,000, NASA estimated. (NASA Release 64-303)
* Air Force Systems Command reported that Rome Air Development Center
     ( W C ) , sponsoring approximately $1 million annually in computer
     research and development, was major Air Force agency performing re-
    search in the computer field. According to Alan R. Barnum, Chief of
    RADC’S Data Processing Section, “RADC’S primary responsibility in com-
    puter research is development of high speed computer devices and spe-
    cial computers to meet peculiar Air Force problems. A b , methods
     of programing computer instructions, development of larger and faster
                                                                          407
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

    computer memories and research in a new area called artificial intelli-
    gence.” (AFSC Release 1 1 4 )
December 4: ComSatCorp said it had 140,000 public shareholders, with
    more than half holding ten shares or less, and with 95 per cent holding
    50 shares or less. This total did not include an estimated 60,000public
    stockholders whose shares were held for them by securities firms and
    banks and, therefore, not listed in their own names. ComSat stock
    climbed 6% points to close at a new high of 55% on the New York Stock
    Exchange. It ranked as the second most active issue with a turnover of
    134,200 shares. (ComSatCorp Release; Vartan, NYT, 12/5/64, 39)
December 5: MARINER IV underwent a critical course change to make it pos-
    sible for the craft to take useful pictures of Mars during the fly-by in
    July 1965. In response to commands radioed from earth, a small rocket
    on the base of the spacecraft, which could add anything between an
    eighth of a mile an hour to 188 miles an hour to the craft’s speed, was
    fired. Initial indications were that the correction was successful and
    accurate.
       Several days later, tracking equipment and associated computers con-
    firmed that the rocket firing had produced three changes in MARINER IV’S
    flight path: (1)the Mars fly-by from 151,000 mi. in front of Mars to a
    closest approach of 5,400 mi. behind Mars; (2) the arrival date from
    July 16, 1965, to July 14; and (3)the flight path past Mars from the
    leading edge to the trailing edge of Mars. The maneuver was followed
    by sun and Canopus reacquisition. A second midcourse maneuver
    would not be required.
       The midcourse rocket used by MARINER IV was the first to be used by
    this cowtry that was capable of a second firing. (NASA Release 64-310;
                                  Miles, Wash.Post, 12/6/64)
    Witkin, NYT, 12/6/64,67;
December 6: NASA and General Electric Co. announced they had accom-
    plished precision tracking of EXPLORER XXII with a laser device. Tss et
    were conducted at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center using a ruby laser
    mounted on a telescope. With the telescope aimed along the predicted
    path, the laser was flashed several times as EXPLORER XXII, containing an
    array of corner reflectors, passed overhead. The reflectors, made of
    quartz crystal, were designed to return the beam of the laser almost
    exactly where it came from. The optical signals were displayed on an
    oscilloscope. As the laser pulse traveled from the telescope to the satel-
    lite, then back to the.ground, the elapsed time measured could be con-
    verted into distance. Expected accuracy was within 10 ft. (Chic. Trib.,
    12/7/64)
* James V. Bernard0 was appointed Director of      NASA Educational Programs
    and Services, would direct programs for developing an understanding
    of U.S. aerospace activities among students, teachers, and the general
    public, and for providing services to schools, colleges, and educational
    organizations. Dr. Aaron P. Seamster was named Deputy Director.
    (NASA Ann. 6La-293)
December 7: MARINER IV lost its lock on Canopus. “Current analysis sup-
    ports the theory that a dust particle reflecting the light of the sun passed
    through the field of view of the Canopus tracker,” NASA said. Loss of
    lock on the star would not alter the spacecraft’s course, would merely
    affect its attitude, which would be of importance only when the space-
    craft neared Mars and attempted to photograph the planet. NASA planned
    to command the spacecraft to reacquire Canopus soon.
408             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTXS, 19 6 4

               manager of the Mariner program for NASA, reported that a solar
       JPL,
    plasma probe experiment, which had functioned perfectly for eight days,
     had ceased to transmit useful information. (AP, Houston Post,
     12/8/64)
December 7: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops
     Island, Va., with Univ. of N.H. instrumented payload reached 90-mi.
     altitude, but experiment results were not obtained because of telemetry
     failure at 4.05 sec. Primary purpose of flight was to check out instru-
     mentation for NikeApache sounding rooket experiments to be con-
     ducted on the IQSY Mobile Launch Expedition in early 1965. A second
     checkout launch was scheduled for mid-January. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Scientists at Johns Hopkins Univ. announced ohemations from an un-
     manned balloon on Oct. 27 that might indicate life on Venus. Experi-
     ments showed that the clouds covering Venus were composed of water
     in the form of ice particles and that the surface temperature was close to
      -40’ F, with only a few degrees difference between the light and dark
     sides of the planet. An earlier baloon flight in February had revealed
     that the air above the clouds was rich in water vapor. The scientists
     theorized that if there were water vapor, some of its molecules would be
     broken up by ultraviolet sunlight into oxygen and hydrogen; an atmos-
     phere with oxygen and water vapor would be a propitious environment
     for life.
         Radiotelescopes on earth and on the MARINER 11 space probe, which
     had passed within 21,000 mi. of Venus in December 1962, indicated the
     surface temperature was 800’ F. However, since interpretation of radio-
     telescope waves as an indication of temperature had neither been proven
     nor universally accepted, the Johns Hopkins scientists suggested that
     previous findings might only indicate a large amount of lightning-like
      electrical activity in the turbulent atmosphere of Venus. (Sullivan,
      NYT, 12/8/64; Fenton, Balt. Sun, 12/7/64; Wash. Post, 12/8/64)
0 Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9,

      1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,Chairman of Senate
      Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson
      in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting
                                                Apollo X program. He argued
      Laboratory (MOL) program and NASA’s
      that $1billion could %esaved over a five-year period if MOL were to be
      cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space
      station. A jointly operated national space station program would, ac-
      cording to Anderson, best utilize US. space resources. Sen. Anderson
      felt that MOL lacked growth potential because it could not progress
      beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply
      system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
 0 Plans for adding a transmitter to the Pan American Boeing 707 for two-

      way communicationtests using SYNCOM III as a relay point were discussed
      at an Air Transport Association meeting attended by representatives
      of FAA, NASA, Bendix, Pan Am, and Hughes Aircraft. Teletypewriter
      messages had been successfully transmitted in November from a ground
       station at Camp Raberts, Calif., to a Pan Am 707 enroute to Honolulu.
       ( A v . Wk., 12/7/64r,34)
 0 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists would evaluate two H-10

       atomic hydrogen maser clocks for possible use in high-precision satellite
      tracking as well as experiments testing Einstein’s prediction of the d e c t
                                                                          409
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     of gravity on time. The clocks were developed by the Quantum Elec-
    tronic Devices activity of Varian Associate3 and would use the natural
     oscillation resulting from the interaction of the proton and the e h t r o n
     in the hydrogen atom. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
December 7 : USAF announced completion of the highly successful Demonstra-
     tion and Shakedown Operations (DASO) series of test firings of the Titan
     II intercontinental ballistic missile. Five Titan 11s had been successfully
     launched from Vandenberg AFB by Strategic Air Command (SAC) crews
     and had landed on target down the WTR. The series was conducted to
     test lannch techniques and lasted from July 30 to Nov. 4, 1964. Said
     Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity, Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logis-
                                               ..
     tics, the 100 per cent successful “record . is unequaled in ICBM his-
     tory and will provide a goal for future missile systems in the years
     ahead.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/8/iX; AP, Balt. Sun, 12/9/64)
  M s i e and Rockets reported that a combination vacuum cleaner and fire
   isls
     extinguisher was being developed by Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.
     for use in the MOL. Dubbed VacGuard, the device would operate on
     the pressure difference between the cabin and outer space. It would
     control cabin fires, remove unwanted solids, liquids, and gases, and
      control sudden leaks in the space cabin wall. The device would
     consist of an adapter, a flexible hose, and a selector valve. (M&R,
      12/7/64, 17)
* AF Cambridge Research Laboratories had successfully demonstrated that
     communications could be made through brain waves. According to Dr.
     Edmond M. Dewan, trained subjects could alter the pattern of their
     brains’ alpha rhythm, the low-frequency wave related to visual percep-
     tion. The alpha rhythm could be turned on and off, allowing use of a
     binary digit system or Morse code for communication. (M&R, 12/7/64,
     17)
0 Radar and Doppler velocity sensor system destined to assist the Surveyor

     spacecraft in its soft landing on the moon was in advanced test phases
     at Ryan Electronics, Missiles and Rockets reported. Flight tests of the
     system using helicopters at Holloman AFB and at the Hughes Aircraft
     Co. airport had been successfully completed and had run from 6,000
     to 20 ft. above the ground. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
* In an editorial, Robert Hotz, editor of Aviation Week and Space Technol-
                             ...
      ogy, said: “There is a        good possibility that the national space pro-
      gram may get its most severe shellacking to date if some plans currently
     finding favor within Administration executive circles are, in fact, imple-
     mented. One of these proposals would slice the scientific programs of
     the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the bone and
      concentrate the NASA budget on the Apollo manned lunar landing pro-
     gram. Some portions of the scientific community have been making
     this charge without much justification for several years. If NASA does
     virtually abandon its highly successful scientific exploration program
      now, the howl from scientists will rise in a swift crescendo. It would
      be a major mistake to make such a drastic switch in what is now a pretty
      well-balanced NASA effort.” (Av. Wk.,    12/7/64,11)
0 Houston “Colt .Gs” National League baseball team changed its name to the

      Houston “Astros” to exploit the city’s claim to be the US. space capital.
      (Av.Wk.,12/7/64, 15)
      766-598 oc--85---2T
410             ASTRONAUTICS ANI) AERONAUTJCS, 1964

 December 7: Carl Brown Harper, expert in aeronautical engineering who
      had been a consultant to the Dept. of Justice since 1930, died after a
     heart attack. Mr. Harper had held a number of patents on the retractable
     gun turret and on aircraft wing designs now used on the Boeing 707,
     the Douglas DC-8, and other high speed aircraft. ( r a s h . Post,
      12/9/64)
 December 8: Apollo spacecraft (BP-23) was subjected to simulated cata-
     strophic failure of its launch vehicle in a successful test of the abort
     escape system at White Sands, N. Mex. Apollo command and service
     boilerplate modules were boosted on a Little Joe I1 launch vehicle to
     the region of maximum dynamic pressure at 29,000-ft. altitude and
     launch vehicle failure was simulated. The escape vehicle, mated to the
     spacecraft by a connecting tower, yanked the Apollo free of Little Joe
     and carried it almost two miles higher. The Little Joe rocket fell to
     earth; the Apollo modules were returned gently to the ground by three
     88-ft. parachutes. This was the third successful test of functioning of
     the 33-ft. launch escape tower designed to jettison the command module
     and three Apollo astronauts to safety in an abort before or during the
     launch phase of a Saturn V mission. It was the first test of the boost-
     protective cover subsystem, a contoured shell fitting over the command
     module and designed to protect the docking mechanism of Lunar Excur-
     sion Module (LEM) from excessive heating during high temperatures of
     first-stage flight. It also protected command module windows from
     exhaust of the launch escape motor. (NASA Release 64-299)
  A Saturn S-IVB stage began a 6,000-mi. land, sea, and river trip from
     the Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., Calif., to NASA Marshall
     Space Flight Center. At MSFC, the stage would be mated with a first
     stage of the Saturn IB, built by MSFC and modified by the Chrysler
     Corp., and an Apollo spacecraft. Tests of the assembly would check
     the complete Saturn-Apollo vehicle for its ability to withstand vibra-
     tions and other stresses expected in flight. (Marshall Star, 1 2 / 9 / a
     1-2)
  The US. Army Corps of Engineers and NASA announced the award of a
                                            $60
    contract for master planning of NASA’s million Electronics Research
    Center to the joint venture firms of Edward Durell Stone, New York
    City; Giffels and Rossetti, Detroit; and Charles A. Maguire Associates,
    Boston-Providence. The contract was awarded by the New England Divi-
    sion of the Corps of Engineers, which had been designated by the Elec-
    tronics Research Center as NASA’s  design and construction agent for the
    buildings to be located on a 29-acre site at Kendall Sq., Cambridge,
    Mass. (NASA Release 64-307)
0 Three contracts were awarded by NASA Lewis Reseerch Center to Hughes

    Aircraft Co. The first contract, totaling $1,151,370, was a 12-mo. con-
    tinuation of a previous contract for research and development of a
    contact ion engine using cesium as a propellant. The other two con-
    tracts were also follow-on efforts: a contract for $202,915 provided for
    fabrication of porous ailoy and solid sintered ionizers; a contract for
    $243,061 covered tests and evaluation of physical, electrical, and cesium
    ionization properties of porous ionizers and evaluation of the electrical
    properties of solid sintered ionizer material. (LRC Release 6 1 1 4 )
                                                                             411
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

December 8: NASA Lewis Research Center awarded a $2,315,400 contract to
     Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Iw., for design, develop
     ment, and testing of an Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine that would
     use flox (liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen). The contract provided for
     firing a complete Atlas sustainer engine for the first time using flox as
     the oxidizer; RP-1, a type of kerosene, would still be the fuel. (NASA
     Release 64-306; LRC Release W 1 1 3 )
  ComSatCorp asked 16 companies to propose studies on how to judge the
     merits of launch vehicles which could be used to put medium-altitude
     communications satellites into orbit around the earth. ComSatCorp
     told FCC it planned to launch its first satellite, the Early Bird, in March as
     a communication link between Europe and North America. The Early
     Bird would be able to transmit two-way telephone conversations, tele-
     vision computer data, and other types of communications as an experi-
     ment in synchronous satellites, placed above the e uator at an altitude of
     22,300 miles. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 12/99/M)
  A team of Canadian scientists from McGill Univ., conducting Project Harp
      (High Altitude Research Program), was using a ZSO-ton, 16-in. naval
     gun to launch scientific rockets to heights of nearly 100 mi. The method
     was both reliable and economical (more than 80 shots had been fired,
     most of which were successful), and the launch procedure relatively
     simple. Objective of experiments was to find the secret of the lower
      ionosphere’s influence on radio communications. Dr. Gerald Bull, who
     conceived the idea of Project Harp, said that a new technique was being
      developed whereby a combination of gun and rocket could place a 100-lb.
     payload in earth orbit. (Jeffrey, London Daily Telegraph, 12/8/64,14)
  N e w Yark Times reported that scientists might use an infrared radiometer
      to predict location and time of future volcanoes. The scanner had al-
     ready detected heat changes in the earth’s surface in volcanic areas in
      Hawaii that correlated with later volcanic eruptions. (Sci. Serv., NYT,
      12/8/64,60)
* USAF successfully launched the fifth Asset re-entry test vehicle in its series
      of six from Cape Kennedy. The glider rode pickaback aboard a single-
      stage Thor booster. (Wash. Post, 1 2 / 9 / a ; M&R, 12/14/64,10)
* The first landing by computer alone was made by a United Air Lines Cara-
      velle jet at Dulles International Airport, Washington. With no direc-
      tions from the pilot, the machine brought down the aircraft, constantly
      judging correct altitude, rate of descent, and speed and bringing the
      craft in line with its decisions. In bad weather, the system would make
      possible a computer landing at 100-ft.ceiling and quarter-mile visibility.
     Manual landing limits were 200-ft. and one half mile. (Tuck, Wash.
      Post, 12/9/64)
0 NIMBUS I meteorological satellite, which had lost its electric power and

      stopped functioning Sept. 23, revived and was returning useful engineer-
      ing data. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center said the solar paddles,
      which had been locked, had apparently directed themselves at the sun
      long enough to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries but the gas for stabili-
      zation had been exhausted and the craft was tumbling at about 15 rpm.
      This caused photographs to be fuzzy and useless. (GSFC Release
      G-64-34)
412            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

December 8: Soviet Union said it continued to be in “stable” contact with
    ZOND 11, then 1.53 million mi. from earth. No further reference was
    made to a partial power failure aboard the craft. (NYT, 12/8/64,54)
* NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2 million contract to
    Motorola’s Western Military Electronics Div., to develop the Airborne
    Ranging Orbital Determination (AROD) system. (M&R, 12/14/64,21)
* Radio Corp. of America introduced a new line of computers using tiny sili-
    con chip circuits (monolithic integrated circuitry) . A silicon chip
    circuit would barely cover a typewritten          but would contain two
    electronic circuits with 15 transistors and 13 resistors. The line was
    named Spectra 70 because RCA felt it would provide a complete spectrum
    of computing, peripheral, and communications equipment, and would
    meet the full range of system and application requirements of science and
    industry. (Wash. Post, 12/9/64)
* On the eve of his 85th birthday, M/G Benjamin D. Foulois (USA, Ret.) was
    honored for his achievements in aviation at a dinner at Andrews‘m~.
    General Foulois, who was the United States’ first military pilot, was
    inducted into the Primus Club-an elite group of aerospace pioneers-
    and hailed as “a living link between the age of the Wright Brothers and
    today’s astronauts.” (Raymond, NYT, 12/9/64,53)
December 9: X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA pilot Milton 0. Thompson to
    91,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,545 (mach 5.3) mph to check
    air flow around the nose, heating caused by skin friction, and boundary
    layer air flow at different velocities and angles of attack. (NASA X-15
    Proj. O f ;NYT, 12/11/64,34)
           f.
* The last in a series of 11 tests of the F-2 Apollo service module engine
    was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers
    at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec.
    and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing.
    The F-2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to
    earth from the moon. (Lee, Howton Post, 12/10/64)
* FCC postponed a decision on the question of who would own and operate the
    ground stations to be set up as part of the communications satellite
    system and called for further filings on the issue. Detailed arguments
    were due Jan. 5, and reply comments on Jan. 18. It was estimated it
    would take the FCC a minimum of six weeks to evaluate all comments.
    The carriers that had filed protests to exclusive ComSatCoF ground
    station ownership were American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Inter-
    national Telephone and Telegraph Corp., Radio Corp. of America,
    Western Union International, and Hawaiian Telephone Co. (Av. Wk.,
    12/14/64,27; AP,N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/10/64)
* A committee had been set up by Prime Minister Harold Wilson to review
    Britain’s future in space, it was announced. The committee would
    examine the merits of a national satdlite-launcher program based on the
    Black Knight rocket as well as Britain’s commitment to the European
    Launcher Development Organization (ELDO) which would hope to start
    launching satellites two or three years from now. The space committee’s
    report would be expected in February. (Machod, CSM, 12/9/64)
  A unique optical system known as a laser range finder w s announced by
                                                             a
    RCA’S Aerospace Systems Div. and US. Army Electronics Command.
    The unit operated by sending a very narrow beam pulse of red light
    toward the target at the speed of light. After reflection from the target,
                                                                           413
                ASTRONATCICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 9

    the red light of the laser beam was received and sensed by a phototube
    in the range finder. An electronic counter measured the elapsed time
    between the transmitted pulse and the return reflection and converted
    the elapsed time instantaneously into a measure of distance.
        Similar systems had suffered from loss of alignment with use between
    the receiving telescope, which sensed the reflected laser light, and the
    sighting telescope by which the receiver was aimed at the target. The
    new design combined these two telescopes into one unit that allowed a
    lighter, more precise, and more rugged system to be fabricated.
     (MarshallStar, 12/9/@, 5-6)
December 9: Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin told the Soviet parliament that
    expenditures for defense would drop by four per cent or 500 million
    rubles ($555 million) in 1965. He also declared that his government had
    acted after being informed by American officials that U.S. planned to re-
    duce its military budget in the coming year. A spokesman for the U.S.
    Embassy said later that the embassy had no knowledge that such informa-
    tion had been given to the Soviet government. In his budget message,
    Premier A. N. Kosygin told the Supreme Soviet that “people of science
    must do a lot for us to be able to provide more material benefits for the
    satisfaction of the population’s growing requirements,” complained that
    the opportunities for doing this “have been by no means exploited.”
    After calling for scientific bretikthroughs to the production process in
     chemistry, electronics, transistor technology, and biology, Kosygin said :
    (6 There are major shortcomings in scientific research planning.         Our
    plans do not make use in good time of all that is progressive and useful
     in research discoveries. For this reason, scientific discoveries and
     technical inventions not infrequently become outdated and lose their
     practical worth.
        “Utilization of the latest achievementsof science and technology should
     be made one of the main criteria in the appraisal of economic plans and
     their fulfillment. Unfortunately, many people employed in industry con-
     tinue to regard further capital investments as the main and only source
     of increased output and do not really strive hard for the rapid introduc-
     tion of scientific and technical achievements, which could produce a
     considerably greater &ect than additional capital investments. Scien-
     tific and technical progress opens new horizons for a radical improvement
     in quality and an expansion of the range of goods produced.” (Av. Wk.,
     12/28/64,16; Tanner, NYT, 12/10/64r; WS],          12/10/64)
December 10:Final Gemini unmanned flight test (GT-2) from ETR was post-
     poned after a last-second engine misfire on the Titan I1 rocket. The
     trouble occurred 1.7 seconds after the Titan I1 booster engines ignited:
     loss of hydraulic pressure caused one of the two engine nozzles to swivel
     out of place; and automatic system sensed this and immediately extin-
      guished both engines in the rocket’s first stage one second before lift-off.
     A NASA spokesman said that one of the nozzle tubes received a slight crack
     as a result of the malfunction and that extensive checking of a l systems
                                                                      l
     must be completed before a decision would be made as to whether the
     entire first stage would be replaced.
        The Titan I1 was to have lifted the 6,900-Ib. Gemini capsule to 106 mi.
      in the suborbital flight and then accelerated it to faster and hotter re-
     entry than normal. A parachute landing in the Atlantic was projected
      for the capsule and recovery planned. Chief goals o the flight, second
                                                              f
414            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONADTICS, 19 64

    in the Gemini series, would have been to test the heat shield as well as
    control, life support, and other systems.
        NASA said the delay meant the first manned Gemini flight would not
    take place until the second quarter of 1965. GT-2 would be attempted
    again in January. (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib. 12/10/64; Balt. Sun.
    12/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/10/&)
December 10: USAF Titan 111-A space booster was launched from Cape
    Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight. Midway
    in its first orbit, approximately 115 mi. above the earth, the 5,250-lb.
    “transtage” (a third stage with multiple start-stop-restart capability and
    ability to transfer a payload from one orbit to another) performed a
    360” somersault to align the platform’s inertial guidance system gyro-
    scopes. At the end of its first 100-min. orbit, explosive charges auto-
    matically kicked a 3,750-lb. cylinder-shaped dummy satellite into a
    separate orbit. After the Titan 111-A firing, Brig. Gen. Joseph S.
    Bleymaier, project director, said: “The success confirmed our confi-
    dence in the system. We feel that the Air Force now has a real purpose
    in accomplishing space missions.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/11/64; Simons,
     Wash.Post, 12/11/64; AP, NYT, 12/11/64,20)
* X-15 No. 1 was piloted by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (USAF)to 112,000-ft.
    altitude at maximum speed of 3,500 (mach 5.11) mph to test scientific
    instruments (a densitron and daytime sky background experiments)
    carried in pods recently installed on the craft’s wing tips and to sample
    density of upper atmosphere. The flight also served as a checkout of
    the newly installed Honeywell inertial guidance system. (NASA X-15
    Proj. O f ;NYT, 12/11/64,25)
             f.
* U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS LI into orbit. In addition to scientific instru-
    mentation, the craft contained a radio system for the precise measure-
    ment of orbital elements and a radiotelemetry system for transmitting
     data to earth. All equipment on board was operating normally. Ini-
    tial orbital data: apogee, 544 km. (344.24 mi.) ; perigee, 264 km. (164
    mi.) ; period, 92.5 min.; inclination, $8.8”. (Tass, Pravda, 12/11/64,
    1, ATSS-T Trans. ; Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/11/64, 1, ATSS-T
    Trans.; VPI, NYT, 12/11/64, 43; Wash. Post, 12/11/64)
  An unexpected rise.in the number of meteors bombarding the earth from
    April to October 1963 was reported in Science by two Canadian and
    two New Zealand scientists. The rise was detected by radar echoes and
    the number of meteors put at 300 million. Studies made by the New
    Zealand group after the great increase indicated that the meteor rate
    rise may be recurring, with decreasing strength, once every six months.
      (Sci. Serv., NYT, 12/25/64; AP, Carey, Wash. Post, 12/11/64)
  NASA announced that it would negotiate a one-year contract with Mason-
     Rust for continued support services at NASA Michoud Operations.
     (Huntsville Times, 12/11/64)
December 11 : Atlas-Centaur 4 (AC-4) hurled its Centaur second stage
    into orbit around the earth with a mass model of the Surveyor lunar
    spacecraft in its nose. The first-burn performance of the Centaur
             sent the stage into a nearly circular parkiig orbit of 100 mi.
               and 106 mi. apogee. The second burn should have put the
     rocket into an oval path taking it out as much as 5,000 mi. from
    earth; however, the attempt to restart the R G l O engines failed and
     the stage began to tumble and roll. After about 15 hr. in orbit, the
                                                                           415
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    Centaur stage and its Surveyor dummy payload re-entered the atmos-
    phere over the South Pacific east of Australia and disintegrated.
       NASA said all prime mission objectives had been met, including the
    demonstration of the structural integrity of the Atlas-Centaur during
    powered flight, testing of the guidance system which was flying closed
    loop for the first time, verification of the structural and thermal integrity
    of the Centaur nose fairing and insulation panels, and verification of
    the performance of the jettison systems for the nose fairing and insula-
    tion panels.
        Project officials were investigating what caused the stage to tumble,
    preventing propellants from reaching the pumps. (NASA Release 64c
    289; Lewis News, 12/24/64, 1; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 24; Wash. Eve.
    Star, 12/11/64)
December 11: First launch of NASA Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was con-
    ducted at Wallops Island, Va., the rocket reaching 6,000-ft. altitude in
    successful test. For this first test upper stage was inert, the main
    objectives being to demonstrate compatibility of Aerobee 350 with
    Aerobee launch-tower rail system and evaluate performance of Aerobee
    350 during first-stage (Nike) boost. Preliminary evaluation of test
    indicated NASA Goddard Space Flight Center could proceed with plans
    to launch complete live Aerobee 350 without redesign of the rocket or
    the launcher rail system. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Developmental spacecraft landing rockets were tested using a Gemini
     boilerplate. Spacecraft was dropped from a C-119 aircraft at 7,000-
    ft. altitude. Two 12,000-lb.-thrust rockets were fired simultaneously
    when the spacecraft was ten ft. above the water with burn time one
     and one half sec. Landing speed of the craft was slowed from 27 f p s
     to about nine to 10 fps; normal g-force of seven to eight g’s was reduced
     to approximately two and one half g’s on impact. A controllable para-
     chute steered by radio commands from a NASA ship lowered the space-
     craft into the waters of Trinity Bay, Tex. The landing rockets were
     not a definite part of either the Gemini or Apollo programs. (MSC
     Roundup, 12/23/@, 7)
  NASA announced that a 10-month study contract for $191,835 to assess the
     technological problems of designing, building, and operating a manned
     orbiting astronomical observatory had been awarded to the Boeing Co.
     Boeing would study possible ways in which such an observatory might
     be operated, with particular emphasis on the role of man in its scientific
     program. A requirement of the study was that the orbiting telescope
     be sufficiently adaptable to support a broad astronomical program. The
     study would assume that the telescope would be operated in conjunction
     with a proposed Manned Orbital Research Laboratory (MORL) under
     study by NASA Langley Research Center for NASA Office of Manned Space
     Flight. (LaRc Release)
* In a Gemini suit comfort test, H y Maples successfully completed a 96-hr.
                                     ot
     stay in a S-ft.-dia. chamber in the Crew systems Laborato at NASA
     Manned Spacecraft Center. The suit was not pressurized %ring the
     test, but the test chamber was a pure oxygen environment with 5 lbs. of
     pressure, the same environment that the Gemini spacecraft would use
      at orbital altitudes. During the test, Maples followed a four-hour-work,
     four-hour-rest cycle. He used a task board which tested his mental
      alertness by matbematical calculations he made on a series of lights on
416            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    the panel board. Maples’ food was a Gemini flight diet consisting of
    freeze-dehydrated, dehydrated, and bite-size food. Other tasks Maples
    performed during his stay in the chamber included checks of the environ-
    mental control system and exercise with a bungee cord. Although he
    did not take off his helmet during the test, he was able to open the face-
    plate and take off his gloves. With this test, the Gemini suit passed
    another phase of its qualification for use in the manned Gemini flights.
    (MSC Roundup, 12/23/64)
December 11: Formation of a National Academy of Engineering under the
    charter of the NAS was announced by D . Frederick Seitz, President
                                                 r
    of the National Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel,
    President-elect of the National Academy of Engineering. Among the
    founding members were Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Adminis-
    trator, and Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion
    Laboratory. (NAS-NRC Release; Wmh. Post, 12/12/64, 20)
* The hydrogen-fueled J-2 engine that would power the upper stages of the
    Saturn V launch vehicle successfully demonstrated its ability to stop
    and restart in a ground test carried out at the Santa Susana Field Lab-
    oratory of Rocketdyne Div. The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine would oper-
     ate in a cluster of five to provide one million lbs. of thrust for the S-I1
    second stage of the Apollo moon launch vehicle, as well as operating
     singly in the S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB. The test engine was oper-
     ated initially for 165 sec. and shut down. Following a 75-min.
    “coast” period, the engine was restarted. After seven seconds, it was
    shut down for six minutes, then restarted and operated for the full
     duration of 310 seconds. Among specific objectives demonstrated by
    the test were automatic repressurizing of the start tank during engine
    operation, sustained tank pressure during the orbital coast period, and
    reliable operation of the electrical and pneumatic systems used for
    restart. (Marshall Star, 12/16/64, 1, 12; AP, Balt. Sun, 12/12/64)
0 A ten-second firing of the “battleship” stage of the Saturn S-11,       second
    stage of the Saturn V moon rocket, was conducted by North American
     Aviation, Inc., at their Santa Susana Field Laboratory. The test dem-
     onstrated the ability of the battleship stage and accompanying facilities
     to operate the 5-2 engine at full thrust. The S-I1 would be powered
     by a cluster of five 5-2 liquid hydrogen engines, developing a total
    thrust of a million pounds. (NAA‘ S&ID Skywriter, 12/31/64, 2 ;
     Marshall star, 12/16/64, 1,12)
December 11-12: MAIUNER IV passed unscathed through the Geminid stream,
     the first of three meteor streams it had to cross on its 71/-mo. journey
    to take television pictures of Mars. (NASA Release 64-323)
December 12: USAF and the Atomic Energy Commission (MC) were reported
     to be negotiating a $13,000,000 contract with the Garrett Corp. for a
     33-month program of advanced development and ground testing of the
     Space Power Unit Reactor (Spur) system. Spur was one of two ele-
     ments in the Snap-SO/Spur system-Snap-50,          under development for
    AEG by Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, being the energy producing reactor,
     and Spur, the portion which converted heat to electricity. The objective
     would be to provide a flyable system in the 1970’s. (Haggerty, .I/Armed
    Forces, 12/12/a, 8 )
* Thiokol Chemical Corp. Wasatch Div.’s 156-in. solid-propellant rocket
     motor was fired for 130 sec. and terminated within 0.5 sec. of predicted
                                                                         417
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 41

    action time, although the last 30 sec. of the firing was completed without
    the plastic nozzle extension, which parted at the metal attachment flange.
    Severe erosion of the 5-ft. nozzle extension skirt, which was constructed
    entirely of ablative materials, weakened the structural integrity of the
    skirt and it blew off after about 100 sec. of motor burning. The firing
    continued normally after loss of the skirt with only about an 8%
    degradation in thrust, which had peaked at just over 14 million lb.
                                                                 .
    This was the first demonstration of thrust-vector-control using a movable
    nozzle. The rocket motor case used in this feasibility demonstration
    was undamaged, would be used in the follow-on 156-in.program which
    was awaiting DOD approval. (Av.Wh., 12/21/64, 26)
December 12: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press confer-
    ence at which he responded to questions regarding the MOL project:
       QUESTION: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a
    billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbit-
                                   Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.1 Can you tell
    ing Laboratory with NASA’s
    us how you feel about that?”
       SECRETARY MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid dupli-
    cate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program.
    The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program
    should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program
    will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There
    is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must
    maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the
    space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the
    Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing
    the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense
                                                               ..
    Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . My prin-
                               ...   I believe we are a military organization,
    ciple is a very simple one
    we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our
    military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in
    effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100percent in favor of doing so.”
       QUESTION : “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether
    you are backing the MOL or not?”
       SECRETARY MCNAMARA: “Yes, indeed.”
       QUESTION: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.”
       SECRETARY MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the MOL
    program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken
    into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program
                                                   .     . I want to be certain
    not directly related to the Lunar Program.
    that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what
    NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is
    directly related to the Lunar Program.’’ (Text; MBiR, 12/21/64,
    20; SBD, 12/15/64)
  Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that DOD would
    establish a Contract Audit Agency whose principal function would be
    to consolidate the activities and the 3,600 personnel of various units
    formerly engaged separately in auditing defense and space contracts.
    He estimated that this would result in a “manpower” saving of $1.8
    million. (NYT, 12/13/64)
418             ASTRONAUTICS ANI, AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

December 12: Britain’s new Labor Government had reviewed plans to build
    the Concorde supersonic airliner and was reported to be seeking a
    compromise with France over the project. It was possible that the
    U.K. would propose to France an extension of the Concorde project
    over a longer period of time to stretch out cost of development. Also
    Britain would like France to consider the possibility of U.S. participa-
    tion so that cost could be split three ways. (Farnsworth, NYT,
    12/13/64,4)
December 13: RELAY I began its third year in orbit and could still send
    clear, high-resolution television and audio signals across oceans and
    continents. The communications satellite had circled the globe 5,685
    times and accomplished 186 demonstrations and 2,139 experiments,
    with a transponder-on time of 334 hours. The RELAY I project was
    directed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Release 64-213)
* USAF launched Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from WTR with unidentified
    satellite payload. It was later revealed that two satellites were placed
    in orbit (HHN-48)
  Translations of reports in Russian journals indicated that space flights
    lasting longer than 24 hours produced changes in the human body, in-
    cluding bladder and kidney troubles, that could not be corrected. Future
     Soviet flights would be aimed at detecting the beginning of these dis-
     orders and attempting to prevent them. The translations indicated that
    the Russians planned to send up more doctors and physiologists and
    that the primary reason for the l6-mo. delay between flights by the
     U.S.S.R. was the seriousness of the disorders affecting astronauts after
    flights lasting for five days. Future crews would be selected “as medi-
     cal teams as opposed to individuals,” said one Soviet journal. The
     men would also be picked on the basis of their medical compatibility-
     to see that one man’s personal germs, bacteria, or vim5 did not infect
     other members of the team. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 12/13/64)
December 14: Dr. Donald E. Hornig, scientific adviser to President John-
     son, was quoted on the controversial MOL project and its possible merger
     with NASA’s      Apollo: “MOL is still under discussion, and the scope of it
     is still in a state of flux. The Air Force certainly has a role to play
     in space.” Sources inside the White House said Dr. Hornig was against
     full funding of the MOL, for which project the Air Force wanted $175
     million in FY 1966. (Av. Wk.,       12/14/64,15)
e NASA designer of ECHO I, William J. O’Sullivan, said he believed the satel-
     lite still had its spherical shape after over four years in orbit. An
     optical inyestigation made by the Goodyear Aerospace corp. for NASA
     Langley Research Center indicated that the satellite’s aluminum sur-
     f a c e w h i c h made the balloon highly reflective of light and radar
     waves, regulated its temperature, and protected the plastic film from
     space hazards-still reflected like a mirror. From calculations using
     the known reflective characteristics of ECHO I when it was launched
     and his interpretation of the Goodyear measurements, O’Sullivan con-
     cluded that ECHO I “is still essentially spherical and that its very thin
     coating of aluminum has sufkered no measurable degradation in spec-
     ularity or reflectivity.” (LaRC Release)
                                                                         419
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

December 14: Missiles and Rockecs reported that NASA was reviewing the pros
    and cons of Project Orion (an advanced nuclear-pulse rocket propulsion
    concept) to determine whether the agency could justify a mission re-
    quirement for a nuclear-pulse vehicle-such as a fast manned trip to
    M r . DOD was scheduled to drop its research in January 1965, because
      as
    the Air Force could not establish a mission requirement. Both W D and
    AEC would join in financing a joint program if NASA established the mis-
    sion requirement. Project Orion would not in any case be available in
    the same time period as solid-core nuclear reactors, whose development
    was already well underway. (Wilks, M&R, 12/14/64,12-14)
  Langley Research Center aerospace engineer Dewey L. Clemmons, Jr.,
    presented a paper at the Symposium on the Establishment of a Euro-
    pean Geodetic Network for Artificial Satellites held in Paris, France,
    describing the US. Passive Geodetic Satellite (Pageos) planned for
    launch during the first half of 1966. He said: “The satellite will be
    an aluminum-coated sphere 100 feet (30.48 meters) in diameter, a
    near replica of ECHO I (1960 Iota 1) that was launched by the United
    States on August 12, 1960. No instrumentation will be attached to the
    surface of the Pageos satellite. Pageos will serve the geodesist by
    simply acting as a point source of light in the sky as it reflects the
    incident sunlight. Simultaneous photographs of this light source against
    the star background, taken by two or more widely separated ground-
    based cameras, will enable geodesists to determine the spatial coordinates
    of each camera position. An interconnected series of camera positions
    can be established that will cover the entire surface of the earth, thereby
    permitting geometric determination of each camera position within a
    single reference system. The use of this satellite for geodetic purposes
    will continue for at least five years during which the necessary photo-
    grammetric observations can be made and to provide a purely geometric
    determination of the shape and size of the earth.” (Text; AP, NYT,
    12/15/64,41)
* Dr. Eugene Konecci, of the NASC staff, told Missiles and Rockets that there
    had been no mention of airlocks in public or private discussions of the
    Vostok and Voskhod spacecraft, and no other indications of plans for
    extravehicular operations. Although the Soviets were aiming at
    rendezvous, this was expected to be strictly a vehicle maneuver. “Soviet
    interest in the use of helium-oxygen atmospheres for longterm space
    vehicles may indicate that they do not have capability for extra-vehicular
    experimentation,” said Dr. Konecci. (MdiR, 12/14/64,16)
  Among the ten top scientific, medical, and technological advances in 1964
     as selected by Dr. Watson Davis, Science Service Director, were:
       1. Close-up photographs of the moon taken by RANGER VII.
       2. Orbiting of the earth by three Russian cosmonauts in the VOSKHOD
    I spacecraft.
       3. Discovery of quasars, the brightest, most violent, and heaviest
    sources of light and radio waves, possibly fueled by collapse of gravity
    waves. (Sci. Serv., Tush. Daily N m s , 12/14/64)
* NASA announced that 142 colleges and universities would participate in
             graduate training program during the 1965-66 academic year.
    NASA’s
     (NASA Release 64-308)
420             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

December 14: US. Army announced that the Lockheed-California Co.’s
    XH-51A compound helicopter ( a helicopter having wings as well as
    rotor blades) had flown 242 mph-“the fastest known speed of any rotor
     craft in the world.” The flight was made by a test pilot, Donald Segner,
     off the Southern California coast. (AP, NYT, 12/14/64, 32)
* USAF Air Defense Command loth Aerospace Missile Sq., a fully operational
    unit of ADC at Vandenberg AFB which would man an antisatellite weapon,
    was on 5-min. alert status. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64, 13)
December 14-1 7 : Twenty-six aviation officials from 23 countries convened
    in Washington for activities celebrating the 20th anniversary of the
    formal beginning of post-war international cooperation in civil aviation
    after the Chicago Conference of 1944. Dignitaries were honored guests
    at the Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington on Dec. 17. (FAA
    Release 64-109)
December 15: SAN MARCO I (SM-1) was orbited from NASA Wallops Station.
    The NASA-trained Italian crew launched the 2%&. Italian-designed
    satellite on a four-stage solid-propellant Scout to an orbit with an apogee
    of 490.04 mi., a perigee of 124.62 mi., an orbital period of 94.7 min.,
    and an inclination of 37.77’. It was the first time a foreign coun-
    try had designed, built, and launched a satellite in orbit in the course
    of NASA’s  international program. The satellite would measure air density
    and ionospheric characteristics related to long-range radio trans-
    missions and would qualify satellite and train crew for subsequent
    launches from sea platform in Indian Ocean. (Wallops Release 64-91)
* At a symposium sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Dr.
    Norman F. Ness likened the earth to a kind of comet with a long magnetic
    tail that extended for an unknown distance. The “new look” was
    drawn from results of the first detailed mapping of the earth‘s magnetic
    field on the nighttime side of the magnetosphere by EXPLORER xvm (IMP
    I Interplanetary Monitoring Platform), launched Nov. 26, 1963. Until
     ,
    recently, scientists had believed that the earth’s magnetosphere was
    basically spherical ; however, data from EXPLORER XVIII indicate that
    countless magnetic lines of force stretched out like the tail of a comet
    to an unknown distance in space, apparently beyond the moon. Within
    this comet-like tail, the lines of force in the Northern Hemisphere were
    directed towards the sun; in the Southern Hemisphere, away from the
    sun. In between, there was a neutral zone.
        Dr. Ness characterized this neutral zone, which had been hypothesized
    but never before detected, as a thin sheet which was a permanent part
    of the earth’s environment and virtually void of any magnetic activity.
    Though the neutral zone’s exact role was unknown, Dr. Ness speculated
    that it might be responsible for formation of the auroras, creation of
    the Van Allen radiation belt, and presence of the gegenschein. Ness
    concluded that in view of the evidence from EXPLORER XVIII, “The only
    difference between the earth and a comet is that the earth possesses a
    strong magnetic field and comets do not.” (Simons, Wash. Post,
    12/16/64; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/16/a; Wash. D i y News,   al
    12/16/64; Toth, Detroit News, 12/16/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    12/16/64; AP, NYT, 12/16/64, 30; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 25)
* Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of the NASC staff addressed the National Space
    Club on the Soviet bioastronautics program. He said that although
                                                                           421
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

   some American scientists had been critical of the amount and kinds
   of data released by the Soviets, Soviet scientists appeared to be desirous
   of further opening their research in technological areas such as life
   support.
        On choosing the proper atmosphere for space flight, Dr. Konecci said:
                                     ...                                   ...
    <<
       Some American scientists            advocated a two-gas system.
                                                   ...
   Others chose a 5 psi 100% oxygen system.              Animal and human ex-
   periments to date indicate that there are no apparent physiological effects
   due to 100%oxygen up to and beyond 30 days.
        “What is important to mention is that we had the technology as part
   of our aircraft system in handling 100% oxygen in low pressure-high
    pressure and liquid states, and we have extended this use to space
                            ...    have not been confronted with 100% oxygen
   cabins. The Soviets
   problems. Because of the near sea-level atmosphere in their Vostok
                            .
   and Voskhod flights . . they were concerned more with weightless-
                                 . . .”
    ness and radiation effects.
        Dr. Konecci said that both US. and the U.S.S.R. had much research
    work ahead. “The Soviets have still to fly their life support systems
                                       ..
    for the full designed parameter . in Vostok this was supposed to be
   ten days wt later literature indicating a twelve-day capability. I
                 ih
    expect the Voskhod has the comparable capability, that is, about twelve
    days, but because of the three-man crew this would in fact mean a three-
    fold increase of their life support capability, i.e. on a man-per-day basis.
    I think we can also expect the Soviets to attem#t manned rendezvous
    maneuvers. I really do not believe at this time that they will attempt
    manned extravehicular experiments until (1) they have a better space
    suit, wSch they appear to be working on; (2) that they have a better fix
    on the poszible decompression sickness (bends or dysbarism) problems
    of decompressing from a sea-level atmosphere with nitrogen to a com-
    patible space suit environment; and (3) until we perform the Gemini
    intentional decompression and extravehicular experiments.” (Text)
December 15: The New York Stock Exchange banned any new margin trad-
     ing in ComSatCorp stock in an effort to stop speculation. The effect
     of the ruling was to cut off the supply of borrowed money that had helped
    traders push the stock to a high of 71% from 46,its price a little over
     three months ago. ComSatCorp stock had proved to be particularly
     volatile because many of the 5 million shares offered to the public last
     June at $20 were in long-term accounts and were not for sale. (Phalon,
      NYT, 12/16/64,63)
    Col. George E. Humphries, President of the .Engineering Institute of
0

       Canada, said in an interview that Canada was gaining more technically
       trained personnel, particularly among university engineering professors,
       than it had previously. “Salaries have risen here during the past 5
       years, and for every engineering teacher that goes to the United States,
       Canada is gaining two from that country,” Colonel Humphries con-
       cluded. (Canadian Press, NYT, 12/15/@, 79)
    Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, 1964-65, published in London, said that
       the US. probably had led the Soviet Union for some years “in terms o     f
       quality and quantity of scientific data and military intelligence acquired
       in space.” Jane’s said the strong US. lead w s indicated by the photo-
                                                      a
       graphs of the moon sent back by RANGER VII last year, which it termed
       “one of the great astronautical achievements of 1W.” (UPI,
      Post, 12/15/64!)
422             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64

December 16: Two NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were launched from
     White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The first rocket reached 126.5-mi.
     altitude carrying instrumented payload which was recovered after im-
     pact. Electron measurement experiment did not work, but the other
     experiments apparently were successful: hypervelocity micrometeoroid
     collectors, cosmic dust collectors, and momentum and energy measure-
     ments as correlative data for the collectors. The second rocket reached
     145.5-mi. altitude in successful nighttime test to study distribution of
     Lyman-alpha radiation. Scanning ultraviolet spectrometer and a pho-
     tometer were used. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
* A hingeless Lockheed XH-51N rotor helicopter for advanced research in
     rotary wing aircraft had been delivered to NASA Langley Research Center.
     Studies would be made of the loads and flying qualities problems that
     might be encountered by operational aircraft of this type and of the
     extent to which their potential advantages of simplicity and improved
     flying qualities could be realized in practice. Rotor blades on the
     XH-51N were held firmly to the hub, which was attached rigidly to the
     engine drive shaft. On other helicopters, the blades were either hinged
     at the side of the rotor hub or were gimbaled atop the mast. (LaRC
     Release 12/16/64)
0 Najeeb Halaby, Administrator of FAA, said that the four aircraft companies

     designing the supersonic transport (SST) had submitted proposals which
     showed “very substantial progress in the last 6 months.” Halaby
      spoke of progress in the three principal problem areas associated with
      development of a 2,000-mph airliner: the safety and economics of its
     operation and the sonic booms created in its wake. The two airframe
     competitors were the Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; designs
      for the engine were submitted by General Electric and the Pratt
     Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. (Toth, Vash. Post, 12/17/64,
     Balt. Sun, 12/17/64)
0 USAF announced that Aerojet General Corp. would receive a $2,7U,OOO

      increment to a previously awarded contract for research and devel-
      opment for the Titan I11 transtage engine, from Ballistic Systems Div.
      of Air Force Systems Command. (DOD Release 888-64)
   USAF announced that Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems,
      would receive a $4,000,000 order to an existing contract for procure-
      ment of Thor space boosters from Space Systems Div. of Air Force
      Systems Command. (DOD Release 888-64)
 0 NASA used an Aerobee rocket to launch two experiments from White Sands

      Missile Range. The experiments were to measure cosmic dust and
      electron densities in the upper atmosphere. (M&R, 12/21/64, 8 )
         NASA also successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from
      White Sands, N. Mex., to peak altitude of 121 mi. Objective was to ob-
      tain data on the electron density distribution in the ionospheric D region
      by means of a radio propagation experiment, and to measure photo-
      emission currents. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
 December 17: MARINER IV Mars-bound space probe received two commands
       intended to cause the spacecraft’s attitude control system to fix and
       remain on the star Canopus. The first required the tracker to break
      lock with the star Gamma-Velorum and go into a search for Canopus.
       Canopus was reacquired. The second command was to deter MARINER
       IV from losing its lock on Canopus. (NASA Release 64-323)
                                                                            423
                                  AND                      19 64
                ASTRONAUTICS             AERONAUTICS,

December 17: NASA extended until Dec. 31, 1966, its contract with the Cali-
    fornia Institute of Technology for research and development programs
    conducted at the Government-owned Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Work
    that would be performed included research and development in lunar and
    interplanetary programs, aeronautics, development and operation of
    deep space tracking facilities, providing NASA with technical advice, scien-
    tific studies, and reports of investigations, and providing supervision of
    related work given to contractors.
       Requirements from NASA would be issued in the form of written Task
    Orders, and the cost of this contract would be determined by the sum
    of these task orders. In addition, the two parties would negotiate each
    fiscal year for a fixed fee for the management of the Jet Propulsion
    Laboratory. (NASA Release 64-320)
* Dynatronics, Inc., Orlando, Fla., was selected by NASA to negotiate an
    estimated $3.5-million contract award for design, manufacture, and
    on-site engineering support of 19 pulse code modulation (PCM) systems
    in NASA’s  worldwide Apollo Manned Space Flight Network, with options
    for additional systems. (NASA Release 64-319)
  NASA would negotiate with the Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for
    purchase of digital data processors to be used in the Apollo Manned
    Space Flight Network ground stations and tracking ships. The fixed-
    price contract would approximate $4.5 million for the ten systems with
    options for additional systems. (NASA Release 64-318)
0 Kenneth C. McCracken, head of cosmic ray research of the Earth and

    Planetary .Sciences Laboratory at the Graduate Research Center of the
    Southwest said that the Imps (Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms)
    scheduled to be shot into earth orbit in 1966 would be the best tool for
    studying cosmic rays during the years of the quiet sun. Besides lasting
    much longer than either the “deep” space probes or the balloons, they
    would have one other tremendous advantage, McCracken said. “The
    IMPS will have very eccentric orbits, skimming 200 miles over the surface
    of the earth at the closest points of their orbits, or ‘perigees,’ and soaring
    185,000 miles out in space at their ‘apogees,’ or farthest points of
            .
    orbit. . . That means that in counting and analyzing cosmic rays we
    shall for the first time be able actually to compare the virgin, or primary,
    rays with the secondary particles that have had all the wear and tear of
    passing through the earth’s atmosphere and magnetosphere.” (Getze,
    L.A. Times, 12/17/64)
  Dr. Victor F. Hess, co-winner of the 1936 Nobel Prize and former Professor
    of Physics at Fordham Univ., died at the age of 81 in Mt. Vernon, N.Y.
    Dr. Hess shared the Nobel Prize with Dr. Carl C. Anderson of the Cal-
    ifornia Institute of Technology for his part in the discovery of cosmic
    rays. (NYT,      12/19/@, 29)
* Boeing announced that Dr. George M. Knauf, for the past three years dep-
    uty director of space medicine in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight,
    would join the company as chief of bioastronautics. He would manage
    groups working on life support and protection, engineering psychology,
    and program support. (Seattle Post-ZnteUigence, 12/18/fj4)
  Howard Simons of the Washington Post was awarded the 1964 American
    for the Advancement of Science-Westinghouse Science writing award.
    His winning entry consisted of stories on the Samos satellite, cybernetics
    in Russia, and the planet Jupiter. (Wash. Post, 12/18/64)
424            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

December 18: Tass disclosed that ZOND 11 was jxpipped with a new type of
    rocket engine known as a plasma accelerator and that the engine, on
    radio command from earth, had successfully operated the attitude
    control system that oriented the spacecraft with respect to the sun. It
    was the first time that such a plasma engine had been tested under
    conditions of actual space flight. Information continued to be received
    on the operations of the systems and units aboard the spacecraft; radio
    communication with the station was stable. (Tass,         Komsom.obkaya
    Pravda, 12/19/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 12/18/64, 12)
* NASA selected 14 f r s for negotiation of contracts to provide engineering,
                     im
    fabrication, and institutional support services to six laboratories and
    three offices of the Marshall Space Flight Center. Work would be in
    support of the Saturn/Apollo launch vehicle program with cost estimated
                                             Release 64-322)
    at $68 million for one year. (NASA
* More than 900 persons had applied to NASA for the 10 to 20 positions for
    scientist astronaut that it would fill next year. To qualify, a scientist
     had to be under 34 years old, a US. citizen, no taller than six feet, with
    a B.A. degree and a doctorate or the equivalent in experience. Recruit-
    ment would end Dec. 31. Recommendations would be made by the
    National Academy of Sciences to NASA in the spring of 1965. (AP,
    Miami Her., 12/18/64)
  USAF successfully launched a Minuteman I1 “instant ICBM” from Cape Ken-
    nedy. The test warhead hit its Atlantic target area more than 5,000
    mi. from the launch site. (UPI, NYT, 12/20/64, 41)
* Present dollar volume of contracts handled by the NAsA-Michoud plant
    passed $1 billion during 1964. (N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/18/64)
* MemSers of Local 1685, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of
     America, ended a 24-hr. strike at the Merritt Island Launch Area ( MILA)
     and nearby Patrick AFB facilities. The walkout had tied up $246 million
     in construction for space projects, including construction on an assembly
     building for the Saturn V lunar rocket, and work at the Titan I11 and
     Saturn IB launch areas. Carpenters had protested the use of nonunion
     workers by the Akwa-Downey Construction Co., a subcontractor on one
     of the projects. It was the fourth major labor difEculty at NASA Kennedy
    Space Center in 1964. (UPI, NYT, 12/18/64, 39 and 12/19/64, 48;
     Chic. Trib., 12/18/64)
December 18-19: Total lunar eclipse occurred. A lS-ft.-dia. dish antenna,
     built by Marconi Co. and designed for Queen Mary College of London
     Univ., was used for the first time to view the eclipse. It was operated
     as a radiotelescope at wavelengths of about one mm.-possibly the larg-
     est ever built to operate at such short wavelengths. The dish employed
     an epoxy-resins structure reinforced with glass fibers and having a zinc-
     sprayed surface.
        During the eclipse, extensive heat-map measurements of the lunar
     surface were made from Egypt by team of Boeing Scientific Research
     Laboratories scientists. Preliminary analysis of their measurements
     showed hundreds of “hot spots,” or surface temperature anomalies, on
     the lunar surface, although the experimenters had expected to find only
     a few dozen. The experimenters made 12 20-min. scans of the moon
     during the eclipse, in both the visual and infrared portions of the spec-
     trum. Measurements were made at El Kottamia Observatory, 50 mi.
     east of Cairo, at invitation of United Arab Republic Astronomical Serv-
     ice. (M&R, 1/4/65,21; NYT, 12/22/64; M&R, 1/18/65,28)
                                                                         425
               ASTRONAUTICS ANT) AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

December 19: A Gemini-type spacecraft was successfully landed at Edwards
    AFB in first manned test of the new paraglider recovery system. North
    American Aviation test pilot Donald F. McCusker guided the capsule
    back to earth following a four-and-a-half minute flight beneath the
    inflated wing, after being released from a helicopter at an altitude of
    8,500 ft. McCusker was slightly injured when the paraglider landed
    at about 25 mph-faster than had been anticipated. (L.A. Times,
    12/20/64~;Sun Diego Union, 12/20/64; NAA S&ID Skywritei, 12/31/a,
    4)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) ,chairman of the Senate Committee
    on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued a statement related to his
    letter to President Johnson [See Dec. 7,19M] in which he had proposed
    a merger of the Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) and
    NASA Apollo-X programs: “Department of Defense and NASA officials
    have informed me of an agreement they have worked out in relation to
    the Air Force’s proposed Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) and the
    space administration’s proposed Apollo-X.
        “The Department of Defense and NASA have gone a long way toward
     answering the questions I raised several weeks ago. I suggested at
    that time that perhaps a great savings could be achieved without sacri-
     fice to either the NASA or Air Force responsibilities in space by harmo-
    nizing MOL and Apollo-X. I have been told that the Air Force and NASA
    will take advantage of each other’s technology and hardware development
    with all efforts directed at achievement of a true space laboratory as an
    end goal. The review underway by both agencies will strengthen the
    total space effort.
        “We should take full advantage of the technology and ground-support
    systems developed for Project Apollo. The object of the Senate Space
    Committee in raising questions about MOL and Apollo-X was to accom-
     plish the wisest use of personnel and money, not in criticism of either
    project.”
        New York Times reporter John Finney interpreted Sen. Anderson’s
     statement as an indication that the Administration “had gone along with
     his [Sen. Anderson’s] suggestions. Not lost upon the Administration
     was the letter’s implication that it would be diflicult to defend the pro-
     posed $5.2 billion space budget on Capitol Hill unless the Administra-
    tion could show it had eliminated duplication.” (Text; Finney, NYT,
     12/20/64,45)
  NASA Goddard Space Fight Center announced plans for negotiation with
     the General Dynamics-Electronics Co. €or purchase of approximately
     $1.25 million worth of unique ground tracking equipment to be used
     in the Applications Technology Satellite project. ATS Range and Range
     Rate electronic systems would be installed in three ground stations to
     provide ground trackers with extremely accurate satellite position, ve-
     locity, and range. The systems would also drive displays and digital
     data consoles. The contractor would design, manufacture, and test the
     systems under a cost reimbursable contract with incentive provisions.
     ATS satellites, designed to advance technology in communications,
     meteorology, and other applications, would require unique ground sys-
     tems ready for the first launch {n 1966. (GSFC Release 636-64)
426            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4

December 19: An astronomer at Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories,
    Calif., Allan R. Sandage, told the 2d Texas Symposium on Relativistic
    Astrophysics that an explosion in the galaxy 36.2 may indicate the
    birth of a quasi-stellar force ( QS F) . A quasi-stellar force would be
    an entirely new source and kind of energy in the universe which would
    not follow the known rules of physical forces. (AP, Ymh. Post,
    12/17/64)
* USAF launched unidentified satellite on Thor-Agena D booster from
    Vandenberg AFB. (HHN-48)
* Tass reported that a Gorky Univ. team, headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky,
    the leading Soviet authority on radio emanations of the moon, had
    found evidence they believed showed that the upper layer of the moon’s
    surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguishing it both chem-
    ically and in mineral content from deep layers. Results were obtained
    during the complete lunar eclipse of last Dec. 30 observed from Ussurisk,
    in far eastern Siberia. Troitsky’s group made use of the fact that the
    lunar surface cooled during eclipses and that the cooling caused a drop
    in the intensity of radio emanations. The Russians worked out the
    relationship between the decrease of radio emanations from the ob-
    scured part of the moon and the physical properties of the surface.
     Investigating the properties of the uppermost porous layer of the moon’s
    surface to a depth of about four inches, the Russians established that
    its electrical conductivity was 50% to 100% greater than that of the
     underlying rocks and concluded that the two’ layers differed in chemical
    composition and mineral content. The conductivity of the top layer
     was found to correspond to that of meteorites, confirming the hypothesis
    that bombardment bv meteorites and the settling of meteoritic dust
     played an important part in shaping the uppermo; layer of the moon.
     (NYT, 12/21/64)
* The New York Times reDorted an announcement this week by the Inter-
     national Atomic Eneriy Agency (IAEA) that nuclear energy ‘had gained
     recognition in 1964 as an economically competitive source of electric
     power. A spokesman for the IAEA cited a 515,000-kw. nuclear plant
    to be built by General Electric for the New Jersey Central Power and
     Light Co. near Toms River, N.J. The bid for a nuclear p l a n t 4 6 6
     million-had     been lower than those for coal-powered plants despite
     the abundance of coal in southern New Jersey. (Grimes, NYT,
     12/20/64,8)
December 20: MARINER IV, bound for M r ,began passing through a second
                                          as
     stream of meteoroids. In its first 23 days of flight, the craft had made
     7% million scientific and engineering measurements in interplanetary
     space and was 3,748,352 mi. from earth, traveling at 6,970 mph relative
     to earth. Its velocity relative to the sun was 72,902 mph. The straight-
     line distance from the spacecraft to Mars was 107,592,980 mi. (NASA
     Release 6 6 3 2 3 )
  NASA announced that it had organized a moonwatch network to assist with
     development and operation of the “Moon Blink,” an instrument designed
     to verify and locate color on the lunar surface. When alerted by one of
     the stations, watchers at scattered distant points would train their tele-
     scopes on the moon to verify a sighting. Professional and amateur
     astronomers at some 35 stations linked by long-distance telephone were
     working with NASA to give volunteer assistance to the Moon Blink pro-
                                                                           427
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERO                     1964

    gram. The instrument was being developed by NASA’s
                  rch and Technology under contract with T
                   ,Annapolis, Md., and consisted essentially
                    uld blink when red calor showed on the moon. Although
    the instrument was being developed for detection of unusual coloration
    on all types of bodies orbiting in space, the moon’s surface was con-
    sidered of particular interest since the red color could signify a source
    of gases and possibly of energy. Any source of energy would be
    significant to the NASA lunar landing program. (NASA Release 64-36!
December 20: Researchers reported the centrifugal experiment conducted
    for the Air Force by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems
    Div. indicated that a centrifuge device in a space station could help to
    recondition astronauts living for prolonged periods in a weightless con-
    dition. Tests in which five college students spent 42 days in a hori-
    zontal position showed that tendency to faint on standing diminished
    after periodic centrifuge rides. (NYT, 12/20/64,42)
* Dr. Boris Yegorov, the Russian doctor who orbited the earth in the
    VOSICHOD I spaceship, suggested that persons suffering from high blood
    pressure and heart trouble might one day be rocketed into weightless
    space for therapy. By relieving the gravitational load on the patients
    and giving them drugs, he said, ‘5t will be possible to heal a person and
    give his wearied heart a chance to recuperate.” Dr. Yegorw said this
    novel heart treatment would be possible in the “foreseeable future.”
     (Toth, Boston Sunday Globe, 12/20/64)
December 21: EXPLORER XXYI, Energetic Particles Explorer D (EPE-D) ,was
     launched into an eggshaped orbit atop a three-stage Delta rocket from
     Cape Kennedy. The 101-lb.windmill-shaped satellite carried five experi-
    ments designed to learn how high energy radiation particles are injected,
    trapped, and eventually lost in the Van Allen radiation belts. Infor-
    mation abtained from the mission was expected to make important con-
     tributions to the Apollo manned lunar landing program, specifically in
    the design of protective spacecraft sl-;tlding and in planning flight trajec-
    tories for moon landing. Information on the depth of penetration of
    the geomagnetic field by high energy solar protons-particles of
    potential danger to moon-bound astronauts-might also be obtained.
     Preliminary orbital data: apogee, 16,280 mi.; perigee, 190 mi.; period,
     7 hrs. 36 min.; inclination, 20.15’. The satellite was designed for an
     operational life of one year. (NASA Release 64-302; AP, Benedict,
     Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
  USAF launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Agena I booster toward a
                                                              )
     polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. Purpose of the shot was not indi-
     cated. (UPI, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
* USAF launched Blue Scout, Jr., probe from Vandenberg AFB on a non-
     orbital space mission. Press sources reported this as the second success-
     ful launch of a contact cesium ion engine, developed by Electro-Optical
     systems, Inc. (HHN-48; MBR, 1/4/65,11)
  Dr. Winston E. Kock, Director of NASA Electronics Research Center in
     Cambridge, Mass., announced that Dr. Lester C. Van Atta and Dr. W.
     Crawford Dunlap would head two of the Center’s major operations. Dr.
     Van Atta would direct research in electromagnetics, including micro-
     wave and optical research. Dr. Dunlap would direct research in com-
428            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    ponent technology, including solid state and materials and qualifica-
    tions standards. (NASA Release 64-317)
December 21 :NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Commercial Club
     of Chicago: “There is an analogy between our national space program
     and our national history. The exciting adventures of the settlement of
    North America captured popular fancy. But it was the quiet develop
     ment of the free spirit of Americans and the growth of our form of self-
    government that were to weigh heavier in the scales of history than
     Indian raids and campaigns of the colonial wars.
        “Another analogy closer to us has been the change in public attitudes
    that has led Americans to adopt new scientific ideas and concepts that
    may have been rejected only a few years ago.
        “Today we live in a period of unprecedented scientific and technolog-
                       ..
     ical explosion. .       To be visionary is no longer to be labeled as
    impractical.” (Text)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.) , Chairman of Senate Committee
     on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Denver Post reporters that
     the manufacture of the M O L spacecraft would be delayed until the De-
     fense Dept. presented an “acceptable definition” of the program. He
     said that President Johnson was reviewing the 1966 budget which con-
     tained $155 million for MOL, but that the money would not be spent
     until Air Force objectives in space were defined and accepted. (Part-
     ner, Denver Post, 12/22/64)
  The Air Force version of the controversial F-111 fighter-bomber, formerly
     called the TFX, made a successful but somewhat abbreviated maiden
     flight from Carswell AFB, Tex. (the site of the General Dynamics Corp.
     plant that built the plane). Piloted by Richard L. Johnson and Val E.
     Prahl, the 1,650-mph aircraft performed all the items on the test pro-
     gram that were possible with the malfunctioning wing flaps. The
     variable-geometry wings, capable of a 70’ sweep, were kept in 26”
     position during the first flight. In 21 min. of flight, the F-111 achieved
     an altitude of 17,000 ft. and a speed of 230 mph. On takeoff it required
     less than half the runway used by conventional jet planes. The Navy
     version of the F-111 was scheduled to fly by mid-1965. (Witkin, NYT,
     12/22/64, 12; UPI, Chic. Trib. 12/22/64; Aviation Daily, 12/23/64)
  A study at Northrop Space Laboratories was reported as indicating that
     a fluid-filled “bladder” might offer the best form of protection to astro-
     nauts during impact acceleration. Using guinea pigs, the investigators
     found that the fluid-filled garment seemed to offer the same advantages in
     minimizing internal organ displacement as did water immersion, but
     without the risk of generating high hydraulic pressure pulses. (M&R,
     12/21/645 21)
  Strategic Air Command announced that the Chicago area would be one of
     two test corridors for an exercise in which a squadron of SAC B-58
     Hustler bombers would test for pinpoint accuracy on simulated targets.
     The three-month exercise would begin Jan. 4 (UPI, NYT, 12/22/644,
                                                     .
     12)
* NASA announced award of 35 supplemental or new research grants and
     contracts totaling $1,%7,842 to 30 universities, colleges, and private
     research institutions. (NASA Release 64-313)
  M s i e and Rockets reported that studies carried out by Astro Research
   isls
     Corp. for NASA indicated the feasibility of forming large spheres in space
                                                                          429
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     by blowing them as bubbles. The technique promised space structure
     sizes hitherto unattainable with very low masses. For example, a 100-
     ft.-dia. ECHO 11-type sphere of two-micron-thick film, could be blown
     from 200 lbs. of viscous material. (M&R, 12/21/64, 21)
December 22: X-15 No. 3 was flown by Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (USAF)
     to 81,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,545 (mach 5.37) mph
     to test X-15’s skin friction at relatively high speeds and low angles of
     attack, and to obtain information on ablative materials. The 10-min.
     flight was one of a series to study heat buildup and air-flow patterns
     resulting from friction. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 12/24/64)
  United Technology Center successfully test-fired its 120-inch-dia., 1-
     million-1b.-thrust solid propellant rocket motor for nearly two minutes
     at Edwards AFB, Calif. The firing was the fourth static test within two
     months. The 250-ton rockets were being developed for the first stage
     of the Air Force’s Titan 111-C standard space launch vehicle, under con-
     tract to the AF’s Space Systems Div. The Titan 111-C was scheduled
     to orbit a variety of manned and unmanned payloads, including the
     Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL). (M&R, 1/4/65, 26)
  USAF’S new strategic reconnaissance plane, the SR-71, made its maiden
     flight at Palmdale, Calif., exceeding an altitude of 45,000 ft. and a speed
     of 1,000 mph. The one-hour flig2;t was reported to have been very
     successful; all test objectives were met. Powered by two J-58 jet
     engines, the SR-71 would eventually fly at more than 2,000 mph and
     above 80,000 ft. The Lockheed-built plane was flown by civilian test
     pilot Bob Gilliland. In 1965, the SR-71 would be assigned to Strategic
     Air Command (SAC) at Beale AFB, Marysville, Calif. (DOD Release
     902-64; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun,12/24/64)
* Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that President
     Johnson had ordered development of the world’s largest airplane-
      a giant military subsonic jet transport able to carry 600 troops or 250
      tons of cargo nonstop for 7,000 mi. at 550 mph. The CX (Cargo
      Experimental) military jet transport was predicted to be ready for
     the Air Force by later 1968. Development costs would total $750
      million. According to McNamara the CX would “maximize the effec-
     tiveness’, o f eight combat-ready divisions stationed in the US. and
      reduce “reaction time in meeting global crisis.” It would also “have
      potential commercial use for both passenger and cargo purposes.” In
      addition the CX would be able to carry any piece of divisional equip-
      ment used by an Army division, which present aircraft cannot do.
       (Mohr, NYT, 12/23/64, 1; Glass, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/23/64)
* It was announced that an advanced experimental radar system, built close
      to the ground and designed to detect, track, and identify missile war-
      heads and to assign targets to antimissile sites, was undergoing tests
     at White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex. The radar system had no moving
     parts and no moving antennas; energy would be transmitted directly
      from the many elements of the antenna array and would be steered
      electronically by shifting the electrical phase of the individual antenna
      elements. (NYT, 12/22/64, 45)
  During a background briefing for news representatives on NASA elec-
      tronics and control research activities, Francis J. Sullivan, Acting Di-
      rector, Electronics and Control Division, Office of Advanced Research
430            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    and Technology of NASA Hq., said: “Past analyses of the NASA R&D
    funds indicate that approximately 4Q per cent of our R&D dollars that
    are utilized in launch vehicle work go into the electronics industry.
    The same applies to 70 per cent of the spacecraft funds, and 90 per cent
    of the tracking and data acquisition funds. If you sum up these
    factors, it will indicate that approximately 50 per cent of NASA’s      R&D
    dollars in any one fiscal year find their way into the electronic and
    control type industries.” (Transcript)
December 22: A subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee
    recommended that the Department of Defense move ahead with a pro-
    gram to develop fighter planes capable of vertical and short takeoffs
     and landings (V/Stol). The subcommittee urged that the military
    services “not over commit themselves to the helicopter to the detri-
     ment and interests of V/Stol transport aircraft when they become avail-
     able.” Furthermore, it was the judgment of the subcommittee “that
     none of these programs presently being supported by the Department
     of Defense are adequate to determine the operational suitability ’of a
    V/Stol fighter aircraft for close tactical support.” (Balt. Sun, 12/23/64)
* In spite of the successful maiden flight of the F-111, Sen. John L. McClel-
    lan (D.-Ark.) said, in a telephone interview, that the Senate investi-
     gations subcommittee would not discontinue plans to try to determine
     whether the $6-billion General Dynamics Corp. contract for production
     of the F-111 was actually awarded to the high bidder on the basis of an
     inferior design, and if so, whether influence was involved. No specific
     date was mentioned for resumption of the investigations. (AP, NYT,
     12/23/64+, 15; AP, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64)
* US~F  announced it had built the T-27 space flight simulator-a $5,500,000,
     15-ton machine which would be used for astronaut training at the Aero-
     space Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif. The simulator was
     built under a contract with the Link Group of General Precision, Inc.
      (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/23/64, 24-)
  Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) announced that Pakistan International
     Airlines (PIA) had reserved two delivery positions for the US. super-
     sonic transport plane bringing the total of reserved positions for the
     SST to 93 and the number of airlines holding positions to 21 (14 foreign
     flag and seven US.flag airlines). (FAA Release 64-110)
* USAF successfully fired an Atlas-F ICBM down the WTR from Vandenberg
     AFB-the third major launching from the base in two days. (PPI, NYT,
     12/23/64, 28)
0 USN launched a Polaris A-3-the       13th consecutive success-from the sub-
     merged submarine Yon Steuben off Cape Kennedy. (M&R, 1/4/65,
     111
* Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that Gen. John Paul
     McConnell would be nominated to replace Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, who
     would retire as Air Force Chief of Staff on Jan. 31,1965, after 35 years
     in the armed forces. Gen. McConnell would assume his new position
     Feb. 1. (NYT, 12/23/64,11; Barrett, HTNS, Pash. Post, 12/23/6p,2)
December 23: NASA announced realignment of its manned space flight orga-
     nization, designed to (1) provide a central organizational element with
     the overall operations responsibility for manned space flight programs,
     and (2) make a single organization responsible for the assembly, check-
     out, and launch of the total Apollo space vehicle in manned space flight
                                                                          431
                                 AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64
               ASTRONAUTICS

    programs at Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area ( MILA).
    Key organizational changes would be effective Jan. 1,1965 : (1) appoint-
    ment of E. E. Christensen to a new position, Mission Operations Director,
    in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, supported by two Mission Di-
    rectors with overall responsibility for the individual mission to which
    they were assigned; (2) creation of an Operations Support Requirements
    Office, headed by Porter Brown and staffed by representatives of each
    NASA program office, appropriate centers, and Office of Tracking and Data
    Acquisition; (3) transfer of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Opera-
    tions to Kennedy Space Center; and (4) establishment at KSC of the
    position of Director, Launch Operations. Dr. Kurt H. Debus would
     also act as Director, Launch Operations; G. Merritt Preston, head of
     MSC Florida Operations, wodd become Deputy Director, Launch Oper-
     ations. Resident officeswere provided at KSC for MSC and MSFC program
     managers. (NASA Ann. 66301;KSC Release 224)
December 23: NASA and ComSatCorp jointly announced the signing of an
     agreement covering the launching by NASA of “Early Bird”-the first
     communications satellite intended for commercial use. The agreement
     provided that NASA would launch Early Bird from Cape Kennedy, Fla.,
     into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude above the Atlantic as soon
     after Mar. 1 as NASA found feasible. ComSatCorp would pay NASA
     approximately $3.5 million for the initial launch, whether or not the
     Thrust Augmented Delta launch vehicle was successful in orbiting the
     satellite, and for each subsequent launch under the contract. The $3.5
     million would reimburse NASA for the cost of the Delta vehicle, other
     launch services, propellants, guidance and tracking services, and data
     processing. Should the first launch be unsuccessful, NASA would try
     again on a second satellite. The contract gave ComSatCorp the option of
     calling for additional launches, after July 1, of synchronous satellites
     of the same type. (ComSatCorp Release, 12/23/64)
* Jet Propulsion Laboratory released figures on MARINER IV, valid as of 12:Ol
     pm: total miles to trave1-325,000,000; total miles traveled-44,000,000 ;
     miles remaining to travel-281,000,000 ; miles from earth-4,306,180 ;
     speed in relation to earth-7,023 mph; speed in relation to sun-72,532
     mph; total days required for trip-228; days already in space-26; days
     remaining to travel-202.     (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/24/64)
* It was reported that President Johnson would give special attention to
     science and technology programs in budget-making conferences at his
     Texas ranch. Dr. Donald S. Hornig, the President’s special assistant
     for science and technology, said in Austin Press Conference that the
     significance of his presence as a participant in all meetings was that
     Johnson was looking at the “totality” of the various Government en-
      terprises supporting science and technology in an effort to pursue a
      balanced program. Hornig said the Federal government was spending
      about $15 billion-roughly 15% of its budget-on scientific research,
      technical development, test, and engineering programs with about half
      this amount spent by DOD. Dr. Hornig also said he believed the hun-
      dreds of millions of dollars going into the effort to put an American
      on the moon by 1970 was well spent because “the moon is a very
     interesting place scientifically.” It will “take a lot of going” to achieve
      that goal, he said, but present schedules “will allow it.” (Wash. Eve.
     Star, 12/23/a)
432             ASTRQNAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

December 23: Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the
     Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), said that many American
     and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weight-
     lessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet
     scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell
     division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astro-
     nauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present con-
     ditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the onJy
     alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity
     tb simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/M)
  Dr. Herbert Friedman, chief of astrophysics at the Naval Research Labora-
     tory in Washington, D.C., told a meeting of the American Physical
     Society at Berkeley that x-ray detectors carried in Aerobee sounding
     rockets had picked up evidence of radiation above the earth’s atmos-
     phere which indicated the possibile existence of a “neutron star.” The
     invisible object, lying in the constellation Scorpius and relatively close
     to the earth, emitted streams of extremely feeble x-rays. Its size was
     unknown. The existence of such a star would offer important confirma-
     tion of scientific theories about the birth and death of all stars, and the
     distribution of elements throughout the universe. It would also be the
     densest collection of matter in the universe: a massive lump of nuclear
     particles weighing a billion tons per cubic inch. (Perlman, S.F.
     Chronicle, 12/24/64)
  NASA Ames Research Center announced that the Carl N. Swenson Co., San
     Jose, Calif., had been awarded a $992,000 contract to construct a rein-
     forced-concrete vacuum chamber and Structural Dynamics Laboratory
     at ARC. The space chamber would be in the form of a ten-story, 30-
     million-lb., hollow concrete pentagonal tower with walls three feet thick,
     would aceomodate full-scale segments or smaller-scale models of rockets
     and spacecraft, and could be evacuated to a pressure of ten millimeters
     of mercury. (ARC Release 64-31)
December 26: A Nationul Geographic report, based on findings by NASA and
     Air Force researchers, estimated that the earth‘s gravitational field picked
     up several million tons of dust and small particles every year and that
     the total accumulation of this material on the earth’s surface since its
     formation two billion years ago was well over ten feet. (NYT,
     12/27/64)
e It was reported that the Marconi Co., Ltd., in England, was attempting to
     perfect a safety aid that would make gliders more visible to radar to
     help avoid air-to-air crashes with aircraft. Carefully calculated pat-
     terns of thin foil, detectable by different radar wavelengths, were being
      mounted in and on a test glider flown ‘bythe London Gliding Club. (Sci.
      Serv., NYT, 12/26/64+, 9)
* Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in an article written
     for the Florida Times-Union: “Expansion’s of man’s geographical
      horizons have almost invariably been linked with surges of creativeness
      in the arts and sciences. The Space Age could well revitalize human
      affairs even more than did the vigorous world-ranging of Western
                                                                            .. .
      navigators that ended the stagnation of the Dark Ages in Europe.
        “Already some philosophers see the possibility that world-wide inter-
      est in the space program and growing international participation in it
                                                                         433
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

    could be the first steps toward providing our troubled race with a moral
    and constructive substitute for war.
        “It is entirely possible that, along with broadening of perspectives,
    there will be basic changes for the better in man’s aspirations as astro-
    nauts of many nations venture deeper and deeper into the vastness of
    space in which ours is but one small planet circling a sun-star of rela-
                               ..     .,’ (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64+)
    tively minor importance.
December 26: Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space
    Flight Center, said the Florida Times-Union: “Any statement of what
                                                            ...
    space exploration will be like 100 years from now is            in the same
                                    ..    . Any specific projects which we may
    league as crystal ball gazing.
              ...    will fall far short of activities that will be routine a
    describe
    century from now.
        “One hundred years ago the ‘iron horse’ was the fastest means of travel
                 .
    available. . . Airplanes were unknown. In this atmosphere Jules
                                ..
    Verne sat down and wrote . ‘From the Earth to the Moon’ published
              ...
    in 1865.          His spacecraft carried three men (and two dogs), was
    launched from the east coast of Florida, circled the Moon, and returned
                                                       ..
    to Earth during a round trip that took 11 days. .        Jules Verne used a
    huge cannon buried in the sand to boost his capsule to escape velocity.
     . ..  Today we are using Saturn chemical rockets to propel our Apollo
    spacecraft outward for its first trip to the Moon. And by the year 2064
    altogether new means of propulsion will make our present-day launch
    vehicles and spacecraft appropriate relics for the Smithsonian Institu-
            . .”
    tion. .         (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/6d)
December 2630: A plasma torch, designed and built by scientists at the
     Univ. of California at Los Angeles in a space chemistry program spon-
    sored by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) ,was demon-
     strated publicly for the first time at the annual meeting of the American
    Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) , at Montreal. The
     device provided the first laboratory source of extremely hot,*pureplasma
     which could be precisely modulated, and whose composition could be
     varied widely, thus making it possible for scientists to simulate the
     chemistry of the hottest stars. (AFOSR Release 12-16-43; M&R,
     1/4/65,21)
December 27: In the Journal of the American Physical Society, Irwin I.
     Shapiro of MIT’S Lincoln Laboratory proposed use of radar as a test
     for Einstein’s general theory of relativity: radar pulses would be sent
     to one of the solar system’s inner planets, either Venus or Mercury,
     and the time-lapse before the radar echoes’ return measured on the earth.
     According to Einstein’s theory, when the radar beam passed close enough
     to the sun to encounter a very strong gravitational field, the radar waves
     should slow down. The slowdown should be sufficient to delay return
     of the radar echoes by as much as 0.0002 seconds, a time interval accu-
     rately measurable by electronic techniques. (Wash. Post, 12/28/64)
  President of the Delaware Academy of Science, John S. Seney, reported
     experiments he hoped would lead man to fly under his own power, like a
     bird. He had captured a turkey buzzard which he hoped to put through
     a series of tests in a wind-tunnel in the basement of his home. “If we’re
                                                                          ...
     going to fly, the only way to do it is to fmd out what this bird’s got
     and then put all this together in relation to what modern materials are
     available. Then maybe we’ll come up with some sort of flying suit.”
      (NYT, 12/28/M, 51)
434            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

December 28: MARINER IV passed the 50-million-mi.mark on its 325-million-
    mi. flight to Mars. The spacecraft was operating normally and trans-
    mitting items of information at a rate of 331/3/sec. Nearly 10 million
    scientific and engineering measurements in space and outside the earth’s
    orbit had been transmitted in its first 29 days of flight. (NASA Release
    64-326)
0 A spokesman for the Senate’s Select Committee on Small Business’ Sub-

    committee, headed by Sen. Russell B. Long (D.-La.) ,reported it would
    meet shortly after Congress convened Jan. 4 to consider senatorial re-
    quests for an investigation of charges that NASA had given away to
    business firms valuable patent rights developed at public expense and
    worth millions of dollars. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, claimed
    the agency was following Federal law and guidelines laid down by
    President John F. Kennedy shortly before his death. (AP, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 12/28/64)
  U.S. Navy was reported to be defining its manned orbiting laboratory
     (MOL) ocean surveillance experiment despite the proposed merger of
                                      Apollo-X programs. Navy felt its space
    the Air Force MOL and NASA’s
    mission potential should be explored as thoroughly under either mili-
    tary or civilian programs. The Navy space mission was first envi-
    sioned to involve five major areas concerning shipping: detection; loca-
    tion; identification ; classification; tracking of surface and subsurface
    craft. (Fink, Av. Wk.,   12/28/€4,13)
  Support for theories that extraterrestrial forces influenced rain and snow-
    fall was reported at a meeting of the American Association for the
    Advancement of Science. Glenn W. Brier of the US. Weather Bureau
    presented evidence that the moon, when new or full, influenced the timing
    of precipitation by gravitationally nudging unstable atmospheric con-
    ditions into rainfall or snowstorms. Dr. E. Keith Bigg of Australia’s
    Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization in Syd-
    ney reported research which substantiated his theory that meteoric dust
    particles acted as nuclei for ice crystals to form on and fell to earth as
    rain or snow, with the whole process taking about 30 days. (Osmund-
    sen, NYT, 12/29/64,6)
0 U.S. Army announced that the Corps of Engineers awarded a $1,159,000

     (NASA funds) fixed-price contract to Carpenter Brothers for construction
    of a mobile equipment maintenance building at NASA’s Mississippi Test
    Operations. (DOD Release 908-64)
  GAO Comptroller General Joseph Campbell said that GAO would evaluate DOD
    policies affecting nonprofit organizations performing design, technical
    direction, and systems engineering functions for the military services.
    “We have a continuing interest in finding out whether salaries higher
    than the government scale paid by some of these organizations axe really
    necessary and justified or are only a way of indirectly paying higher
     [wages] for government work,” Campbell said. Another area of prime
    concern to GAO was relinquishment to nongovernment organizations of
    technical direction and similar activities it considered Government man-
    agement functions.
       DOD had already clamped fiscal ceilings on six of these organizations
    to prevent their growth and was inviting increased industry competition
    in the areas of technical direction and systems engineering.
                                                                        435
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4

       Campbell told Aviation Week and Space Technology that “if we are
    faced with any intention to sustain permanently some of these orga-
                                      ,we would have to look into the situation
    nizations as arms o
    very carefully and
       In commenting on NASA’s    approach to nonprofit organizations, Ernest
    W. Brackett, Asst. Deputy Associate Administrator, noted that although
    NASA had “inherited” one nonprofit organization, the California Insti-
    tute of Technology’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, it had not and would
    not establish any “captive” nonprofit organizations. Two other nonprofit
    organizations were also performing work for NASA-RAND Corp., with
    contracts totaling $3.3 million, and MIT’S Lincoln Laboratories, with
    contracts totaling over $7 million. (Av. Wk., 12/28/6LE, 31)
December 28: Director General of the International Air Transport Asso-
    ciation, Sir William Hildred, said in the association’s annual air traffic
    forecast, “Thanks to increased efficiencies and economies, the balance
    between revenues and expenditures should continue to improve. In
    fact, it just seems possible that the industry will succeed in making a
                                                                   (UPI, NYT,
    positive net profit in 1965 for the first time in its life.”
     12/29/64,50)
* Among persons listed by Aviation Week and Space Technology for sig-
    nificant contributions to the progress of aerospace in the US. during
     1964were:
        Harold Finger and Milton Klein, manager and deputy respectively
    of the joint AEC-NASA Nuclear Space Propulsion Office for “pushing
    the Rover program through four successful tests of a nuclear rocket
     reactor using liquid hydrogen and demonstrating the technical feasibil-
    ity of caclear propulsion for manned interplanetary flights of the
     future.”
        Harris “Bud” Schurmeier, Ranger program director of the Jet Pro-
     pulsion Laboratory and his technical team for “their tremendous tech-
     nical success with the Ranger 7 that produced the first detailed
    photographs of the lunar surface.”
        Paul F. Bikle, Director of NASA Edwards Flight Research Center, and
     pilots Milton Thompson and Jack Mackay of NASA and Maj. Robert
     Rushworth and Capt. Joe Engle of USAF for “their continued operation
     of the North American X-15 research aircraft into a wide variety of
     unexplored areas both in performance and equipment testing.”
        John Mengel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for “direction
     of the global NASA tracking and data acquisition network which produced
     an average of 50 mi. of taped data per day from payloads in space.”
        Col. Harold W. Robbins, USAF Space Systems Div., for “technical
     direction and support of the large solid rocket program that culminated
     this year in the successful demonstrations of 156-in.-dia. motors and
     the initiation of a 260-in.-dia. program.” (Av. Wk., 12/%/64+, 9 )
December 28-30: Dr. John H. Wolfe o NASA Ames Research Center sug-
                                          f
     gested the probable source of Van Allen belt radiation at the meet-
     ing of the American Geophysical Union in Seattle. Dr. Wolfe said
     the Van Allen radiation belts probably had their source in the comet-
     like tail of the magnetosphere extending from the dark side of earth
     away from the sun. Spiraling protons and alpha particles emitted by
     the sun were shielded from solar wind in this area. Affected only by .
436             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

     the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of force
    and conveyed to the Van Allen belts.
        New data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instru-
     ments aboard EXPLORER XXI IMP-B (Interplanetary Monitoring Plat-
    form) and OGO I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) led to this
     conclusion. Data collected from as far into space as 96,000 mi.
    revealed that interaction of the solar wind and the geomagnetic field
    around the sunlit side of earth created a boundary region 2% earth
    diameters thick at a distance of five earth diameters from the point on
     earth closest to the sun. This expanded to six diameters thick 90”
    around earth.
        Hydromagnetic effects in this boundary deflected solar radiation
    around earth and prevented it from penetrating directly to the relatively
    low altitudes of the Van Allen belts except during the more energetic
    solar storms.
        Satellite data also indicated that the comet-like tail of earth extended
    directly along the line from the sun through earth, rather than being
    slightly deflected as had been believed. Wolfe said the tail seemed
    less tapered and more nearly cylindrical than had been expected, and
    extended at least as far as the orbit of the moon. (ARC Release 65-2;
    AP, Detroit News, 1/8/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
December 29: The first of three giant Pegasus satellites arrived at NASA John
    F. Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn I space vehicle (SA-9) would
    launch the 3,200-lb. satellite into an orbit visible from earth and ranging
    from about 310- to 465-mi. altitude, sometime in the first quarter of 1965.
    Primary mission of the Pegasus satellites would be to use its 2,000 sq. ft.
    of capacitator panels to measure, record, and transmit back to earth
    data on the frequency, size, direction, and speed of meteoroids in near-
    earth space. This information would be important to development of
    manned and unmanned spacecraft. (KSC Release 227-64)
* The first Apollo spacecraft adapter was delivered by Army CH-47A heli-
    copter from Tulsa, Okla., to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center-Florida
    Operations at Merritt Island. The 4,000-lb., 22-ft.-dia., 28-ft. long,
    cone-shaped unit structurally simulated t b adapter section that would
    house the Apollo lunar excursion module (LEM) on its trip to the
    moon. It would undergo tests to determine whether the mechanical
    fit was adequate, if sufficient access was provided to perform service and
    checkout of the LEM, and to determine its compatibility with test facili-
    ties and ground handling. Helicopter was chosen over other forms of
    transportation because of the awkwardly large diameter of the section.
     (KSC Release 227-64)
* Soviet radio astronomy expert Iosif Shlovsky said at a symposium on 1 9 a
    science conducted by Tass news agency that the biggest success of 1964
    in world astronomy was an experiment by Dr. Herbert Friedman of
    the US. Naval Research Laboratory. The experiment showed that a
    large region of the Crab Nebula produced x-ray radiation. Data ob-
    tained by Friedman with an Aerobee rocket launched July 5 from White
    Sands Missile Range “established how the flux of x-ray radiation corn-
    ing from the Crab Nebula changed when the moon passed between it
    and the rocket,” Shklovsky said. Some scientists had attributed the
    radiation to a tiny, superdense “neutron star.” But observations from
    the rocket as the moon shut off direct view of the Nebula showed that a
                                                                         437
               ASTRONAUTICS AND BRONAUTICS, 1 9 64

    larger area was
    12/19/64r, 3)
December 29: NASA Flight Research Center requested bids for construction
    of a high-temperature heat facility at Edwards, Calif. The completed
    facility would include enough test area to permit heat load testing of
    actual aircraft of the size of the XB-70 and the proposed supersonic
    transport. It could produce temperatures up to 3,000’ F on small iso-
    lated arms of the test aircraft; large areas could be heated up to 600” F.
    The contract would be administered by the US. Army Engineers. (FRC
    Release 334%)
  Successful first flight tests at Dallas of XC-142A V/Stol transport aircraft
    that could take off and land vertically were conducted by Ling-Temco-
    Vought. Initial hover flights were held to an altitude of five feet.
       Design plans called for the aircraft to attain speeds of 430 mph. Its
    wings could be tilted upward while the fuselage remained level. Thrust
    from the engines would lift the plane off the ground to a desired height;
    the wings could then be tilted back in place for conventional flight.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/30/&)
* Navy radar operators at Patuxent Naval Air Station, Md., reported the
    sighting of two high-speed unidentified flying objects which approached
    the base at a speed of approximately 4,800 mph, executed a tight turn,
    and disappeared. (AP, Phil. Inq., 1/6/65)
December 30: In a New Year’s greeting addressed to President Anastas I.
    Mikoyan and Premier Alexgi N. Kosygin of the Soviet Union, Presi-
    dent Johnson urged agreement on a series of United States disarma-
    ment proposals and arms control: “Arms control remains especially
    urgent; nothing can contribute more to the hopes of mankind for the
    future. During the months ahead I hope we can work for practical
    agreements to this end. We can and should move to limit the spread
    of nuclear weapons; to achieve a verified worldwide comprehensive
    test ban; to make a cut-off of fissionable material production for
    weapons coupled with measures to safeguard the peaceful uses of nuclear
    power; and to agree on a verified freeze in existing offensive and defen-
    sive strategic nuclear delivery systems.
       “By progress in this critical area, our Governments can help to make
    this a happier and safer world for all people. You may be certain that
    the American people and their Government will never be second in this
    effort.” (Mohr, NYT, 12/31/M, 1-2)
    policy statement issued by the Committee on Science in the Promotion
    of Human Welfare of the American Association for the Advancement
    of Science (AAAS) charged that social and political pressures on the
    scientific community arising from such major US. space programs as
    Apollo, Starfish, and West Ford constituted a c‘serious erosion of the
    integrity of science.” The report was issued following a five-day meet-
    ing held by the association in Montreal, Canada.
       Commenting on the “spare race” aspects of NASA’s     program, the com-
    mittee said the pattern for orderly development of research had been
    altered by the “essentially political decision to pursue project Apollo.”
    The report concluded that Apollo did not appear to be based on the
     orderly systematic extension of basic scientific investigations.
       Another NASA program to come under fire at the AAAS meeting was
    the Voyager Mars exploration project attacked by D .Barry Commoner,
                                                         r
438              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1904

      professor of plant physiology at Washington University. Dr. Com-
      moner said finding life in any form on Mars would have tremendous
      scientific significance, and that he was not opposed to the basic idea of
      searching for life on the planet. “I simply feel this country is not yet
     prepared to make a commitment of this scope,” he said. “We could
      at this time be a lot closer to resolving this question if the scientific com-
     munity had been given the opportunity to fully discuss it.” He said
     even though the commitment had been made it was not too late to dis-
     cuss fully the question of life on Mars before the 1971 launch. He
      said he hoped Congressional space committees would ask for complete
     justifications on the Voyager project. (Av. Wk.,1/4/65, 18; Abra-
     ham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 12/28/64; AP,Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64)
December 30: Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, told scientists
     at American Geophysical Union meeting in Seattle that the structure of
     some of the ridges on the lunar surface photographed by RANGER VII
     indicated that water might exist on the moon. (AP, St. Louis Post-
     Dispatch, 12/31/&b)
* A pea-sized rocket motor, called a cap motor, weighing less than three-
     hundredths of an ounce, might be given its first trial in space next
     year as a stabilizing motor for a Tiros weather satellite. Conceived
     by the Wright Aeronautical Div. of the Curtiss-Wright Corp. in Wood
     Ridge, N.J., it was made entirely of plastic, contained igniter material
     which would be touched off by an electrical impulse, a solid propellant,
     a combustion chamber, and a flared exhaust nozzle. A string of the
     expendable motors would be mounted on a tape that would feed through
     a half-pound triggering device and fire them one at a time or in sequence.
     9 n e cap motor would yield a pound of thrust for about two-hundredths
     of a second. Two cap motor units, each containing 300 cap motors,
     would be placed on Tiros for the test in an attempt to lengthen its useful
     life beyond an expected three months. The satellite must spin at a
     certain number of revolutions a minute to stabilize its cameras; the
     slight friction in its trajectory would tend to slow it down. Computers
     on the ground would calculate the amount of spin to be imparted; aboard
     Tiros, 100 cap motors would be fired in each burst. (Hudson, NYT,
     12/30/64,1,17)
* Prof. Rene J. Dubos of the Rockefeller Institute charged at the Montreal
    meeting of the AAAS that present-day biology was almost completely
    irrelevant to the study of the nature of man. He said that the proper
    study of man’s nature should concern itself with the evolved patterns
     of physiological responses to a changing environment-what he would
    call “humanistic biology.” Not only would this approach turn up much
    new knowledge about “humaness,” he said, but it would also provide a
    better understanding of the uniqueness of the individual.
        Prof. Dubos stated he was not discussing psychology, a social science.
    Man now possessed technical means for manipulating his mental and
    physiological processes and might soon develop ways to alter his in-
    heritance and so direct the course of his evolutionary fate. “This means
    that mankind may soon be faced with decisions of immense importance
    that must be made in the light of the proper kind of biological knowl-
    edge,” he said. “The glory of the coming age,” he continued, “must be
    conceived within the framework of man’s n a t u r m f his biological
    limitations as well as his potentialities.” (Osmundsen, NYT, 12/30/64,
    11)
                                                                        439
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4

December 30: NASA Director of Personnel, Robert J. Lacklen, who had been
    with NASA since its inception, resigned to accept a position with the
     Richardson Foundation of Greensboro, N.C. Mr. Lackleu would head a
    Personnel Research Institute which would conduct research in personnel
    selection and appraisal. Mr. Grove Webster was named Acting Director
    of Personnel. (NASA Ann. 64-300)
* USN awarded a $13 million contract to General Dynamics-Pomona
     for funding, development, and pilot production of both medium
     and extended range standardized versions of a Tartar/Terrier-type sur-
     face-to-air missile. The standardized antiaircraft missile would use
    the Tartar/Terrier warhead and the same control and launching sys-
    tems with minor modifications and would offer improved reliability
     and performance at reduced cost. (DOD Releases 910-64 and 911-64)
  The Paris Municipal Council had voted for creation of a fly-
     ing fire brigade unit as part of the Paris police budget for 1965. The
    flying firemen would have three helicopters, would deal with fires in
     tall new buildings where expandable ladders would be ineffective. (Reu-
    ters, NYT,12/30/64,42)
December 31: NASA announced it had completed its experimental research
     and development program with SYNCOM 1 and SYNCOM 1 1 and would
                                                1               1
     transfer operation of the synchronous satellites to DOD, starting Jan. 1,
     1965. The transfer would be completed Mar. 31, 1965. DOD would
     operate the satellites for the remainder of their useful lifetimes and
    would provide NASA with any significant telemetry and ranging data.
     Communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two
     Syncoms had been furnished by DOD for the past two years. (NASA
     Release 65-5; DOD Release 1/4/65)
* NASA reported that a magnetometer hammer developed at NASA Marshall
     Space Flight Center to remove distortions from rocket fuel tank “gore
     segments” had salvaged rocket hardware valued in the millions of dol-
    lars. (NASARelease 64.-328)
* Dept. of Commerce announced opening of World Weather Center in Wa&-
     ington, D.C., composed of the Weather Bureau’s National Meteorological
     Center and National Weather Satellite Center with assistance provided
     by other Weather Bureau components. wwc would gather, process, and
     distribute weather observations and prepare weather analyses and fore-
     casts for as much of the globe as possible; provide opportunity for the
     training of meteorologists from the U.S. and abroad; conduct basic and
     applied research on large-scale weather problems; and archive weather
     information for use of the scientific community for research purposes.
     The Center would utilize the new direct Washington-Moscow weather
     communications link as well as the existing international weather com-
     munications systems.
        Plans for the U.N.-sponsored World Weather System would include
     three World Meteorological Centers: one in Washington, another in
     Moscow, and a third at a presently undesignated location in the South-
     ern Hemisphere. (Commerce Dept. Release G 64-184)
* Intelligence information reaching Washington             d that Red Chma
     had begun to manufacture its own MiG jet fighters. Significance of the
     new development was that Red China might have the principal ingredi-
     ents of a nuclear force-A-bombs and jet fighter bombers. (Fryklund,
     Wash. Eue. Star, 12/31/a)
440              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 0 4

During December: Boeing Co. was named systems integration contractor for
            three-stage Saturn V booster. Work would be performed at the
    NASA’s
    firm’s launch systems branch at New Orleans under an $85 million sup-
    plement to its contract as prime contractor for the booster’s first stage.
    Systems and engineering integration would be conducted in three ma-
    jor areas : the vehicle, systems documentation, and systems develop-
    ment breadboard faci&y. On the vehicle itself, Boeing would be re-
    sponsible for mechanical interface engineering, instrumentation and
    telemetry systems, aerodynamics and flight mechanics, flight evaluation
    and operation, atmospheric environmental design criteria, malfunction
    detection system, structural heating and environmental control system,
    structural dynamics, and vehicle assembly documentation. (M&R,
    1/4/65,10)
9 National Weather Satellite Center was seeking sources for services and

    material for advanced development models of water-borne automatic
    unmanned weather stations by January 14,1965. Companies with moor-
    ing and static meteorology sensor technology and design capabilities
    were being sought. (M&R, 12/21/64,8)
  NASA announced that its Officeof Technology Utilization had issued Tech-
    nical Briefs describing two instruments for measuring the rates of hu-
     man respiration and heartbeat. The devices were a pneumotachometer
     (Tech Brief W10259) which would measure respiration rates per min-
    ute on a breath-to-breathbasis and a cardiometer (Tech Brief 6 1 0 2 5 8 )
    which would compute the heartbeat rate from the wave-form output of
    an electrocardiograph (EICG) and visually display the data in beats per
    minute. Both were developed in connection with NASA’s             manned space
    Bight program. (NASA Release 64-311)
       A NASA technology utilization report described the effects of extremely
    low temperatures on structural metals. Based on studies at NASA Mar-
    shall Space Flight Center, the report outlined some of NASA’s        experience
    with various metallic materials and their Capabilities at cryogenic tem-
    peratures. (NASA Release 64-325)
       NASA Tech Brief 64-10006 described a speed-sensing device to help
    power crane operators judge payload movements more precisely. Visual
    and audible signals would be produced in the crane cab to indicate the
    rate of load movement. The device would eliminate the necessity of a
    relay man to transmit hand signals to the crane operator. (NASA Release
    64-300)
  NASA Flight Research Center completed the first series of flight tests of the
    Bell Aerosystems Lunar Landing Research Vehicle ( LLRV) . Program
    05cials observed that the LLRV could simulate many nonaerodynamic
    space-flight maneuvers in addition to the lunar landing for which it was
    primarily designed and asked for a full year of experimentation with the
    craft. (M&R, 12/14/64,10)
  NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1.5-million contract to Monitor
    Systems, Inc., of Fort Washington, Pa., for two digital telemetry s y s
    tems to be installed at KSC’S Central Instrumentation Facility on Merritt
    Island. The systems would be used as intermediate data converters
    and processors during Apollo/Saturn V rocket launches from Merritt
    Island. (KSC Release 2 2 M )
  Paul G. Johnson, of the AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion O f c ,said in
                                                                       fie
    an article in Astronautics and A e r o m t i c s that solid-core nuclear rockets
                                                                          441
                                                         19 64
                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,

    would power the next generation of manned space vehicles. “The exact
    way in which nuclear rockets will be used in the space program will
    depend on many factors other than payload comparisons. One of the
    primary influences will be the relative emphasis placed on manned
    operations in earth orbit, on the moon, and to the near planets. An
    equally strong influence will be the experience in the nuclear-rocket
    development program, which will indicate the possible characteristics
    and availability dates of propulsion systems.” (A&A, 12/64, 22-28)
During December: In the British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight, Brian
     J. Ford suggested that the first men on the moon might be imperiled by
    the residue of an electric charge which he said formed its craters. Mr.
     Ford proposed the theory that the moon’s craters were caused by a gigan-
     tic electrical discharge when the earth and moon were still hot and close
    together, and said that he had reproduced the theoretical conditions in
     miniature in a laboratory. Hi had found that electrical discharge created
     craters which showed the characteristic central peak of a lunar crater and
     formed other corroborating detail. He suggested that the moon might
     still carry an electrostatic charge from this original discharge which
     “might seriously imperil” the first men to land there. ( UPI, Chic. Trib.,
     12/28/64)
  In a report to the Atomic Industrial Forum, Frank Deluzio, staff director
    of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, called for
     increased funds for Kiwi and Nerva and also urged that the suspended
     Rift nuclear rocket program be reactivated. He suggested that studies
     be begun to substitute a nuclear reactor for the chemical engines in the
     giant Saturn V rocket. “While it is admitted that nuclear propulsion
     comes &to its own in the large scale manned missions to the planets,”
                        .
     Deluzio said, “. . nuclear stages should be committed to earlier pro-
     grams, such as lunar landings late in the Apollo program. The integra-
     tion of a nuclear stage with the Saturn launch vehicle should be done
     at the earliest possible moment so that proper experience and confidence
                       ...
     can be obtained          This will increase the utility of the Saturn for a
     great number of years; it means a high return to the nation for its invest-
     ment in the Saturn, its ground support, related systems, and industrial
     capabilities.” Deluzio also urged that nuclear rocket development re-
     main the province of AEC. (McHugh, Copley News Service, Sun Diego
     Union, 12/21/64)
* In an Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, Burton I. Edelson, Chair-
     man of the M A A Communications Committee, said: “In applying earth
      satellites to practical tasks, we have long passed the stage of demon-
      stration. Now as we approach the stage of extensive operations, we
     face another major challenge in what industry terms a ‘market survey.’
     We must be alert to the possibility of entirely new markets which evolve
      once an initial experiment demonstrates capability. The professional
      community can and should make major contributions to the prompt
      exploitation of its brain-childs.” (A&A, 12/64, 13)
                                      ev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy
                                      .S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile
                                                    the
                                      f r t ICBM’s, first Sputniks, the high-
                                       is
      altitude U-2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related
     these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets
      failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that US. miscalculated rela-
     tive missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/644, 114f.)
      7 66 82
       6-9-9
442            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1$ 6 4

During December: Karl G. Ham,Jr., Prea. of Aerospace Industries Assn.,
    editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the
    past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its
                  ...      Enough is known of the potential of the new aero-
    brightest era.
    nautical technology to predict that all types of aviation-military, air-
    l n , and general aviation-will be completely transformed in the next
     ie
    two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over.
    Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far
    from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all
    types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper
    to operate in the future.
       “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the
    new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aero-
    nautical technology, which has provided major advances in high per-
    formance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and
    material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given
                  .
    in aviation. . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will
    not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future
    because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft
    structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet
                   . .”
    experienced. .          (Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9)
During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the US. space program
    continued a an accelerated pace in 1964, The US. orbited a total of
                t
    76 payloads, of which four were deep-space prohes, while the U.S.S.R.
    orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the US. total
    NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included
    in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satel-
    lite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch ve-
    hicles, spacecraft, and space equipment.
       DOD’S launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s,
    with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year.
              most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER VII flight to
       NASA’s
    the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid
    achievements were APT weather photos from TIROS VIII and the much
    improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced
    research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active
    communications satellites concluded with SYNCOM 1x1, which was ma-
    neuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and
    performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay be-
    tween Asia and the US. A significant scientific contribution was made
    by EXPLORER xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere
    and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a
    tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and
    Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn
    I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a
    new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a
    successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-
    hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the
    Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of
    new large engines and of complete stages. In advanced research two
    achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core
    nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of
                                                                         443
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

    nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific im-
    pulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in
    satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geo-
    detic and other uses.
       In DOD’S launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan
    111-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL success-
    fully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also DOD continued its policy of
    launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one
     (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites.
       The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 19% was
    its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew
    not trained pilots.
       For both the US. and Russia, one major effort in each program re-
    mained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a
    deepspace probe (MARINER IV and ZOND 11) enroute to Mars, due for
    flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age
    offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (HHR-8;
    HHN-48; NASA Release 64-321; &A, 64, passim.)
During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in
    the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two
    of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats
    while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in
    both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Teresh-
    kova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June
    1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness,
    but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on
    future iung-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious
    “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack.
       Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the
    electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “varia-
    tions we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should
    be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing
    dangerous” so far in U S . astronauts’ heart rhythm changes. (TNS,
    Bylinsky, Huntd.!.?e Times, 12/27/64)
0 The impact of budgetary restraints upon the Nation’s research and dew&

    opment programs was marked in industry, Government agencies, and
    the university scientific community, John Finney claimed in the New
    York Times. Employment in the aerospace industry dropped from
    1,186,000 in August 1963 to 1,112,000 in September 1964, and manu-
    facturers were forced to turn to civilian products to augment sales.
    Limiting of NASA funds forced postponement of some of the follow-up
    programs for Apollo, such as a manned orbiting laboratory. Universi-
    ties whose research programs depended heavily on Federal research
    support were having di5culty in obtaining funds to complete projects
    already undertaken and could no longer expect liberal Government sup-
    port for their research proposals. (Finney, NYT, 1/11/65)
* FAA reported record number of applicants for private pilot’s licenses-
    51,548, an increase of 18% over 1963 total of 44,032. FAA Adminis-
    trator Najeeb E. Halaby attributed increased public interest in flying
    to “cooperative efforts on the part of Government and industry in mak-
    ing private flying safer, easier, and cheaper.” (FAA Release 65-1)
444            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1964

During 1964: A milestone in ion engine development was achieved when
    heavy-coated barium oxide filaments operated for up to 5,000 hrs. in
    bell-shaped vacuum chamber, NASA Lewis Research Center announced
    on Dec. 31. Until now, filaments for producing ions in electric engines
    had had a life of only a few hundred hours. (Lewk News, 1/8/65,2)
  Series of six Sandia Corp. Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets was launched
9

    from May to August. The six Nike-Tomahawks,which reached altitudes
    of about 300 h (186 mi.), were launched from the Island of Kania,
                       .
    as part of U.S. readiness program for use if space testing of nuclear
    devices was resumed. Experiment instrumentation for the series was
    provided by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists. Objective of
    te experiment was to obtain precise measurements of radiations in the
      h
    sun's corona. Another purpose was to demonstrate feasibility of using
    relatively inexpensive, spin-stabilized, ballistically pointed rockets for
    solar x-ray spectroscopy. Results of this research were lated reported
    at the December meeting of the American Geophysical Union (AGU).
     (OAR Review, 12/64,22)
During the space age: As of the close of 1 9 a , NASA had placed 70 spacecraft
    into earth orbit, lunar trajectory, or solar orbit since the birth of NASA
    on Oct. 1,1958. Of this number 52 were still orbiting as of Dec. 31,1W,
    and 21 were still transmitting signals. Some 55 million data points were
    being received daily at GSFC, recorded, and stored on magnetic tape at
    the rate of about 100,000 reek per year. Three of the 70 spacecraft
    impacted on the moon ; 15 re-entered the earth's atmosphere and burned
    up. Of the 31 silent satellites in orbit, 6 were in orbit about the sun,
    25 about the earth. Satellites still transmitting meaningful data in-
    cluded one deepspace probe (MARINER IV), 5 communications satellites
    (plus the beacon on passive communications satellite ECHO 11) , 3 weather
    satellites, 10 scientificsatellites. (NASA Release 65-1)
                            Appendix A
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE
                  FLIGHTS
                      A CHRONICLE FOR 1%4
   The following tabulation was compiled from open sources by Dr. Frank
W.Anderson, Jr., Assistant NASA Historian. Sources included the United
Nations Public Registry, the Satellite Situation Report issued by the Space
Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center, public informa-
tion releases of the Department of Defense, NASA, and other agencies, and the
Report to the Congress from the President of the United States: United States
                   Space Activities, 1964. Russian data are from the U.N.
Aeronrmtics ~ n d
Public Registry, the SateUite Situation Report, translations from T s News
                                                                        as
Agency statements in the Soviet press, and international news services’
reports.
   It might be well to call attention to the terms of reference stated or implied
in the title of this tabulation. This is a listing of payloads that have (a)
orbited, (b) as probes, ascended to at least the 4,000-mile altitude that tra-
ditionally has distinguished probes from sounding rockets, etc., or (c) con-
veyed one or more human beings in space. Furthermore, only flights that
succeeded-or at least are not known to have failed-in doing one of the
above are listed. Date of launch is referenced to local time at the launch site.
An asterisk by the date marks those dates that are one day earlier in this
tabulation than in listings which reference to Greenwich time.
   In these categories the world space effort continued to gain momentum,
with a total of 111 successfully launched payloads in a total of 90 launches.
The US.program was up from 65 payloads in 44 launches in 1%3 to 76 pay-
loads in 6Q launches in 1 W (DOD: 53 payloads in 38 launches; NASA: 23
payloads in 22 launches). The U.S.S.R. doubled its program from a nu-
merical standpoint, with 35 payloads in 30 launches in 1964, as opposed to
 17 payloads in 17 launches in 1963. It is interesting that in 1964 the U.S.S.R.
blossomed forth with four multiple-payload launches, her first since Feb-
ruary 1961.
   As we have cautioned in previous years, the “Remarks” column of these
appendixes is never complete because of the inescapable lag behind each
flight of the analysis and interpretation of scientificresults.
                                                                      445
446        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4




      m
      it
      4
      $n
      E
                                       447
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4




            I
448        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4




                    33
                    d                             9




      1
      4
      $4
                                                         449
                                             19 64
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,




     8
 0




                                                     a




                                                     m
                           N                 d
         %
El
h

         J
J                          i                 L       i
                           2                 2       2
2        2
450   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 64
                                       451
                                1964
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,




                                       b
                                       .I
                                       !
                                       a
                                       m'
452       ASTRONAUTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4




      W
                   B     0
                         ,I
                         -


                   2     2
      3
      k
                                                   453
         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4




                                               0
E
                                      b
1                                              m
                                               d




    a
    fi
    4:
    2
    z:
    p
    -4
454                            964
          ASTRONAlTPICS




             N
      N            N
                          19
      i            i      gs
             2
             2
                                                   455
        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4




m   m
    s
P        2
    a




4        4
    0

iii


                                                   3
d                                              3
4                                              4
456        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4




      rl
      E
      f2




                                                   4   4
                           $     4
ASTRON
458       ASTRONAUTICS AND AEBONAUTICSI, 19 6 4




                               8's:
                                     d
      I
                                                      459
            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 196 4




                                           P




                                           5
                6     6                           5
s   j
                                                  z
    8   z                                  z
8               z     z
460




      D   D


I-
                                       461
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 0 4
462       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4




      Y

      f
      m
                   AND                  196 4
    ASTRONAUTICS         AERONAUTICS,




d
4
P
-


z
c
                           Appendix B
    CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR NASA LAUNCHINGS
     JANUARY 1, 1964, THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 1964
   This chronology of major NASA launchings in 1!W is intended to provide
an accurate and ready historical reference, one compiling and verifying in-
formation previously scattered over several sources. It includes launchings
of all rocket vehicles larger than sounding rockets launched either by NASA
or under “NASA direction” (e.g., NASA provided vehicle, launch facilities, and
tracking facilities to the Italian crew who launched SAN MARCO I).
   An attempt has been made to classify the performance of both the launch
vehicle and the payload and to summarize total results in terms of primary
mission. Three categories have been used for vehicle performance and
mission results-successful (S) , partially successful (P), and unsuccessful
    .
 (U) A fourth category, unknown (Unk) ,has been provided for payloads
where vehicle nalfunctions did not give the payload a chance to exercise its
main experiments. These divisions are necessarily arbitrary, since many
of the results cannot be neatly categorized. Also they ignore the fact that a
great deal was learned from shots that may have been classified as unsuccessful.
   A few unique items require separate treatment. Their dates have been
kept in sequence but their history has been relegated to footnotes.
   Date of launch is referenced to local time at the launch site. A double
asterisk by the date marks those dates that are one day earlier in this tabula-
tion than in listings which reference to Greenwich time. Abbreviations of
two launch sites change in midyear with the establishment of the USAF’S
National Range Div. (5/15/64) :
  Previous                              New
                    Missile Range
    Am-Atlantic                                       Test Range
                                          ETR-Eastern
    Pm-Pacific     Missile Range          W T R - W ~ S Test~
                                                        ~ ~ Range
    ws-Wallops     Station
                    Sands Missile
    WSMR--white
      Range

   Sources used were all open ones, verified where in doubt from the project
offices in NASA Hq. and from the NASA Centers. For further information on
each item, see Appendix A of this volume and the entries in the main chro-
nology as referenced in the index. Prepared January 1965 by Dr. Frank W.
                                                 .
Anderson, J . Assistant NASA Historian (APPH)
            T,
                                                                     465
466   ASTRONATJTICS A N D AERONAUTICS, 19 64




                                   .m           m
       m   m   m   P   D   m   m        m   m


                       Y
                                   .m
       m   m   m   h   g   m   m        m   m



                       D   m   m
       m   m   m   m               .m   m   m   &
                                                              467
        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 6 4




                                              P
                        9
m   m   m   m   m   m        m   P   .m               m   m



                                     .    m       a   m   m
    m   m   m   m   m        m   m
                        .&
R



m   m   m   m   m   h   m    m   9   'm               m   m
                                              !
                                              a
468   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4




      m   m   m-m   m   m



          g
      m       m.m   mm



      m       m.m   m   m
          m
                             Appendix C
                 ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES

   Listed here are abbreviations for sources cited in the text. This list does
not include all sources provided in the chronology, for some of the references
cited are not abbreviated. Only those references which appear in abbreviated
form are listed below.
   Abbreviations used in the chronology entries themselves are cross-
referenced in the Index.

                               AIAA’S magazine, Astronautics & Aeronautics
A&A
A&A 64                         NASA APPH, Astronautics and Aeronautics 1964   [this
                                publication1
    Release                   Atomic Energy Commission News Release
AEC
AF Info. Pol. Ltr.            Air Force Information Policy Letter for Commanders
                              Air Force and Space Digest magazine
AF Mag.
                              A r Force Office of Scientific Research News Release
                               i
AFOSR Release
                              Air Force Systems Command News Release
AFSC Release
                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
AIAA Release
                                News Release
                              Army-Navy-Air Force Journal & Register (now Jow-
A-N-AF J&R
                                nal of the Armed Forces)
AP                            Associated Press
ARC Release                   NASA Ames Research Center News Release
Atlanta Const.                Atlanta Constitution newspaper
ATSS-T Trans.                 Translation by NASA Scientific and Technical In-
                                 formation Div., Translators
Av. Daily                     Aviation Daily Newsletter
Av. Wk.                       Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine
Balt. Sun                     Baltimore Sun newspaper
Chic. Trib.                   Chicago Tribune newspaper
Commerce Dept. Release WB-    Dept. of Commerce, Weather Bureau News Release
ComSatCorp Release            Communications Satellite Corporation News Release
CR                            Congressional Record
CSM                           Christian Science Monitor newspaper
                              Chicago Tribune News Service
CTNS
DAC Release                   Douglas Aircraft Co. News Release
DMSSD Apogee                  Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. Apogee
DOD Release                   Dept. of Defense News Release
FAA Release                   Federal Aviation Agency News Release
FonF                          Facts on File
FRC Release                   NASA Flight Research Center News Release
FRC X-Press                   NASA Flight Research Center’s FRC X-Press
GE Forum                      General Electric Forum m-gazine
Goddard News                  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News
GSFC Release                  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center News Release
GSFC SSR                      NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situa-
                                 tion Report
                              NASA APPE, Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned
HEN-48
                                Space Flights4964 (EEN-40)
                                                                        469
470                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19 6 4

                               Howton Chronicle newspaper
Houston Chron.
                               Houston Post newspaper
Houston Post
                               New York Herald Tribune News Service
RTNS
                               J o d of the Armed Forces (formerly Army-Navy-
J/Armed Forces
                                 Air Force I o u r d & Register)
                               Jet Propulsion Laboratory News Release
     Release
JFL
                               John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, News Release
      Release
KSC
                               NASA Langley Research Center's Langley Researcher
Langley Researcher
                               NASA Langley Research Center News Release
L ~ R CRelease
                               Los Angeles Times newspaper
L.A. Times
                               NASA Lewis Research Center's Leuris News
Lewis News
                               NASA Lewis Research Center News Release
LRC Release
                               Missiles and Rockets magazine
M&R
                               NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center's
Marshall Star
                                 Marshall Stm
                               NASA Manned Spacecraft Center News Release
       Release
MSC
                               NASA Manned Spacecraft Center's Space News
       Roundup
MSC
                                 Roundup
                               NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center News
        Release
MSFC
                                 Release
                               North American Aviation, Inc., News Release.
       Release
NAA
                                National Aeronautic Association News Release
       Release
NAA
                               North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information
       S&lD Skywriter
NAA
                                 Systems Div., M I D Skywriter
                               North American Newspaper Alliance
NANA
NASA Aah. Hearings             NASA Authorization [FY 19651 Hearings
                               NASA Headquarters Personnel Bulletin
NASA Hq. PB
                               NASA Legislative Activities Report, Vol. 11, No. 50
NASA LAR II/50
NASA O f Int. Aff.
      f.                       NASA O5ce of International Affairs
                               NASA Public Ailairs, Reports & Special Communica-
NASA R&SC Div.
                                 tions Div.
                                       H . News Release
       Release                 NASA ( q )
NASA
                               NASA Report of Sounding Rocket Launching
       cpt. SRL
NASA
                               NASA (Hq.)
       X-15 Proj. Off.                      X-15 Project O5ce
NASA
                               National Aeronautics and Space Council News
       Release
NASC
                                 Release
          Release              National Academy of Sciences-National Research
NAS-NRC
                                 Council News Release
                               NASA Management Instrnction-
NMI-
    Release                    National Space Club News Release
NSC
N.Y. Her. Trib.                New York Herald Tribune newspaper
NYT                            New York Times newspaper
                               New York Times News Service
NYTNS
OAR Release                    Office of Aerospace Research (USAF) News Release
Phil. Eve. Bull.               Philadelphia Evening Bulletin newspaper
Phil. Inq.                     Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper
Sat. Eve. Post                 Saturday Evening Post magazine
SBD                            Space Business Daily newsletter
Sci. Amer.                     Scientijic American magazine
Sei. Sen.                      Science Service
SR                             Saturday Review magazine
Testimony                      Congressional testimony, prepared statements
Text                           Prepared report or speech text
Transcript                     05cial transcript of news conference or Congres-
                                 sional hearing
                               United Press International
UP1
U S . Naval Inst. Proe.        US.Naval Institute Proceedings magazine
U.S. News                      US.News and World Report magazine
Wallops Release                NASA Wallops Station News Release
Wash. Daily News               Washington Daily News newspaper
Wash. Eve. Star                Washington Evening/Sunday Star newspaper
 Wash. Sun. Star
Wash. Post                     Washington Post newspaper
WBE Sci. Serv.                 World Book Encyclopedia Science Service
WSJ                            Wall Street J o u d newspaper
                                      Index
      (supersonic aircraft) (see also YF-          150A, 304,328,387
A-11
         85-86, 90, 92, 93, 101, 104, 133,         300, 264
  12A),
  154,164,225,254,274, 292,328,331                 300A, 30
AAAS. See American Association for the             350,415
  Advancement of Science.                     Aerodynamics, 29, 122, 158, 217, 257,
AACB. See Aeronautics and Astronautics          290
  Coordinating Board, NASA-DOD.               Aeroflot (U.S.S.R. airline), 241
AAS. See American AstronauticaI Society.      Aerojet-General Corp., 148,263
Abella, Dr. Isaac D., 383                       contracts, 18, 23, 78, 80, 115, 249, 312,
Abelson, Dr. Philip, 262                           328, 422
ABL. See Automated Biological Labora-           Dade County, Fla. plant, 190,248
                                                test, 140,154,239,323,327,369
  wry.
Abrams, Gen. Creighton W., Jr. (USA),         Aeronautical Research Institute of
  394                                           Sweden, 194
Abres. See Advanced ballistic re-entry        Aeronautics, 46-47, 78, 154-155, 181, 292,
  system (Abres).                               303
       See Atlas-Centaur 3.                   Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinat-
Ac-3.
Accelerometer, 18                               ing Board, NASA-DOD (AACB), 90, 231
Accident, 92, 135, 147, 156, 166, 178, 181,   Aeronaves de Mexico, 175
  252,269                                     Aeronca Manufacturing Corp., 222
                                              Aero PropuIsion Laboratory (USAF) , 167,
Acetaldehyde gas, 180
Acord, James D.. 82                             313
AC Spark Plug Div. (General Motors            Aerospace (subject). See Space,
  Corn.). 18.218                              Aerospace and Defense Service Engineer-
             ---
     r-l  I --I

“An-Accounting of Stewardship, 1961-            ing Dept. (GE), 70
  1964,”318                                   Aerospace Corp., 104,118,265
Activation analysis laboratory (Texas         Aerospace Educational Center (USAF
  A&M Univ.), 156                               Academy), 198
Adair, Rep. E. Ross, 55                       Aerospace Industries Association of
Adhesive, 360                                   America (AIA), 89, 114, 2%, 27%280,
Advanced ballistic re-entry system              442
   (Abres), 403                               Aerospace industry, 75, 114, 288, 333,
Advanced Bearing Technology (sP-38 1,           443
  104                                         “Aerospace Man of the Year,” 315
                                              Aerospace Medical Association ( AMA) ,
Advanced Manned Precision Strike System
   (AMPSS) (USAF), 66                           174,175
Advanced Research Projects Agency             Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories
   (ARPA), 10, 28,57,76,153,290,337,386          (AMRL) (AFSC), 70
Advanced Technological Satellite ( ATS) ,     Aerospace medicine (see also Bioscience,
  177                                           Life science), 45,48,52
Advanced Vidicon Camera System                Aerospace Plane (U.K. space transporter),
   (AVCS), 298
                                                270
Advisory Committee on Reactor Safe-
                                              Aerospace Research Application Center
  guards (AEC), 91
                                                 (ARAC) ,100
Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research
                                              Aerospace Research Center (Univ. of
  and Development (AGARD), 349
                                                Illinois), 241
AEC. See Atomic Energy Commission.
                                              Aerospace .Research Pilot School (USAF) ,
         See Arnold Engineering Develop-
AEDC.
                                                197,206
  ment Center.
                                              Aerospace Technical Council (AIA), 89
Aero Club of New England, 117
Aerobee (sounding rocket), 82,95,254          Aerospace Workshop, 244, 247
  launch, 210.363                             AFA. See Air Force Academy.
      150,‘30, 79, 124, 128, 144, 192, 260,   AFA. See Air Force Association.
        262, 283, 299, 335, 368, 374, 381,    AFAA. See American Fighter Aces Asso-
        39,422                                  ciation.
                                                                              471
472                                      INDEX

                                              Air Force Ballistic Systems Div. (AFBSD) ,
         See Armed Forces Communica-
AFCEA.
                                                18
  tions and Electronics Association.
                                              Air Force Cambridge Research Labora-
        See Air Force Cambridge Re-
AFCRL.
                                                tories (AFCRL), 74, 132, 147, 159, 178,
  search Laboratories.
AFL-CIO (American Federation of Labor-          230, 241, 265, 288, 354, 409
                                                                                   .
                                              Air Force Eastern Test Range (ETR) See
  Congress of Industrial Organizations),
                                                EastemTest Range.
  141,-323
                                              “The Air Force in the Years Ahead,” 112
AFML. See Air Force Materials Labora-
                                              Air Force Institute of Technology, 303
  m+Y.
                                              Air Force Materials Laboratory (AFML),
         See Air Force Missile Test Cen-
AFMTC.
                                                153
  ter.
                                              Air Force Missile Test Center (AFMTC)
         See USAF Office of Aerospace Re-
AFOAR
                                                 (now Eastern Test Range), 5,164
  search.
                                              Air Force National Range Div. (AFNRD),
Africa, 134,188,308
                                                 164
AFSC. See Air Force Systems Command.
                                              Air Force O5ce of Aerospace Research
AFSSD. See Air Force Space Systems Div.
                                                  (AFOAR), 9,34,38,159,288
AFSTC. See Air Force Space Test Center,
                                              Air Force Oftice of Scientific Research
  ProvisionaL
Agate (rocket), 210                              (AFOSR), 379
                                              Air Force Research and Technology Div.
Agena (booster) (see also Atlas-Agena,
  Thor-Agena), 25,60, 197, 275, 298, 339         (AFRTD), 381,383,392
                                              Air Force Space Museum, 261
Agreement
                                              Air Force Space Systems Div. (AFSSD) , 12,
  Communications satellite system, global
                                                 74, 89, 123, 129, 208, 257, 261, 286, 328
     commercial, 260, 293, 431
  France-Portugal, observation station,       Air Force Space Test Center (Provisional)
     132                                         (AFSTC) (see also Western Test Range),
  France-Spain, satellite tracking station,      3,164
     204                                      Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), 6,
  Mor stabilization, 141                             70, 74, 95-96, 135, 146, 153, 210, 217,
  NAS-SoViet Academy of Sciences, 182                327
                                                 contract, 89,278,279,328
  NASA
                                                 management, 3,41,112,178,257
     Australia, 103
      Cmada, 11                                  report, 98-99
      Commerce, 43,312                           research, 303
      DOD, 64,143,312,319                        test, 167,313,337-338,383,385
      FAA, 312                                 Air Force Western Test Range. See
      India, 7497                                Western Test Range.
      Interior, 312                            Air France. 57
      Malagasy Republic, 306                   Air-India, 60
      Netherlands, 278                         “Air pads,” 8,289
      Pakistan, 97                             Air pollution, 229-230
                                               Air Products & Chemicals, Inc., 14
      Sweden, 204
      Treasury, 312                            Air Proving Ground Center (Eglin AFB,
      U.S.S.R.. 97. 342                           Fla.) ,70
   US.-Malagasy’Republic, 306                  Air tra5c control, 158,216,332
                                               Air Transport and Space Meeting and
   US.-U.S.S.R., 251,256
 Agriculture, US. Dept. of (USDA) , 102           Production Forum (SAE-ASME) , 158,
 AGU. See American Geophysical Union.             158-159
 Ahmedabad, India, 6,lO                        Air Transport Association of America
        See Aerospace Industries Associa-          (ATA) ,211,288,408
 ALL
   tion.                                       Airbag safety system, 192
 AIAA. See American Institute of Aero-         Airborne Ranging Orbital Determination
   nautics and Astronautics.                       (AROD) system, 412
 A m . See American Institute of Biologi-      Aircraft, 293,303
   cal Sciences.                                  attack, intercontinental range, 66, 172
 Air cushion, 8,289                               commercial, supersonic. See Aircraft,
                                                                               .
 Air Force. See US. Air Force (USAF).                 suuersonic transuort (Sst)
 Air Force Academy (AFA), 70, 125, 127,           counter-insurgency (COIN), 287
   198                                            foreign, 209
 Air Force Aeronautical Systems Div.              interceptor, 72,79,92,98
                                                  reconnaissance, long-range (SR-7 1 ) ,
    (AFASD) ,181
 Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory,                260-261
    167,313                                        transport, 113-114,318
 Air Force and Space Digest, 160,303           Aircraft, supersonic commercial transport
 Air Force Association (AFA), 112,315              (Scat) (see also Aircraft, supersonic
  Air Force Avionics Laboratory, 178               transport), 85-86,108
                                                                                   473
                                         INDEX

Aircraft, supersonic transport (Sst) , 5,     American Bankers Association, 3 , 252
                                                                                1
                                              American Federation of Labor-Congressof
    57,85-86,101,117,142,147,189,213-
                                               Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) ,
    214,220,223,246
  appropriations, 115,119-120                  141, 323
  contract, 201                               American Fighter Aces Association
  cost, 31,82,93,94,114,187                    (AFAA), 78
                                              American Geophysical Union (AGU) ,146-
  crew training, 200
  development, 4, 13, 28, 43, 78, 115, 116,    147.435-436.438.444
     135. 148-149, 150. 153, 154, 161, 162.   Amencan Institute kor Biological Sciences
     183, 194-195, 201, 236, 242, 268, 288,     (AIBS), 210
     292-293,318                              American Institute of Aeronautics and As-
  Government-industry, 4,61,187                    tronautics (AIAA), 21, 139, 190, 166-
  program study report, 76,85-86,90,115,           167, 223, 225-226, 228, 228-229, 230,
     119-120                                       234-235, 235-236,238,343
  reservations for, 19, 57, 60,63, 70, 81,     awards, 21, 166, 376-377
     96,136,158,159,175,430                    committees, 226
  takeoff requirements, 150                    meetings, 197, 235-236, 350, 375-376,
AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div.                  377
   (Garrett Corp.), 6, 57, 197                 National Capital Section, 13
Airglow, 11, 15, 99,243,290,398               American Machine and Foundry Co., 148
Airlift, 98-99                                American         Management    Association
Airlines, 2                                     ( A M A ) , 243
The Airman, 302,333                           American Medical Association (AMA),
Airports, 133,332,904                          219
Airworthiness requirements, 156               American Meteorological Society (AMS),
Akwa-Downey Construction Go., 328, 424         35, 146-147
A1 Kahar (U.A.R. rocket) (“Conqueror”),       American Optical Co., 264-265
  303                                         American Orthopsychiatric Association
A1 Raid (U.A.R. rocket) (“Explorer”),           ( A O A ) , 110
                                              American Physical Society ( AP S ) , 22, 23,
                                                153, 155-156, 432
                                              American Science and Engineering, Inc.,
                                               299, 363
                                              American Society of Biological Chemists
                                                 (ASBC) , 110
                                              American Society of Mechanical Engineers
                                                (ASME), 403
  356‘                                        American Telephone and Telegraph Co.
Algae experiment, 248                           (AT&T), 61, 79, 123, 168, 192, 209, 219,
Algeria, 161,308                               334,383-384,412
Allen, Arthur R., 280
                                              American Women in Science symposium,
Allott, Sen. Gordon L., 93,164
                                               362
Alloy, 291
                                              Amery, Julian, 311,329
Alouette (satellite) (program), 11
                                              Ames. Milton B.. Jr.. 91
ALOUETTE I (Canada satellite), 11,106,2%
                                              Ames‘Research Center (ARC), 39,85, 131,
Alphonsus (moon crater), 180, 364
                                                    158, 202, 322
Alss. See Apollo Logistic Support System.
                                                bontract, 65,266265,339,432
Alternate Stability Augmentation System
                                                research, 71,197,226,290
   (Asas), 6
                                                Structural Dynamics Laboratory, 432
Alternating Gradient Synchrotron, 71-72
                                                test, 129
Altman. David. 166
                                              Amine, 181
Alvarez; Luis W., 1 1
                                              Amoeba, 72
AMA. See American Management Associ-
                                              Amos, Project (ARPA), 57
  ation.
                                              Amplifier, 295
AMA. See American Medical Association.
Amateur rocketry, 255                         Ampss. See Advanced Manned Precision
                                                Strike System.
Ambartsumian, Viktor A., 296-297
                                              AMR. See Atlantic Missile Range.
AMC. See Army Materiel Command.
                                              AMRL. See Aerospace Medical Research
Amer, Dr. N M., 174
             .
                                                Laboratories.
American Association for the Advance-
                                                       See American Meteorological So-
  ment of Science (AAAS), 262, 433, 438       AMS.
                                                ciety.
American Assembly Student Conference,
                                              Amu. See Astronaut maneuvering unit.
  125
American Astronautical Society (AAS) ,        Anders, Capt. William A. (USAF), 292
   167-168, 170, 170-171                      Anderson. Dr. Carl C., 423
     7 7 6 5 9 8 0-65-31
474                                      INDEX

Anderson, Sen. Clinton P., 33, 176, 350-         miIitary, 258,302,316
                                                 plans for, 33, 71, 74-75, 89, 157-158,
     351
  Apollo-X program, 4 ,417, 425                      185-186.276.314.321
                         08
  appropriations, 1  8                           progress, 3,13,.5%54,60
  lunar program, 13,18,268-269                   space hazards, 13, 18, 3031, 47, 173,
  Manned Orbiting Laboratory program,                194,219
                                                 support of, 20-21, 41, 69, 138, 168,
     408, 417, 425
  Ranger failure, 126,150,163                        176. 238. 244
                                                 testink. 37i
  Rift program, 3 4 4)
                                               Apollo rspacecraft) ,65, 70, 126, 138,206,
Anderson, Dr. Evelyn, 93
                                                    228, 292, 316, 318, 387
Anderson, Jack, 81
Anderson, Dr. Oscar E., Jr., 237                 adapter, 436
Anderson, William J., 104                        Apolo-X, 363, 382
                                                 boilerplate model, 138, 175, 192-193,
Andoeya, Norway, 56, 375
                                                     196, 314, 321, 325, %6, 467, %8
Andover, Me., 32,1166,219
                                                 contract, 306
Andrews APB, Md., 164,412
                                                 equipment, 6,68,81, 134,218, 239, 299,
ANL. See Argonne National Laboratory.
                                                     300
Ann Arbor, Mich., 251
                                                 escape system, 175,314
Anna (satellite), 222
                                                 facilities, 299
ANNA IB (Satellite), 370
                                                 launch vehicle, 89,229-230,353
Annapolis, Md., 334
                                                 modde, 105
Anniversary, 2, 104, 163, 211, 216, 335,
                                                     command. 175
  381,420
                                                     lunar exkuision (Lem), 39, 43, 73,
Antares rr (motor), 135
                                                       81, 105, 116, 139, 183
Antenna, 33, 38, 222, 264, 297, 321, 424
                                                 test, 6, 10, 89, 90, 154, 175, 192-193,
  parabolic, 31,216,3%
                                                     314.321.325
Antennas and Propagation, Professional
                                                 tracking, 216,305
   Group on, IEEE, 326-327
                                                 use of, 170,249
Antiaircraft missile, 439
                                               Apollo/Apollo Logistic Support System
Antimissile defense system, 214
                                                  (Ass1,170
Antimissile missile, 381,388,394
                                               Apollo, Extsnded, (Apollo-X), 145
Antipov, Dr. V. V., 389
                                               Apollo Logistic Support System, (Alss) ,
Antiraaiation compounds, 276
                                                 73,105,183
Antisatellite defense system, 197,330,370-
                                               Apollo/Lunar Exploration System for
  371
                                                 Apollo (Lesa), 105, 170
Antonious, Capt. Michael N. (USA), 394         Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory
      .
AOA. See American Orthopsychiatric As-
                                                  (Aorl), 145, 258
  socmtion.                                    Apollo, post, study, 388
Aoao.      See Orbiting Astronautical Ob-      Apollo/Stay Time Extension Module
   servatory, Advanced.                           (Stem). 170
Aogo. See Orbiting Geophysical Observa-        Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) (Johns
                                                 Hopkins Univ.) , 5758
   tory, Advanced.
AorI. See Apollo Orbital Research Lab-         APS. See American Physical Societv.
   oratory.                                    Apt. See Automatic picture transmisiion.
Aoso. See Orbiting Sofar Observatory,          ARAC. See Aerospace Research Applica-
   Advanced.                                     tion Center.
                                               Aral Sea, U.S.S.R., 156
AP. See Associated Press.
                                               ARC. See Ames Research Center.
APL. See Applied Physics Laboratory.
                                               Arcas, boosted (sounding rocket), 99,
Apollo (program), 26, 83, 118, 129, 143,
                                                  305,328
      144, 192-193, 194, 207, 216, 224, 225,
                                               Arcetri, Italy, 180
      228, 237-238, 297, 326-327, 34J
   astronaut, 4 , 66, 74-75, 158, 167-168,     Archangel, U.S.S.R., 27
                 3
      173,206,209,224,239                      Arc-jet engine, 167
   criticism, 54, 64,185486,203,257, 337,      Arco, Idaho, 93
      3i
       f2                                      ARCS Industries, Inc., 383-384
   experiment, 258,313                         Arctic Circle, 216
   facilities, 10,14,15,24,77,209,.268         Arents (Advanced Research Environ-
   funds for. 2. 1%13. 18. 45-46. 77. 99-
                                                  mental Test Satellite) spacecraft, mod-
      ioo,ioi, io4-ios, 221, a4-Z25,*2i7-         ified. See Orbiting Vehicle 2.
      228, 237-238, 242, 247, 274
                                               Arfons, Art, 365
   lunar landing program, 16, 23, 47, 68-
                                               Argentina, 403
      69, 171, 271-272, 275-276, 298-299,
                                               Argentine National Commission on Space
      324, 391, 3%
                                                  Research (CNIE) , 403
   management, 5344,120, 364, 375
                                                                                       475
                                           INDEX

Argo D-4 (Javelin) (sounding rocket),            Astrobee 1500 (sounding rocket], 358-359
   15, 137, 355, 360-361, 380                    Astrometric telescope, 75
Argonne National Laboratory (ANI.), 4            Astronaut, 81, 120, i73, 183, 190,236-237,
ARIEL I (satellite), 106,453                          242, %9,265,302,319
ARIEL 1 (satellite), 118, 452-453, 482.483
                                                                             .
         1                                         contract. life stow.,119.287
                                                                       -
Aristarchus (lunar crater), 78, 106, 180,          death, 370
  203-204,205,316                                  performance, 4849,112,208
Arizona. 239                                       politics, 15-16
Arizona; Univ. of, 148,301                         quarantine, 215
   Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, 267,            rescue, 100,102,174,203
       275-276,331                                 scientists, 10, 356
   Space Sciences Center. 259                      selection, 263
Arkinsas, 369-370                                  training, 5, 25, 43, 66, 99-100, 102, 158,
Arecibo, Puerto Rico, 38, 297, 393                    278, 281, 302, 306, 318, 356
Armed Forces Communications and Elec-              women as, 187,244,226
   tronics Association (AFCEA) , 183-184,
                                                 Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu), 89
   185
                                                 Astronautics and Aeronautics (magazine),
Arms control, 437
                                                   88, 122, 160,197-198,269,302,401
Armstrong, Neil A. (NASA), 102, 244
                                                 Astronautics Award, 375-376
Army. See U.S. Army.
                                                 Astronomers, 78, 126, 203,205, 296, 326
Army Air Corps, 136
                                                 Astronomical Journal (U.S.S.R.) , 364
Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA 1,
   37                                            Astronomy, 106, 223, 251, 262, 296, 327,
Army Corps of Engineers, 59,130,274                385,436
   contract, 8, 13, 15, 28, 31, 38, 61, 62,      Astrophysical Ohservatory, Arcetri, Italy,
       63, 74, 102, 121, 127, 164, 203, 216,       180
       268, 291, 328, 329, 400, 410, 434         Astrophysics, 386,426
Army Electronics Command, 241                    Astrophysics and Physical Meteorology
Army Map'Service, 74,220-221                        Laboratory ( J H U ) , 132
Army Materiel Command (AMC), 11, 211             Astrorocket, 123
A r m y Missile Command (Redstone Ar-                       See Aviation/Space Writers As-
                                                 A/SWA.
   senal), 112, 211, 305                            sociation.
Army-Navy-Air Force Journal and Reg-             AT&T. See American Telephone and Tele-
   ister, 26                                        graph Co.
Army Signal Corps, 46-47                         ATA. See Air Transport Association of
Arnold Engineering Development Center              America.
    (AEDC), 215-216
                                                 Atchley, Mrs. Hazel T., 114
Arnold, H. H., Trophy, 315
                                                 Athena (missile) (USAF), 58, 193, 241,
Arod. See Airborne Ranging Orbital De-
                                                    329, 338,398, 4 0 .6
   termination.
                                                 Atlantic City, N.J., 56, 297
ARPA. See Advanced Research Projects
                                                 Atlantic Missile Range (AMR) (see also
   Agency.
                                                       Eastern Test Range, Kennedy Space
Artemia egg experiment, 248
Arthur, George H , . 379                               Center (NASA), and Cape Kennedy),
                                                      5. 9, 19, 37, 38, 72, 113, 116, 144-145
Artsimovich, L. A., 198
                                                    facilities, 38-39, 63, 77
 Asas. See Alternate Stability Augmen-
                                                    launch, 135
    tation System.
                                         -
ASBC. See American Society of Biological              booster, 13, 82, 113
   Chemists.                                          failure, 104
 Ascani, 3 / G Fred J. (USAF), 172                     Gemini, unmanned, 130
Ascension Island, 30, 42-43, 62, 135, 137,             missile, 5, 6, 31, 79, 81, 84, 122, 132
    277-278,287                                        probe, 34-35
Ashklabad, U.S.S.R., 27                                satellite, 19
Asimov, Isaac, 163                                     Saturn, 32
ASME. See American Society of Mechan-                  sounding rocket, 122
    ical Engineers.                                 management, 127,192
Asset (Aerothermodynamic/elastic Struc-             prelaunch activities
    tural Systems Environmental Tests)                 Gemini, 9
     (see also Start), 19, 114, 208, 258, 286,         Saturn, 7, 126, 149
    307, 392, 411                                   submarine launch, 11,19
 Associated Press (AP) ,77,143                      test, 114
 Association of the United States Army, 388      Atlantic Monthly, 303
 Asteroid, 28                                    Atlantic Ocean, 10, 1 , 15, 30, 38, 104,
                                                                            1
 Astro Electronics Div. (RcA), 193                  110, 137, 14.0, 158, 209, 221, 227, 234,
 Astro Research Corp., 428-429                      243,256,258,332433,378
  476                                       INDEX

 Atlas (missile), 111, 157-158, 177, 213,          Aurora, 11,5051,99,243,290
                                                   Aurora borealis, 107
        234,275,309
                                                   Australia, 84,103,139,205,210
     contract, 308, 319
                                                      cooperation
     launch
                                                         satellite communications system, 189,
        D, 135,217,403
                                                           218,292,330
        E. 79
                                                         space, 96-97,269-2'70,284,396
        F; 63, 177, 430
                                                     supersonic transport, 2  9
        failures, 127, 145-146,150,177
                                                   Australian Commonwealth Scientific and
        operational, 8,64,101, 125,265
                                                     Industrial Organization, 434
     plans for, 78,87,106
                                                  Automated Biological Laboratory (ABL) ,
    test, 78
 Atlas-Agena (booster) (see also Agena) ,            20a,259,295
                                                  Automatic data processing. See Com-
        78, 79, 102, 146, 171, 186, 218, 219,
                                                     puter.
        239, 252-253, 259, 263, 309, 326, 344,
                                                   Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt)
        361
                                                         107
    B, 34-35,60-61, 64, 3 6 4 8 453, 456,
                             0, 4,
                                                     pictures, 251,298
        466,467
                                                     receiving station, 5
    D,182,285,378,397-398,406,450,452,
                                                  Automation, 286
        456, 458, 459, 460, 461, 467, 468
                                                  Autopilot, 257
 A t l as 3 (SLY-3), 95-96, 269
                                                  Avcs. See Advanced Vidicon Camera
 AtIas-Centaur (see also Centaur), 4 71,,
                                                     System.
       309
                                                  Aviation, 7 , 204,303,329-330,332
                                                               %
    3 (AC-s),    227,466
                                                     civil, 94,216,237,332
    4 (AC-4),41@15, 461,468
                                                  Aviation Human Resources Study Board,
 Atlas 116 D (booster),221
                                                     FAA, 237,332
 Atmosphere, 76, 149-150
                                                  Aviation/Space       Writers'     Association
    artificial, 302
                                                      (A/SWA). 190-191. 192.194. -- - ---
                                                                                    194.-195
    demarcation line, 14-15                                                -7       -3
                                                                                ~




                                                  Aviation Week and Space Technology, 78,
    density, 131-132, 140
                                                     92,101,129,154,200,220,224,225,226,
    helium-oxygen,274,309
                                                     240, 257, 274, 281, 289, 324. 329. 330.
    temoerature. 22-23. 131-132
                                                     340,341,357,395,396,408,4&, 434,4%
   upper, measurement, 14, 47, 5051, 56,
                                                  Aviation Writers' Association (AWA) , 235
       62, 62, 140, 141, 204-205, 244, 269-       Avionics, 257
       270,273,277-278. 387                       AWA. See Aviation Writers' Association.
Atmospheric science, institute of (pro-
                                                  Awards, 269
   posed), 100
                                                     government, US., 11, 32, 39, 63,74, 77,
Atomic bomb, 46-47, 320
                                                        93, 114, 136, 150, 154, 258, 265, 266,
Atomic clock, 126, 408-409
                                                        276,316,325, 328
Atomic energy. See Nuclear energy.
                                                    incentive (see also Inventions), 82, 114,
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), 40-41,                 142
       49, 51-52, 89, 91, 115, 126, 200, 22%        institutions (univ., etc.), 232
       229, 231, 237, 246-247, 307, 369, 388,       society, 75, 185, 188, 200, 235-236, 263,
      400                                                 317.403
   contract, 4 61                                      aero&utics, 21
   funds, 48, 67, 85, 117, 161, 213, 400               astronautics, 21,111,164,235-236,315
   launch, 173                                         aviation, 317.334
   report, 37,72,91                                    foreign, 101,.198,320
   test, 3 63, 93, 104, 125, 175, 188, 256,
           ,                                           medicine, 175-176,266
      338,360                                          space, 21,111,235,334,392
Atomic Industrial Forum, 400, 405,441            Azores, 55,132
Atomic Research and Development Au-              B-52 (Stratofortress), 70, 214, 326
  thority, New York State, 70                    B-68 (Hustler), 157-158, 207,317
Atomics International, 3,39,260                  B-70 (Valkyrie), 98
Atoms-for-Peace Conference, Third Inter-            XB-7 0,172,358,369
  nationaI, 305                                     XB-?OA, 297,323,349
Ats. See Satellite, Advanced Technologi-         Bacterial compatibility, 396
  cal.                                           Bahamas, 386
Attitude control, 82, 257, 264-265, 386,         Baikonur, Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R., 468.469
                                                 Bailey, Dr. Victor Albert, 56,121
  397-98
Atwood, U.S. Ambassador-to-Kenya, Wil-           Bain, Gordon M ,13,268
                                                                   .
  liam, 229                                      Baker, Burke, Planetarium (Houston), 244
Aubiniere, Gen. Robert (France), 161             Bakharev, Anatoli, 210
Auburn, M s . 104
            as,                                  Bal Harbour, Fla., 174
Auriol, Miss Jacqueline, 200                     Baldwin, Hanson, 255
                                                                                   477
                                          INDEX

Ball Brothers Research Corp., 95,141           Berlin, Germany, 4 1 , s
                                               Bermuda, 39,132,176,239,252,487
Ball, Ed, 69-70
Balloon                                        Bern, Univ. of (Switzerland), 248
  experiments, 4,258                           Bemardo, James V., 407
                                               Berry, Dr. Charles A., 91, 134, 167-168,
  flight, 132-l33,176
  launch, 42, 56, 57, 74, 96, 216, 291, 364,     249
     448449,482                                Beryllium, 230
Balloon astronomy, 223                         Bethesda, Md., 237
                                               Bethpage, N Y , 299
                                                            ..
Balloon-parachute,129
Balloon-satellite communications network,      Bettelheim, Dr. Bruno, 362
  89                                           Beverly Hills, Calif., 327
Balloon weather station (France), 218-         Bevins, British Postmaster Gen. Reginald,
  219                                            136
                                               Bigg, Dr. E. Keith, 434
Ballute (balloon-parachute) ,129
Baltimore, Md., 10,202                         Bikle, Paul F., 77,220,435
Baltimore Sun,10,272-273                       Billingham, Dr. John, 230
Bangalore, India, 203                          Bioastronautics, 80, 308309,420421
                                               Biological laboratory, automated (Abl),
Barabashov, Nikolai, 315
Bambados Island, B.W.I., 10,29                   208,259
Bamum, Alan R., 406-407                        Biological specimens in space, 72, 178-
Barre, Dr. Robert L., 1 01 1
                       1-1                        179,204
Barycentric orbit, 159                         Biology, 168-169, 169, 178-179, 204, 255-
Baskakov, Edward, 351                                256,438
Basov, Nikolai G., 367                           gravitational, 309
Bass, Abraham S., 379                            space, 208
Bates, Rep. William H., 108                    Biomedicine, 35-36,245,262,305,310
Bauer, Louis H., Founders Award, 175-          Bios. See Biosatellite.
  176                                          Biosatellite (Bios), 72, 168-169, 178-179,
Baumann, Robert C., 82                           221,225
Bav of Pies invasion. 64                       Bioscience, 168-169,208,210
Baievsky;br. Roman, 174-175                    Bio-Space Technology Training Program,
Beacon, crash, 5,19                              305
Beacon Explorer (satellite). See Ex-           Bird flight, 433
  plorer Beacosl.                              BIS. See British Interplanetary Society.
Beadle, George W., 357                         Biscarosse, France, 132
Beagle, Project (Mars project), 257            Bisplinghoff, Dr. Raymond L., 1 , 53, 108,
                                                                                 1
Beale AFB, Calif., 346,429                       135, 139, 151-152, 160, 202, 275, 293,
Bean, Lt. Alan L. (USN),336                      322,333,405
Bear landing test, 313                         Bisson, Edmond E., 104
Bearing technology, 146,293                    Black 81 Decker Manufacturing Co., 5
Beattie, Donald A., 170                        Black, Eugene R., 61, 76, 82, 85-86, 90,
Beckman Instruments, Inc., 100, 352, 382,        115, 119-120
  3%                                           Black Knight (U.K. rocket), 269370,278,
Bedwell, M/G T. C., Jr. (USAF), 44               311,412
Beet, 204                                      Black Prince (U.K.    rocket), 311
Beetle exoeriment. 72                          Black Report (see also Black, Eugene R.) ,
Beischer,-Dr. Die&ich E., 174                    115
Belew, Leland F., 377                          Blaikburg, Va., 290
Belgium, 246,264,397                           Blagonravov, Anatoli A., 17-18, 30, 54,
Bell Aerosystems Co., 138, 160, 172, 197.         171. 175. 204. 208, 342, 349
                                                                      .   .
  215,251,4443                                 Blaw-box Co..'33
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 154               Bleymaier, B/G Joseph S. (USAF), 123,
Bellows, W.S., Construction Corp, 8,268           139, 166, 192, 193, 278, 304,376, 414
Bendix Corp., 148,183,251                      Block II vehicle, 247, 448-449
  Eclipse-Pioneer Div., 22                     Blossom Point, Md., 130
   Products Aerospace Div., 13                 Blount Brothers Corp., 224
Bendix Field Engineering Corp., 336            Blount Construction Co., 28
Benoist flying boat, 2                         Blue Scout (rocket), 104
Benton, Sen. William H., 195                      Jr., 300,427,450451,476-477
Berenice (French rocket), 371                  Blue Streak (U.K.    booster), 205,257,269-
Beresford, Spencer, 29                            270,358
                                               BNA. See Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
Berge, Glenn, 383
Bergen, William B., 259                        BNL. See Brookhaven National Labora-
                                                 tory.
Bergmann, Dr. Peter, 155-156
                                               Boa constrictors, 56-57
Berkner, Dr. Lloyd V, 155
                     .
478                                      INDEX

                                                                                       , 269-
                                              British Interplanetary Society   (BIS)
      See British Overseas Airways Corp.
BOAC.
                                                 270
     See Budget, Bureau of.
BOB.
                                              British National Committee on Space Re-
Bochum, West Germany, 385
                                                search, 118
Boeing Co., 10, 12,73, 105, 124, 18,171,
                                              British Overseas Airways Corp. (BOAC) ,
    269,352
                                                 57, 158
  Aerospace Div., 183
                                              Broadway Maintenance Corp., 127
  contract, 251,404,405,415,441)
                                              Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) ,
  supersonic transport, 13, 28, 183, 201,
                                                71-72, 133
    373-374,392,41)5
                                              Brooklyn, Polytechnic Inst., 331
 test, 155
                                              Brooks AFB, Tex., 44, 45, 4 , 52, 80, 112-
                                                                         8
Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories,
                                                113
  424-
                                              Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Em-
Boeing 707 (Stratoliner), 150, 158, 392,
                                                ployees, 209
  408
                                              Brovtsev, Col. Sergei G., 269
Boeing 720 (airliner 1,233
                                              Brown and Root, Inc., 321
Boelkow Co. (West Germany), 265
                                              Brown, Clinton E., 45
Bogart, L/G Frank A. (USAF), 368
                                              Brown, Dr. Harold, 65
Boggs, Rep. Hale, 324,361362
                                              Brown, Dr. Harrison, 314
Bomber aircraft, 92,140-141
                                              Brown, Porter, 4 3 U 3 1
  congressional action, 69, 72, 79, 81, 82,
                                              Brown Univ., 359
    98,141
                                              Brown, William F., Jr., 223
  reliability, 28,136-137
                                              Browne, Dudley E., 31
Bomber, rocket-sled-launchedorbital, 78
                                              Brun, Pres. Edmond A. (France), 308-
Bone decalcification, 178-179,309
                                                 309
Bonn Univ., (West Germany), 372
                                              Brussels, Belgium, 24
Bonneville Salt Flats, Utah, 353
                                              Bubble blowing technique, 428429
Bono, Philip, 238,246,347
                                              Buchanan, L/'C Robert S. (USAF) ,52
Boosted Arcas. See Arcas, boosted.
                                              Buchheim, Dr. Robert W., 289
Booster, 10,143,170-171,258,324
                                              Buckley, Edmond C., 71,108-109
Booth, Seth W., 39
                                              Budget, Bureau of (BOB), 5,117
Borman, Maj. Frank (USAF), 263
                                                appropriations, 45-46,67,72
Boron fiber technology, 207,244,257
                                              Buffalo, N.Y., 199, 251
Boscombe Down, U.K., 329
                                              Bull, Dr. Gerald, 411
Boston Globe, 43,109,141
                                              Bumper (v-2 ) (booster), 261
Boston, Mass., 23-24,37,59,75,77,79,91,
                                              Bunker-Ram0 Corp., 259
   113.115.185.201.244.250.292
                         ~~




                                              Burbank, Calif., 85-86, 367
 Boulder, dolo.,'389 '
                                              Burch, Dean, 364
 Boundary layer stabilization, 122-123
                                              Bureau of Aeronautics (USN), 334
 Bounder (Soviet bomber), 196
                                              Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (BNA),
 Bowen, Howard, 387
                                                 250,252
 Boyd, Alan S., 8
                                               Bureau of Ships (USN),305
 Boyle, B/A Francis D., (USN), 358
                                               Burkett, Warren, 258
 Boynton, John H., 225
 Brackett, Ernest W., 51,250,281,435           Burlington, Vt., 207
 Brademas, Rep. John, 1   4                    Bush, Dr. Vannevar, 1    1
 Brady, Joseph L , 1
                   .                           Business Week, 75
 Braille translations, 239
                                               Butadiene, 190
 Braking techniques, 158,2%
                                               Butz, J. S., Jr., 303
 Branch, B/G Irving L. (USAF), 77
                                               Bykovsky, L/C Valery F., 179, 443
 Braniff Airways, 136
 Bransteller, Robert J., 142                   c- 1 (rocket engine), 3 9 9 4
                                                       see cx.
 Brazil, 280, 375                              c-5.
 Bread mold experiment, 72                     c-97 (Stratocruiser) ,214
 Breedlove, Craig, 353                         c-iia (Flying Boxcar), 156,276,415
 Brennan, Dr. John J., Jr., 337, 363           C-130 (Hercules), 158,264
                                               c-i 3 3 ( Cargomaster), 176, %
 Brewer, Frank G., National Trophy, 1963
           ,200                                C - 1 4 0 ~(Jetstar), 147, 257
   (NAA)
                                               CAB. See Civil Aeronautics Board.
 Brewster, Kingman, Jr., 191-192
                                               Cable, 1-2,55,123
 Brezhnev, First Secretary Leonid, 353,355-
   356                                         Cairo, U.A.R., 303
 Brier, Glenn W., 434                          Cairo Univ. (U.A.R.) ,78
 Brinich, Paul F, 142
                .                              Calcium, 180,309
 Britain. See United Kingdom (U.K.).           California, 40-41, 75, 85-86, 91, 120, 202,
                                                  207,312, 314
 British Aircraft Corp., 170
                                                                                   479
                                          INDEX

California Institute of Technology (Cal         Career Service Award (National Civil
 Tech), 60,97-98,128,163,163-164,179,             Service League) ,136
 291.314.326.383.435                            Cargomaster. See C-113.
California; Univ. of (Berkeley), 1, 148,        Carlucci, Frank, 129
                                                Carmody, Robert J., 114
 177-178,221,222,323,339
California, Univ. of (Ias Angeles)              Camarvon, Australia, 39,222,284
  (UCLA) ,220,240,433                           Carnegie Institution of Washington, 138-
California, Univ. of Southern (USC) , 24.3,       139
  245                                           Carpenter Bros., 203,434
  - -_
                                                Carpenter, Lcdr. M. Scott (USN), 176,252,
Calilsto (Jupiter’s moon), 179, 326
                                                  266,322,372,390
Cal Tech. See California Institute of
                                                Cartellieri, Wolfgang, 387
  Technology.
                                                Carvalho Silos,Geraldode, 375
Cambridge, Mass., 116, 292, 301, 304,327,
                                                Cascade Mountains, Oreg., 296
  345,363
                                                Case Institute of Technology (CIT), 42,
Camera, 41, 4142, 114, 118, 214,217,263
                                                  56,214-215
Camera station, automatic, 171
                                                Case, Sen. Clifford P., 201
Camera System, Advanced Vidicon
   (Avcs) ,298                                  Caspian Sea, 21
                                                Cat. See Turbulence, clear air. 88
Cameron, A. G. W., 28,314
                                                Cat-Spy (instrument), 88
Camp Roberts, Calif., 290-291, 332-333,
                                                CBS. See Columbia Broadcasting System.
  408
                                                        See Central Computer and Se-
Campbell, Joseph, 434,435                       CCS.
                                                  quence.
Canada, 70, 116, 254, 258-259, 396, 421
                                                Cellular structure, 114
  communications, 58,63, 189,218
                                                Centaur (booster), 221,246,300
  launch, 10,29,30,411
                                                  AC-2,32
  satellite program, 1 1
                                                  AC-3,227,234,483
  sounding rockets, 30,4243
                                                  AC-4,414415,476477,4?87
Canadian Pacific Air Lines, 70
                                                  development, 78,193,371472
Canary Islands, 39,55,204
                                                  use of, 138,171,173
Canaveral Council of Technical Studies,
                                                Centaur “E” Stand Project (Plum Brook),
  145
                                                  221
Canberra, Australia, 103,396
                                                Center for European Nuclear Research
Cancer. 144-145.277
                                                  (CERN) (Switzerland), 71-72
Canning, Thomas M., 290
                                                Center for Radio Physics and Space Re-
Canopus (star), 397-398, 398499, 407-
                                                  search (Cornell Univ.) , 164-165
  408,422
                                                Center of Science and Industry, Colum-
Cap motor, 438
                                                  bus, O., 119
Cape Canaveral, Fla., name, 22,126
                                                Central America, 146
Cape Girardeau, Mo., Chamber of Com-
                                                Central Computer and Sequence (ccas) ,
  merce, 63-64
                                                  41
Cape Kennedy Air Force Station, 22
                                                Central Radio Propagation Laboratory
Cape Kennedy, Fla. (see also Cape Canav-
                                                  ( NBS ), 363,373
     eral, Atlantic Missile Range, and
                                                Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales
     Kennedy Space Center, NASA), 101,
                                                         .   See National Center of Space
     126, 166, 201,227, 279, 297, 309, 310,       (CNES)
                                                  Research (France).
     397,411,414
                                                Centrifuge, human, 226,243,245,249,427
  construction, 15, 39, 51, 59, 61, 62, 63,
                                                Ceramics, 261
     65,77,124,130,131
                                                Ceres Missile Range (France), 233
  earthquake, 119
                                                CERN. See Central for European Nuclear
  labor relations, 209
                                                  Research.
  lightning damage, 289,294
                                                Cesium, 158-159,410,427,476479
  strike, 51, 59, 61, 62, 63, 65, 69-70, 124,
                                                CH-46C (helicopter), 264
     126, 128, 130, 131, 133, 141, 212, 243
                                                CH-47A (helicopter), 436
“Capitol Cloakroom” (radio program), 2
                                                Chaff, tracking of, 107
Capsule, rotating, test, 194
                                                Chamical, Argentina, 403
Caracas, Venezuela, 275
                                                Chandler, Judge Stephen, 177
Caravelle (jet transport), 411
                                                Chaney and James Construction Co., Inc.,
Carbon 13,398
                                                  61,328
Carbon dioxide, 132-133,382
                                                Chanute, Octave, Award, 376-377
Carcinogenic research, 277
                                                Charleston, S.C., 330
Cardiac arrhythmia, 43 !
                                                Charyk, Dr. Joseph V., 242,283, 284, 285
Cardiometer, 440                                Chatenet, Pierre, 25
Cardiovascular system, 174-175, 177-178,        Chayes, Abram, 63
  178-179                                       Checkout equipment, 248
Career guidance clinic, 388                     Chemical energy conversion, 151-152
                                        n
480                                          I
                                             X
chemical propulsion, 83,296,302              Colleges. See Universities.
Chemistry, 262,288                           Collier, Robert J, Trophy, 328
Cheprov, Ivan, 313                           Collins Radio Co., 176,216
cherry, William R, 276                       Collii, Dr. Ronald T. H., 278
Chesapeake Bay, 197                          Colorado, 58
Chewing gum, 172                             Colorado Springs, Colo., 125,198
Chicago, Ill., 110-111, 212, 288, 357, 428   Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 2,
Chicago Sun-Times, 211                         90.211
Ghicago, Univ. of, 4, 140, 268, 339, 357,    C o l d - i a Univ., 188,238,277
  362                                        Columbus, Ohio, 15-16, 30, 33, 100, 119,
Chick embryo research, 131                     142
chico, Calif., 78-79                         Combustion, 216
Chile, 153                                   Comet, 210, 398
Chimpanzee, 390                              Commerce, Dept. of, 1-2, 18, 43, 75, 183,
China, Communist, 129,296-297,352, 354,        231
  382,394,439                                Commercial Club, Chicago, 428
Chope, Henry R., 100                         Commercial Museum, 322
Christensen, E. E, 430-431                   Commission on Federal Expenditure Pol-
Christian Science Monitor, 40,59,66            icy (proposed), 18
Christmas Island, Pacific Ocean, 333         Committee on Potential Contamination
Chrysler Corp., 73, 104, 148, 212,3414342      and Interference from Space Experi-
  Florida Missile Operations, 201              ments (SSB) ,116-117
   Space Div., 84-85                         Committee on Science and Public Policy
Chubb, Talbot, A., 45                          (NAS) , 110
Cincinnati, Univ. of, 139
                                             Committee on Science in the Promotion of
Circumlunar flight, 173
                                               Human Welfare (AAAS), 437
CIT. see Case Institute of Technology.
                                             Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) ,
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB), 4,8
civil aviation, 94, 216, 237                   155, 171, 172, 175, 177-178, 178-179,
Clark AFB, Philippines, 2%291                  179, 17%180, 180, 183, 185, 220, 432
Clark, David B., Co., 197                    Committee to Preserve Cambridge (Mass.)
Clark, Evert, 76                               Industries, 327, 363
Clark, Se? Joseph S., 128                    “Common Action for the Control of Con-
Clark Univ., 233,319                           flict,” 59
Clark, Maj. William B. (USAF), 48
                                             Commoner, Dr. Barry, 437438
Clarke, Arthur C., 88
                                             Communicable disease, 249
Clay, Cassius, 81
                                             Communication (see also Communication
Clear air turbulence (Cat), 88, 291, 383
Clear Lake, Texas, 25, 74, 116, 221               satellite systems), 50-51, 113, 142,
Clemmons, Dewey L., Jr., 419                       189, 258-259, 333
Cleo, Hurricane, 297                           contracts, 105, 134, 176
                                               exhibition, USIA, 142, 261
Cleveland, Harlan, 83-84
Cleveland, Rep. James C., 48                   experiments, 3,17-18,22,55,60,75,105,
Cleveland, Ohio, 91, 163, 166-167, 295,           132, 143
  300                                          extrasensory perception in, 278
Cloud, 287,288-289,46445                       international, 17-18, 22, 30, 60, 75, 79,
  cosmic-dust, 190                                111-112,208
  noctilucent, 34147,204-205,241,277-          systems
     278                                          balloon-satellite, 89
Cloud cover, 124                                  microwave, 143
Cloudcroft, N.M., 181                             radio, 14Q
                                                  satellite, 22, 32, 75, 81, 168, 185, 238
CNES (centre National d’Etudes Spa-
                                                  tracking, 134,176,216
  tiales). See National Center of Space
                                                  voice, 22,89,134,142,319
  Research (France).
                                                  x-ray, 100
CNES-NASA program, 95
                                             Communications Satellite Act of 1962, 58,
CNIE. See Argentine National Commis-
                                               116,130,286
  sion on Space Research.
                                             Communications Satellite Corp. ( CornSat
Cochran, Jacqueline, 181,200,203
                                                  Corp), 255
CODSIA. See Council of Defense and
                                               agreement, 260,293,431
  Space Industry Associations.
                                               contract, 61, 105, 209
COESA. See US. Committee on the Ex-
                                               criticism. 313
  tension of the Standard Atmosphere.          internatibnal applications, 55, 79, 122,
COIN. See Aircraft, counter-insurgency.           2444 258-259, 293, 347
Cole, Pleasant T., 82                          management, 219,260,286
                                                                                   481
                                        INDEX

 military applications, 27, 107, 116, 118,                      Space Nutrition and Re-
     130,247,283,284                                          Problems, 151-152
 operations, 75 113, 168, 192, 202, 209,                       the Role of Simulation in
     279,285,291,310,317,321                    Space Technology, 290,293
 organization, 242,265, 318,321,323,331       Congress, 2, 12, 23, 23-24, 244, 259, 260,
 Plans, 3 ,8s                                      260-261, 275-276, 279, 300401, 301,
 satellite program (see also Early Bird),          307,317,334,339
     96, 105, 139, 237, 247, 383-384            Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, 67,
 stock, 75, 279, 291, 405, 407, 421                117. 161
 terminal stations, 365,383-384                 Joint kommittee on Economics, 18
 test, 326                                      NASA budget, 12-13, 23, 181, 221, 227,
Communications satellite system, commer-           300301
 cial, 3 8 , s                                  report to, 35,55,58,253,284
Communications satellite system, interna-     Congress, House of Representatives, 8, 13,
     tional, 55,209                                37, 69, 85-86, 115, 117, 189, 201, 221,
  agreement, 205-206,260,283,293                   237, 259, 274, 284,291, 292-293, 320,
 cGticism. 313                                     324, 331-332
  development, 61, 79, 96, 105, 129, 136,       bills introduced, 18,23,183
        237,255,285                             bills passed, 72, 101, 108, 185, 259, 285
     contract, 105, 209                         Committee on Appropriations, 141, 180,
  establishment, plans for, 38, 61, 68, 310           183, 185, 213
  impact of, 88                                    Subcommittee on Independent Offices,
  international participation, 26, 58, 61,            185-186
     63, 122, 129, 136, 189, 205-206, 215,      Committee on Armed Services, 28, 4 -    4
     218, 240                                      45,65,69,81,92,430
  management, 286                               Committee on Education and Labor,
 military use of, 27, 55, 107, 116, 118,           Subcommittee on National Research
     130,186,247,254,283,284                          Data Processing and Information
Communications satellite system, military,            Retrieval Center, 144-145
  27, 55, 107, 116, 118, 130, 186,247, 254,     Committee on Government Operations,
  279, 283, 284, 289, 332-333, 345, 347,           Subcommitteeon Military Operations,
  358                                                 107, 109, 118, 130, 186, 345, 347
Computer, 142,269,383,412                       Committee on Interstate and Foreign
  “satellite alert,” 188                              Commerce, 8, 117-118
  systems, 132, 297                                Subcommittee on Public Health and
  use of, 1-2, 161,-237, 252, 284, 411                Safety, 8
                                                Committee on the Judiciary, 4 3 4 4
ComSatCorp. See Communications Satel-
                                                Committee on Rules, 69
  lite Corp.
                                                Committee on Science and Astronautics,
Concorde (U.K.-France) supersonic trans-
                                                      2-3, 12-13, 15, 64-65, 77, 79, 101,
  port, 61,170,279,314,362,418
                                                      102, 103, 106, 126, 136, 165, 200,
Conference, Atoms-for-Peace, Third In-
                                                      211,281,311,401-402
  ternational, 305
                                                   hearings, 45-46, 46-47, 49, 50, 50-51,
Conference .Group of US. National Or-                 5253, 53,67
  ganizations of the U.N., 83-84                   Subcommittee on Advanced Research
Conference, Midwest Governors, 312-313                and Tracking, 12, 71,80, 83, 91-92,
Conference of Photovoltaic Specialists,               92-93,95,101, 103
  202                                              Subcommittee on Manned Space
                                                      Flight, 12,66,68-69,73,80
Conference of Postal and Telecommuni-
                                                   Subcommittee on NASA Oversight,
  cations Administration, European, 26
                                                      107-108, 150, 150-151, 151, 163,
Conference on aerospace medicine, 45,
                                                      163-164, 215, 220
  4 ,52
    8
                                                   Subcommittee on Science, Research,
Conference on Geological Problems in
                                                      and Development, 2-3,12,165,165-
   Lunar Research, 180
                                                      166, 186, 191-192,285,312,362
Conference on Government Contracting               Subcommittee on Space Science and
   for Research and Development, 250,252              Application, 12, 69, 71, 79, 165
Conference on Human Factors in Elec-             Independent Offices Appropriations Bill,
   tronics, Fifth Annual, 166                       Fiscal Year 1965, 180, 183, 185, 185-
Conference on New Technology, 204, 367              186,242,266,276, 284,285,286,300-
                                                   301
Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space,
   Fourth National, 156-157, 157-158, 162        Republican Conference, 203
Conference on Satellite Communications,          Select Committee on Government Re-
   European, 58, 61, 63, 189, 218, 260              search, 22, 67
 482                                     INDEX

     -
 Conpress. Senate 12. 37. 75. 79. 85-86-         Convention of Mltr Elcctronics, Inter-
                                                                  iiay
                                      -- --
                                 -I

      93, 187-188, ' O 22i, 225, 227, 227:
                     2K                            national, 317
      228,237,25257,277. 284,310, 329-          Cook Electric Co., 212,231
      330,330431, 331                           CooIant, 125
    bills introduced, 18,180,312                 Cooling techniques, 181,291
    bills passed, 79, 82, 98, 219, 221, 260,    Coons, Dr. D. Owen, 91
      276,284                                    Cooper, Maj. L. Gordon (USAF), 4, 33,
    Commission on Federal Expenditure              48, 98-99, 1 1 129, 1 8 163, 164, 177-
                                                                1,       5,
      Policy, 18                                   178, 194, 247, 273, 317, 325, 355, 393
                                                Coordinating Research Council (CRC) ,81
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space
      Sciences, 18, 43-44, 64-65, 94, 96-97,    Copenhagen, Denmark, 96,175-174
      97-98, 100, 101, 104-105, 106, 108-       Copernicus (lunar crater), 275-276
      109,126,163, 165~180,200,211,268-         Coperuicus, Nicolaus, 125, 398
      269,4Q8,425,41                            Coriolis effect, 168-169
    Committee on Appropriations, 237-238,       Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Inc.,
         257,266                                   147,199
      Subcommittee on Independent O5ces,        Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Cen-
         242                                      ter, 200,213-214
    Committee on Armed Services, 79             Cornell Univ., 164-165, 180, 211,297,301,
      Subcommittee on Preparedness In-            306307,393
         vestigation, 15,177                    Corona, 34,96,119,180,260
   Committee on Commerce, 5                     Coronie, Surinam, Dutch Guiana, 278
   Committee on Foreign Relations, 67, 68       Coronoscope 1 (project) (ONR-NSF-NASA),
                                                               1
   Committee on Government Operations,            96
                                                Cosmic dust, 190
      18
   Committee on the Judiciary, 43-44            Cosmic radiation, 174,216
   Committee on Labor                           Cosmic radio communications, 75
                                                cosmic ray, 4, 42,5051,56, 176, 179-180,
      Subcommittee on Employment and
                                                  211, 291
         Manpower, 128
                                                Cosmic Research, 443
   Committee on Public Works
      Subcommittee on Air and Water Pol-        Cosmonaut, 120, 130, 174-175, 183, 205,
                                                  226,309,345,352
         Iution, 229-230,230
                                                Cosmonautics, 353
   Committee on Rules and Administration
                                                Cosmonauts' Desk, 1 1 3
     Subcommittee on the Smithsonian In-
                                               Cosmos (U.S.S.R. satellite), 151-153,357,
        stitution, 220
                                                  379
   Committeeon Small Business, 434
                                               COSMOS V, 399
Conmess, International Astronautical Fed-
                                                COSMOS XXIJI, 116
   eration (IAF), 15th 308-309, 313, 314
                                               COSMOS XXV, 450-451
Congress, 4th, International Council of
                                                COSMOS XXVI, 107,110,448
   the Aeronautical Sciences, 296
                                                COSMOS XXVII, 118,448
Congressional Medal of Honor, 271-272
                                               COSMOS XXVIII, 128,449
Congressional Record, 22, 2 , 35, 84, 145,
                              4
                                               COSMOS XXIX, 149,449
     164,187-188,213-214291
                                               COSMOS XXX, 450
   economy, 213-214
                                               COSMOS XXXI, 205,451
   space program, 29,221,318,337
                                               COSMOS XXXII, 210,451
  supersonic transport, 93-94, 213-214
                                               COSMOS XXXIII, 220,451
Constellation (Lockheed), 306
                                               COSMOS XXXIV, 234,451
Constellation, Super (Lockheed I O ~ ~ G ) ,
                                               COSMOS XXXV, 249,452
  197
                                               COSMOS XXXVI, 265, 453
Contaminants, 382
                                               COSMOS XXXVII, 286,453
Contamination, atmospheric, 76
                                               COSMOS XXXVIII, 290,454
Contract (see also under agencies, such as
                                               COSMOS XXXIX, 290,454
     NASA, WAF, etc.) ,214,281
                                               COSMOS XL, 290,454
  cost-plus-incentive-fee,164
                                               COSMOS XLI, 294,454
  fixed-price, 110
                                               COSMOS XLII, 294,455
  geographical distribution of, 165, 165-
                                               COSMOS XLIII, 294, 455
     166,261
                                               COSMOS XLIV, 299,455
  incentive, 171,173,250,342
                                               COSMOS XLV, 315-316, 456
  military. 26.86.165-166
  space, 29,86,162                             COSMOS XLVI, 327,456
Contributions Award, NASA, 276                 COSMOS XLVn, 341,457
Control Data Corp., 269,299                    COSMOS XLVIII, 351,458
Convair 880 (aircraft), 233                    COSMOS XLIX, 362, 4-59
Convention of International C i d Avia-        COSMOS L, 365,459
  tion, 216                                    COSMOS LI, 414,461
                                                                                   483
                                      INDEX

                                            Davis, M/G Leighton I. (USAF), 3, 164,
          See Committee on Space Re-
COSPAR.
  search.                                       192
Cost-plus-incentive-fee (CPIF) contract,    Davis, Dr. Watson, 419
  164                                       Davis, M/G W. Austin (USAF), 39,145-146
Cotton, Col. Joseph (USAF) ,340             Dayglow, 378
Coughlin, William, 58                       Dazzle, Project (US.-U.K.-Australia re-
Council of the Aeronautical Sciences, In-       entry research), 26%270, 278
  ternational, 4th Congress, 2%             DC-3 (transport), 113-114,318
Council of Defense and Space Industry       DC-7 (transport), 147,192,306
  Associations (CODSIA), 246                DC--8 (transport), 158,180,410
Council on World AfEairs, 391492            De Gaulle, Pres. Charles (France), 161
                                            Debold, Lcdr. J. F. ( USN) ,238
COURIER (communications satellite), 241
Courtney-Pratt, J. S., 154                  Debrovner, Dr. M., 208
                                            Debus, Dr. Kurt H., 5354, 109, 352-353,
Coyote, Calif., 278,401
Cpif. See Cost-plus-incentive-fee con-          43W1
                                            Decelerator, 163, 259
  tract.
                                            Decompression experiment, 274
Crab Nebula, 153,254,436-437
                                            Decoration for Exceptional Service (FAA),
Crane, Mayor Edward A., 292
                                                164
Crash, 178
                                            Deep Space Network (NASA), 31
  aircraft, 8, 41
                                            Defence Research Board (Canada), 1       1
  beacon, locator, 19
                                            Defender, Project (ARPA) ,.211
  test, 147,211,214,306
                                            Defense and Space Operations Div. (Wes-
Crater ray, 298-299
                                                tinghouse Corp.) , 202-203
CRC. See Coordinating Research Council.
                                            Defense Cost Reduction Week. 248
Creede, Colo., 3%
Crews, Capt. Albert R. (USAF), 304          Defense, Dept. of (DOD), 6-7,9,23,35-36,
                                                   49, 51, 67, 75, 133, 136-137, 154,
Crosby, Harry, 239
                                                   178, 201, 213, 214, 222, 282, 303, 305,
Crossfield, A. Scott, 29
                                                   334,335.430
Cryogenics, 101, 103
                                                appropriations, 69,72,79,81,82,98,101,
CTA-21 (radio emission source), 364
                                                   102, 103, @0,
                                                             l -5
                                                               1
                                                               l       106, 108, 115, 141
CTA-102 (radio emission Source), 364
                                                budget, 21, 48, 69, 80, 84, 88, 115, 360
Cuba, 81, 195,200
                                                communicationssatellite system, 27,107,
Cudaback, Dr. David D., 221-222
                                                   109, 116, 130, 247, 254-255, 279, 283,
Cuddeback Dry Lake, Calif., 185
                                                   284,289,332-333,345,347
Cunningham, Newton W.,     352-353
                                                contract, 3, 286,305, 319, 338, 332, 369,
Cunningham, R. Walter (NASA), 296, 356
                                                   375
Curtis, Rep. Thomas B., 18
                                                Contract Audit Agency, 417
Cnrtiss-Wright Corp., 13,28,183,223,279,
                                                cooperation. 231. 246-247
  438
                                                   NASA,12,'6&, 80, 82, 90, 108-109,
cx (military jet transport ~ 5 1 , 4 2 9
                                                        143, 145, 166-167, 168, 171, 176,
Czechoslovakia. 120
                                                        192,258-259,291,439
Daddaio, Rei: Emilio Q., 2 4 , 160, 165,
                                                     Mol, 1,8,10,68,417,428
   221,281,285,312
                                                   NASA-AEC, 231
Dade Countv. Fla.. 190
                                                cost reduction, 89,248
DagIe, Sidney J., 141
                                                Distinguished Civilian Service Award,
Dakar, Africa, 244)
                                                   265
Dallas, Tex., 30, 106, 187, 203, 437
                                                 expenditures, 235,240,434435
Dallin. Prof. Alexander. 1 8
                           8
                                                 information analysis center, 303
Damping device, 13,276
                                                launch. 442-443. 44-479
Daniel, Mann, Johnson & Mendenhall,
                                                 management, 28, 49, 51, 96, 115, 164,
   383-384
                                                   183,281,311
Darchiya, Sh. P., 203
                                                 R&D, 23,26-27,48,69,165
Darr, Joseph A., Jr., 406
                                             Defense Research Laboratories (General
Darwin, George H., 28,257
                                                 Motors), 8,197
Daw. See Demonstration and Shake-
                                             Defense Science Board (DSB) ,29
   down Operations.
                                             Definition Phase Project (Pdp) (DOD),
Data, 371, 371-372
                                              9fi
Data acquisition, lpO,216,219
                                            DeFrance, Dr. Smith J., 136
Data collection satellite system, 1%
                                            Degner, Capt. Eugene A. (WAF), 112-113
Data-filter equipment, 216
                                            Dehydration effects, 129
Data processing equipment, 378
                                            Deimos, Project (Douglas Aircraft Co.),
Data retrieval, 305
Davis, Alonza J., 114                        347
                                            Deissler, Robert G., 4W3
Davis, eh. M/Sgt. Frank M. (WAF), 315
                                            Delamar Lake, Nev., 29
Davis, Rep. John W., 23
484                                    INDEX

Delaware Academy of Science, 433            Donner, Frederick G., 323,331
Delta (see also Thor-Delta), 72, 80, 109,   Donover Construction Co., 127
     145,212,225,251-252                    Doolittle, L/G James H. (USAFR), 206-207
  X--248,135,141,147, 166                   Doppler tracking method, 109, 325
Delta Air Lines. 158                        Dornberger, Dr. Walter, 59
Delta, Thrust-Aumented (Tad) (boost-        Douglas Aircraft Co., 80, 141, 238, 251-
  er), 80, 212,225,290-291,431, 454, 467          252
Deluzio. Frank. 441                            contract, 189,193,242,248,422
                                                  study, 7 , 87, 205
                                                          4
Demler; M/C Marvin C. (USAF), 174, 392
                                               Missile and Space Systems Div., 87, 122,
Democratic National Convention, 246, 297
                                                  189,246,249,302,403,422,427
Democratic Party Platform Space Plank,
  -_-                                          Saturn, 25-26, 159, 189, 193, 226, 242,
  394.
                                                  248,302
Demonstration and Shakedown Operations
                                               space station, 74,93,122,189,205,249
  IDaso). , -
  . - , 409
                                               studies, 81-82
Dempsey, J. R., 269,275
                                               World Cniiser. 327
Denmark, 49,56,173-174,397                             -------,
                                            Douglas, Donald W., Sr., 327
Denmark-America Foundation. 173-174
                                            Douglas, Col. William K. (USAF), 175-176
Dennis, David H ,
                . 226
                                            Douglas-Home. Sir Alec. 349
Dennison, James T., 347
                                            Dow-Chemical'Corp., 222
Densitron, 263
                                            Downey, Calif., 24,299
Deyjty, atmospheric, 50-51,131-132,141,
                                            Drag measurement, 319
  ZW
                                            Dragon (French sounding rocket), 273
Dentistry, 121, 172
                                            Drake Univ., 244
Denver Post, 428
                                            Draley, Eugene C., 177
de Orsey, C Leo, 343
           .
                                            Draper, Prof. Charles Stark, 311, 397
Department of Defense. See Defense,
                                            Drinkwater, Fred J., 376
  Dept. of.
                                            Driscoll, John, 337
Derelin, Rep. Lionel Van, 275
                                            Drogue parachute, 131,156,175
Deny, La., 56
                                            Drop test, 163,220,259
Derrvberrv. Mrs. Maw. 114
                                            Drummond, Roscoe, 40
Desert su&val training, 281
                                            Dryden, Dr. Hugh L., 85, 113, 124, 143,
Detection system, malfunction, 13, 121
                                                  158, 163, 282-283, 300-301, 319, 416,
Detector, dectron, 103, 179, 210, 325
                                                 432-433
Detroit, Mich., 33, 143
                                               awards by, 77,82,276
Deutsch, Dr. Annin, 180
                                               awards to, 111, 127, 234, 235-236
Dewan, Dr. Edmond M ,409
                       .
                                               honored, 335
DH-125 (U.K. jet transport), 209
                                               international cooperation, 96-97
Diamant (French booster), 161, 210
                                                  US.-U.S.S.R., 2 17-18, 175,203,204,
                                                                  ,
                    . Jr.,
Dickerson, Joseph T , 187
                                                    208,342,349
Dictionary, astronautical, English-Rus-
                                               space, peaceful use of, 156-157
  sian, 128
                                               space program, 46-47, 74, l4%150, 187,
Dillon, See. of Treasury Douglas, 119-120
                                                 224,240,243,43243
Dimethvlhvdrazine. 229-230
                                            DSB. See Defense Science Board.
Dingeldeii, Richard C., 350
                                            Duberg, Dr. John E., 177
Dipole, 116-117
                                            Dubos, Prof. Rene J., 438
Dirksen, Sen. Everett, 337
                                            DuBridge, Dr. Lee A,, 176
Disarmament, 17, 21, 186-187, 437
                                            Duke Univ., 194
Disarmament Conference, 17, 21
                                            Dulles International Airport, Washington,
Discoverer (satellite), 108-109, 150-151
                                               D.C., 411
Disease, communicable, 2 9 4                Duluth, Minn., 116
Distinguished Civilian Service Award
                                            Dunning, Dr. J. R., 277
   (DOD), 265
                                            Durban, So. Africa, 226-227
                                   ,
Distinguished Flying Cross (USAF) 32        Dushanbe, U.S.S.R., 27
Distinguished Flying Cross (USA), 394       Dust, cosmic, 306307,331
Distinguished Service Honor Gold Medal         extraterrestrial, 263
  Award and Certificate (AFCEA), 185           lunar, 267,271,275-276,305-307
                                            Dyment, John T, 114
                                                             .
Distinguished Service Medal (USAF), 266
Dixon, Franklin P., 213,375                 Dynamic Crew Procedures Simulator
Doctors, medical, trained as astronauts,       (MSC), 236
  249                                       Dyna Soar. See x-20.
Documentation, Inc., 237                    Dynatronics, Inc., 423
DOD. See Defense, Dept of.                  Early Bird (ComSatCorp communiea-
Dolan, Thomas E., 139                         tions satellite), 105, 139, 237, 247, 4 1
                                                                                     1.
Donely, Philip, 156                            431
                                                                                   485
                                          INDEX

Earth, 106-107,125,152,158                     Egg experiments, 72,174,248
  atmosphere, 70, 9 , 117                      Eglin AFB, Fla., 70
                      6
  formation, 28,170                            Egypt. See United Arab Republic.
  gravitational field, 68,325                  EIA. See Electronic Industries Associa-
  heat, 62                                       tion.
  investigations of, 1                         Eisele, Capt. Donn F. (USAF) ,318
                                               Eisenhower, Pres. Dwight D., 33, 64, 133,
  magnetic equator, 31
  magnetic field, 30, 68, 96, 104, 245, 250,     188,213, 246, 274
     265                                       Eisenhower, Dr. Milton, 194
  radiation, solar, effects of, 291            EJC. See Engineers Joint Council.
  surface, 21                                  Ejection seat (see also Escape system),
Earthquake, 119,1%, 354                           129
                                               El Centro, Calif., 129,317
Eastern Airlines, 88
Eastern Test Range (ETR) (formerly Air         El Kottamia Observatory, United Arab
                                                 Republic, 424
     Force Missile Test Center (AFMTC)
     and Atlantic Missile Range (ABW).         ELDO. See European Launcher Develop-
                                                 ment Organization.
     See also Kennedy space center, NASA,
     and Cape Kennedy), 221-222, 261,          Electric propulsion, 228-229, 296, 302
                                               Electric power, nuclear reactor, 229, 305,
     309-310, 336
                                                 333
  launch, 258-259
     booster development, 192                  Electricity, static, 147
     missile, 266, 328,330                     Electrojet, 31
                                               Electro Mechanical Research, Inc., 352
     plans, 171, 223
     satellite, 252, 264, 290, 3 . - 0         Electron (U.S.S.R. satellite), 152
                                0536
  management, 164, 177, 192                    ELECTRON I, 33,42,54,62,447
  prelaunch activities                         ELECTRON 11, 33,42,54,77,447
     Ranger, 218                               ELECTRON III, 245,273,452
                                               ELECTRON w,
     Saturn, 235                                              245,273,452
                                               Electron accelerator, 22 '
     Titan, 269
                                               Electron beam welder, 184
  support services, 239
                                               Electron bombardment, 290
Echo (satellite), 282
                                               Electron concentration, 4 22950-51
                                                                        3
ECHO I (communications satellite), 284,
                                               Electron density, 119, 140
  3 8 418
    0,
                                               Electron detector, 325
ECHO 11 (communications satellite)
                                               Electron miscroscope, 326,392
  communications experiment, 54, 60, 75
                                               Electronic beacon, 325
  launch, 25-26, 447, 449, 466
                                               Electronic Industries Association (EIA),
  performance, 29
  tracking, international cooperation, 30        2%
                                               Electronic parts standardization, 334
     U.S.S.R., 17, 27, 96-97
                                               Electronic stethoscope, 172
  use of, 85
Eclipse                                        Electronics, 166,183,300
                                                 industry, 13, 430
  lunar, 424, 426
  solar, 180                                     systems, 102
Eclipse-pioneer ~ i (Bendix carp.), 22         Electronics Instrumentation Div. (Lear
                          ~.
                                                 Siegler, Inc.) , 102
Economic Club of Detroit, 143
Economy, national, 18, 38, 144, 183, 217,      ~ectronics, Military, International Con-
  221, 266                                       vention, 317
Edelson, Burton I., 4 1                        Electronics Research Center (ERC)
                      4
                                                    (NASA), 43, 59, 388, 393, 427
Edgar, George P., 317
                                                 appropriations, 115
Editor and Publisher, 287
Edmondson, Sen. J. Howard, 57                    congressional action, 77, 100-101, 185
Education, 56, 197,217,247,263                   contract, 410
                                                 location, 13, 37, 79, 91, 201, 292, 327,
  funds for, 3,7, 183,186
                                                    339, 345, 337
  need for, 263
programs, 4,279-280, 407                         organization, 301
Edwards, AFB, Calif., 218,225,331                Site Evaluation Committee, 23, 113
                                               E1ectro-optical systems, 3419 392
  Aerospace Research Pilot School, 197,
                                               Electrostatics, 56, 325
     206
                                               Eleuthera Island, Bahamas, 386
  engine test stand, 122
                                               Elizabeth n, Queen, 59
  engine tests, 429
                                               Ellington AFB, TeX-9 74
  flights, 6,29,104,118,181,191,193,203,
                                               Elliott, Rep. Carl, 67
  227, 251, 264-265, 297, 329, 352
  test flight, 85,278,323,349,425              Elms, James C., 16
Eggers, Dr. Alfred J., Jr., 173                Ely, L/G William J. (USA), 165
Eggleston, John M., 4  8                       Emme, Dr. Eugene M., 226
486                                      INDEX

Employment, 175-176, 226, 2 6 288, 302,
                           8,                 ETR. See Eastern Test Range.
  443                                         Europa 1 (3-stage satellite launcher), 270
Energetic Particles Explorer D (EPE-D).       Europe, 5,58,%, 140,253
   See EXPLORER XXVI.                              Western, 297, 303
b e r g y conversion, 151                     European Conference of Postal and Tele-
Energy transfer, 114                               communications Administration, 26
Engine                                        European Conference on Satellite Com-
   arc-jet, 167                                    munications, 58,61,63, 189,372
   ion, 82,238,256,444                        European Economic Community, 25
  liquid fuel, 87, 115,209                    European Launcher Development Orga-
   ramjet, 77, 223                                nization (ELDO), 97, 198, 257, 269-270
  reliability, 235                            European Space Research Organization
  rocket, 115, 160                                     (ESRO), 97, 161, 242, 264
  supersonic transport, 161                        agreement, 258
  turbofan, 28                                     Iaunch
  vernier, throttleable, 199                           U.K., 239, 242
Engineering Experiment Station (USN),              plans, 113, 364, 360
  334                                              tracking station, 264, 308, 397
Engineering Institute of Canada, 421           Eurovision (Western Europe TV net-
Engineers, 84                                      work), 297
  and scientists, 83, 7 4 94, 302, 308, 345   Evans, Albert J.. 92
  space program, 6,3536,184                   Evans, Thomas C., 170
  training, 255                               Evins, Rep. Joe L., 29
Engineers Joint Council (EJC), 12             Exceptional Civilian Service Medal
Engineers’ Week, 74                                 (WAF ), 74
Eugle, Capt. Joseph H. (USAF), 6, 130,        Exceptional Service Decoration (FAA),
   182,241,264,326,329,414                         164
Entry Technology Conference, 350              Exhaust, rocket, 229-230
Environment (see also Space Environ-          Exhibit, 145, 214, 230, 247, 266, 300
     ment Weightlessness)                     Exobiology, 50, 3 6  6
   atmospheric pressure, 56                   Explorer (program), 1      1
   blood Dressure. 129. 177-178               EXPLORER I (satellite), 37,%, 196
   genetics, 169,171,179                      EXPLORER VIII, 106
  heart, 172, 174                             EXPLORER 1~,131-132
  insect, 72,117,174,179                      EXPLORER E 172 ,
  nervous system, 169,178                     EXPLORER XII, 479
  oxygen test, 44,87,130,174                  EXPLORER XIV, 479
  radiation, 48,169                           EXPLORER XV, 479
Environment,                                  EXPLORER XVI, 194,380
  hazards of, 1%                              EXPLORER XVIII, 103, 168,284, 320,339
  oxygen, 44,130,174                          EXPLORER XIX, 473
  space cabin, simulation, 87, 130            EXPLORER xx, 296, 360361, 363, 455, 467
  space, simulation, 39, 50, 112, 118, 224    EXPLORER XXI, 339, 436, 457, %7
  undersea, 176                               EXPLORER XXII, 346,351,386,407,457,467
Environment control, 6,89                      EXPLORER XXIII, 380,459,467
Environmental sensor, 339                     EXPLORER XXIV, 394,460,467
Eole, Project (France), 218                   EXPLORER xxv, 394,460,468
         See EXPLORER m.                      EXPLORER XXVI, 427,462,468
EPE-D.
“Epsilon” (meson particle) , 352              Explorer Beacon (satellite), 325,482,109
Equator, 305,314                              Explorer, Geodetic (satellite) ,325
ERC. See Electronics Research Center
                                              Explorer-Jupiter C (satelIite) ,234
  (NASA).
                                              Explorers’ Club, 327
Erevan, USSR., 27
                                              Explosion, 25,104, 110
Erhard, Chancellor Ludwig (W. Ger.),
                                              Export, 114
  273
                                              Extrasensory perception, 278
E r & v , Nimlai P., 121
                                              Extraterrestrial life, 210
Escape systems, 89,129
                                              Ezop, James J., 135
Esgar, Jack B., 82
                                              F-I (rocket engine), 114, 120, 122, 197,
ESP Research Associates Foundation, 287
                                                  242,346,377
ESRO. See European Space Research Or-
   ganization.                                F-2 (rocket engine), 412
Esro 1 (satellite), 2.58, 397                          (Phantom II),226
                                              ~-4
Esro 2 (satellite), A , 397
                    !%                        F - i o F (aircraft), 191
Estes, L/G Howell M., Jr. (USAF), 6           F-1 2~ (A-i supersonic aircraft), 225,254
                                                              1
                                                                                 487
                                        INDEX

        (Starfighter), 5 43, 181, 203, 404,   Feoktistov, Konstantin Petrovich, 348,355,
                        ,
F-104
  406                                           359,469
                                              Ferguson, E. E,373
                                                             .
F-106 ( Thunderchief ),66,178
                                              Ferguson, L/C James (USAF), 45
~ - 1 1 1 (TFX), 190-191,428,430
                        ,                     Fermi, Enrico, Award, 395
F-II 1~ (USAF-TFX) 190-191
                    ,                         Fiber metal, 197
F-1 1 1 B (USN-TFX) 191
FAA. See Federal Aviation Agency.             Fiberglas, 393
Fafnir Bearing Co., 293                       Field, Jennings Pemble, Jr., 342
                                              Field Enterprise Educational Corp., 287
Fairbanks, Alaska, 103, 284
Fairhall, Minister of Supply Allen, 278,      Fighter, tactical. See F-111.
                                              Finger, Harold B., 83, 195, 229, 296, 311,
  3%
Fairhurst, Judge Charles, 345                   349, 435
                                              Finney, John, 26-27, 86, 351, 355, 425
“Fairy castle” theory, 299
                                              Fire, crash, 214
FAITH 7 , 367
                                              Fire, Project (NASA), 135
Falkland Islands, 397
                                              Fire 1 (reentry test), 135, 350, 483
Farman, Henry, 79                                    ,
                                              Firefly, Project ( USAF ) , 7 , 265
                                                                           0
Farman, Maurice, 79
                                              Firor, Dr. John W., 389
Farrell Construction Co., 61
                                              Fischel, Jack, 122
Fassett, John W., 141
Fatigue, metal, 103                           Fisher County, Tex., 121
                                              Flagstaff, Arir, 75,20&205,218,223
FBA. See Federal Bar Association.
FCC. See Federal Communications Com-          Flare, solar, 13,48, 173, 194,388-389
                                              Flax, Dr. Alexander H., 166,303
  mission.
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration.        Fleas, 201
Fecker, J. W., Co., 264                       Fleming, Arthur S ,Award, 63,173
                                                                 .
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), 60, 80-        Flight Achievement Award (AAS) ,164
     81, 113, 133, 164, 171, 216, 237, 296,   Flight control, 29,
     318, 332, 443                            Flight Research Center (FRC) (NASA), 70-
  award, 164                                       71, 77, 138, 145, 147-148, 218, 263
  contract, 56, 201,259                         contract, 201,319
  cooperation, 231,233                          flight, 214, 283
                                              Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) , 147, 156,
  organization, 24
  report, 293,332                               306
  tests, 214                                  Flight simulation, 146, 199
     safety, 147,211,306                      Flight training, 332
      sonic boom 43. 63. 8 . 1 7 1 5 177.
                           4 1. 7.            Florence, Italy, 171, 175
      183, 187, 242, 253,268;274; 277; 314;   Florida, 68, 153,221,266,
     360                                      Florida East Coast Railway, 51,59,61,63,
   transport, supersonic, 201                   65, 69
      design and development, 5,28,57,61,     Florida Library and Historical Commis-
         148, 183,318                           sion, 22
                                              Florida Operations (MSC) ,299
      management, 115,154
      reservations, % 136,159,175
                     ,                        Florida Times-Union, 433
Federal Bar Association (FBA 1,250            Florkin, Prof. Marcel, 432
Federal Communications Commission             Flotation collar, 102
   (FCC), 55, 105, 113, 122, 139, 168, 286,   Flox (fluorine-liquid oxygen), 77,106,219
  412                                         Fluid mechanics, 235-236
Federal Electric Corp., 201                   Fluorine, 76, 230
Federal government. See United States         Fluorine-hydrogen, 160,230
   government.                                Fly, fruit. See Fruit fly.
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Serv-      Flying Boxcar. See 6-110.
   ice (FMCS), 25                             Flying saucers, 289, 387
Federal Support of B s c Research in
                         ai                   Flying submarine, 397
   Institutions of Higher Learnina. 110       Flying wing. See MX-324.
                I       -        -I




Federal Systems Div. (IBM), 122               FMCS. See Federal Mediation and Con-
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) , 333            ciliation Service.
                                              Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 131
Federal Women’s Award, 93
                                              Food, 7 . 145
                                                       9
Federation of Italian-American Democratic
   Organizations of New York, 101             Force measuring instrument, 114
Fellowships, 308                              Ford, Brian J., 441
Fels Planetarium, 205                         Forecast, Project (USAF), 66, 206, 252,
 Fenn College (Cleveland, 0.),214                257
                                              Forgash, Moms,370
 Fenn, Prof. Wallace Osgood, 266, 315
Feodorov, Yevgeny, 352                        Fort Bliss, Tex., 394
488                                     INDEX

Fort (=hur&iU Research Range,Manitoba,         solidfiquid, 160
     278,290                                   toxic, 230
  launch                                     Fuel assembly, simulated, for nuclear re-
     balloon, 4                                actnr- 25
                                                       --
                                                -----I
     sounding rocket, 11,22,30,42,62,79,     Fuel cell, 68,140,383
                                             Fulbright, Sen. J. William, 84, 173. 221.
       84, 107,110,113-114,l33,140-141,                                           .   .
       260, 262, 264, 277, 373, 378, 380       225,227,237,257
                                             Fuller, George A., Co., 121,400
Fort Davis, Tex., 148
Fort Dix, N.J., 146                          Fullerton, Calif., 100
Ft. Hood, Tex., 182                          Fulton, L/C Fitzhugh L. (USAF), 273,317
                                             Funk, M/G Ben I. (WAF ),12,29,162,269
Ft. Monmouth, N.J., 241
                                             Furnace, black-body, 142
Fort Washington, Pa., 444
                                             Fumas, Dr. Clifford C., 29
Fortune (magazine), 39, 111, 122, 161,
                                             Fusca, James A., 291
  441
                                             Future Flight Manpower Study Board
Forum on Developments and Techniques
                                                (FAA), 55
  for Air Traffic System of the Future
                                             Gable, L. D., 166
   (RTCA). 158
                                             Gagarin, Col. Y r A., 74,96,125,130-131,
                                                              ui
                                               340
                                             Galactic radio noise, 118
  136, 412
                                             Galaxy, 297
Foundation Library Center, 3
                                             Galileo, 271
Fracture toughness, 223
                                             Galveston Bay, Tex., 5,131,352
France, 14, 79,132,245,266,303,314,385
                                             Ganymede (Jupiter’s moon), 179
  aircraft. “Concorde” (France4J.K.). 61,
                                             GAO. See General Accounting Office.
     171, 314, 362
                                             Garbacz, Michael L., 113
  communications, 140
                                             Garbarini, Robert F., 130
  cooperation, 95
                                             Garner, Howell D., 276
  launch, 210, 371
                                             Garrett Corp., 404,416
  rocket engine, 233, 371
                                               AiResearch Div., 6
  space program, 161
                                             Garrick, I. Edward, 352
  tracking, 32,132,204,308
                                             Gas bearing, 386
  weather balloon, 219
                                             Garland, Kenneth W., 42,269
Franchi Construction Co., 38
                                             Gatlinburg, Tenn., 349
Frankford Arsenal (USA), 94
                                             Gazenko, Dr. Oleg, 174,309, 374, 389-390
FRC. See Flight Research Center.
                                                      See General Dynamics/Astronau-
Freche, John C., 56                          GD/A.
                                                tics.
Frederick, Okla., 177
                                             GE. See General Electric Co.
Freedman, Dr. Sanford, 9
                                             Geake, Dr. J. E., 4.03
Freedom Foundation, 75
                                             Geiger counter, 325
Freeman, Capt. Theodore C. (USAF) ,370,
  388                                        Gell-Mann, Dr. Murray, 72
French Guiana, 161                           Gem. See Ground effect machine.
French National Center for Space Studies     Gemini (program), 68,71,74,82,99, 118,
   (CNES), 95
                                                   121,129,192,224,274,356
French National Geographic Institute, 308      appropriation, 186
Frequency control and calibration facility     cooperation, 12,55,71,82
   (AMR), 39
                                                criticism, 203
Friedl, George, Jr., 224                        development of, 52,139,375-376
Friedman, Dr. Herbert, 21, 45, 153, 179,        experiment, 258
  254-
  _.4.32.       4%
                ---
   -7 - - - 2
                                                plans for, 173,194,329
“Friendship Sputnik“ (ECHO II), 85              tracking stations, 222,306
Friloux, Henry, 197
                                             Gemini (spacecraft), 284,292,300,317
Fritz. John. Medal. 1%5.334
                                                astronaut training, 25,81,209
Frog.egg experiment, 173
                                                equipment, 57,135,178,240
“From the People” (radio program), 354
                                                facilities, 10
Fruit f y 72,171,179
       l,
                                                GT-1,130,134,449,466
Frutkin, Arnold W., 240,371
Fryd Construction Corp., 63                     GT-2,265,289,294,297,316
FSF. See Flight Safety Foundation, 107,         GT-3, 212, 273, 289, 294,316,365366
  109,186,235                                   GT-4,263,265
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission.             launch vehicle (Titan 111, 9, 13, 20,63,
Fubini, Dr. Eugene, 107,109,186,235                245,259,297,328,371,413
Fuel, 32                                       recovery, 5
  high-energy, 115,167                         landing. See Paraglider.
  safety of, 81                                rendezvous, 2   6
                                                                                 489
                                       INDEX

  test, 131, 1 6 167, 174, 181, 193, 197,    George C. Marshall Space Eligkt Center
              5,
                                                           See Marshall Space Flight
     264, 276,278,318                           (NASA).
  use o , 249, 307-308                         Center.
        f
                                             George, Col. Clarence J. (USA), 77
Gemini B/MO~, 145,261
Geminid stream, 415                          George Washington Univ., 178
Genatt, Saul H ,313
               .                             Georgetown Univ., 148, 405
General Accounting O5ce (GAO) ,55,127,       Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia
                                               Tech), 126,147
  253, 334
                                             Gerhart, Gen. John K. (USAF) , 362
General Atomics Div. (General Dynam-
  ics), 248, 380                             Germanium alloy, 291
“General Aviation Aircraft Owners Sur-       German rocket scientists, 254,262
                                             Germany, East, 15,41,129,34
  vey-1962”, 293
General Contractor, Inc., 31                 Germany, West, 265,273
General Cultural Exchange Program, 182         rocket, 52,78,369,381
General Dynamics Corp., 77, 145, 148,353       scientist, 1 , 369, 381
                                                           5
  General Dynamics/Astronautics (GD/A),        space program, 197
                                             Gerrity, L/G Thomas P. (USAF), 89,409
    78, 111, 193, 234, 269, 275, 308, 344,
                                             Getler, Michael, 317
    384
  General Dynamics/Convair, 89, 397          Giffels and Rossetti, 410
  General Dynamics/Electric Boat Div.,       Gibbons Stanley Ltd. of London, 205
                                             Gifford, Frank, 88
     397
  General Dynamics/Electronics Co., 425      Gignoux, Dominique M.P., 66
  General Dynamics/General Atomics           GillesDie. Ben. 219
                                             Gilletpi; Walter F., 114
     Div., 380
General Electric Co. (GE) ,68, 73-74, 159    Gilliland, Bob, 429
  Aerospace and Defense Service Engi-        Gilruth, Dr. Robert R., 16,33,91, 121,134,
     neering Dept., 70                         244-245. 322
  Apollo Support Dept., 299                  GIMRADA. See Geodesy, Intelligence and
   Command Systems Div., 2                     Mapping Research and Development
  contract, 59,201,219, 221, 248-249,319,      Agency.
                                             Gisell, William G., 215
      4Q5
     study, 68,74,204-205                    GISS. See Goddard Institute for Space
  Re-entry Systems Dept., 337                  Studies.
  supersonic transport, 13, 28,183           Glantz Contracting Corp., 127
 Valley Forge Space Technology, 177,304      Glass fiber, 393
General Federation of Women’s Clubs. 207     Glenn, L/C John H., Jr. (USMC), 75, 125,
General Motors Corp. (GMC) ,323                   358,388,343,404
  AC Spark Plug Div., 18                       accident, 87, 121, 336
  Defense Research Laboratories, 8,197         colonelcy, 365
                                               consultant. 237. 245
General Precision, Inc., 430
General Purpose Airborne Simulator
  (GPAS), 199
General Telephone Co., 81
Generator, 65, 172
Geneva, Switzerland, 17, 21, 100-101, 116,   Glider, 71, 145,201
  122,187,205,215,255,305                      glider, delta wing (see also Asset), 208,
Genisco, Inc., 65                                  258
                                             Glow, Project (USA), 211
Geodesy, 109
                                             GMC. See General Motors Corp.
Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Re-
                                             GNP (Gross National Product), 187, 278
  search and Development A g e n c y
                                             Goddard Historical Essay Award, 111
   (GIMRADA) (USA), 74
                                             Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS)
Geodetic Explorer (satellite), 325
                                                ( N A S A ) . 314,372
Geodetic research, 146,222,325               Goddard Range and Range Rate System
Geodetic Satellite Policy Board, NASA-DOD-     (tracking system), 284
  Dept. of Commerce, 325                     Goddard, Dr. Robert H., 47,104,125, 160,
Geological Problems in Lunar Research,         263, 319
  Conference on, 180                         Goddard, Robert H., airmail stamp, 160,
Geologist, 6 . 100
             6                                 341
Geology, 170                                 Goddard, Robert H,Library, 233
                                                                    .
Geomagnetic field, 50,380                    Goddard, Robert H., Memorial Dinner, 111
Geophysics, 170, 208                         Goddard, Robert H., Memorial Trophy,
Geophysics Corp. of America, 14,141)           111
George AFB, Calif., 5                        Goddard Scholarship, 111
     m-59a 0-65-32
490                                      INDEX

Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC)            Green River, Utah, 58, 193, 241, 329, 338,
   (NASA), 42, 102-103, 181, 1 8 u)o-
                                8,               381.406
                                              Greenacre, J. C, 2M
                                                             .
   201,224,276,305,311,316
 communications, 185, 285                     Greenbelt, Md., 185
 contract, 202,239,330,336,396                Greensboro, N.C., 439
 cooperation, 10, 38, 118, 289                Greenstein, Dr. Jesse L., 398
                                              Grissom, Maj. Virgil I. (USAF), 134, 188,
 experiment, 30, 169, 249, 308, 311, 319,
                                                 316,329,366,369
    37.5
                                              Gronouski, Postmaster Gen. John A, 160
  Iowa-rock, 102
                                              Gross, Rep. H. R., 201
  launch, 19, 109, 118, 290, 297, 306, 339,
                                              Ground-BasedAstronomy-A Ten-Year Pro-
     346.379-380.394.427
                                                gram, 385-386
  management, 3% '
                                              Ground effects machine (Gem), 354
  test, 137,140,278
                                              Ground station, transportable, 295
  tracking, 284
                                              Group Achievement Award (NASA), 77,
Goett, Dr. Harry J., 240,282,319,344, 352
                                     I


                                                 221
Goercke, Prof. Paul, 263
                                              Gruene, Hans F., 352-353
Gold alloy, 291
                                              Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., 100,
Gold, Harold, 158
                                                 116, 215
Gold, Dr. Louis, 155
                                              GSFC. See Goddard Space Flight Center-
Gold, Dr. Thomas, 164, 180,301,306
                                              GT-1; See Gemini.
Goldbaum. George C.. 238
                                              GT-z See Gemini.
Goldberg, Delphrs C.,'24
                                              GT-8. See Gemini.
Goldberg, Dr. Leo, 301
                                              GT-4. see Gemini.
"Golden Age of PoIitical Science", 87
                                              Guam Island, Pacific, 66, 291
Goldstein, Harold, 149
                                              Guaymas, Mexico, 39,369
Goldwater, Sen. Barry M., 9, 69, 136, 253,
                                              Gubser, Rep. Charles S., 153
  258.321.331.351.362.370
                       -I

                                              Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, 155
Goliath (aircraft), 7 9
Goodrich, B. F., Sponge Products Div., 52     Guggenheim, Daniel and Florence, Award,
                                                 1964 (IAA), 266
Goodyear Aerospace Corp., 129, 212, 418
                        corp.,
Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall (U.K.) , 204,       Guggenheim, Daniel, Medal, 1964,263
                                              Guggenheim, Harry F., 387
  270
                                              Guggenheim International Astronautics
Gordon, Kermit, 67
                                                Award, I964 (IAA), 315
Gore, Sen. Albert, 116
                                              Guidance, 142
Gorki Univ., U.S.S.R., 85,426
                                                inertial, 121,193
Gorki, U.S.S.R., 54,75
Government Accounting Office (GAO ) ,         Gulf Area DeveloDment Committee.'
                                                 Houston Chamber o'f Commerce, 277
  381,434
                                              Gunder, Dr. Dwight F,360
                                                                    .
Government Contracting for Research and
                                              Gurney, Rep. Edward J., 22
  Development, Briefing Conference, 250
                                              Gus (mouse), 255
Government Employees Incentive Awards
                                              Gyros, 18
  Act, 142
                                              H-1 (engine), 28,192,211
Government-industry relationship, 165
                                              H-10 (atomic clock), 4 8 0
GPAS. See General Purpose Airborne
  Simulator.                                  Hackes, Peter, 221
                                              Haggerty, James J., Jr., IO, 26, 213, 307,
Grain, solid, 248
Grand Canyon, Ariz., 100                        339,347,443
                                              Hailsham. Lord. 36
Grand Coulee Dam, 152                                        ->--
                                                       I--

Grand Rapids, Mich., 343                      Hailstone damage, 227
                                              Halaby, Najeeb E., 4,55,84,119,148,183,
Granite Construction Co., 402
                                                 187,211.220,242,314.318.332,336.422
Grants                                                                 ,...
                                              Haley, Andrew G., 236
  government, 1 , 104,110,162,211,216-
                  1
     217,259,397                              Hall, Dr. Albert C., 51,68,74
  nongovernment, 3,111,219                    Hall of Science, 310
Graphite, 331                                 Hall, Robert Cargill, 111
Graphite reactor, 83                          Halo, Operation (USA), 32
Graphite refractory coating, 153              Hamburg, Germany, 297,301
Graveline, Maj. Duane E (usm MC), 393
                           .                  Hamburg Univ. (Germany), 296
Gravitational biology, 309                    Hamilton Standard Div. (UAC), 197
Gravitational collapse, 155                   Hammack, Jerome B., 63
Gravity, artificial, 226,309,384              Hammaguir, Algeria, 161,210
Gray, Edward Z., 8,73,217                     Hammer, magnetic, 329
Gray, Robert H., 339                          Handle, self-latching, 114
Gray, Prof. Wood, 178                         Haney, Paul, 248,280,294,384,395
Green Bank, W.Va, 321                         Hansea Grant, 234
Hardeman, Paul, Inc., 15                          (fighter aircraft), 203
                                           HF-24
                                           Hibbard, William D,181
                                                               .
Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy,
                                           Hibex, Project (Hi-G Booster Experi-
  273, 317
Harp, Project (High-Altitude Research        ment) (ABPA), 1    0
  Project) (USA), 29,411                   High-altitude Clear-Air Turbulence (Hi-
Harper, Carl Brown, 410                      Cat), 383
Harper, Charles W., 322                    Hi-Cat. See High-altitude Clear-Air Tur-
Harper’s Dry Lake, Calif., 239               bulence.
Harrison, Nat, Associates, 52              Hidden Hills, Calif., 70
Harrison, Patrick, Inc., 1 9
                          1                Hi-Dive (USAF rocket), 317
                                           High, H. J, Construction Co., 164
                                                     .
Hart, Mrs. Philip A., 164
Hartman, Edwin P., 139                     High Resolution Infrared Radiometer
Hartmann, Dr. Sven R., 383                   (Hrir), 298
Harvard Business School Club of Wash-      “Highlights of Recent Space Research”,
  ington, 8
Harvard Univ., 22,180,301                  Hilburn Board, 151
Harvev. Gordon. 167                        Hilburn, Earl D., 42, 144, 165, 224
Havana. Cuba. 121                          Hill, Louis W., Award, 235
Hawaii,’< 109: 207,268,332                 Hindustan Aircraft Co. (India), 203
Hawaiian Telephone Co., 412                Hines, Prof. Colin O ,140
                                                               .
Hawker-SiddeleyDH-125 (U.K. jet), 209      Hines, William, 48
Hawkins. R. S 230
              ..                           History, 255-256
Haworth: Dr. Leland .T. 104                Historv of Aeronautics and Astronautics.  .
Hawthome, Calif., 201 - -                    Technical Committee on (AIAA) ,226
Hayes, B/G Thomas J., 1 1 (USA), 136,143
                         1                 HITCHHIKER I (satellite), 178
Hazard, outer space, 264-265               Hjornevik, Wesley L., 353
Head. Dr. Richard. 4                       H G ~ O (lifting-body), 71, 201, 220, 308
Health, Education, and Welfare, Dept. of   Hodges, Luther H ,. 43,119
   (HEW), 48,277                           Hoffa, James R., 243
Heart, 131,174,305                         Holifield, Rep. Chet. 117,201
Hearth. D. P., 199                         Holloman AFB, N.M., 91, 133, 333, 9 0   .9
Heat exchanger, 142                        Holmberg, Neal A., 150
Heat-sensitive detector. 179               Holmes, D. Brainerd, 141
Heat shield, 9,<45,1817                    Holzman, B/G Benjamin G. (USAF, Ret.),
Heat transfer, 14,70,236,305                 366
Heat Transfer Division Memorial Award      Honeycomb structure, 13,197
   (ASME). 403                             Honeywell Co., 193, 257, 263
Heating,.i22-123                             Aeronautical Div., 65,224
  aerodynamic, 290                         Hooker, Ray, 139
  reentry, 9, 170-171,226, 258,289         Hordexum seed experiment, 248
  solar, 141                               Horizon scanner. 7 . 279-280. 241
                                                               7
Hebrew Univ. (Israel), 125                 Homer, H. M., 161 ’
Height gage, 39                            Homer, Richard E., 343
Heinkel Go., 265                           Hornig, Dr. Donald F.. 1 , 144, 186, 211,
                                                                     2
Held, Dr. Richard, 9                         379;418,431
Hehooter. 216. 392                         “Hot universe” theory, 180
  record, 394                              Hotz, Robert B., 225, 240, 274, 324, 357,
  speed, 207                                 374, 409
  use of, 305,439                          House, William C., 108
Heliopolis, U.A.R., 303                    Houston Astros, 409
Helium, 130,140,309                        Houston Chronicle, 258
Helium-oxygen atmosphere, 309, 373         Houston Museum of Natural Science, 24A
Helms Soaring Hall of Fame, 244t           Houston Post, 55
Henderson, E. P., 133                      Houston, Tex., 8 35, 65, 81, 121,206, 209,
                                                             ,
Herbig, George Howard, 155                   235, 244-245, 273, 277, 290, 299, 321,
Herodotus (lunar crater), 205                409
Herschel, Sir William, 203                 Houston, Univ. of, 199
Hershey, Pa., 379                          Hovercraft. 311.354
Herskovitz, Sheldon B., 110                Howland Island, 333
Hess, Dr. H. H., 116                       Hoyle, Dr. Fred, 23
Hess, D . Victor F., 423
        r                                  Huber, William G., 238
Hetzel, E. P., 264,278                     Hughes Aircraft Co., 61,90,105,160,209,
Heusinger, B. IC, 302                           228,237,384,49410
HEW. See Health, Education and Wd-           Research Laboratory, 159,256
   fare, Dept. of.                         Human centrifuge, 226,243
492                                       INDEX

                                                Iceland, 273
Human factors research, 9,166
Human Factors in Electronics, Fifth             Idaho, 306
                                                        See Institute of Electrical and Elec-
   Annual Conference on, 166                    IEEE.
                                                   tronic Engineers.
Humphrey, Sen. Hubert H., 180,275,286,
                                                IGY. See International Geophysical Year.
   297,312,347
                                                IIOE. See International Indian Ocean Ex-
Humphrey, Vice President-elect Hubert
   H., 398                                         pedition.
                                                IISL. See International Institute of Space
Humphries, Col. George E., 421
 Hunsaker, Dr. Jerome C., 247                      Law.
Hunter, Maxwell W., 26 Jr.,                     IIT Research Institute (Illinois Institute
                                                   ofTechnology), 135,197
Huntsville, Ala., 29,35,70,104
                                                Ikeda, Prime Minister Hayato (Japan),
Huntsville Industrial Expansion Commit-
   tee, 367                                        115
                                                Ikeya (comet), 398
 Hurlburt, E. O., Center for Space Re-
   search (NRL) ,15                             Ile du Levant launch center (France), 233,
Hurricane, 122, I, 218,253
                  %                                371
Hurricane Cleo, 297,316                         Illinois, Univ. of, 140,241,393
Hurricane Dora, 309-310,316,326                 Image orthicon tube, 72
Hurricane Ethel, 326                            Image velocity sensor, 257
                                                IMCC. See Integrated Mission Control
Hurricane Florence, 326
                                                                .
Hurricane Gladys, 321                              Center (MSC)
Hussein I, King (Jordan), 142                    IMP I (Interplanetary Monitoring Plat-
Hutchins, Dr. Robert M., 120                       form). See EXPLORER XVIII.
                                                Impact studies, 197
Hyatt, Abraham, 247
Hydrazine, 62,230                               Imperial College, London, 71
                                                “An Improved Precision Height Gage”, 39
Hydrocarbon, 181
                                                India, 60,70-71
Hydtofoil, 370
                                                   cooperation, space, 31,%
Hydrogen, 140,226
                                                   Dept. of Atomic Energy, 31,70
   atomic, 15
   liquid, 14,32                                   launch, 6,10,25
   propellant, 223                                 space program, 7
                                                Indian Ocean, 70,107,294,325,405
Hydrogen bomb, 14,394
                                                Indiana Univ.. 100
 Hydrogm-fire detector, 210
                                                Indonesia, 89 .
Hydrogen peroxide, 89,247,298
                                                Industrial applications of space research,
Hydrology, 62
Hyman, Hayman, and Harris, 14                      33,39,288
 Hynek, Dr. J. Allen, 72,393                    Industrial Nucleonics Corp., 100
Hypersonic flight, 3 , 173                      Industry extension service, 226
                     3
                                                 Industry Studies on Manned Interplane-
 Hypersonic Ramjet Experiment Project,
                                                    tary Missions for NASA, Symposium on,
   391
HGr&onic vehicle, 257                               29
                                                Inertial guidance, 121,193,263
Hypervelocity impact, 197
                                                Information, 132,312
Hypervelocity       Impact      Symposium,
                                                   distribution of, 243,255,305
   Scventh, 392
                                                   exchange of, 1,310
Hypotension, orthostatic, 129, 177-178
                                                   scientific and technical, 144, 237, 243,
IAA. See International Academy of Astro-
                                                   283,285,293
   nautics.
                                                Information and analysis center (DOD) ,
IADR. See International Association for
                                                   303
   Dental Research.
                                                Information retrieval, 58
IAF. See      International Astronautical
                                                Infrared, 57
   Federation.
                                                Infrared astronomical observatory (Proi-
 IATA. See International Air Transport
                                                   ect Amos), 57
   Association.
                                                Infrared horizon scanner, 241
IAU. See      International Astronomical        Infrared laser rays, 112
   Union,                                       Infrared radiation, solar, 76,230
Iberia Air Lines (Spain), 159                   Injun (satellite), 473
IBM. See International Business Machines        Innovations, 88,217,280, 306
   Corp.                                        Innis, Robert C., 376
ICAO. see International civil Aviation          Innsbruck, Austria, 32
   Organization.                                Insect, 89,171,174,179
Icarus (Intercontinental Aerospacecraft         Institute for Satellite and Space Research
   Range Unlimited System) (see also                (W.  Germany), 385
   Ithacus) ,81432,246                          Institute for Strategic Studies (U.K.), 385
          See Missile, ballistic, interconti-   Institute of Astrophysics and Space Re-
 ICBM.
                                                   search (W.
   nentaL                                                       Germany), 372
                                                                                     493
                                         INDEX

Institute of atmospheric science (pro-        International communications satellite
   posed, U. of Miami), 100,147                  system. See Communications satellite
Institute of Electrical and Electronic           system, international.
   Engineers (IEEE), 51, 300, 306, 366        International controls, space experiments,
Institute of Marine Sciences, 100                76
Institute of Navigation, 231                  International Convention of Military Elec-
Institute of Normal and Pathological             tronics. 317
                                              International cooperation, 16, 84, 96-97,
   Physiology (U.S.S.R.), 226
Institute of planetary bioscience (pro-             198,251,287,295,308-309,324
   posed, U. of Miami), 100                      civil aviation, 216
                                                 communications, 25, 32, 49, 55, 58, 61,
Institute of Scientific and Technical In-
   formation (U.S.S.R.) , 211                       75, 129, 185, 205, 215, 218, 247, 260,
Institute of space physics (proposed, U. of         282-283, 285, 293, 313, 315, 330, 449
                                                 IQSY, 45
   Miami), 100
                                                 meteorology, 1-2
 Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aerospacial
                                                 nuclear, 72
   (Spain), 31
                                                 space (see also International space pro-
Insulation, 103
                                                    grams), 6-7, 16, 27, 29, 35, 38, 75,
Integrated Mission Control Center (IMCC)
   (MSC) , 206                                      97, 112-113, 132, 194, 195, 203, 235,
                                                     239-240, 250, 269-270, 271-272, 287-
Interceptor aircraft, 72, 154
                                                    288, 311, 345
Intercontinental Aerospacecraft, Range
                                                 tracking stations, 264,306
   Unlimited System. See Icarus.
                                              International Council of the Aeronautical
Interferometer, 269
                                                 Sciences, 4th Congress, 296
Interim Communications Satellite Com-
                                              International Date Line, 105,294,305,310,
  mittee. 3 1
           .7
                                                 314
Interior, Dept. of, 231
                                              International Geophysical Year (IGY), 45,
   Office of Solar Enerm 180. 275
                                                 70
International Academy of Astronautics
    (IAA), 266, 311, 389                      International Indian Ocean Expedition
International agreements                          (IIOE), 71, 107
   communications satellite system, 240,       International Institute of Space Law
      293                                         (IISL), 14
   India-NASA, 7ir-71                         International Satellites for Ionospheric
   NAS-U.S.S.R., 182                              Studies. See Isis
   NBS-USSR.,41                               International Scientific Radio Union, 140
   US-ESRO,     264
                                              International space law, symposium, 313
   US-Malagasy Republic, 306
                                              International space programs (see also
   US.-U.S.S.R., 251,256
                                                     International cooperation, space), 36-
International Air Transport Association
                                                    37,269-270,371
    (IATA), 114
                                                 FranceSpain, 204
International Association for Dental Re-
                                                  U.K.-Australia-Emo, 269-270
   search (IADR), 121
                                                 U.K.-Italv. 311
International Association of Man in Space,
                                                 U.S.-Argentina, 403
   372
                                                 US.-Australia, 84, 139, 222, 284, 292
International Astronautical Federation
                                                 US.-Canada, 10-11, 30, 42, 47, 63, 189,
       (IAF), 14                                   nr 0
   15th Congress, 308-309410,313-314               L10
                                                US.-Denmark, 56,173
International Astronautics Award, Gug-
                                                U.S.-ESRO,  264
   genheim, 1964,315
                                                US.-France, 311
International Astronomical Union (IAU) ,        US.-India, 31, 70-71
   296-297-298-301                              US.-Italy, 311, 476,
International Atomic Energy Agency              U.S.Japan, 115, 140,294
    (IAEA), 426                                 US.-Netherlands, 278
International Atoms-for-Peace Confer-           US.-Norway, 56,216
   ence, Third, 305                             US.-Spain, 31
                                                US.-Sweden. 99.147.205.24J
International Business Machines Gorp.
                                                US.-U.K., 118,311, &13,482
       ( IBM),73,142,284                                                      ~




                                                US-U.S.S.R., 2, 17, 30, 5M0, 97, 172,
   Advanced Systems Development Div.,
                                                    175.204-205,208.240
       239, 255                                                 .    I



    Federal Systems Div., 122                 International Symposium on Bioastronau-
 International Civil Aviation Conference,       tics and the Exploration of Space, Third,
   216                                          388, 393
International Civil Aviation Organization     International Telecommunications Union
             406                                 (ITU) ,37,260,313
   (ICAO),
                                       INDEX

International Telephone and Telegraph        J-4 (enpine).  215
  Co. (ITT) ,61, 74, 79, 379, 412                  (eiginej ,86,261,429
                                             5-68
International Union of the Physiological     Jack, John R., 142
  Sciences (IUPS) ,266,315                   Jackass Flats, Nev., 175,300
                                             Jackson, Nelson P, Aerospace Award,
                                                                  .
International Year of the Quiet Sun
   (IQSY ),34,42,140,  356,395                  111
                                             Jacobson, Col. R. K. (USAF) ,41
Interplanetary flight, 176,301
Interplanetary Monitoring P 1 a t f o r m    Jaffe, Leonard, 130,352
   (Imp). See EXPLORER XVIII, EXPLORER       Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, 421
                                             Japan, 19,210,258-259,347
  XXI.
Inventions (see also Patents), 1 , 25, 82,     communications, 185, 189, 219
                                  2
                                               launch, 245,258-259
       114, 142
    policy, national, 5,293                    meteorologists, 112
    property rights, 5,43                      TV transmission, comsat, 115, 140, 294,
    waiver, 294, 329                              314
Inventors, 5,12,25,66,82                     Japan Broadcasting Corp., 259
Inventors’ Congress and Space Sympo-         Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecom-
    sium, 369                                  munications, 315
Ion engine, electrostatic, 142, 159, 238     Japanese Research Council, 112
                                             Jasperson, Capt. Robert E. (USN, Ret.),
Ion measurement, 15, 30, 50-51, 140
Ion propulsion, 82,324,410                      188
Ion thrustor, 159                            Jastrow, Dr. Robert, 314
Ionization gage, 77                          Javelin (sounding rocket). See Argo
Ionized calcium, 180                           D-4.
Ionized plasmas, 132                         Javits, Sen. Jacob K., 18,35,201
Ionosphere, 76, 140                          Jefferson, Howard B., 319
    effects of, 251                          Jeffries, John, Award, 376
    measurements, 11,210,249,296-297,393     Jenkins, Dr. Dale, 178
    research, 30, 50, 1 0 125, 241, 468
                        1,                   Jet airborne simulator system, 147
Ionospheric D region, 51, 56, 140, 422       Jet control, 248
Ionospheric E region, 51,140                 Jet Propulsios Laboratory (JPL) (Cal
Iinospherib Research Laboratory (Royal             Tech), 3 , 135,60,137
                                                            7
       Technical Univ., Denmark), 56           awards, 246
Iowa, 102,128                                  facilities, 177
Iowa, Univ. of, 387                            launches. 34.64.263.378.397
Iowa Wesleyan College, 232                      Manner project; 30630c 338
 IQSY. See International Year of the Quiet     NASA management, 58,6041.97-98,128,
    Sun.                                           137-138, 163-164, 422-423, 435
Irish International Airlines, 81                organization, 137,220,224
Iron Workers Union (mu) (see alw                Ranger project, 42,58,64,128,137-138,
    United Iron Workers), 126, 131                 151, 163-164, 215, 218, 266-267, 275,
 Isakov, P. K., 3 90                               309
 Isis (International Satellites for Iono-       research, 62,144, 167, 297, 399400
    spheric Studies), 11                     Jetstar. See C-lMA.
                                             Jet stream, 140
 Israel, 55
 Italian-American Democratic Organiza-       JHU. See Johns Hopkins Univ.
    tions of New York, Federation of, 101    Jodrell Bank Experimental Station
 Italy, 227, 246                                 (U.K.), 54575-76,85,97,242,246
    cooperation, 311                         Jodrell Bank Radio Astronomy Station,
                                                 (U.K.) ,239,253,270
    satellite launch, 420, 476, 487
     tracking station, 264, 381              Job classification handbook (Dept.
 Ithacus (rocket transport) (formerly           Labor), 218
                                             Johannesburg, So. Africa, 174,226
    Icarus) ,238,246
                                             John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA.
 ITT. See International Telephone and
     Telegraph Co.                              See Kennedy Space Center, NASA.
                                             Johns Hopkins Univ. (JHU) , 57,79, 131-
 ITU. See International Telecommunica-
     tions Union.                               132,408
 m data adapter. See Computer.               Johnson, Clarence L., 315-316,328
                                             Johnson, David S., 1 10
 IUPS. See International Union of the
                                             Johnson, Gerald W., 19
     Physiological Sciences.
                                             Johnson, John A ,265.337
                                                              .
 Iwan, Lawrence S,236.
                                             Johnson, President Lyndon B., 6,55, 117,
 IWU. See Iron Workers Union.
 Izvestia, 1 104,204,272,282,348,3%
             ,                                     129, 143, 164, 188, 218, 234-235,245,
                                                   247.257.294.297.307. . 323.330.397-
 5-2 (rocket engine), 159, 248, 294, 403,                            .        ,.
                                                   398, 4Q8;437.
     416
                                                                                 495
                                         INDEX

  aircraft. 287                               Karlsruhe, West Ger., 26
                       ,85-86,%, 93,133,255
    A-1 1 ‘( YF-12A)                          Karrer, Dr. Sebastian, 148
     bomber, 140                              Karth, Rep. Joseph E., 69, 71, 114, 150,
            260-261, 274                        163. 313
    SR-71,
  appointments, 12-13                         K&e,       Pres. Abeid (Zanzibar), 129
  awards by, 11,184,316,328                   Kashima, Japan, 185,315,326
  budget, 12,20-21, 244,300-301               Katz, Lester, 114
  communications satellite system, 58,278,    Katz, Dr. Ludwig, 178,325
     405                                      Kaufman, Harold R., 82,142
  defense, 320-321                            KC-130F (Hercules), 371
  disarmament, 17,21                          KC-135 (Stratolifter), 182,208
  economy, 18,38,40,257,265-266               Keating, Sen. Kenneth B., 187, 201
  education, 2                                Keats, E. S., 158
  international cooperation, 16, 265, 287     Keldysh, Mstislav V , 198,359
                                                                   .
  peace, 17, 21,50, 143, 201,272,333          Kelley Board. See NASA Board of Inquiry.
  RANGER VII. 272. 287.300                    Kelley, Dr. Albert J., 43,111,184,275,368,
  space pro&am; 32, bo, 85-86, 223, 267,        388, 393
     272,278-279,317418,335                   Kemp, Richard H., 82
  supersonic transport, 85, 149, 153, 183,    Kennedy Airport International Hotel, 326
     405                                      Kennedy, David M., 242
  technological change, 387                   Kennedy, President John F., 22, 47, 58,
Johnson, Mrs. Lyndon B., 109, 114,294           6061, 101, 189, 206, 208, 223, 246, 272,
Johnson, Paul G., 235,440                       329,377
Johnson, Richard L., 428                      Kennedy Space Center, NASA (KSC) (see
Johnson, Vincent L., 210,371                      also Merritt Island Launch Area), 81,
Johnson, Dr. Woodrow E., 108                       101,120,263, 317
Johnston Island, Pacific, 161, 394              accident, 135,141,147
Johnston, Maj. John A. (USA), 394               contract, 88,328329,336
Joint Chiefs of Staff, 260                      facilities, 39,77,276
Joint Navigation Satellite Committee            organization, 53-54
   (JNSC) ,312,347                              support services, 85,331
Jones, B/G David M. (USAF) ,375               Kepler (lunar crater), 275
Jones, Dr. W&.m L., Jr., 361                  Kerbel, Lev, 132
Jordan, 142                                   Kerosene, 81, 229-230
Josias. Conrad. 82                            Kerr, Breene M., 195,395
Jour&l of the Armed Forces, 246,254,262,      Kerr, Clark, 323,331
  307408,339,347                              Kerr, Sen. Robert S., 201
Journal of the National Education Associa-    Kharkov Univ. Observatory (U.S.S.R.) ,
  tion (NEA) , 2                                315
JP-4 (fuel), 81                               Khrushchev, Premier Nikita (U.S.S.R.) ,
JPL. See Jet Propulsion Laboratory (Cal          17,143,195,253,300,323,351,353
  Tech).                                      Kidd. Dr. Charles V.. 308
Judi-Dart      (NASA-PakiStan sounding        Kidde, Walter, and do., 247
   rocket) !see also Dart), 107               Kiess, Dr. Carl C., 48,148
Juergensen, Klaus, 114                        Kiewit, Peter, and Sons, Inc., 8, 13, 62
Jupiter (missile), 32                         Kiker, John, 361
Jupiter (planet), 153,399                     Killian, Dr. James R., Jr., 154,355
  atmosphere, 140,179                         Killion, George L., 242
   radiation belt, 387                        Kimball, Daniel A., 55,332
  temperature, 326                            Kimball, Neb., 268
Jupiter C (booster), 37                       Kindelberger, James Howard, Memorial
Justice, Dept. of, 220                           Laboratories, NAA Science Center, 298
Kabanov Effect, 330                           Kinetic energy, 151
Kabanov, Prof. Nikolai, 330                   Kinzel, Dr. Augustus B., 154, 416
Kagoshima Space Center, Japan, 245            Kirchner. Dr. Werner R.. 369
Kalimin, Prof. Yu. D., 374                    kiruna,Sweden,360         ’
Kaman Aircraft Corp., 207
                                                                   ~




                                              Kistiakowsky, Dr. George B., 35, 281
Kamanin, L/G N., 365                          Kiwi (nuclear reactor), 385
Kane, Col. Francis X. (USAF), 161             Kiwi B-4A (nuclear reactor). 195.320
                                              Kiwi B-4D (nuclear reactor) ;195; 229
Kania, Island of, 4 &
Kantrowitz, Arthur, 230                       Kiwi B-4D-CF (nuclear reactor), 63
 Kaplan, Lewis D., 35,48                      Kiwi B - ~ E(nuclear reactor), 229,311
Kappel, Frederick R., 334                     Kiwi B-E (nuclear reactor), 299
Karachi, Pakistan, 107                        Klein, Milton, 435
Kardashev, Nikolai S., 364                    Kleinknecht, Kenneth S., 265
496                                   INDEX

Kleinsaechter, Dr. Hans, 263               Langley Medal (Smithsonian Institution),
Knauf, Dr. George M., 80,423                 166
                                                                            A
Knepton, James C., Jr., 174                Langley Research Center ( m c ) NASA),
Knudsen, Morrison, 102                          4 , 71, 135, 142, 181-182, 1 8, 216,
                                                 2
Kock, Dr. Winston Edward, 244, 304, 427         230,260,276
Koelle, Dietrich E., 197                     contract, 52,93
Koelle, H. H., 401                           experiment, 132, 135,290
Kollmorgen Gorp., 269                        facilities, 159, 182
Kollsman Instrument Co., 218                 inspection week, 181,188
Komarov, Vladimir Mikhailovich, 348-349,     management, 177
  355,359,469                                 organization, 177
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 30                     research, 189-190, 223, 319, 327
Konecci, Dr. Eugene B., 124,166,309-310,     test, 150
  361,376,419,420-421                      Langmuir probe, 373
Koppers Co., Tnc., Malm Construction       Lankeneau Hospital, 129
  Dept, 247, 406                           Lansche, Jane Elizabeth, 237
Korovin, Y. A., 396                        Lanzo, Chester D., 25
Kosygin, Premier Alexi (U.S.S.R.) , 353,           See Langley Research Center.
                                           URC.
  413,437                                  Large Orbital Research Laboratory
Kotelnikov, Vladimir, 321                     (Lorl), 122, 145
Kozyrev, Dr. Nikolai A., 180,316           Lariat (Laser Radar Intelligence Acquisi-
Kraft, Christopher C., Jr., 63,265           tion Technology), 181
Kraft, Dr. Robert, 401                     Las Cruces, N. Mex., 353
Kramer, James J., 328                      Laser, 155,257,346
Kramer, S. B., 200                            deep space
Kranish, Arthur, 88                             acquisition, 5
Krmnaya Zvezda (see also Red Star), 74,         tracking techniques, 5, 109-110, 386,
  118,131,253-254,273                            407
Kreplin, Robert W., 45                       infrared rays, 112,325
Kronoglrd Range, Sweden, 241, 277, 283,      use of, 93, 121-122, 168, 181, 258, 383
  287-288                                  Laser plasma diagnostic probe, 159
Krylov, Marshal Nikolai I., 394            Laser Radar Intelligence Acquisition
Krzeminski, Dr. W., 401                      Technology (Lariat), 181
KSC. See Kennedy Space Center, NASA.       Laser radar system, 113,278
Kubesch, Maj. Sidney J. (WAF), 315         Laser rifle, 94
Kuhrt, Welsey, 26                          LASL. See Los Alamos Scientific Labora-
Kuiper, Dr. Gerard P., 148, 267,271,275,     tory.
  299,301,331,336,347                      Lasv. See Low Altitude Supersonic Ve-
Kurashika Astronomical Observatory           hicle.
   (Japan), 210                            Launch Complex 19 (KSC-MILA) , 20, 38
Kurnit, Norman A., 383                     Launch Complex 20 (KSC-MILA) ,269
Kuzin. Alexander. 202                      Launch Complex 39 (KSC-MILA) ,291
Kuznetsov, Prof. A G ,
                   : . 309                 Launch vehicle
Kuznetsov, Dr. Oleg, 355                     development, 309,
Kwajalein Island, Pacific, 239                  contract, 253, 260, 319
6 2 9 (U.S.S.R. aircraft), 212               expenditure, 99
Labor, 24, 141                               military, 213
Labor, Dept. of, 24,218,302                  operations and capability, 176, 234, 237
Lacklen, Robert J., 341,439                Laurence. William L.. 19
Lagos, Nigeria, 158                        Lausche, Sen. Frank,’201
Laika (dog, U.S.S.R.), 152                 Lava fields, lunar surface, 276, 299, 301
Laird, Rep. Melvin, 115                    Lavrentev, Mikhail A., 21
Lambda ~n (Japanese sounding rocket),      Lawrence Radiation Laboratorv (Univ. of
  245                                        Calif.), 1,19
Laminar flow, 123
                                           Lawyer, Capt. Richard E. (USAF), 304
Landing, computer, 411
                                           Lazar, James, 229
Landing impact test, 313
                                           Lear, John, 307,347
Landing instrumentation, 259               Lear Siegler, Inc., Electronics Instru-
Landing requirements, jet transport, 150     mentation Div., 102
Landing pad, instant, 232                  Leavell, C. H., and Co., 13,62,102
Landing site, 303                          Lebedev, Dr. Vladimir, 355
Land’s End (U.K.), 110                     Legislative Reference Service, Library of
Lang, Dave W ,. 277                          Congress, 301,310
                                           Leighty, George W., 69
Langley AFB, Va., 176
                                                                                   497
                                       INDEX
Lem. See L u n p Excursion Module.           Lincoln, Neb., 247
Lem Truck (Lunar Excursion Module)           Lincoln Laboratory, 269,433,435
   (see also Apollo), 105                    Lindbergh, Charles A., 326-327
LeMay, Gen. Curtis E. (USAF), 44,66,69,      Linde Div., Union Carbide Corp., 401
   72,92,140,315,401,430                     Ling-Temco-Vought, hc., Range Systems
L e m o n , R. M., 215                         Div., 88, 106, 216, 217, 236, 437
Leningrad, U.S.S.R., 261                     Lingle, Walter L., Jr,, 144, 173
Lerner, Max, 352                             Link Foundation of New York, 200
Lesa (Lunar Exploration System for           Link Group, General Precision, Inc., 430
  Apollo) ,74,170                            Link, Marilyn, 200
Leslie Miller, Inc., 127                     Lipscomb, Rep. Glen P., 59
Lessman, Richard C., 236                     Liquid Missile Propellants Symposium,
Leutkirch, West Germany, 283                   379
Levin, Boris, 272                            Liston, Sonny, 81
Levitt, Dr. I. M., 205                       Little Joe II (booster), 89, 90, 175, 410,
Levy, Lillian, 86                              483,487
Lewis Research Center (LRC) (NASA), 25,      Little Rock, Ark., 278,369-370
     62, 78, 115, 142, lS8, 214, 219, 256,   Littlewood, William, 236
     276,403                                 Litton Industries, 159,224
  contract, 119,367                          Livermore Radiation Laboratory, 246-247
  experiment, 124                            Lloyd-Davies, David, 253
  management, 311312                         Llrv. See Lunar Landing Research Ve-
  organization, 328                            hicle.
   Plum Brook Station, 221,224,317           Loads, aircraft, 156
  programs, 230,236,444                        helicopter, 216
  research, 293                              Lockheed Aircraft Corp., 31, 216
  test, 163,197,216,444                        A-11 ( Y F - l 2 A ) , 85-86,92,154,254, 328
  zero-gravity facility, 62                    contracts, 85-86, 405
Lexington, Va., 188                            SR-71, 429
Ley, Dr. Willy, 64                             supersonic transport, 13, 28, 183, 201,
Libonati, Rep. Roland V., 70                      373-374, 405
Library of Congress, 239, 301, 310             u-2, 383
Lick Observatory, 155                          XH-SlA, 420
Liege Univ. (Belgium), 432                     XH-SlN, 216,422
Lievens, Edward J., Jr., 150                 Lockheed-California Co., 80, 135, 291-292
Life detector instruments, 169               Lockheed-Georgia Co., 207, 379
Life (magazine), 405                         Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., 9,103,247,
Life preserver, 354                            281,343,393,406
                                             Lockheed Propulsion Co., 193,331,402
Life science (see also Bioscience), 194,
     208, 309410, 350                        Lof, George, 275
                                             Loginov, Yevgeny F., 241
   atmospheric pressure, 56
   blood pressure, 178,243                   Loki-Dart (sounding rocket), 70-71
   disease. communicable. 249                London, U.K., 5, 46-47, 59, 129, 158, 161,
   genetiis, 169,171,179                        189,205,218,314,330
   heart, 172,174, %l,  243                  London Gliding Club, 432
   helium environmental effects, 309         London Univ. (U.K.) ,424
   nervous system, 169,178                   Long, Dr. S. Burman, 207-208
   nutrition, 151                            Long, Sen. Russell B., 79,434
   optics, 48
            .                                Longmont, Colo., 166
   oxygen environmentpl test, 44, 87, 130,   Loory, Stuart H., 145
      174
                                             Lorl. See Large Orbital Research Lab-
   radiation, 48,72,169,248
                                               oratory.
   weightlessness, 56,89,129,171,174,179,
                                             Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (LASL),
      248,309
                                               63, 175, 229, 299-300, 320, 444
Life support systems, 122
                                             Los Angeles, Calif., 5, 8, 66, 74-75, 121,
Lift-fan aircraft (XV-SA), 251
                                                165-166, 168,244
Liftingbody glider, 71
                                             Los Angeles Times, 262
Lifting body space vehicle, 224
Light beam communications system, 142        Losey, Robert M., Award, 376-377
Light intensity measurement, 13,243          Louden, Frederic A,, 90
Lighthill, Michael V., 279                   Louisiana, 324
Lightning damage, 289,294                    Love, Gov. John A., 58
Ligida, Dr. Myron G H,278
                       ..                    Lovelace Foundation for Medical Educa-
L i l See Lunar International Laboratory.      tion and Research, 175-176
498                                    INDEX

Lovelace, Dr. W. Randolph, 11, 1 3 168-
                                 4,            manned flight and landing, 13, 20-21,
                                                    71, 77, 141, 158, 199, 206, 215, 228,
  165, i'5-176, 187,443
                                                    262, 267-268, 268-269, 275-276,
Love?l, Sir Bernard, 76,109,242,246,266,
                                                    276.316-317.324.354-355.355.379
                                                                                .,
  273., 340. 357
           .
LOVPCJ x d . James A., Jr. (USN), 102,            simulation, 10,'181-182
  167,263, 336                               Lunar research, 362
Low Altitude Supersonic Vehicle (Lasv) ,     Lunar Research, Conference on Geological
  gnx                                          Problems in, 180
                                             Lunar science, 271-272
LoG,-George M., 17,30-31,65,68-69,206,
                                             Lunar surface locomotion, 197
  209, 347, 356
                                             Lunar telescope, 72
Lowell Observatory, 78,106,203-204,205,
                                             Lunar transport ferry, reusable, 281
  316, 401
                                             Lundberg, B. K. O., 194-195
Lowerv Electric. Inc.. 39
                                             Lunde, Barbara, 181
Lowman, Dr. Paul, 170
                                             Lundin, Bruce T., 163
Lowry, Dr. Romney H., 24
                                             LUNIK III (U.S.S.R. lunar probe), 150-151,
LRBM. See Missile, ballistic, long-range.
                                               152
LRC. See Lewis Research Center (NASA).
                                             LUNIK IV (U.S.S.R. lunar probe), 159
Lucas, William R., 352353
                                             Luster, Project, 387
Luedecke, M/G Alvin R. (USAF Ret.), 224
                                             Luyten, D .Willem J., 154
                                                      r
Lufthansa-German Airlines, 96
                                             Lyman-alpha radiation experiment, 15
Lunar (see also Moon)
                                             Lynch, James J., 229
  base, manned, 73, 95, 105, 143, 389
                                             Lyster, Theodore C., Award, 175-176
  crater, 154, 180, 267,271, 275-276, 298-
                                             M-1 (rocket engine), 78, 80
    299, 364
                                             M-2 (lifting-body), 71,201,220,308
  environment, 13
                                             MA-4 (Project Mercury), 225
  exploration, 20-21, 170, 180, 253, 262,
                                             MA-5, 225
     276. 366-367
                                             MA-6, 2%
  graviG,70
                                             MA+, 225
  photographs, 271, 272, 274, 275-276,
                                             MA--8, 225
     287-288,301,306-307.307,357
                                             MA-9, 225,247,273
  probe. 152
                                             Macalester College, 33
  surface, 164-165, 180, 197. 203, 263,
                                             McClellan, Sen. John L., 430
    267, 271, 272,275-276, 287-288, 298-
                                             McCone, John, 119
     299,301,306-307,331
                                             McConnell, Gen. John P. (USAF), 333,430
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, 223
                                             McCormick, B. B., and Sons, Inc., 329
Lunar clock, 205
                                             McCusker, Donald F., 425
Lunar eclipse, 424,426                       MacDill AFB. Fla.. 404
Lunar Excursion Module (Lem), (see           McDivitt, Capt. James A. (USAF) , 263
  also Apolb spacecraft), 39,73,100,139,     McDonald, Frank B., 352
  183, 267-268, 298-299, 306, 344, 357,      McDonald Observatory, 148
  358                                        McDonnell Aircraft Gorp., lll, 182, 226,
Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) Test Fa-          240,261
  cilities (NASA), 31                        McDonnell, James S., 240
                                             McElroy, Neil H., 358
Lunar Exploration Symposium, 215
                                             MeGill Univ. (Canada), 10,29,411
Lunar Exploration System for Apollo. See
                                             McGovern, Sen. George, 75,81-82
  Lesa.
                                             McGrath, Thomas L., 59
Lunar hopper (helicopter device), 251
                                             McKay, John B., 103, 174, 227, 297, 352,
Lunar International Laboratory (Lil) ,         380, 399
  308309,314,389                             Mackay. Radio and Telegraph Co., 55
Lunar Landing Research Facility (LBRC),      McKee, Col. Daniel (USAF), 55
  181-182                                    McKee, Robert E., 31
                                             McKee, Gen. William F (WAF, Bet.),
                                                                        .
Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LIrv),
  138, 197, 218, 368, 377, 396, 4 0
                                  4            266, 304
                                             MacKenzie, John P., 61
Lunar map, 136,220-221,223
                                             McKenzie Pass, Cascade Mountains, Oreg.,
Lunar Orbiter (probe), 47,69,171,276
                                               296
Lunar program (US.) (see also Moon
                                             MacKenzie, Vernon G., 230
     and Lunar), 6-7,35-36,131,152,188-
                                             McLafferty, George H., 26,108
     189,189,254,314
                                             McMillan, Brockway, 354
  appropriations, 12-13,20-21,40, 45-46,
                                             McMorrow, M / G Francis J. (USA). 103
     244
                                             McNamara, Robert S., 9, 28, 66,-92, 98,
  cooperation, 12,35-36
  criticism, 131, 194, 245-246, 258, 362       119, 135, 206, 240, 248, 257, 287, 322-
  importance of, 63-64, 271,271-272            323,345,353,388,404,414,417,429430
                                                                               499
                                      IND)EX
                                                Mission Simulation and Training Fa.
Macomber, John W., 25
                                                   ciliQ, 8
Madagascar, Malagasy Republic, 306
                                                support services, 81-82
Madrid, Spain, 31
Magic Mountain Laboratory, 368               manned space missions
                                                Apollo, 24, 43, 77, 116, 237, 239,244,
Maglic, Dr. Bogdan C., 352
                                                   292,297.299.314
Magnet coil, 380
                                                Gemi&, 5 -25,-43,57, 131, 168, 182,
                                                           ,
Magnetic equator, 31,M
                                                   193, 212, 239, 259, 264-265, 276,
Magnetic field, 2 50, 169, 174, 245, 250,
                 ,
                                                   292,294,329
 379
Magnetic fluid, 142                             Ma w 9
                                                space stations, 80,122,287
Magnetic hammer, 329
                                                tracking. 5
Magnetic storm, 50
                                             organizatsn, 17,54,91,242
Magnetic tape, 82,1%
                                             research, 81,103,158,172,188,230
Magnetometer, 31,103,325
                                            Manned space flight, 26,%. . 118,152. 1 7
                                                                            . . 9.
 rubidium vapor, 210,395
                                                294,301,326,-340
Magnetometer hammer, 439
                                             appropriations, 20,46,185
Magnetosphere noise, 125
                                             capability, 184
Magnuson, Sen. Warren G., 38
                                             circumlunar, 173
Maguire, Charles A., Associates, 410
                                             cooperation, 2
Majunga, Madagascar, 306
                                             cost of, 20-21,23,99,104
Malagasy Republic, 306
                                             hazards, 48
Malan Construction Co., 247, 406
                                             lunar bases, 95
Malaysia, 263
                                             lunar exploration, 67,105
Malfunction detection system, 13, 121
                                             lunar landing (see also Lunar program),
Malina, Dr. Frank J., 389
                                                   69,274,301
Malta Test Station (GE), 70
                                                appropriations, 20, 285
Manpowered flight, 433
                                                criticism, 194,269
Manchester, U.K., 85
                                                goal, 23,46,52,300
Manchester College of Science and Tech-
                                                training, 296
 nology (u.K.), 403
                                             objectives, 217
Mandelkorn, Joseph, 202, 276
                                             program, 5253, 156
Mandiovsky, Dr. Boris, 390                   R&D, 65
Manila, Philippines, 332                    Manned Space Flight Meeting, Third, 375,
Manned Interplanetary Missions Studies       377
 Performed by Industry for NASA in          Manned space shuttle service, 24,135
 1963/64, Symposium on, 29                  Manned space station. See Space station,
                                             manned.
Manned Orbital Research Laboratory
  (Morl) ,93, 189                           Manov, Dr. George G., 102
                                            Manpower
Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), 74,
                                             civil aviation, 55
    146,206,307,429
                                             scientific and engineering, 7 246, 262-
                                                                           ,
 booster, 245, 429
                                                263
  contract, 192,197,257
                                            Mansfield, Sen. Mike, 221
 Gemini B, 261
                                            Manton, William I., 174
 hearings, 44,65,92,l08-109
                                            Map
 management, 11,41,123
                                             lunar, 220, 223
 plans for, 26, 45, 90, %, 139-140, 209
                                             weather, 240
 proposed merger with Apollo-X, 382,418
                                            Maples, Hoyt, 415
  purpose. 2 4-5, 8-9, 4 , 68, 91-92, 99,
              ,           4
                                            Mar. See Radar, Multi-function Array.
    112,211
                                            Marconi Co., 424
 test, 174,195
                                            Mare Cognitum (RANGER VII lunar impact
Manned Orbiting Telescope (Mot), 327         site), 304
Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC) (NASA),      Marine Sciences, Institute of, 100
    16,33,66,116,121,134,207,223,263,       Mariner (spacecraft), 82, 199, 21, 276,
                                                                               .2
    265,302                                  300301
 astronant training, 5,25,43,66,100,159,    MARINER 11 (Venus probe), 152, 172, 184,
    263,336                                  318
  contracts, 277
                                            MARINER 111 (Mars probe), 378, 459, 467
    construction, 8,10,102,268,328
                                            MARINER N (Mars probe), 393, 4 3 4 44, 4
    service, 320-321
                                             course, 398-399,407,422
    study, 81,292,404
                                             Geminid stream, 415,426
 facilities, 3,25,74,77,115,237
                                              launch, 397398,460,468
    Center Support Facilities, 8 268
                                ,
                                             performance, 431,434
    Florida Operations, 54,299
                                            Markey, Dr. Winston R, 289
    Mission Control Center, IO, 206
500                                     INDEX

                                              Matthews Corp., 224
Marks, Leonard H., 242
                                              Matthews, Prof. Paul T., 71-72
Marquardt Corp., 368
Mars (planet), 1, 105, 180, 187, 393          Matthews, Dr. Thomas A., 120
 atmosphere, 8, 35, 48, 88-89, 106, 148,      Maui Island, Hawaii, 57
     168-169, 180, 336                        Mauna Loa, Hawaii, 275-276
                                              Maxwell, B/G Jewel1 C. (USAF), 3
  exploration, 106,359,391
                                              Mayevsky, Victor, 352
  flight
                                              Mayo, Ivan W., 358
     manned, 9,158,185,235
                                              Mazdiyasni, Khodabakhsh S., 153
     unmanned, 171, 199, 217, 257, 276,
        295, 301, 324, 470-471, 474-475       Mazur, Daniel G., 352
                                              MBA. See Missouri Bankers Association.
  life, 8, 48, 143-144, 148, 168-169, 180,
                                              MBS. See Mutual Broadcasting System,
     208,210,259,437438
  surface, 88-89,106,148                       Inc.
MABS I (U.S.S.R. probe), 172                  Mds. See Satellite, Micrometeoroid De-
                                               tection.
Mars spacecraft, 9, 106, 143-144, 168-169,
                                              Mead, Merrill H., 202
  309
Marshak, Prof. Robert E., 348                 Meany, George, 323,331
Marshall, Gen. George C., 77                  Medal For Outstanding Leadership, NASA,
Marshall, George C., Research Library          258
   (VMI), 188                                 Medal of Recognition (USA), 136
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)           Medicine (see also Life sciences), 204,
      (NASA), 29, 114, 122, 29-292, 3 2        265, 397
                                        0,
                                              Medium Orbital Research Laboratory
     320,329,397
  c-i rocket engine, 399-400                     (Morl). See Orbital Research Lab-
  contract, 73,120,424                         oratory, Medium.
                                              Meehan, Dr. John P., 243
     construction, 102,402
                                              Meeker, Leonard C., 116
     study, 183, 248-249, 253, 281, 302,
                                              Meinel, Dr. Aden B., 3-4
        352
                                              Meinel, Carolyn P., 3 4
     support services, 14, 59, 84-85, 238-
        239                                   Melbourne, Australia, 139
  facilities, 77                              Memorandum of Understanding
                                               international, 70-71, 95, 258, 362, 375
  mankgement, 73,120,367
  oreanization. 5344.109                       national, 57, 237, 319
  S&rn (bodster), 8, 14, 49, 73, 84, 104,     Mengel, John, 435
     109, 114, 120, 149, 159, 189, 212,213,   Mercury (planet), 1, 105
     235, 247, 248, 294, 302, 330             Mercury (project), 33,46-CE7,99-100,111,
                                                   129, 157, 194, 207, 225, 228, 247,
Saturn Flight Evaluation Group, 49
  studies, 105, 224                                265,384
Marshall Star, 8                                award, 317,325
                                               flight, 4, 190, 273, 317, 318, 325
Martin Co., 5, 10, 39, 155-156, 192, 197,
                                              Mercury propellant, 158-159
  205,217,240,245,259
                                              Mercurv-Atlas exhibit. 145
Martin Marietta Corp., 123,171
                                              Merrit; Island Launch Area (MILA)
  contract, 3,74,308
  Space Systems Div., 286                          (KSC) ,109,120,354
                                                facilities
Martlet (Canada4.S. rocket), 10,29
Maryland, Univ. of, 162                            construction, 28,38,39, 131, 164, 181,
Maser. 295                                           268,328,329,369
                                                   support services, 54-55, 88, 148, 201,
MaApOptics, Inc., 94
                                                     222, 299
Mason-Rust Co., 238-239,414
Massachusetts. 312                              launch complex, 38,268,291
                                                strike, 59, 65, 124, 126, 128, 131, 133,
Massachusetts' Institute of Technology
                                                   141,424
      (MIT), 9, 22, 56, 154, 237, 245-
                                              Message Multiplexer, 330
     246, 247, 289,331, 336,339, 362,379,
                                              Messerschmitt Co. (W.    Germany), 265
     397
                                              Metal fatigue, 103
  Lincoln Laboratory, 269,433
                                              Metal fiber, 197
Massie, Sir Harrie, 118
                                              Metal fracture toughness, 223
Matador, 241
                                              Meta-planning, 161
Mateos, Pres. Adolfo Lopez (Mexico), 273
                                              Meteor, 1445, 52, 171, 174, 241, 414, 415
Materials, 156,181, M,   303
  heat-resistant, 181-182, ! X 289
                             &,               Meteorite, 121, 128, 132, 133, 171, 190,
                                               280
  structural, 77,147,207,257
Mathematics, 255-256                          Meteoroid, 194, 197,286
                                                hazards, 210,389
Mathews, Charles W , 20,212,329,365-
                     .
  366                                         Meteoroid detectioq satellite, 380
                                                                                    501
                                        INDEX

                                              Milovidov, I. V., 374
Meteorological data
                                              Milwaukee, Wis., 47
 acquisition and processing, 43, 49, 196,
                                              Minnaert, Marcel Gilles Josef, 155
   223
                                              Minneapolis Honeywell Regulator Co.
 exchange, 1-2
                                                See Honeywell Co.
Meteorological Institute (Univ. of Stock-
 holm), 288-289                               Minneapolis, Minn., 312413, 313
                                              Minnesota, Univ. of, 154
Meteorological satellite. See Nimbus,
                                              Minor AFB, N. Dak., 51
 Tiros, Tiros Operational System.
                                              Minton, Dr. John Peter, 112
Meteorology (see also Weather), 190,204,
                                              Minuteman (missile), 8, 9, 66, 89, 166-
  908
MZLsystem, 5,339                                   167, 314-315
                                                bases. 255
Metrology, 41
Metzler, Allen J., 142                          laun& 15, 32, 62, 63,7a79, 79, 84, 89,
                                                       122, 264, 330, 378
Mexico, 46
                                                   failure, 116
Mexico City, Mexico, 39,241
Mexico, Gulf of, 49,102,167                        I, 330
                                                   11. 328. 367.424
Mexico-US. Commission for Space Obser-
 vations, 12th Session, 39                    Mira ired’starj, 223
                                              Mishkol’tse, U.S.S.R., 253
Miami, Fla., 112,175,190, 194,323
                                              Miskovskv. George, 175,244
Miami, Univ. of, 100
                                                                  -
                                              Missile. 303
Michigan, 13
                                                air-td-air, 86, 331
Michigan, Univ. of, 30, 135, 137,210, 264,
 391,393                                        antisatellite, 330, 370371
                                                ballistic, 46-47, 98-99, 129, 136-137,
Michoud Operations (NASA), 84, 127,149,
  173, 211, 212, 230, 238-239, 304, 316-               182-183
                                                   intercontinental (Icbm) , reliability,
  317,324,402,405,414,424
                                                       9, 69, 112, 136-137, 170-171, 238,
Micrometeoroid, 118,263,283
Micrometeoroid Detection Satellite (Mds)               409
  (see also Pegasus), 138                           long-range (Lrbm), 15
Micrometeoroid dust impact, 131                  explosion, 181
“Micromouse burps” calibration, 324              guided, 52, 280,328
Microscope, electron, 326                        military application, foreign, 52
Microwave communications system, 143             nuclear, 213, 246-247
Midwest, 75,211,261,330-331                      reliability, 6, 9, 28, 33, 69, 136-137, 141
Midwest Governors’ Conference, 312413,           transport system, 238
  313                                         Missile, Ballistic, and Space Technology,
Midwest Office (NASA), proposal for, 102-        Ninth Symposium, 284-285
  103                                         Missile-bearing submarine, 136-137
MiG (jet fighter) ,439                        “Missile gap”, 441
Mikhailov, A. A., 203                         Missile installations, 393
Mikoyan, President Anastas I. (U.S.S.R.) ,    Missile Sites Labor Commission, Presi-
  437                                            dent’s (MSLC), 24-25,65,124,131
Mikoyan, Artem I., 363                        Missiles and Rockets, 269,281, 317
m L A . See Merritt Island Launch Area.
                                                 missile, 52, 282
                             -
Milan, Univ. of (Italy),.Polytechnic Insti-
                      -                          space
  tute, 127
                                                     cooperation, 311
Military bases, satellite photographs, 195,
                                                     facilities, 58, 67
   910
                                                     plans, 19, 143-144,144, 199,220,247,
 MZ&ry capability, 89,333
                                                        295
 Military Electronics Convention (IEEE) ,
                                                     programs, 29, 164, 165, 181, 419
  51-52
                                                     research, 78, 129, 274, 383, 409,428-
 Military procurement and R&D authoriza-
                                                        429, 429
  tion bill, 69, 72, 79, 81, 82, 98, 101
 Military Requirements Review Group,           Mission Control Center (MSC), 10
   USAF/NASA, 319                              Mission Simulation and Training Facility
 Military Sea Transportation Service              (MSC), 8
   (MSTS), 64-65
                                               Mississippi Test Facility (MTF) (NASA),
 Milky Way Galaxy, 23,314
                                                     51, -77
 Miller, Bernie P., 353
                                                  construction, 13, 61, 121, 127, 203, 216,
 Miller, Mre. Betty, 273,317
                                                     247. 434
 Miller, Rep. George P., 2412-13,15,67,
                                                  support services, 14
   126,136,150,163,176,292-293,298,311
                                               Missouri Bankers Association (MBA) , 173
 Miller, Col. Robert C. (USAF), 376377
                                               Missouri Cotton Producers Association,
 Mder, Rep. W l i m 313
                 ila,
                                                  1%
 Bilillikan, Dr. C a k Blanchard, 155
                  lr
                                           INDEX

Missouri Valley College (Marshall, Mo.) ,       Moses, Robert, 310
                                                Moss, William W., 349
  1%
      See Massachusetts Institute of Tech-      Mosser Construction Co., 367
MIT.
                                                Mot. See Manned Orbiting Telescope.
 nology.
Mmu. See Modular Maneuvering Unit.              Motion picture, 382
Moberly, Mo., 291                               Motorola, Inc., Western Military Elec-
Mock. Mrs. Geraldine. 142.164                    tronics Div.. 412
Mod& Maneuvering Unit (Mmu) ,313                Mt. Haleakala, Maui Island, Hawaii, 57
                                                Mt. Kobau, B.C., 396
Moffatt, Dr. John W., 155
                                                Mt. Palomar Observatory, 120, 179-180,
Moffett Field. Calif.. 231
                                                   326, 398
Mohole, Project (NSF), 21
                                                Mt. Wilson Observatory, 148, 180, 398
Mojave, Calif., 19
                                                Mrazek, Dr. William A., 109
Mol. See Manned Orbiting Laboratory.
                                                MSC. See Manned Spacecraft Center.
Molab (mobile laboratory), 251
                                                MSFC. See Marshall Space Flight Center.
Mold, 73
                                                MSTS. See Military Sea Transportation
Molecular densities, 241
                                                  Service.
Molybdenum, 146
                                                MTO. See Mississippi Test Operations,
Moms. See Satellite, Multiple Orbit-Mul-
 tiple.                                            NASA.
                                                Mud Lake, Nev., 66
Mongolia, 354
                                                Muden, So. Africa, 226
Monitor Systems, Inc., 440
                                                Mueller, Dr. George E., 120, 187, 218, 234
Monomethylhydrazine, 400
                                                 Apollo, 54,74,77,104-105,157-158,173,
Monroney, Sen. A. S. (Mike), 78, 82, 181,
                                                     194,237,299-300,364,   387
  310
                                                 Gemini, 68-69, 74,316,356
Montoya, Rep. Joseph M., 320
Monument. 132. 384                               hearings, 69, 104
              ,
             I~



                                                 lunar program, 52-53,369
Moon (see also Lunar program), 28, 70,
                                                 Saturn, 138,173,199
       102,125,188
                                                 space flight, manned, 184,206
  and cloud relationship. 288
                                                 space program, 53, 326, 368-369
  atmosphere, 106-107 -
                                                Muhleman, Dr. Duane O., 165
  craters, 154, 180,267,271,299,364,441
                                                Murphy, Charles J. B., 441
  exploration of, 2 35, 69, 72, 81, 106,
                    ,
                                                Murphy, Dr. Thomas P., 4,395
       156, 170, 230, 240, 251, 272, 275, 297
  landing                                       Murray, Dr. Bruce C., 179
    manned, 2, 6 16, 20, 45, 52, 54, 95,        Mururoa, Tuamotu Islands, 14, 266
                ,
                                                Museum of History and Technology
       100. 104-105. 116. 132. 152. 173.
                                                  (Smithsonian Institution), 241,282
       189; 204, 2 k 2 0 7 ; 258; 261; 268;
                                                Museum of Modem Art, 230
      278,321
    unmanned, 156-157, 176-177, 258             Museum of National Science (Houston),
  map of, 220,223                                  244
                                                                                           ,
  photographs, 271-272, 273, 307, 460           Mutual Broadcasting System, Inc.   (MBS)
  surface of, 69, 78, 103, 106, 128, 156,          149
                                                Muzzaffarpur, India, 133
    164-165, 180, 203, 220-221, 223, 237,
                                                ~ ~ - 3 2(Northrop flying wing), 239
    267, 272-273, 275-276, 299, 307, 331,                  4
                                                Mylar, 141
    426427
  volcanic activity, 180                        Myrtle Beach, S.C., 309
                                                                             .
                                                N-on-p (negative-on-positive) See Solar
  water on, 223, 438
"Moon Blink", 426                                 cell, radiation-resistant.
                                                NAA. See National Aeronautic Associa-
Moon Harvest, Project (NASA), 128
Moon suots. red. 78. 203-204. 205                 tion.
Moore, George S.., 19'                          NACA. See National Advisory Committee
Morgan, Williim C., 82                            for Aeronautics.
                                                NAE. See National Academy of Engineer-
Morl. See Manned Orbital Research Lab-
  oratory.                                        ing.
Morl. See Orbital Research Laboratory,          NAFEC. See National Aviation Facilities
  Medium.                                         Experimental Center. FAA.
Moron A r Base, Spain, 5
        i                                       Nakamura, Seitaro, 394
                                                NAPCA. See National Association of Pro-
Morris, David, 383
Morris, Thomas D., 291                            fessional Contract Administrators.
Morrison-Knndsen Co., Inc., 15                  NAR. See National Association of Rock-
Morrison, Dr. Richard B., 210                      etry.
Morse, Rep. F. Bradford, 339                    NAS. See National Academy of Sciences.
Morse, Sen. Wayne L, 51
                     .                                   See National Academy of Sci-
                                                NAS-NRC.
                                                  ences-National Research Council.
Moscow (U.S.S.R.), 10, 21, 34, 54, 59,
  130,131,132,143,174,204-205,208,210,          NASA. See National Aeronautics and
 226,289                                          Space Administration.
                                        INDEX                                      503
            Space Nuclear Propulsion Office   National Aeronautics and Space Act of
NASA-AEC
             63, 140,248,311, 327, 385         1958, 5,44,217,282,294, 311, 331,338,
  (SNPO),
NASA Authorization Act (see also NASA,         377
  appropriations), 247                        National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
NASA Board of Inquiry (Kelley Board),             istration (NASA), 25-26, 35, 51-52,
  151                                             54,71-72,102,117,136,154,156,171,
NASA Central Instrumentation Facility,            206-207, 214, 216, 235, 261, 294-295,
   MILA,28                                        300-301,308,310-311
NASA Contributions Award, 276                  agreement, 43,64,237,258
NASA Deep Space Network, 31                       international, 1 , 59, 67, 71
                                                                  1
NASA-DOD Aeronautics and Astronautics          appropriations, 12, 20, 46,115, 180, 183,
      Coordinating Board (AACB) ,90               185-186,228,237,242,266,276,285-
NASA-DOD agreement on operational track-          286
  ing ships, 64-65
                                                astronaut, 10, 209,263, 3 6 318
                                                                           0,
NASA-DOD-Dept. of Commerce Geodetic             award, 77, 82, 150, 180, 276, 352
   Satellite Policy Board, 325
                                                budget, 7,49,66,181,223
NASA Electronics Research Center Site
                                                contract, 86, 162, 189, 214, 237, 261, 281
   Evaluation Committee (see also Elec-
                                                   booster, 27, 84, 160, 211, 212, 213
   tronics Research Center, NASA), 23,113
                                                   engine, 115, 116, 120, 242, 294
NASA Electronics Research Task Group,
                                                   facilities, 39,61,63, 143,224
   304
                                                   fuel, 14, 77
NASA Group Achievement Award, 77, 221
                                                   ground systems, 103, 132, 176, 216,
NASA Historical Advisory Committee, 178,
                                                      325
  322
                                                   incentive, 171,173,342
NASA-JPL Tracking Station, Goldstone,
                                                   spacecraft, 65, 90, 116, 134, 171, 193,
   Calif.. 37. 143
                                                      306
NASA Manded-Space Flight Experiments
                                                   space equipment, 142, 143, 177, 218
   Board, 137
                                                   study, 33, 105, 208, 248, 259, 292
NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership,
                                                   support services, 58,85, 148,168,236,
   258
                                                      237
NASA Midwest Office, proposal for, 102,
                                                cooperation, 176, 231
   145
                                                   DOD, 51,64,167,176,325
NASA New Orleans Coordinating Commit-
                                                      application, 33
   tee, 316,324
                                                      Gemini, 12,82, 192
NASA Ninth Semiannual Report to the
                                                      Mol, 10,68, 90
   Congress, 245
                                                   DOD-AEC, 231
NASA North Eastern Office, 304
                                                   USAF, 55, 80, 96, 117, 171, 206, 237,
NASA Policy Planning Board, 166                       257, 292, 302, 319, 322, 354
NASA Science and Technology Advisory               USN, 71, 292-93
   Committee for Manned Space Flight,                 ONR, 3496, @6
   120, 237                                     cooperation, international, 96-97, 24Q,
NASA Summer Faculty Fellowship, 214                   324
NASA-SUPARCO Project (see also Judi-               Argentina, 403
   Dart), 107                                      Australia, 84, 103
                                                   Canada, 11, 23, 30, 42, 47, 62, 141,
 NASA Test Complex Beta, 403
                                                      2%
NASC. See National Aeronautics and
                                                   Denmark, 56
   Space Council.
                                                   ELDO, 269-270
Natal, Brazil, 375                                 ESRO, 258
 National Academy of Engineering (NAE),            France, 95
    12, 154, 416                                   India, 6, 31,70
 National Academy of Sciences (NASI, 12,           Italy, 115
      31,154-155,245,281,416                       Japan, 115
   agreements, 2, 182                               Netherlands, 278
    Panel on Astronomical Facilities, 385          Norway, 56
   report, 109                                      Pakistan, 107,403
   sonic boom, 183,227                              Spain, 31
    Space Science Board, 116,151,158,210,           Sweden, 99,205,299
      356, 366, 391                                 U.S.S.R., 17,27,30,54,59,75
 National Academy of Sciences-National           criticism of, 56, 201, 203, 207
    Research Council (NAS-NRC), 308             economy, 38
 National Advisory Committee for Aero-          education, 136
    nautics (NACA), 136, 147, 154,171, 182,     expenditures, 202
   326                                           experiment, 71,77,137,1%
504                                     INDEX

National Aeronautics and Space                    Saturn, 238,330
  Administration-Continued                        space, 8, 20-21, 26, 35-37, 49, 50-51,
 facilities, 103, 109                                5243, 69, 71, 77, 94-95, 98, 106,
    construction, 15, 38, 61, 63, 77, 102,           117, 141,199,206,228,258,324
       136, 164                                   space station, 8, 80, 90
    ground system, 132                            Syncom, 286, 290-291,326
    location, 91, 327                             Tos, 193
    support services, 54                          Tracking and data acquisition, 71,
 funds. 4  8                                         202-203
 grants, 1 , 156, 162, 199, 211, 216, 220,
            1                                  report, 5, 35, 39, 4344, 67, 95, 101, 104,
    239, 241, 245, 259, 280. 331                  142, 217, 235, 257, 263, 306
 information dissemination, 255, 282           research, 47, 53, 78, 277, 293, 326-327
 launch, 8, 258                                   aeronautical, 78, 108, 117-118, 187-
    balloon. 9 . 291                                 188, 292-293
               6
                                                  fuel, 246
    develoimenc launch vehicle, 32, 192,
                                                  nuclear, 26-27, 83, 103, 229, 248
      227, 321,414415
    failure. 9.41.109.215.227                     DroDulsion, 23. 223-224
                                                scieniist and en’gineer, 94-95, 110-111,
    probe, ’interplanetary,’378, 397
                                                  196
    probe, lunar, 34, 263
                                               standards, reliability and quality, 143,
    satellite, 8, 118, 290, 296, 298, 305-
                                                  281
      306,339,346,380,394-395.420.427
                                               studies. 45. 95. 98. 241
    sounding rocket. 11; 13. 14.22-23- 3 .
                                        0
                                               supersonic’transport, 4, 43, 57, 78, 115,
                                                  117-118, 119-120
                                               test, 71, 137, 147, 182, 192, 296
                                                  communications, 3, 17-18, 22, 32, 1%
                                               tracking station, 10, 27, 55, 103, 129,
       328, 335, 3 3 355, 360-361; 363;
                    4,
       368, 374, 374-375, 379, 380, 3 4           159, 306
                                       8,
                                               universities, 4, 100,406,428
      %4, 387, 387, 391, 395, 415, 422,
                                                  training, 4, 419
      422
                                               X-I5,29,33,77,263
   t a t , 192-193, 256
                                             National Aeronautics and Space Council
      Apollo, 175, 192-193, 321
                                                (NASC) ,136,186-187,269,279-280,350,
       equipment, 256
                                               354-355, 361
       Gemini, 130
      reentry, 132, 135. 289-290             National Air and Space Museum (Smith-
 managem& 11; 2425, 25, 41, 49, 51,            sonian Institution) (formerly National
   60, 73, 137-138, 173, 187, 195, 220,        Air Museum), 260
   281, 302,311-312                          National Air Museum (Smithsonian In-
 organization, 4,11, 12,16,17,22,24-25,        stitution), 35, 260
   43, 49, 51, 53-54 77, 102, 113, 120,      National Association of Professional Con-
   143, 144, 154, 173, 187, 195, 202, 210,    tract Administrators (NAPCA), 281
   213, 224, 265, 266, 268, 274, 287, 301,   National Association of Rocketry ( NAR) ,
   304,306                                     292
 patent, 56,95
                                             National Automation Conference (Ameri-
   legislation, 5, 4344
                                               can Bankers Association), 252
   policy, 201, 293, 434
                                             National Aviation Facilities Experimental
   waiver, 214, 293, 329
                                               Center, FAA (NAFEC), 56, 214
 personnel, 6, 35, 52-53, 230, 237, 244
                                             National Aviation System Symposium,332,
 policy, 165,173,250
                                               336
 procurement, 49, 51, 80, 143, 189, 257,
                                             National Broadcasting Co. (NBC) , 1%,
   293,329
 progrks, 181-182, 1%,219,243, 257             221, 294, 347
   APOUO,18,185-186,224,225,228,237,         National Bureau of Standards (NBS), 5,
      316                                      4,339,363,373
   astronomy, 327                            National Business Aircraft Association
   bioscience, 72, 80, 151-152, 178-179,       (NBAA) Award, 334
      210
                                             National Cancer Institute, PES, 112, 277
   Gemini, 18, 55, 68-69, 71, 273, 316,
                                             National Center for Atmospheric Research
      325
                                               (NCAR), 42,96,176,399
   lunar orbiter, 69
                                             National Center of Space Research (CNES-
   Oao, 212,215
                                               Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales,
   Oeo, 249-250 308
                                               France), 95. 273
   Ranger, 34-35, 41, 41-42, 4 , 60-61,
                                 2
      64,150,150-151,151,215,263,267,        National Civil Service League Career Serv-
      267-268,298-299                         ice Award, 1964, 136
                                                                                     505
                                            INDEX

                                                 Navigation, 111-112, 125, 146-147, 305,
National Commission on Technology, Au-
                                                   333
 tomation, and Economic Progress, 259,
                                                 Navigation satellite. See Satellite, Navi-
 286
                                                   gational.
National Conference on the Peaceful Uses
                                                 Navy. See U.S. Navy.
 of Space, Fourth, 156-157
                                                 Navy Oceanographic Meteorological Au-
National Defense Transportation Associa-
                                                   tomatic Device. See Nomad.
 tion, 370
National Editorial Writers’ Conference,          NBAA. See National Business Aircraft
                                                   Association.
  3x7
NiGonal Education Association (NEA)              NBC. See National Broadcasting Co.
  Joural, 2                                      NBS. See National Bureau of Standards.
National Electronics Conference, 357             NCAR. See National Center for Atmos-
National Geographic Society ( NGS) ,1617,          pheric Research.
                                                 NEA Journal (National Education Asso-
  325, 432
National Humanities Foundation (NHF)               ciation), 2
                                                 Nebraska, 247
  (proposed), 240
                                                 Neeper, Mr. & Mrs. Bernard W ,121
                                                                                 .
National Institutes of Health ( N I H ) , 165-
                                                                              .
                                                 Negative-on-positive (n-on-p) See Solar
  166. 308
NGio&Labor Relations Board (NLRB) ,                cell, radiation resistant.
 2&25,61,126,128,133,209, 212                    Negro, space-age training, 263
                                                 Nelson, a v o Emery E. (USA), 394
National Magnet Laboratow, 379
National Management Association, 342             Nelson, Sen. Gaylord, 81, 214, 261, 330-
National Medal of Science, 11,397                  331
National Merit Scholarship Corp., 255-256        Nelson, Richard H., 235
National Meteorological Center, 439              NEO. See North Eastern Office, NASA.
National Multipurpose Space Station, 388         Nema (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehi-
National Operational Meteorological Sat-           cle Application), 83, 140, 151-152, 236,
 ellite System (Noms) (USWB), 43                   327,353
National Orbiting Space Station (Noss)           Ness, Dr. Norman F., 420
  (DOD), 68                                      Netherlands, 249-250, 278
National Radio Astronomy Observatory,            Netherlands Organization for the Advance-
  NSF, 321                                         ment of Pure Research, 278
National Range Division (NRD) (AFSC),            Neutron flux mapping device, 25
    3, 164                                       Neutron star, 153, 254, 432, 436-437
  Eastern Test Range (ETR) ,178,192,239          Nevada, 281
 Western Test Range (WTR), 178, 192,             Nevada Test Site, AEC, 104
    239                                          New Hampshire, 64
National Reactor Testing station, AEC,           New Hampshire, Univ. of, 25, 31, 408
  93                                             New Jersey, 165
National Science Foundation (NSF), 21,           New Jersey Central Power and Light Co.,
  48, 96, 104, 112, 161, 165-166, 220, 223,         426
  240, 3 6 2 , 4 0 14 2                          New Mexico, 34,254
National Security Industrial Association
                                                 New Mexico State Univ., 206
  (NSIA) , 246,344
                                                 New Orleans, La., 212, 238, 304, 316-317,
National Space Club, 34,68,111,144,182-
                                                   324
  183,217,259,290,319,358,397,420421
                                                 New Orleans Times-Picmyme, 281-282
National Space Development Center
  (lapan), 259                                   New Product of the Year Award (Missiles
National Space Research Commission                 and Rockets), 269
   (Spain), 31                                   New York, 75, 231
National Space Station Planning Sub-               Atomic Research and Development
  panel, AACB, 90                                    Authority, 70
National University Extension Association        New York Herald Tribune, 82, 122, 145
  (NUEA) , 149-150                               New York Medical College, 226
National Weather Satellite Center                New York, New York, 1 5, 19, 81, 129,
                                                                           ,
  USWB, 101,439,4.41)                                142, 165, 200, 230, 240, 247, 288,310
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-              meetings, 9, 21, 22, 23, 112, 114, 1 3
                                                                                        4,
  tion), 25, 349                                     149, 154, 158, 158, 164, 167, 180,231,
Nature (British journal), 121, 278                   243
Naugle, Dr. John E., 98                          New York Post, 352
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) ,15,45,          New York Society of Newspaper Editors,
  179-180, 254, 271, 432, 436437                   215
Naval School of Aviation Medicine, 174,          New York Society of Security Analysts,
  219                                              161
      776598 0-65-33
                                         INDEX

New York Times, lO,ld, 16,19,26,27,66,        Nitrogen, 217
  76, 86, 92, 156, 200, 220, 227-228, 255,    Nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere, 309
   256,272,288,382,411,436                    Nitrogen tetroxide, 48, 229-230, 399-400
New York U i . 331
             nv,                              Nitze, Paul H., 353, 379
New York World's Fair, 101, 145, 214,         NLRB. See National Labor Relations
  310                                           Board.
New Zealand, 66,414                           Nobel Prize, 367
Newell, Dr. Homer E., 176, 176-177            Noctilucent clouds, 3-4, 147, 241
  moon, 106                                   Noise (see also Sonic boom), 236
                                                aircraft, reduction, 187-188
  post-Apollo, 366-367
  Ranger, 150-151,267,271                       boundary layer, 174,305
  space programs, scientific, 50-51,69,71,      galactic, radio, 118
                                                radio frequency, 125
     79
Newkirk, D .Gordon, 96
            r                                   turbulent air, 103
                                              Nomad (Navy Oceanographic Meteorolog-
News, dissemination of, 248
                                                ical Automatic Device), 49
Newsom, Dr. Bernard D., 384
                                              Nomss. See National Operational Me-
Newsweek, 28
                                                teorological Satellite System.
Newton, Sir Isacc, 125
                                              Noordwijk, Netherlands, 364
NGS. s e National Geographic Society.
        e
                                              NORAD. See North American Defense
NHF. See National Humanities Founda-
                                                Command.
  tion.
                                              Norair Div., Northrop Corp., 145, 201
Nichols, Jack J., 114
                                              Nord 262 (French transport), 318
Nickel alloy, 56
                                              Norman, Lee, 156
Nickerson, Col. John C. (USA), 92
Nicks, Oran W.,                               North American Aviation, Inc., 6, 66, 172,
                 151,352
                                                   198, 214, 264, 278, 299, 402
Nicolaides, John D., 163
                                                contract, 24,29
Nicolet, Prof. Marcel, 266
                                                research, 194,197,280
NIH. See National Institutes of Health.
                                                Rocketdyne Div., 45, 120, 159, 211, 219,
Nii Jima Island, Japan, 259
                                                  236, 242, 248, 249, 294, 346
Nike-Apache (sounding rocket)
                                                Science Center, James Howard Kindel-
  launch
                                                  berger Memorial Laboratories, 298
     foreign, 56
                                                Space and Information Systems Div.,
        Canada, 72, 84, 110, 113, 114, 115,
                                                  56-57,89,158, 160,186,216,239,306
          133, 137, 145, 373, 378, 380
                                                supersonic transport design, 13, 28, 183
       India, 6,14382, 384
                                              North American Defense Command
       Pakistan, 107,399,@3
                                                   (NORAD), 61,198,362
        Sweden, 277-278,283,287,288-289
                                                Space Detection and Tracking Center
     US., 11, 13, 14, 42-43, 62, 140, 192,
                                                   (SPADATS) , 254
       202,210,222,243,249,251,287,297,
                                              North Atlantic Treaty Organization. See
       343, 344, 379, 384, 391, 392, 395,
                                                 NATO.
      422
                                              North Carolina Science and Technology
  use of, 31,241,278,290
                                                Research Center, 194
Nike-Cajun (sounding rocket), 147
                                              North Carolina State College, 194
 launch
                                              North Carolina, Univ. of, 194
    foreign, 277-278, 283, 287, 403, 406
                                              North Eastern Office, NASA (NEO), 102
    US., 22-23, 30, 4243, 47, 62, 99,
                                              Northeastern Univ., 163
       141,277-278,283,287,374-375,391,
                                              Northrop Aircraft Corp., 321
      392
                                                Norair Div., 145
  use Of,%l
                                                Ventura Div., 129, 144
Nike-Javelin (sounding rocket), 122
                                              Northwestern Univ., 393
Nike-Tomahawk (sounding rocket), 4 4   4
                                              Norway, 56,216,246, 397
Nike-X (anti-Ichm missile system), 250,
                                              Norwegian Space Research Committee, 56,
  328, 332, 388
                                                375
Nike-Zeus (antimissile missile system),
                                              Nose cone, missile, 57, 113, 171, 403
  211, 250, 322
                                              NOSS. See National Orbiting Space Sta-
Nikolayev, L/C Andrian G., 10, 74, 177-
                                                tion.
  178,209,248,286
                                              Notre Dame, Univ. of, 342
Nikolayeva, Yelena Andrianovena, 248
                                              Nova (booster), 158
Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Valentina, 10, 59,
                                              Novae Sagittae, 401
  209, 226, 248, 443
Nimbus (meteorological satellite), 283        Novins, Stuart, 211
NIMBUS I (meteorological satellite), 298,     Nozzle, gimbaled, 89, 236, 331
     305, 326, 442, 464465, 485               NRD. See National Range Division.
  photographs, use of, 309,310                Nrds (NucIear Radiation Detection Sat-
Nitric acid oxidizer, 233                       ellite). See Vela, Project.
                                                                                     507
                                         INI)EX

        See Naval Research Laboratory.       Oklahoma City, Ob., 43,63, 84, 90, 175,
NRL.
         (experimental nuclear reactor),          177, 183, 187, 242, 244, 253, 268, 274,
NRX-A
    327, 385                                      279,314
  Al. - - -
   -,140                                     Oklahoma Frontiers of Science Founda-
  A2,327, 353                                  tion, 340
     See National Science Foundation.        Olling, Edward H., 140
NSF.
                                             Olson, Walter T, 293
                                                            .
      See National Security Industrial
NSIA.
 Association.                                Olympic Games, 1964, 32, 146, 258-259.
Nuclear energy, 17, 19, 21, 37, 104, 126,         261,347
    161, 266,288,295,337,360,426             Olympus (space station), 247
 peaceful use, 1 25, 40-41, 143, 251         Omaha World-Herald, 120
                  ,
 power, 25, 40-41, 49, 145, 151-152,296,     Omega-minus particle, 71
   324. 333                                  ONERA. See Office National #Etudes et
     ~-
 propilsion system, 83, 89, 93, 228-229,       de Recherches Aerospatiales.
   296,302,305,320,333                       om. See Office of Naval Research.
 reactor. 25, 40-41. 83,, 195.228-229.248,   Optical degradation, 118
                             ,
   296,305; 311,320                          Optical Re-entry Instrumentation System,
 rocket, gas-core, 26-27, 83                      211
Nuclear energy conversion, 151-152           Optical reflector, 325-326
Nuclear-powered Low Altitude Supersonic      Orange County, Calif., 140
  Vehicle (Last.), 303                       Orbital operations, earth, 253
Nuclear radiation detection. See Vela,       Orbital Research Laboratory, Large
  Project, and Sentry.                         (Lorl), 122, 145
Nuclear Rocket Systems Analysis Pro-         Orbital Research Laboratory, Medium
                                               (Mor11, 145
  gram, Advanced, 236
Nuclear submarine, 221, 266, 302, PO6        Orbital shuttle transport, 249
Nuclear test ban treaty, 266                 Orbital systems, 145
NUEA. See National University Extension      Orbital tanker. 281
                                             Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) ,
  Association.
Nutley, N.J., 22, 130                             78, 106, 196, 201, 212, 215, 2 1
                                                                                31
Nutrition, 151                               Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Ad-
Nylon parachute, 144                           vancd (Aoao), 98
                                             Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) ,
Oakland, Calif., 317
Oakwood, Tex., 176                                 196,200,436
Oao. See Orbiting Astronomical Observ-                  306, 308, 311, 319, 456, 467
                                                  OGO-I,
  atory.                                          Ogo E, 249
OAR. See USAF Office of Aerospace Re-        Orbiting Geophysical Observatory, Ad-
  search.                                      vanced (Aogo) ,98
Oberth, Hermann, Award, 392                  Orbiting observatory program, 258, 318
Oberth, Hermann, Medal (West German          Orbiting Solar Observatory (Om), 55, 95,
  Association for Rocket Research Tech-           135, 1 %
  nique and Space Flight), 320                  os0 I, 82
Oceanography, 49, 146-147, 196,262           Orbiting Solar Observatory, Advanced
Odessa, Tex., 268                               (Aoso) , 98
O'Donnell, Kenneth, 363                      Orbiting Vehicle 1 (ov-I), 383
Offenbach, West Germany, 1                   Orbiting Vehicle 2 (ov-2) ,269
Office National $Etudes et de Recherches     Ordabl, Douglas D., 190
  Aerospatiales (ONERA ) (formerly Office    Orion (constellation), 374
  National d'Etudes et de Recherches         Orion, Project, 419
  Aeronautiques) , 155, 233, 371             Orlando, Fla., 281
Office of Naval Research (ONR), 34, 96,      Orroral Valley, Canberra, Australia, 103
  140,222,330                                Orthicon, image, 72
                                             Orthostatic hypotension, 129, 177
Office of Science and Technology, Presi-
                                             Osborne, Dr. Louis S., 22
  dent's, 12, 186
                                             Osborne, Stanley de J.. 76,90
Office of Solar Energy (Dept of Interior),
                                             Oscar satellite series, 254
  180,275
                                             Om. See Orbiting Solar Observatory.
Ogo. See Orbiting Geophysical Observa-
  tory.                                      OSSA. See NASA Office of Space Science
                                               and Applications.
Ogo-E. See Orbiting Geophysical Obser-
  vatory.                                    Ostrander, M/G Don R. (USAF), 34
Ohio, 15, 87, 121,289                        O'Sullivan, William J., 418
Ohio State Univ., 33,217                     Ousley, Gilbert W., 336
Ohnuki, Prof. Y., 71                         Outstanding Achievement Award (AFSC) ,
O'Keefe, Dr. John A., 102, 128                 39
508                                     INDEX

                                              Parasail, 131, 156, 182, 352, 361
Outstanding Leadership Medal (NASA),
  258                                         Parin, Prof. Vasily V., 177-178, 226
                                              Park, France, 14, 25, 79, 113, 264, 273,
        See Orbiting Vehicle 1 .
OV-I.
ov-2. See Orbiting Vehicle 2.                   326-327, 439
                                              Parker, Alvin H., 268
Oxford, N.C,99
Oxidizer, 77,79,125, 190                      Particles, energetic, 103, 249-250, 306-307
Oxygen, 15,230,290                            Pasadena, Calif., 139, 139, 176
  environment test, 44,87,130                 PASSIM. See President's Advisory Staff on
  liquid, 190, 246                              Scientific Information Management.
                                              Pastore, Sen. John O., 19, 40-4.1, 117
  measurement, 56-57
Oxygen difluoride propellant, 78              Patents (see also Inventions), 56, 95, 100,
Oxygen-helium atmosphere, 309                      102, 153, 184
Oxygen-hydrogen fuel, 230                       award, 66,172,188,287
                                                legislation, 5, 43-44
Ozma, Project, 321
                                                policy, 5, 43-44, 201, 293, 329,434
Ozone. 76. 118
P-on-n. See Positive-on-negative.               waiver, 214,293,329
PAA. See Pan American Airways.                Patrick AFB, Fla., 3, 164, 192, 424
Pace, Prof. Nello, 177-178                    Patrick AFB Contractors' Association, 126,
Pacific Missile Range (pm) (see also            141
                                              Paiuxent Naval Air Station, Md., 437
      Western Test Range), 3 4 , 95, 161
                                              Paul VI, Pope, 273
  budget, 21
                                                                                        .
                                              Pdo. See Proiect Definition Phase (DOD)
  launch
                                              Pearson, Drew, 81, 262-263
    mipsile
          -
    -.___.
       Atlas F, 63, 127, 145-146              Pegasus (micrometeoroid detection satel-
       Minuteman, 15, 62, 78-79, 79, 116        lite), 138, 286, 436
       Titan 11.24.67.104                     Pell, Sen. Claiborne, 56
    satellite misdon,' 10, 17, 25, 66, 78-    Pelly, Rep. Thomas M., 23
        79, 85, 102                           Pendleton, Oreg., 116
                                              Pendray, G. Edward, Award, 236
  management, USAF, 34,178,192
Pacific Northwest, 75                         Pennsylvania, 75
Pacific Ocean, 37, 105, 158, 178, 185, 196,   Pennsylvania Military College Engineer-
                                                ing Centennial Medal, 206-207
  266, 268, 273-274, 290-291, 305, 305,
                                              Pennsylvania, Univ. of, 395
  314, 326, 333
                                              Pepper plant experiment, 72
Pack, back, jet-propelled, 313
                                              Perini Corp., 15
Pads. See Precision Aerial Delivery Sys-
                                              Perkin-Elmer Co., 211
  tem.
                                              Perkinson, William J., 10
Page Communications Engineers, Inc.,
                                              Pershing (missile), 394
  383-384
                                              Personnel exchange agreement (NASA-
Pageant, 268-269
                                                USAF), 319
Pageos (Passive Geodetic Satellite), 419
                                              Peters, L/C John D. (USAF), 358
Pakistan, 96-97, 107, 399, 403
                                              Pettingill, Dr. Gordon H., 297
Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), 430
                                              Phantom 11. See F-4 aircraft.
Palestine, Tex., 42, 56, 57, 96, 140, 176,
                                              Philadelphia, Pa., 129, 143, 205, 322
  397
Palewski. Gaston. 14                          Philco CorD.. 10.61.176.259
- __. - -----
       ..
        ..
         I                                                        I   .



Palm Springs, c&, 197                         Philippine; ' 0 '
                                                             19
                                              Phillips, Franklyn W., 301
Palmdale, Calif., 172, 297. 323. 429
                                              Phillips, M/G Samuel C. (USAF) ,315,364,
Pan American Airways ( P n A ) , 233, 398
                                                371
Pan American-Grace Airways, Inc. (Fana-
                                              Phoebus (graphite reactor), 320
  gra), 175
                                              Phoenix, Ariz., 147, 306
Panama Canal Co., 19
                                              Phoenix (missile), 190-191
Panama C a d Zone, 221
                                              Photoelectric sensor, 339
Panel on Astronomical Facilities (NAS),
                                              Photography, 55,271,315
  38-86
Pangborn, W. V., and Co., Inc., 39            Photon echo effect, 383
                                              Photovoltaic cell, 202
Papeete, Tahiti, 14
                                              Physical Review Letters, 4, 383
Papell, S. Stephen, 142
                                              Physical sciences, 151-152, 255-256, 344-
Parabola, zero-gravity, 70
                                                345
Parachute, 129, 144, 193, 317, 367
                                              Physical stress measurement, 241
  drogue, 131,156,175
                                              Physics, 198,241,262,265
  jumps, 32,213,283
                                              Physiological research, 29
Parade of Progress, Cleveland, O., 300
                                              PIA. See Pakistan International Airlines.
Parade magazine (Washington Post), 207
                                              Piccard, Dr. Jean Felix, 132
Paraglider, 68-69, 280
                                              Piccard, Dr. Jeannette, 132
  test, 158,193,210,239,264,278,425
                                                                                  509
                                        INDEX

Pickering, Dr. William H., 41, 128, 176,     Potassium, 62
  224, 267-268,271, 308-309,315, 416         Potrero, Calif., 193
Pierce, Dr. J. A., 263                       Power, Gen. Thomas S. (USAF),400
Pierce, John R., 11                          Power Engineering Co., 127
                                             Prahl, Val E., 428
Piezo-electric transducer, 131
Pioneer (space probe), 225                   “Prairie Network” (meteorite tracking
Pilot, 110,233, 288,443                        stations), 171
Piper Apache (aircraft), 317                 Prather, Victor A., Award, 164
Pittsburgh, Univ. of, 328                    Pratt & Whitney Div. (United Aircraft
                                                  Corp.) , 77,24849
                                                         .
Pitz, Prof. Wolfgang, 262-263
Planaria, 89                                   construction contract, 85-86, 193
Planetarium, 244                               supersonic transport contract, 13, 28,
Planetary spaceflight, 176,297, 300-301           161,183,201,373-74,405
Plans for Progress Seminar, 212              Pravda, 105, 142, 272, 3 8 333, 381
                                                                      0,
Plant experiment, 179                        Precision Aerial Delivery System (Pads)
Plasma, 82, 132, 159                            (See also Paraglider), 239
Plasma accelerator, 424                      Preflight Operations Div., MSC, 54
Plasma-jet generator, 238                    Presidential Medal of Freedom, 316
Plasma physics, 241                          President’s Advisory Committee on Super-
Plasma probe, 325                               sonic Transport, 135, 142, 149, 162, 183
Plasma torch, 433                            President’s Advisory Staff on Scientific
Plastic, 303                                   Information Management (PASSIM), 2,
Plastic honeycomb matrix, 181-182              71
Platform, stabilized, 22                     President’s Board of Inquiry, 51
Pleumeur-Bodou, France, 32, 140              President’s Missile Sites Labor Commis-
Plum Brook Station, LRC, 221, 224, 317,        sion, 24-25
  367                                        president’s Office of Science and Tech-
Plummer, William E., 340                       nology, 12, 186,362
Pluto (nuclear missile), 213,26247,317       President’s Safety Award, 184
Plutonium, 14.3                              President’s Science Advisory Committee
PMR. See Pacific Missile Range.                           %
                                                (PSAC).
Pneumotachometer, 440                        Press conference, 12, 4 , 130, 140, 171,
                                                                        0
Point Arguello, Calif., 102, 106, 114 146,        200,319, 323, 327
  182,203,220,239                              A-11, 85, 133
Point Loma, Calif., 78                         Apollo, 43
Pt. Mugu, Clf, 178, 315, 326
             ai.                               international cooperation, 74-75, 129
Poland, 311                                    JPL management, 137
Polaris (missile), 150, 268, 307, 314-315,     missile reliability, 9, 33
     330, 349                                  Mol project, 417
  launch                                       radiation hazards, 45,131
     A-Z,11,68,221                             RANGER W ,d2
                                                         I
     A-3,6,19,238,266,279,406                  Saturn, 32,4Q
  submarine firing, 209,430                    supersonic transport, 119, 148-149, 318
POLET II (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 134, 450
                                             Pressly, Eleanor, 109
Politics and science, 86-87                  Pressure measurements, 379
“The Politics of the Space Age,” 86-87
                                             Pressure suit, 146, 159, 197, 239-240
Polonium, 200
                                             Pressure valve, helium, 304
Polyamide prepolymer, 228
                                             Pressure vessel, thin-walled, 82
Polynesia, 14, 266
                                             Preston, G. Merritt, 120,431
Polyuretanes, 228
                                             Price, Rep. Melvin, 317
Pompidou, Premier Georges (France), 266
                                             Priester, Dr. Wolfgang, 372
Ponnamperuma, Dr. Cyril, 390
                                             Primus Club, 412
Poodle, Project (USAF-AEC) (see also Ro-
                                             Princeton Univ., 154,223,374
  ver), 200,209
                                             Pritchard, Wilbur L., 118
Popovich, Marina, 212, 282
                                             Prittie, Terence, 303
Popovich, L/C Pave1 R., 177,212,282,286,
                                             Probe, 20,263
  348
                                               atmospheric, 42-43, 103, 159, 325
Port Columbus Airport, O., 142
                                               lunar (see also Ranger), 4748, 143,
Porter, Richard W., 172
Portsmouth, N H , 9
               ..                                 152,308
                                               planetary (see also Mariner), 198, 208,
Port Tobacco, Md., 364
Portugal, 55, 132                                 295
Positive-on-negative (p-on-n) , 19-20        Products Aerospace Div. (Bendis Corp.) ,
Positron, 4                                    13
510                                      INDEX

Professional Group on Antennas and               Solar
  Propagation, IEEE, 326                           effects of, 13, 18, 34, 45, 48, 75, 173,
Prokhorov, Aleksandr M., 3 7 6                        250
Prom (Program Management, Resources                measurement, 45,140,444
  Management, and Objectives Manage-               shielding from, 13,31
  ment), 285                                        study of, 18, 132
Propellant grain,                                space, 146,169,349
Propellant, 78,229,235                             measurement, 28,32,245
Propellant tanks, 82                             ultraviolet. 76
                                                        .. ..
Propellant valve, 9, 181                       Radiation, I&., 299
Propulsion, 190,241,302303                     Radiation belt, 35,3?, 42, 50, 152, 168,245
  chemical, 229                                  Van Allen. 37. 50. 168. 169. 173. 178.
                                                                    ,    .     ,    ,    I



  electric, 229, 302, 324                          273,325; 4 g
  hydrogen peroxide, 89                        Radiation detector, 8
  ion, 82,324,410,429                          Radio and Television News Directors As-
  jet, 47                                        sociation, 384
  nuclear, 2%230,2%, 320,324,333               Radioastronomy, 106, 116, 321
  ramjet, 77, 224                              Radio Attenuation Measurement (Ram),
  rocket, 334                                    132,319, 487
Propulsion Award (AIAA) , 166                  Radio blackout prevention, 319
Propulsion system, 22, 66, 107, 228, 2%        Radio communication treaty, 68
Proton, 22,34,50,178,219                       Radio Corp. of America (RCA), 3, 61, 79,
Proton detector, 325                                168,193,209,252,412
Proxmire, Sen. William, 81, 93, 127, !276,       computer, 326,412
  329                                            contracts, 3,39,134, 297
                                               Radio frequency, 37,68,125
PSAC. See President’s Science Advisory
                                               Radio noise, galactic, 118
  Committee.
                                               Radio propagation, 2
Pucinski, Rep. Roman C., 117, 144, 211
                                               Radio pulses, high-frequency, 239
Puckett, Dr. Allen E., 237
Pulkovo Observatory (U.S.S.R.) , 180, 203      Radio Research Laboratory Station
                                                 (Japan), 185, 355
Pulse code modulation, 423
                                               Radio Technical Commission for Aero-
Purdue Univ., 216,274
                                                 nautics (RTCA), 158
Pygmy (tetrahedral satellite), 252
                                               Radio thermal measurements, 164
Qantas Empire Airways (Australia), 19
                                               Radio waves, 34,103,319,330
“Quality Assurance Provisions for Govern-
                                               Radioactive fallout, 146,202
  ment Agencies” (NPC Z O O,231,291-i~)
                                               Radiobiologist, 169
Quality control, 6, lrE3
                                               RadioisotoDe. 100
Quarantine, astronaut, 215
                                               Radiomet;, 125, 411
Quasar (quasi-stellar object), 155, 340,       Radiometer, Infrared, High Resolution
  419                                            (Hrir),298
Quasar 3G273,155                               Radiometric observations, 82
Quasi-Stellar Force (Qsf) ,426                 Radiotelephony, 76
                                               Radiotelescope, 34, 38, 224, 239, 424
Quasi-stellar radio source, 155
                                               Radkowsky, Dr. Alvin, 369
Queen Mary College, London, 424
                                               Radnofsky, Mathew I., 354
Quesada, Elwood R., 213
                                               RAE. See Royal Aircraft Establishment.
Rabatin, Michael J., 114                       Raffensperger, M. J., 213,397
Rabom, V/A William F., Jr. (USN, Ret.),        Rahman, Prime Minister Tunku Abdul
  126                                            (Malaysia), 263
                                               Railroad Telegraphers Union (RTU) , 61,
Radar, 30,168,239,429
                                                 62,65
  laser, 112, 278
                                               Raines, Col. Martin L. (USA, Ret.), 339
  Multi-function Array (Mar), 250
  over-the-horizon, 320, 330                   Rain-making rocket, 227
                                               Raisting, West Germany, 22
Radar astronomy, 105,297
                                               Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement1,
Radar interference, 34Q
                                                 Project, 132,319, 487
Radar reffector, 325                           Ramjet engine, 77,223
Radford, Adm. Arthur (USN, R t ) 370
                                 e.,           Ramey, James T,400
                                                                .
Radiation, 55, 138-139, 194, 202, 291          RAND Corp., 89, 435
  cosmic, 174, 216                             Ranger (program), 128,163,197,300
  damage, 8, 131                                 failure (see also RANGER VI), 215
   effects, 72, 169, 171, 179, 219, 248, 265     management, 138, 163-164
  energetic particle, 250                        objective, 47
  ionizing, 174, 24S                             program review, 34-35,42,58,150,150-
  measurement, 125, 169, 245, 265                   151
                                                                                      511
                                         INDEX

                                               Reiffel, Dr. Leonard, 135
Ranger B (see also RANGER w)     ,218
                                               Reischauer, Edwin O., 142
RANGER VI (lunar probe), 37, 82
  failure, 54, 56, 58, 60-61, 64, 65, 138,     Relativity theory, 433
       451,482                                 Relay (communications satellite), 130,
     hearings, 150, 150-151, 151, 163, 215       282-283
  landing, 41, 4142                            RELAY I (communications satellite), 3,19,
  launch, 34-35,448,466                              38,286,353,373,397,418
  Review Board, 42,126                         RELAY 1 (communications satellite), 22
                                                        1
                                                 launch, 19, 446
RANGER VII (lunar probe), 42,64,128,176,
                                                 transmissions, 32, 81, 115, 185, 246, 397
     218, 272. 275,275-276,276, 279,287-
     288, 300, 304,309                           use of, 270,353, 373
                                               Reliability, 45, 143, 234-235, 2 1 8
  briefing, 275-276, 298-299
  comments, 267-268, 271-272, 272, 272-          missile system, 6,129
     273,273,300,313                             space system, 6
  data, 267,271,301,331                          symposium, 6, 6-7
   launch, 263,453,467                         Religion and space, 207-208
  performance, 264, 267                        Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu), 217
  photographs, 306-307,307,318,419,421,        Rendezvous, 224, 228, 241, 259, 301-302,
     435, 438                                    357, 419
Rao, Sweden, 397                               “Reporters’ Roundup” (radio program),
RAS. See Royal Aeronautical Society of           149
  Great Britain.                               Republic Aviation Corp., 98, 196, 289
Rat experiment, 305, 328                       Republican Citizens Committee, Repub-
Ravenholt, Albert, 281-282                        lican Critical Issues Council, 194
Ray, cosmic, 4, 42, 50,56, 176, 179-180        Republican National Convention, 246,248,
Raytheon Co., 216,218                            250-251
RCA. See Radio Corp. of America.               Republican study group on space and
Reaction Motors Div. (Thiokol Chemical           aeronautics, 153
   Corp.) ,29, 78                              Rescue receiver/transmitter system, 1%
Reactor, 3,25, 40-41, 83,93,143, 176,248,      Rescue ships, 203
     260, 296, 299-300, 305, 311, 317          Research Airplane Committee, FRC, 77
   graphite, 83, 151-152,320                   Research and development, 33, 78, 181-
 Reactor-in-Flight Test. See Rift, Project           182, 279-280,295, 300-301, 303, 326-
  ( NASA-AEC) .                                      327
Reader, Paul D., 142,238                         aeronautical, 292-293
Records, 66, 268                                 Federal S U D W ~ ~ .18. 108. 165. 165-166.
 helicopter, 394                                     185-186,*i11, ’31g 33Ok31,’ 374        ’
  soaring, 268                                   funds for, 20-21,21, 33, 48,69, 72, 160,
  speed, 321                                         300301. 401-402. 429-430
  women, 181,200,203                              industry, 7,154
Recovery technique, spacecraft, 158               information, distribution of, 144-145,
Red China. See China, Communist.                     312,386
Red Star (see also Krasnaya Zvezdu) , 41,         management, 160, 344
  253-254                                         planning, long-range, 67, 160, 166-167,
Redding, Calif., 78                                  344
Redeye (anti-aircraft missile), 328            Research Award (AULA), 21
Redstone (missile), 368                         Research, basic, 8, 24, 33, 53, 91-92, 160
Redstone Arsenal, Ala., 12, 103, 332           Research Institute for Advanced Studies
Reed, Sylvanus Albert, Award, 21, 173              (Martin Co.), 155
Reed, Wdmer H., III, 276                        Research Triangle Institute, 194
Reentary, 99,132, 159                          Retrometer, 142
  heating, 135, 173                             Retrorocket, 106,121
  research, 8, 103, 278, 307-308               Reusable spacecraft, 123, 249, 391-392
  vehicle, 3, 9, 1 , 135, 161, 241, 307-308,
                  1                             Reuss, Rep. Henry S., 115
  309                                          Reynolds, Maj. Herbert H. (USAF), 390
                                                Reynolds, James J., 69-70
Re-entry Flight Demonstration, 289-300,
    468                                         Reynolds, Dr. O r E., 63,168-169,295
                                                                 r
  RFD-1,3                                                 See Re-entry flight demonstration.
                                                RFD-1.
  RFD-8, 346,468
                                                Rhodes, Gov. James A., 261
Reeves Instrument Co., 336
                                                Rice Univ., 11, 107, 110, 113, 162, 243,
Reeves, John, 4%
                                                  290
Reflector, 325
                                                Richardson Foundation, 439
Regeneration, 89
                                                Rickover, V/A Hyman G (USN),40,395
                                                                          .
Reid, Edwin, 316
Reid, Henry J. E ,Jr., 276
                .                                                B., 347
                                                Rieke, William
512                                      INDEX

                   (Reactor-in-Flight Test)
Rift, Project                                 Rosman, N.C., 103, 202-203, 308, 311
                 103,340,441                   Roswell, N.M., 64,101
  (NASA-AEC),
Righini, Dr. Guglielmo, 180                   Rotary Club, Los Angeles, 244
Ripley, Dr. S. DiUon, 11,56                   ROTC (Reserve officers Training Corps),
Ritland, M/G 0 J. (WAF), 170-171
                 .                                319
Riverdale, the Bronx, 205                     Rotor downwash, 214
m-10 (liquid hydrogen rocket engine),         Round-the-world flight, 327
                                              Roush, Rep. J. Edward, 38, 102-103, 145,
     32,67,193,414
  A3, 227                                          331332
Rmu. See Remote Maneuvering Unit.             Rover (nuclear rocket engine) (see also
RN-6 nOZZleS, 236                                  Poodle, Project), 209, 435
Roanoke, Ala., 56                              Rowan, Carl T., 282-283
Robbins, Col. Harold W. (USAF), 435           Roy, Maurice, 155
Rochester, Univ. of, School of Medicine,      Royal Aeronautical Society of Great Brit-
  266, 315                                        ain (RAS), 198
Rock, Vincent P., 59                          Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE),
Rockefeller Institute, 438                         (U.K.), 230
Rocket, 59, 159, 190, 215, 229-230, 248,      Royal Crown Cola Co., 358
     258                                      Royal Technical Univ., Ionospheric Re-
  chemicaI, 83, 125                               search Laboratory (Denmark), 56, 375
                                              RS-70 (aircraft), 260-261
  foreign. 268. 303
                                              RS-71 (aircraft), 292
  nuclear, 83, ‘107-108, 115, 195,229,234-
  235,235,236,296,311                         RTCA. See Radio Technical Commission
                                                   for Aeronautics.
Rocket case, solid propellant, 279
Rocket Day (U.S.S.R.), 394                    RTU. See Railroad Telegraphers Union.
Rocket engine (see also Rocket motor),        Rubidium vapor magnetometer, 210
                                              Rubis (French rocket), 210
     25-26, 171,219, 239
                                              Rumsfeld, Rep. Donald, 79, 115
  electric, 256
                                              Runway traction equipment, 2%
  hybrid, 233
                                              Rushworth, Maj. Robert (USAF), 29, 57,
  ion, 82, 256
                                                   118, 156, 214, 222, 285, 321, 331, 429
  liquid propellant, 47, 67, 248-249
  nuclear, 115, 200, 234                      Rusk, Secretary of State Dean, 343
                                              Russell, Sen. Richard B., 90
  reliability, 45, 234
                                              Russell, Terrence E., 259
  solid propellant, 23, 39, 80, 167
Rocket launcher installation, 253             Russia. See U.S.S.R.
                                              Russian Institute (Columbia Univ.), 188
Rocket, model, 292
Rocket motor, solid propellant (see also      Rutter, Richard, 288
                                              Ryan Aeronautical Corp., 39
  Rocket engine), 193, 235,311-312, 323,
                                              Ryan, Rep. Harold M., 13
  328
“Rocket Propulsion of Long Range              Ryan, L/G John D. (USAF), 400
  Bombers,” 59                                Ryan, Tom, 147
                                              5-48 (ionosphere explorer satellite), 106,
Rocket sled, 78,224
Rocketdyne Div. See North American                296
  Aviation, Inc., Rocketdyne Div.             S-51 (U.K. satellite), 270
                                              S-52 (U.K.satellite), 270
Rodino, Rep. Peter W., 291
                                              5-53 (U.K. satellite), 270
Roediger Construction, Inc., 367
                                              s-66. see Explorer, Beacon.
Rogallo, Vernon L., 131
                                              s-I. See Saturn I.
Rogallo wing, 198
                                              s-IC. See Saturn V.
Roganville, Tex., 57
                                                         See Saturn I (SA-8).
Rogers Dry Lake. Calif., 6, 285               +I-8.
Rogers. Thomas F. 49.                         SN. See Saturn I, Saturn IB.
                                                       SA-6, etc. See Saturn I.
RoG, Frank E., 337                            SA--6,
                                              SAA. See South African Airways.
Roman, Dr. Nancy G., 163,327
                                              SAC. See Strategic Air Command.
“Romashka” (“Daisy”) (U.S.S.R. nuclear
                                              Sacramento, Calif., 25, 154, 193, 320, 403
  reactor), 333
                                              Sacramento Peak Observatory, 34
Romatowski, Ray, 154
                                              “Saddlebags” for Lem, 139
Rome, Italy, 58,61,63
                                              SAE. See Society of Automotive Engi-
Rome, N.Y., 30,33                                neers.
Rome Air Development Center (RADC),
                                              Saenger, Dr. Eugen, 59,78
  381, 406
                                              Safety, air, 156. 171, 192. 211, 214, 291,
Romo, L/C Peter (USAF) , 5                      306, 332
Rose, V/A Rufus E. (USN, Ret.), 1%            Safety Award, President’s, 184
Rosen, Dr. Harold A, 111                      Sagan, Dr. Carl, 180
Rosenberg, Dr. Norman W., 265                 Saigon, S. Vietnam, 332
Rosenblum, Dr. Louis, 184                     Sailplane, record, 268
                                                                                      513
                                          INDEX

St. Louis, Mo., 173,223                         Satellite Control Facility (SCF), 164
St. Petereburg-Tampa Airboat Line, 2            Satellite, data collection system, 1   %
Salisbury, Australia, 84,292                    Satellite Div. (Union Carbide Corp.), 56
Salmon, Project (AEC), 360                      Satellite, ESRO, 113, 161
Salt water conversion, 55                       Satellite, geodetic program, 325
Salt0 di Quirra, Sardinia, 239, 242
                                                Satellite, ionosphere explorer (5-48). See
SAM. See USAF School of Aerospace Med-
                                                  Topi.
  icine.
                                                Satellite, Ionospheric Studies, Interna-
Sammy (sounding rocket experiment),
                                                  tional. See Isis.
  290
                                                Satellite launcher (see also Europa I),
Sammy I (sounding rocket), 11
                                                  269-270
Sammy I1 (sounding rocket), 107
                                                Satellite launching center (French), 161
Samos (Satellite Military Observation
                                                Satellite, meteorological, 20, 193, 224
  System), 207,281-282
                                                  cooperation, 4  3
San Antonio. Tex.. 388
                                                     international, 1-2,30,204
San Bernardho, Calif., 78
                                                  use of, 50, 95, 157
Sandia Corp., 44,
                                                Satellite, micrometeoroid detection. See
San Diego, Calif., 166,253,284
                                                  Pegasus.
San Francisco, Calif., 36, 78, 165
                         (Italian satellite),   Satellite, navigational, 68, 95, 157, 158,
SAN MARCO I (SM-I)
  420,462,&8                                         188
San Miguel Observatory, Buenos Aires,             civilian system, 68, 158, 231, 312, 381
  .187
                                                Satellite, nuclear powered, 8
Sa;-hcholas Island, Calif., 178                 Satellite, nuclear radiation detection. See
San Salvador, 386                                 Vela, Project; Sentry.
Sandage, Allan R., 426
                                                Satellite observation station (USS R.),
Sandar, Dr. Herman J., 74
                                                  81
Sanders Associates, Inc., 330
                                                Satellite, orbiting observatory (see also
Sandia Corp., 3
                                                  Oao, Ogo, Oso, Aoao, Aoso) , 103
Sands, B/C Hry J., Jr. (USAF), 3
              ar
                                                Satellite, polar orbit, 231
Santa Ana, Calif., 224
Santa Clara, Calif., 360                        Satellite, solar-powered, 8
Santa Clara, Cuba, 121                          Satellite, solar x-ray monitor, 45
Santa Rita Technology, 339                      Satellite stabilization, 68
Santa Rosa Island, Fla., 70
                                                Satellite Techniques Laboratory (Rice
Santa Susana Field Laboratory, 416
                                                  Univ.), 107
Santiago, Chile, 168
                                                Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction
SARC. See Systems Analysis and Research
                                                  Systems (Stars), 352,3%
  Corp.
Sarnoff, David, 252                             Satellite, tetrahedral (see also Pygmy),
Sas. See Stability Augmentation System.           252
Satellite, 2 254, 255, 281, 284, 302
            ,                                   Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition
  armed, interception and destruction,            Network. See STADAN.
                                                                      .
     322, 323                                   Satellite, twin (ARPA) See Vela, Project.
  cooperation, international, 97, 264, 282-
                                                Satellite, unidentified, 275
    283
                                                  launch vehicle
  foreign, 203, 264
                                                     Atlas-Agena, 79, 102, 146, 182, 239,
  surveillance system, 102,181
                                                        285.326, 406
  use of, 2 30, 118, 146-147, 324
           ,
                                                     Scout; 203‘
Satellite, Advanced Technological (Ate),             Thnr-Ahle-Star. 1 3 342. 418
                                                                         7.
                                                      - ._ _ .
                                                          _ ___ -
  50,90,203,223                                      Thor-Agena, 10,17,’66,85, 114, 151,
“Satellite alert” comuuter. 188                         205, 213, 216, 218, 238, 244, 277,
Satellite, biological- (see -also Biosatel-              294. 316. 340. 354, 373, 378, 392,
  lite), 257                                            426;427- .
satellite, communications, 20, 140, 204,        Satellite, weather (see also Satellite, mete-
     209, 238,240,241,269                         orological), 188,204,240,258,509
  cooperation, international, 49,84,96-97,
                                                Satwday Evening Post, ?6, 8 , 133, 164
                                                                                6
        189, 282-283, 313
                                                Saturday Review, 307
     US.-U.S.S.R. 2 17-18
                     .
  medim- altitude, & , 927-186
                      4                         Saturn (program), 4 13, 124, 170, 226,
                                                                        ,
  military use of, 27, 118, 130, 186, 247,           238,302
                                                  achievements, 38, 40, 281,317, 318,379
     -255,279,289
  synchronoussrbit (see also Syncom C             contracts, 14, 39, 62
     and SYNCOM m), 84, 139, 209, 290-            facilities, construction of, 62, 211, 347
                                                  management, 73,169
     291
514                                     INDEX

Saturn I, 114,318                             Scat wing design, 189
  booster, 80,104,149,286,341                        See Satellite Control Facility.
                                              SCF.
                                              Schaefer, Dr. Hermann J , 219
  engine, 25-26, 211
  propulsion, 229-230, 246, 302               Scheer, Julian, 395
  stage, 84, 246                              Scbell, Dr. Allan, 38
                                              Schenectady, N.Y., 255
     S-N, 25, 192, 196,242,321,325,4   %
Saturn I (SA-5),32, 40, 54                    Schilling, David C., Trophy, 315
                                              Schiro, Mayor Victor H., 324
  launch, 27,32,44&7,W, 466
                                              Schirra, Cdr. Walter M., Jr. (USN), 99,
  performance, 32, 49
  preflight preparation, 26                     129,134,178,188,317,393
                                              Schjeldahl, G.T, Co., 284, 397
  stage, 27, 32
Saturn 1 (SA-B), 196, 199, 238, 314, 321      Schleicher, Richard L., 198
  launch, 192-193, 4 0 4 6                    Schmidt, Dr. Maertin, 120
                     5,.6
  preflight preparation, 70,126               Schmitz, Bruce W., 276
Saturn I (SA-?), 309, 325, 386                Schneider, William C., 371
  launch, 321, 435,467                        Schnitzer, Emanuel, 287
  preflight preparation, 238, 317             School of Aerospace Medicine (SAM).
Saturn I (SA--81, 138, 149,212                  See USAF School of Aerospace Medicine.
Saturn I (SA--91, 104, 138, 436               School of Environmental and Planetary
Saturn I (SA-10) , 138                          Sciences (proposed, Univ. of Miami),
Saturn IB, 213                                  loo, 101
  contract, 22, 84, 142, 189, 193,213,248,    Schriever, Gen. Bernard A. ( W A F ) , 98,
     302                                        112-113, 164, 182-183, 190-191, 207,
  development, 157, 192-193, 193, 318           211-212, 244,252,284-285
                                              Schulte, William J., 334
  engine, 302, 402
                                              Schultz, Col. Kenneth (USAF) ,90
     H-1, 211
     5-2, 159, 294                            Schurmeier, Harris (“Bud”), 275-276,
  equipment, 22,132,142,297                     309,353,435
                                              Schwab, William B., 25
  plans for, 53,140,145,189
  stage, 84                                   Schwarzschild, Dr. Martin, 223
                                              Schweikart, Russell L., 356, 363
     S-IVB, 159, 189, 193,242, 248, 302
                                              Schwinghamer, Robert J., 329
Saturn rB/Centaur (booster), 173
Saturn V, 38, 145, 189, 195,234, 235,248,     Science, 2 3, 16,18,24,110-111,149,199,
                                                        ,
     329                                        221, 240, 277, 280, 318, 344, 348, 357
  booster, 87, 105,213, 223, 229-230, 247,      413, 437
                                              Science (magazine), 3 62, 262, 306, 314,
     377                                                              ,
  contract, 15, 22, 39, 120, 127, 142, 160,     414
                                              Science Advisory Committee, President’s
     189,213, 242, 248, 248-249, 297, 330,
     44
      4l                                        (PSAC), 35
  development, 20-21, 157, 193, 235, 318      Science and Mechanics, 331
  engine, 229-230, 402                        Science and Dolitics, 86-87
     F-1, 120,242, 346, 377                   Science a n d technology. See Science;
     .T-2,248,294                               Technology.
  equipment, 22,132,142                       Science and Technology Advisory Come
  facility, 1 , 39
             5                                  mittee for Manned Space Flight (NASA),
     ground support system, 297, 330, 400       129,237
  plans for, 53,80, 140,145,157,223,242,
                                              Science Development Program (NSF) , 104
     247,295,350
                                              Science Policy Research Div., Library of
  stage, 8 127, 160,248
           ,
                                                Congress, 301, 310
Saturn V/Apollo, 105, 124, 132, 139, 183,
                                              Scientific and Technical Information Fa-
  1%
                                                Cat)’, NASA, 237
Saturn V, post-, booster, 247
Saturn Flight Evaluation Group (MSFC),        Scientific Association for Air and Space
  49                                            Flight, West Berlin (Germany), 320
Saturn Vertical Assembly Bui1d:ng             Scientific Committee on the Effects of
   (VAB) (MILA), 131                            Atomic Radiation (U.N.), 202
Saudi Arabia, 52                              Scientist-astronaut, 395,424
Saunders, Benjamin M ,114
                       .
                                              Scientists. 7 . 110-111. 253-25.2
                                                           1
Savino, Joseph M., 25
                                                and eniineers, 74,94,128,149,156-157,
Scams (communications system), 222,
                                                   161,1%, 2 l 302,308
                                                             9,
Scandinavia, 99,375, 397                        as astronauts, 10, 237, 245-246
Scanner, horizon, 77,224-225, 241               emigration of, 15,308
Scanner, Project (NASA), 65, 224-225            exchange program (U.S.-U.S.S.R.), 182
Scat. See Aircraft, Supersonic Commer-          space program, 7 3 , 139, 184, 1
                                                                   ,6              %
  cial Air Transport.                           training, lunar mission, 158
                                                                                    515
                                         INDEX

                                               Shafrir, Dr. U i 220
                                                             r,
Scientists and Engineers for Johnson and
   Humphrey, 374                               Shapiro, Irwin I., 433
                                               Shea, Joseph F, 47,206,314
                                                              .
SCORE (communications satellite), 241
                                               Sheldon, Dr. Charles S., 152, 376
Scorpio (constellation), 153
                                               Shell Ol Co., 62
                                                      i
Scott, Capt. David R. (USAF), 306
                                               Shepard, Cdr. Alan B., Jr. (USN), 16,
Scott, Walter C., 150
Scout (booster), 71,106,176                      134,166,188,242
                                               Sherman, Harold, 278
   lannch, 4 118, 203, 289, 394, 451, 455,
              ,
                                               Shetland Island, Scotland, 264
      457, 459, 460, 462, 466, 4 6 , 468
                                67
                                               Shewmake, Glenn A., 354
   use of, 4 95, 113, 132, 161, 258, 270,
              ,
                                               Shielding, 13
      296
                                               Shiina, Foreign Minister Etsusaburo, 343
“Scramjet” (supersonic combustion ram-
                                               Ships, Bureau of, (USN),305
   jet), 385
S I See Selective Dissemination of Infor-      Ships, tracking, 64-65, 168
 D.
                                               Shlovsky, Dr. Iosif S,23,436
                                                                    .
  mation.
Sea Lab I, Project (USN), 176, 252, 266        Shock absorber, 13, 136
                                               Shock wave, 103,156
Sea of Clouds (moon), 263, 267
                                               Shoemaker, Dr. Eugene M ,223, 271, 299
                                                                           .
Sea of Tranquility (moon), 37, 41, 4551
                                               Short takeoff canabilitv. 191
Sea urchin egg experiment, 72,174                                     ,,--

                                               Shuey, Henry M., 21
Sea water desalinization, 251, 256
Seaborg, Dr. Glenn T., 4041, 67                Shuttle transport, orbital, 135, 249, 307
                                               Siberia launch site, 333
Seacat (U.K. guided missile), 280
                                               Sikeston. Mo.. 195
Seagoing tracking system, 84
                                               Sikorsky, Igoi, 317
Seal Beach, Calif., 375
Seaiant, 228                                   Silicon cells, 1%
Seamans, Dr. Robert C., Jr., 12-13, 32,42,     Silicon elastomer, 181-182
                                               Silverstein, Dr. Abe, 21, 204,214, %5
   50, 97-98, 149, 162, 163, 176, 184, 228,
                                               Simkin, William, 124
   254 295, 297, 300301, 335, 344
Seamster, Dr. Aaron P., 4Q7                    Simons, Howard, 1 21, 57, 342, 351, 423
                                                                    ,
                                               Simplon Tunnel, 248
Seattle, Wash., 124,251,279
                                               Simpson, Dr. George L , 100,140,195,395
                                                                      .
SEC. See Securities and Exchange Com-
                                               Simulation i Space Technology, Confer-
   mission.                                                  n
                                                 ence on Role of, 290,293
Secor (Sequential Collation of Range)
                                               Simulator, jet airborne, 147
    (geodetic satellite) (USA), 68, 74, 222,
                                               Simulator, satellite attitude control, 264-
   365
Securities and Exchange Commission               265
    (SEC) . 168. 333                           Singer, Dr. S Fred, 62, 100, 101
                                                             .
                                               Sissakian, N. M ,309,348
                                                               .
Sedov, fir. Lkonid I., 315, 348
See,Elliott M , . 306                          Sissenwine, Norman, 14-15
                                               Sisu IA (sailplane), 268
Seed experiment, 2 M
                                               Skidmore, Owings & Memll, 56
Segner, Donald, 420
                                               Skrivanek, R. A., 147
Seismograph, 106
                                               Skua (U.K. meteorological rocket), 270
Seitz, Dr. Frederick, 29, 154,416              Skybolt (missile), 150
Selective Dissemination of Information         Skyhook (ONR balloon flight program),
    (Sdi), 255                                   291
Selenodetic measurements (lunar surface        Skylark (U.K. sounding rocket), 239,242,
   survey), 81                                   270
Semipalatinsk region, U.S.S.R., 388            Slayton, Donald K., 66, 188, 242, 345
                                               Sled, monorail, 333
Sen, Dr. Hari K ,119
                  .
                                               Sleighride, Project (USA), 11
Seney, John S,433
                .
                                               Slemon, Air Marshal C. R. (Canada), 198
Sensor, 1, 196,305
           %                                   Sloan, Alfred P., Fellowships, 1964-65,
   image velocity, 257
                                                 150
   meteoroid penetration, 210                  Slone, Henry O., 404
   radiation receiving, 251
                                               Sloop, John L, 11,229-230, 360
                                                              .
Sentry (nuclear radiation detection satel-     s~v-3. See Atlas-3.
   lite) (see also Vela, Project), 253, 256
                                               Small business and Government, 2 . 261
                                                                                   9
Sert (Space Electric Rocket Test), 82,
                                               Smith and Sapp Construction Co., 369
   300
                                               Smith, Prof. Alex G., 153
Sert I, 82,158,197,256,354,467
                                               Smith, Francis B ,177
                                                                 .
Seychelles Islands (West Indian Ocean),
                                               Smith, Sen. Margaret Chase, 57
   159,905
                                               Smith, Wendell S, 141
                                                                  .
SFOF. See space Flight operations Facil-
                                               Smith, William W., 276
  ity (JPL).
5 16                                     INDEX

Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory,         Sonic boom (see also Noise), 277
  116. 171                                       damage, 9 , 117, 175, 242, 253
                                                            0
S m i & & n Institution, 35, 56, 133, 155,       results, 274, 279
  166,220,241,260,280,282                        studies, 43, 63, 84, 9 , 117-118, 175,
                                                                         0
Snakes, experiments, 56-57                          177, 183, 187, 236, 242, 244, 253, 268,
Snap (System for Nuclear Auxiliary                  314,360,392,404,406
  Power), 67, 72                               Sonmiani Range (Karachi, Pakistan),
Snap, 7D, 49                                     107, 399, 403
Snap 8, 260, 404                               Sound, speed of, 15
Snap 9A, 173, 188                              Sounding rocket, 153
SnaD 10A. 72. 333                                experiments, 106,258,355
  f&ds for, 67,72,85,117,161                     international programs, 97
  test, 39,93,117,125                               NASA-India, 31, 70, 380, 384
Snap 50,67,416                                      NASA-Japan, 355
Snow, 434                                           NASA-Netherlands,278
                                                    NASA-Norway-Denmark, 56
Snow goose, 388
SNPO. See Space Nuclear Propulsion Of-              NASA-Pakistan, 107, 399
                  .
  fice (NASA-AEC)                                   NASA-Sweden, 99, 204-205, 241, 277-
                                                      278
Soaring record, 268
                                                    U.S.-ESRO, 264
Soaring Society of America, 244
Soberman, R. K., 147                             launch
                                                    France. 273
Social sciences, 255-256                            . ._
                                           ,        Japan, ’245; 259
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE)
                                                    NASA, 11, 13, 14, 15, 22-23, 30, 4%
  158, 344
                                                      43, 62, 79, 99, 114, 115, 124, 128,
Society of British Aerospace Companies,
                                                      137. 14.0. 141. 145. 210. 243. 249.
  311
                                                       %x
                                                      251: 260: 262: 264: 278: 283: 299:
Society of Photographic Scientists and
                                                            305; 328; 3351 343,’ 344,’ 3 6 6
  Engineers, 1%
                                                      361, 363, 368, 374, 379, 384, 387,
Society of Security Analysis, New York
                                                      391.392.395,399.415,422
  (SSA),161
                                                    Sweden, 99, 277
Sodium-lithium experiment, 99
                                                    u.K., 239,242,278
Sodium potassium, 125
                                                    USAF, 122, 444
Sodium vapor experiment, 6,10, 249, 384
Sognnaes, Dr. Reidar F., 121                   South Africa, 25
Sohier, Walter D., 166                         South African Airways (SAA),226
                                               South America, 134, 146
Sohio Tracking Station, 289
                                               South Pacific, 14
Solar celI
                                               South Pole, 211
  radiation-resistant (n-on-p), 20, 202,
                                               Southern Interstate Nuclear Board, 126
     276, 482
                                               Southwest Research Institute (SRI) , 388
  thin-film, flexible, 124
                                               Southwestern Bell Telephone Co., 81
Solar collector (mirror), 212
                                               Soviet Academy of Sciences, 17, 27, 97,
Solar corona, 34, 96, 119, 180, 260                 177,198,204,321,443
Solar cycle, 13,48,95                            agreement, U.S. (NAS), scientist ex-
Solar eclipse, 180                                  change, 182
                                                 Astronomical Council, 121
Solar energy conversion, 151
                                               Soviet Committee on Standards, Measures,
Solar Energy Laboratory (Univ. of W i d ,
                                                 and Measuring Instruments, 41
  275
                                               Soviet Institute of Norma1 and Patholog-
Solar Energy, Office of (Dept. of Interior),
                                                 ical Physiology, 177
  180, 275
                                               Soviet Russia, 351
Solar flare, 13, 48, 173, 194, 388-389
                                               Space (medium), 179
Solar gases, 250
                                                 environment, 50,117
Solar heating, 141
                                                 exploration of, 2, 6, 67, 87, 95, 125, 126,
Solar paddles, 326                                  133-134, 139, 149, 194, 277, 298, 321
Solar panel, 311                               Space Act of 1958. See National Aero-
Solar particles, energetic, 307                  nautics and Space Act of 1958.
Solar plasma, 50                               Space Aeronautics, 291
Solar radiation. See Radiation, solar.         Space age, 86, 24Q, 243, 257, 320, 432
Solar system, 125, 157, 170, 366                 economics, 144,157,221
Solar wind, 119                                Space and Upper Atmosphere Research
                                                 Committee, Pakistan (SUPARCO), 107,
Solar x-ray emission, 45
                                                 399
Solid propellants, 39, 247, 331, 369, 377,
                                               Space biology, 208
  416-417,429,435
                                                                                   517
                                       INDEX

Space bus (see also Orbiting Geophysical        cost of, 23, 33, 3 , 82, 128, 181, 234-
                                                                   8
                                                    2 5 278-279
                                                     3.
  Observatory, o m I), 306, 308                     -_. ~




                                                critic&.m of,& 133-134, 185-186, 225,
Space Business Daily, 4, 8, 15, 18, 30, 4 ,
                                         5
                                                    250-251,258,337,351
  77, 138,140
                                                military, 4 12, 44,5162, 64, 181, 331-
                                                            ,
Space cabin environment simulation, 4 ,  4
                                                    332.351
  87, 130,304
                                                need,’36-37, 44, 94-95, 127, 136, 256,
Space capability, 20, 32, 3 , 92, 151-152,
                           8
                                                   277,322,324
  156-157, 184, 199, 207, 223, 302, 324,
                                                objectives, 27, 36-37, 86-87, 133-134,
  326,333
                                                    144, 195-196, 236, 297, 368, 371
Space, challenge of, 6, 87, 92, I n , 155,
                                                policy, 2 6-7, 12, 36-37, 118
                                                          ,
  298
                                                prospects for, 109,221,355
Space Congress, 143
                                                requirements, 232-233,302
SpFcecraft,90,100,102,289
                                                support of, 67,177, 186-187,238,333
  international agreement, 100, 1 2 116
                                  0,
                                              Space Propulsion Facility (Plum Brook
  systems, 224, 228-229, 237, 361
                                                Station). 224
Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-
                                              Space race, 7,215-216, 294, 303
  entry Test (Start) (see also Asset), 161,
                                                US-U.S.S.R., 35, 111-112, 122, 136,
  286,307
                                                    215-216,259,294, 295, 318,324,348,
“Space czar,” 388
Space Detection and Tracking Center,
  NORAD (SPADATS) , 254
                                                booster,. 32,-35,3 , 111, 122, 190, 195,
                                                                  8
Space Electric Rocket Test. See Sert.
                                                  223,318,351,355,376
Space-GeneralCorp., 317,-
                                                manned space flight, 111-112, 118, 152,
Space environment, effects of, 112-113,
                                                     190.354-355.357.374
  168-169. 174-175. 194. 204
                         ,-
                                                  to moon, 4 , 64, lh, 125, 152, I%,
                                                              0
Space fer&, 224,307
                                                     199, 221, 268-269, 322, 350, 352,
Space flight, 9,20,125,173,217,258,298,
                                                     357, 437
     304,309
                                                military, 51-52, 118, 136, 181, 190,250-
  effects of, 171, 183, 194, 309, 328
Space Flight Operations Facility (JPL),           251, 258, 268, 322, 323,351,385, 421,
                                                  442
  176
                                                payloads, 61,111,152-153,254,321,376
Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, 86
                                                probes, 150-151,152
Space law, 313
                                                surveillance, satellites. 2 7 357
                                                                           0.
Space Law a d Government, 236
                                                weather, satellites, 35,‘112.
Space lifeboats, 174
                                              Space Radiation Effects Laboratory (LRC),
Space maneuvering systems, 89
                                                159
Space medicine. See Aerospace medi-
                                              Space Research Committee (Norway), 56
  cine; Bioscience; Life science.
                                              Space research results, 79, 172, 306
Space Medicine Liaison Office, NASA, 80
                                              Space science, 50-51, 102, 156-157, 177,
Space, military use of (see also Space
                                                301, 318
     race, military;      Space station,
                                              Space Science Award (AIAA), 21
     manned), 7 34, 194, 197, 206, 258,
                 ,
                                              Space Science Board (SSB) (NASI, 116,
     333
                                                151, 158, 194, 210
  manned space flight, 302
                                              Space Science Dept. (Rice University), 11
  objectives, 12, 51
Spacemobile, NASA, 247                        Space Science Technology Center
Space Nuclear Auxiliary Power. See              (Georgia Tech), 147
  Snap.                                       Space shuttle vehicle (space tug), 24,135,
Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (SNPO)          249, 307
   (NASA-AEC), 63, 140, 248, 311, 353, 385
                                              Space station, manned (see also Large Or-
Space Park (N.Y. World‘s Fair), 101,145,          bital Research Laboratory; Manned
  214                                             Orbiting Laboratory; Manned Orbi-
space, peaceful use of, 12, 64, 67, 157,          tal Research Laboratory; and Olym-
  190,268,277,288,311                             PUS), 52, 80, 90, 95, 169, 211-212,
Space physics, institute of, proposed             249,258, 287,307,324,375
   (Univ. of Miami), 100                        foreign, 199
Space, politics and, 86-87
                                              Spacesuit (see also Pressure suit), 230,
Space port, 157
                                                239, 296, 355, 363, 389, 390, 415-416
space program, national, 112, 172, 207,
                                              Space surveillance system (USN), 102
     215-216, 217, 258, 279-280, 292-293,
                                              Space technology, 20, 25, 33, 40, 112, 157,
     295.312313. 324
                                                181, 204, 211, 240, 243, 255, 284-285,
  accomplishments, 4 35, 35-36, 40, 42,
                       ,
                                                295,302,312,318,324
     169, 111-112, 122, 151-153, 156-157,
     182-183, 274, 279, 282-283,294, 3 31,    Space Technology Center, Valley Forge
     318, 338                                   (GE). 177
518                                      INIlEX

                                              Stanford Research Institute (SRI), 278,
Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., 160,
   209,292                                      332
Space tools, 5,344                            Stanford Univ., 231
                                              Stanford Worldwide Acquisition of
Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Net-
                                                Meteorological Information (Swami),
   work. See STADAN.
Space Transporter (U.K. Aerospace                 3.11
                                              St;& Col, John P (USAF), 313
                                                                   .
   Piane), 270
                                              Star
Space tug, 135,249
                                                  dwarf- 218
Space vehicle research, 91, 224, 281
                                                 inten&, 381, 387
Spaceyards, 157
SPADATS. See      Space Detection and            neutron, 153,254,432,436
                                              “The Star Saanded Banner,” 290
   Tracking Center, NORAD.
                                              Star tracker; 77-
Spain, 31,55,159
                                              Starfighter. See F-104.
   tracking stations, 31,204
                                              Start. See Spacecraft Technology and
Spar, Dr. Jerome, 258
Sparks, Brian, 224                               Advanced Re-entry Tests.
                                              State, Dept. of, 264
Spectrogram, 180
Spectrograph, 78, 398                         State of the Union message, 6
                                              Static electricity, 147
Spectrographic analysis, 48, 138
                                              Staisical Handbook, FAA, 204
Spectrometer, 15,231,263
                                              Stawikowski, Dr. Antoni, 398
Spectroscopy, 444
Speed record, women’s, 181, 200, 203          Stay Time Excursion Module (Stem), 138
Sperry, Lawrence B., Award, 236               Stead AFB, Nev., 281
                                              Steel, 279
Sperry Rand Corp., 305
   Electro-Optics Laboratory, 113             STEG. See Supersonic Transport Evalua-
                                                 tion Group.
   Univac Div., 68, 330, 423                                 ~




Sphere, drop test, 220                        Steinberg, Dr. Menahem, 125
S p P adjusting mechanism, 82                 Seinbere. Robert. 25
Spin Test Facility ( s n ) (KSC), 147         Steller curve of growth, 155
Spinrad, Dr. Hyron, 148                       Stellar fusion, 155
                                              Stem. See Stay Time Excursion Module.
Spitzer, Dr. Lyman, Jr., 45
                                              Stennis, Sen. John, 15,277
Spivak, Jonathan, 85
                                              Stern, Dr. Ralph H., 121
Sprint (antimissile missile), 388
Sproull, Dr. Robert L., 153, 290, 386         Stethoscope, 172
                                              STF. See Spin Test Facility (KSC).
SPSE. See Society of Photographic Scien-
   tists and Engineers.                       Stockholm, Sweden, 169
SPUTNIK I, 86, 111,155, 268, 270, 340, 441    Stockholm, Univ. of (Sweden), 147, 288-
Sputtering apparatus, 124                        289
SR-~I (long-range reconnaissance air-         Stone, Edward Durell, 410
  craft), 260-261, 274, 346, 429              Stonewall, Tex., 279
SRI. See Southwest Research Institute.        Strategic Air Command (SAC), 86, 260,
                                                    274,428,429
SRI. See Stanford Research Institute.
                                                 failures, Atlas, 145
SSA. See Society of Security Analysts.
                                                 launch
SSB. See Space Science Board (NASI.
                                                    Minuteman, 15,62,378
SSD. See Air Force Space Systems Div.
                                                    Titan n, 409
Sst. See Aircraft, supersonic transport.      Stratocruiser. See c-97.
ST-124-BZplatform system, 22, 142             Stratoscope II (balloon), ’ 223, 397
STAB. See Supersonic Transport Advisory
                                              Strawley, John E., 223
   Board.                                     Strikes
StahiIity Augmentation System (Sas), 6           Cape Kennedy, 51,59,61,62,65,6%70,
Stabilization system, gravity gradient, 68,         124, 126, 128, 131, 133, 209, 212, 243
   177, 223                                      White Sands Missile Range, 14
Stabilized platform, 22                       Strong, Dr. John, 364
Stack, John,5,1%                              Structural materials, 77,429
STADAN (Satellite/Space Tracking and          Structures, 29,77,147
   Data Acquisition Network), 130, 202-       Structures and Materials Conference
   203, 284                                       (AIAA), 197
Stadimeter, 178                               Strughold, Dr. Hubertus O., 164
Stafford, H. N,286
              .                               Student Space Conference, 163
Stdord, Maj. Thomas P. (USAF), 102,           Stuhlinger, Dr. Ernst, 302,320, 352
Standards, 41                                 Stump Neck, Md., 30
Stamps, postage, 120,160,205                  Sturman, John C., 25
Stanford, Dr. Henry King, 100                 Stuttering cure, 79
                                                                                 519
                                        INDEX

                                              Symington, Sen. Stuart, 63-64, 256-257,
Styles, Paul L., 24
                                                278-279
Styrofoam, 259
                                              Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space
Subbotin, M., 105
                                                Technology, Ninth, 284
Submarine
                                              Symposiumon Lunar Exploration, 215
  flying, 397
                                              Symposium on Manned Interplanetary
  missile-bearing, 136
                                                Missions Studies Performed by Industry
  nuclear, 221,266,302
                                                for NASA in 1%3/64,29
Submarine launching, 68,266
                                              Symposium on Reliability and Quality
Submarine tracking, 84
                                                Control, 10th National, 6 ,
“Subscale 1” (solid rocket grain), 248
                                              Symposium on Space Stations and Their
Sud-Aviation (France), 170
                                                 Logistic Support (A IM) , 139
Sudets, Soviet Air Marshal Vladimir
                                              Symposium on the Establishment of a
  Aleksandrovich, 104
Sullivan, Francis J, 368, 393, 429
                   .                             European Network for Artificial SateI-
                                                lites, 419
Sumatra, Indonesia, 292
                                              Synchrotron, 72
“Summary of Lessons Learned from Air
                                              Syncom (program), 4 90, 109, 228, 237,
                                                                     ,
  Force Management Surveys,” 198
                                                282
Summerfield, Dr. Martin, 382
Sun (see also Solar cell, etc.) ,1,219, 271   SYNCOM n (communications satellite),
                                                 82, 105,146,238,247,286,305,332,373,
  cosmic rays, 211
                                                397, 439
  electric charge, 121
                                              SYNCOM III (communications satellite),
  corona, 260, 444
                                                 84, %, 139, 259, 286,290-291,294, 298,
  radiation, 76,444
                                                 305, 310, 311, 314, 315, 326, 332, 347,
Sundlan, Bruce G., 242
                                                 398, 458, 439, 442, 454, %7
Sunnyvale, Calif., 164
                                              Syrtis Major (on M r ) 144
                                                                   as,
“Sunrise.” See VOSKHOD r (U.S.S.R.
                                              Systems analysis, 144
  spacecraft).
                                              Systems Analysis and Research Corp.
Suomi, Prof. Verner E., 290
                                                 (SARC), 113
SUPARCO. See Space and Upper Atmos.
                                              Syvertson, C. A., 226
  phere Research Committee, Pakistan.
                                              T-27 (space flight simulator), 430
Supernovae theory, 4
                                              T-33 (jet trainer), 5, 306
Supersonic Advisory Committee (Trans-
                                              T-3 8 (jet trainer), 302
  port Association), 114
                                              T-39 (jet trainer), 41
Supersonic Transport Advisory Board
                                              TAC. See Tactical Air Command.
   (STAB), 119
                                              Tactical Air Command (TAC), 70,191
Supersonic transport aircraft. See Air-
                                   .          Tad. See Delta, Thrust Augmented.
  craft, supersonic transport (Sst)
                                              Takeoff requirements, jet transport, 150
Supersonic Transport Evaluation Group
                                              Tampa, Fla., 2,151
   (STEG), 4 148
            ,
                                              Tananarive, Madagascar, 306
Support Facility (MSC) ,8
                                              Tank, Dr. K r ,203
                                                           ut
Surveyor (program), 10, 41, 106, 171,200
                                              Tanker, orbital, 281
  lunar lander, 47,275-276,276
                                              Taper, Project (Turbulent A r Pilot En-
                                                                             i
  lunar probe, 71,160,197
                                                 vironment Research) (NASA-FAA), 233
Survival and Special Training Squadron,
                                              Tarter/Terrier (missile program), 439
  USAF, 3637th 281
                                              Tashkent, U.S.S.R., 27
Survival training, 5 25, 102, 221, 281, 315
                    ,
                                              Tass, 30,34,35,42,62,75,82,85,103,107,
Suspension system, 276
                                                 118, 128, 130, 132, 138, 149, 159, 165,
Sustained Superior Performance award,
                                                 174 176, 190, 200, 210, 220, 234, 239,
   114
                                                 245,286,290,315,321,424,426,436
SV-5 (ablative-type reentry body), 308
                                              Tat. See Cable, transatlantic communi-
Swami (Stanford Worldwide Acquisition
                                                 cations.
  of Meterological Information), 231
                                              Tat. See Thor, Thrust-Augmented.
Sweden, 246,397
                                              Tat4 (cable), 55
   experiments, 99, 147, 277-278, 288-289
                                              T a t 5 (cable), 55
Swedish Space Committee, 99, 204-205,
                                              Tat-Delta. See Thor-Delta, Thrust-Aug-
  241
Sweet, L/C Floyd J. (USAFR), 244                 mented.
Swenson, Carl N, Co., 432                     Tatum Salt Dome, Miss., 360
Switzerland, 2%                               Taylor, George, Gold Medal, 1963 (=SI,
Sybaris, Greece, 395                             198
Sydney, Australia, 317                        Taylor, Hugh M ,392
                                                              .
Sylvania Co., 89                              Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D. (USA), 214
Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., 1%          Taylor, Dr. Theodore B , 108
                                                                      .
Sylvania Electronics Systems-East, 295        Teague, Rep. Olin E, 66, 107-108, 185,
                                                                     .
Sylvester, Arthur, 284                           316
520                                        INDEX

                                                Thompson, Floyd I.., 166, 282, 319, 343
Technology (see aIso Space technology),
                                                Thompson, J. I., Co., 296
  18, 20,25,53, 75, 83, 160, 167,173, 181,
                                                Thompson, Milton O., 14,70,185,283,305,
  194, 199, 206-207, 234-235, 243, 257,
                                                  367, 368, 412, 435
  277. 284-285,. 286,_303. .312, 318, 324,
                                                Thompson, R. A, 289
  336; 344
                                                                             Inc., 61,160,
                                                Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge,
Technology, Automation, and Economic
                                                   209
  Progress, National Commission on, 259,
                                                Thor (booster), 87,129,197,212,234,322,
  286
                                                   411
Technology commission, national, 313
                                                Thor-AbIe-Star (booster), 173, 342, 418,
Technology utilization, 39, 140, 142, 217,
                                                   457, 461,463
  243, 306,329
                                                Thor-Agena (booster), 124, 234
Tel Aviv, Israel, 205
                                                 launch, 10, 17, 66, 114, 151, 213, 216,
Telecommunication system (see also Com-
  munications) ,26, 49, 270                           218, 283, 294, 482
                                                    B, 25,277,298,447,464,%5, 466, 467
Telemetry, 3, 1 , 30, 143, 150, 176, 264
                1
                                                   D, 238, 316, 340, 354, 373, 378, 392,
  data evaluation, 168
                                                      446, 448, 4 5 , 451, 452, 4.53, 4 4
                                                                                       5,
                                                                 .0
  system, 64,134,142,N
                                                         456, 457, 458, 459, 460,462
Telephone communications via satellite,
                                                Thor-Delta (booster) (see also Delta),
  185
                                                      114, 309, 434
Telephone contract (MSC) ,81
                                                  launch, 19, 446, 457, 462, 466, %7, 468
Telescope, 12, 45, 72, 198, 326, 393
                                                Thor-Delta, Thrust Augmented (Tat-
  astrometric, 75, 218,
                                                  Delta) (booster), %
  balloon-borne, 74, 132
                                                Thor-Jupiter controversy (USA-WAF) , 92
  manned orbiting (Mot), 327,
                                                Thorium, 4041, 62
  orbiting, 301,327
                                                Thousand Oaks, Calif., 298
  radio, 224
                                                Thrust-Augmented Delta (Tad). See
    U.S.S.R. 34>193
  stellar photometer, 231                         Delta, Thrust Augmented.
  x-ray rocket-bone, 179-180                    Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta (Tat).
Television camera, 217, 384                       See Thor-Delta, Thrust Augmented.
Television transmission. 3 19. 115. 14          Thrustor, contact-ionization, 159
                           .
                                                Thumba Equatorial, Rocket Launching
                                                  Station (India), 6, 10, 25, 31, 70-71,
                                                   375,380,382,384
             (communications satellite), 168,   Thunderchief. See F-105.
TELSTAR I
                                                Thurman, Harry L , 168
                                                                   .
  261. 270
             (communications satellite), 140,   Time, Inc., 287
TELSTAR 11
                                                Times-Picayune(New Orleans), 281
  168, 297
                                                Tipton, Stuart G., 211,288
Temperature measurements, 305
                                                Tiros (meteorological satellite) 43, 62,
  atmosphere, 23, 30, 42, 47, 99, 131, 141,
    241. 379                                         240,286,298,305,438
Tennessee Valley Post of AOA, 12                  accomplishments, 84, 124, 179,318
Terent'yev, Col. G., 118                        TIROS I (meteorological satellite), 124
Tereshkova. Valentina. See Nikolaveva-          TIROS II (meteorological satellite), 230
  Tereshkova, Valentina.                        TIROS VII (meteorological sateHite), 218,
Terselic, Richard A., 184                          253
Test facility, solid-motor (Edwards AFB),                     (meteorological satellite), 5,
                                                TIROS VIII
  162                                              100, 251, 298
Test stand, F-1 rocket engine, 122              Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos), 193
Texas ASM, College of, 57, 64, 66, 156          Tischler, Adelbert O., 11,80, 181, 228, 377
Texas Southern Univ., 263                       Titan missile sauadrons. 8, 314-315
Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astro-
                                                Titan 11 (missife and booster), 18, 66, 74,
  physics, 426
                                                     87,289,297,309
             ological College, 154
                                                   launch
              of, 326
                                                     operational, 13, 24, 63, 67, 81, 101,
Tfx (Tactical Fighter Experimental).
                                                         283,337
  See F-111.
                                                     w , 130, 132
                                                       113,
Thermal conductivity, 15                           launch vehicle, Gemini, 9, 1 , 121, 2-59?
                                                                               1
Thermodynamics, 257                                                          449, 466
                                                     294,361, 371, 41-14
Thermonuclear weapons, 14,37                      propulsion system, 18, 328
Thiokol Chemical Corp., 23, 80, 312, 400          reliability, 9, 409
  Reaction Motors Div., 29, 78                    tests, 20,318, 409
  Wasatch Div., 416                             Titan III (booster), 92, 112, 124, 171, 173,
Thomas, Rep. Albert, 81                              186, 240
Thomas, Numa E, 142
                  .                                contract for, 3,164
                                                                                   521
                                        INDEX

                                             Transistors, radiation damage, 8
  facility, 39, 131,209,212
                                             Transport, reusable shuttle, orbital, 249,
  payload, 269, 376
  plans for, 78,129,205,255                    291-292
                                             Transport, troop, rocket (see also Ithacus) ,
  progress, 29, 44, 92
  test, 162,245,278,386                        238,246
Titan 111-A (booster), 269, 304, 414, 443,   Transportation system, air, 332
                                             Transporter, air-cushion, 289
  474
Titan III-C (booster), 197, 206, 213, 269,   Treaty
  279, 289, 358, 386, 401, 429                 astronaut rescue and aid, 100-101, 101-
Titanium, 85                                      102, 116
Titusville, ma., 63                            radio communications, 68
Tobias, Dr. Cornelius, 174                     spaceship damage protection, 101,116
Tokuyasu, Communications Minister            Trew, Francis, 189
  Zitsuzo, 343                               Trident Engineer Associates, 364,
Tokyo Astronomical Observatory, 210          Trinity Bay, Tex., 156,361,415
                                             Troitsky, Vsevolod S., 426
Tokyo, Japan, 14,258,291
Tokyo Univ. Institute for Nuclear Physics,   Tropic Survival School, USAF, 221
                                             TRS 11 (tetrahedral satellite), 252, 453
  394
Toi,'Thomas A., 122                          Truax, Capt. R. C. (USN, Ret.), 334
                                             Trud, 340, 353
Tomato, 204
Tonkin, Gulf of, 279                         Trudeau, Gen. Arthur (USA, Ret.), 370
Tools. mace. 5. 344                          TRW. See Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge.
Topeka: Kans.; 351                           Tsiranana, President Philibert (Malagasy
Topsi (Topside sounder satellite), 106,         Republic), 265
  296, 484                                   TSR-2 (U.K. supersonic aircraft), 329
Tory b c (reactor), 89                       Ttv. See Tow Test Vehicle.
                                             Tuckerman, Arnold J., 228
Tos. See Tiros Operational Satellite.
Toth, Robert C., 262                         Tuscon, Ariz., 3,223,259
Tow Test Vehicle (Ttv), 264                  Tufts Univ., 9
Tower, Sen. John, 321                        Tulane Univ., 111
Townes, Dr. Charles H., 237, 367             Tunesten. 19.115.248
Townsend, Dr. John W., Jr., 63               Turbuofan engine,'28
Toxicity, 230, 382                           Turbojet engine, 28
Tracking, 121, 170, 176, 200,222,270         Turbulence, 8,14,103,233,278
  Doppler method, 109                           atmospheric, 146
  laser, 5                                      clear air, 88,291,383
  optical, 3                                 Turner, Dr. B. A., 263
  radar, 38                                  TWA. See Trans World Airlines.
  S-band, 216                                "20th Century Engineering" (exhibit),
  seagoing system,                              230
  stations                                   Twining, Gen. Nathan (USAF, Ret.), 370
     Alaska (ESRO) ,264, 397                 Tycho (lunar crater), 275,299
     Australia, 39, 103                      Tyler, Tex., 361
     Belgium, 397                            Tyndall ~ mfi.,181
                                                             ,
                                             Typhon (missile) ,26
     Falkland Islands, 397
     France-EsRo, 308                        Typhoon, 112,218
     France-Spain, 204                       Typhoon Ruby, 326
     Malagasy Republic, 306                  Typhoon Sally, 326
     Mexico, 39                              Tyura Tam range, U.S.S.R., 375-376
                                             U-2 {photographic airplane) , 282, 316,
     Spain, 31
     U.S., 10,39,55,159,332                     383,441
     Zanzibar, 129                           UAC. See United Aircraft Corp.
Tracking and Data Acquisition (see also      U.A.R. See United Arab Republic.
   STADAN), 71, 176                                   See California, Univ. of (Los
                                             UCJA.
                                                         .
Traction, runway, equipment, 2%                 Angeles)
Tradescantia (plant), 179                    Ufo. See Unidentified Flying Objects.
Trajectory control, 146                       UIW. See United Iron Workers.
Trajectory-Correction Propulsion System,      U.K. See United Kingdom.
   276
                                              Ultraviolet astronomy, 106
Trans-American Aeronautical Corp. of
                                              Ultraviolet observations, 212
   Washington, 63, 136
                                             Ultraviolet photography, 271, 315
Trans World Airlines (TWA ),58
                                              Ultraviolet radiation, 76,210,374
 Transatlantic flight capability, 327
                                              U.N. See United Nations.
 Transducer, 82,131,146
Transit (satellite), 222                      Underground nuclear test, 388
     776-598 0-65-34
522                                      LNDEX

           (United Nations Educational                   18,22,24,4, 103, 165, 186,211,
                                                   RBD,
UNESCO
 Scientific and Cultural Organization),               262, 281, 312, 313, 330-331
                               -
                                                   science and technology, 110-111, 165
 308, 387
Unidentified Flying Objects (Ufo), 110,          missile reliabilitv. 9. 10. 15. 28. 33. 69
                                                                               ,   ,   ,
 289, 387, 437                                   policy, 188-189, 524,’ 329
                                                 security, national, 7, 9, 12, 36, 99, 217,
Union Carbide, 56, 451
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See           250-251, 258, 280, 284-285, 295, 298,
                                                   “nn
 U.S.S.R.                                          5Ld
Unitary transformations, 72                     space
                                                   accomplishments, 4, 33, 45, 61, 1 1 1-
United Air Lines, 411
United Aircraft Corp. (WAC), 13, 26, 197,             112,151-152,172~271-272,272,282,
 405                                                 300,313,318
United Arab Republic (U.A.R.), 203, 303            activities, 27, 184, 268-269, 302, 377
  Egyptian rocket development, 78, 262-            capability, 32, 38, 94, 158, 271-272
    263,303                                        power, 8, 12,268-269
United Arab Republic Astronomical Serv.            race, 133-134, 295
 ice, 424                                     United States Freight Co., 370
United Brotherhood of Carpenters and          United Technology Center (UTC), 39,162,
 Joiners of America, 424                         166,190,278,386,401,429
United Engineering Trustees, Inc., 334        Univac Div. (Sperry Rand Corp.), 68,
United Iron Workers (urn) (see also Iron        330, 423
 Workers Union), 130, 131                     “Universal” (upper stage vehicle), 87
                                              Universe, 180, 239
United Kingdom (U.K.), 52,59,61,79,94,
                                              Universities, 4, 18, 24, 186, 196, 308, 312,
    158, 246, 253-254, 254, 280, 303, 311,
                                                   397, 406, 419, 428
    314
                                                federal support, 110,443
 aircraft, 209, 329
                                              University Club, 9
 communications, 26, 75, 85, 136, 204,
                                              University Explorer program, 357
    218, 455
                                              University Park, N. Mex., 206
 “Concorde” (U.K.-France supersonic
                                              UPI. See United Press International.
    airliner), 170, 279, 314
                                              Uppsala Ionospheric Observatory (Swe-
 House of Commons, 136
 launch, 118, 205, 239, 242, 257, 278           den), 99
                                              Uranium, 62, 143,248
 Office of the Minister for Science, 118
                                              Uranium-235, 143
 Post Office, 26,270
                                              Urey, Dr. Harold, 299, 438
 space cooperation, 97,196,249,311,412,
                                              Ursini, G. A., 347
    453
                                              US. See United States.
 space program, 26%270, 278, 412
                                              USA. See US. Army.
United Nations (U.N.), 219,266,269,288,
                                              USACDA. See U. . Arms Control and Dis-
                                                                S
    313
                                                armament Agency.
 Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer
                                              U.S. Aeronautics and Space Activities, 27
       Space, 57, 187, 205, 362, 374, 375,
                                              USAF. See U.S. Air Force.
       381
                                              USAF Aeronautical Chart and Information
    Legal Committee, 348
                                                Center, 223
 General Assembly, 21, 37
                                              USAF Aerospace Medical Division (Brooks
 Scientific Committee on the Effects of
                                                AFB, Tex.), 44,48,80
    Atomic Radiation, 202
                                              USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School
 Space library, 269
                                                 (Edwards AFB) ,197,206,395
 World Weather Center, 439
                                              USAF Air Defense Command, 420
United Press International (UPI) ,273,383
                                              USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories.
United Plant Guards Workers Union of
                                                See Air Force Cambridge Research
 America, 124, 126, 128, 133
                                                Laboratories.
United States (US.), 40, 46, 47, 58, 61,
                                              USAF Electronics Systems Command, 404
    85-86, 90, 93-94, 128, 143, 154-155,
                                              USAF Missile Development Center, 333
    156-157, 218, 254, 282-283,285, 292-
    293, 308, 332                             USAF/NASA Military Requirements Review
 budget, 16, 18, 20-21, 45-46, 48, 108,         Group, 319
    244                                                    See Air Force Office of Aero-
                                              USAF OAR.
 defense, 126, 214, 320, 322, 323, 331-         space Research.
    332,333                                   USAF School of Aerospace Medicine
 economy, 18,38,40,240                          (Brooks AFB, Tex.), 87,174
 goal, 6, 160
                                              USAF Space Physics Laboratory, 325
 Government, 28
                                              USAF 3637th Survival and Special Train-
 contracts, R&D, 165, 165-166, 261,, 313
                                                ing Squadron, 281
    criticism of, 22, 93-94, 114, 122, 245-
       246, 253-254                           USAF Tropic Survival School, 221
                                                                                       523
                                           INDEX

                    ,                           US. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 149
U.S. Air Force (USAF)6,29,41,66,70,78,
                                                U.S. Bureau of Sport F s e i s and W l -
                                                                                    id
                                                                      ihre
     135, 178, 190-191, 203-204, 207, 211-
                                                   life, 109
    212, 261, 278, 288, 289, 292,302,315,
                                                US. Committee for International Quiet
    322, 325
                                                  Sun Y a (IQSY ),45
                                                       er
  aircraft, 69,90,101,331
                                                US. Committee on the Extension of the
  antisatellite system, 197
                                                   Standard Atmosphere                14
  award, 32                                                                (COESA),
                                                US. Congress. See Congress.
  contract, 39,74,197,233,308
                                                USDA. See Agriculture, US. Dept. of.
  cooperation
                                                U S District Court (Fla.), 61
                                                 ..
    AEC, 200
                                                U.S. District Judge
    FAA, 214,277
                                                   Florida, 212
    NASA, 117, 171, 181, 206,237,277,
            80,
                                                   Oklahoma City, Okla., 187, 244
          302,319,354
                                                U.S. Embassy (Moscow), 122
       Gemini, 55, 121, 182, 206, 209
                                                U.S. Embassy (Venezuela), 275
    NASA-USN, 33
                                                US. Fighter Aces Association, 188
  facilities, 39
                                                US. Geological Survey, 100,299
  launch, 258, 304
    failure, 104, 144, 145, 193, 222            U.S. Geological Survey Observatory, 223
                                                USIA. See US. Information Agency.
    missile
                                                U.S. Information Agency ( U S A ) , 142,
       operational, 15, 32, 62, 63, 79, 81,
                                                   282-283
          84, 116, 122, 125, 132, 264, 265
                                                US. Marine Corps (USMC), 87, 328,16,
       R&D, 13, 24, 58, 67, 79, 81, 104, 113,
                                                   330
          217,241,283,330
                                                USMC. See US. Marine Corps.
    plans, 78,254,279
                                                USN. See US. Navy.
    probe, 1M
                                                U.S. National Museum (Smithsonian Insti-
    rocket. 300.329
                                                   tution), 121
    satellite, 17, 27-28, 66, 79, 85, 102,
                                                U.S. Naval Air Equipment Center, 4 0   .4
      114,145,1%,151,178,182,203,205,
                                                US. Naval Institute Proceedings, 334
      213,239,244,252-253.277.294.316.
                             .    ,    I   .



                                                U S Naval Observatory (Flagstaff, A&.),
                                                 ..
      326,342,373; 392
                                                  75,218
    sounding rocket, 122,125
                                                U.S. Naval Research and Development
  management, 8, 1 , 23, 92, 98-99, 127,
                     1
                                                   Satellite Communications Group, 238
    198,289,311412
  missile program, 112,252                      US. Naval School of Aviation Medicine,
  Mol, 8, 11, 44, 74, 92, %, 99, 112, 139,         174, 219
    192, 197,205,209,257,261                    U.S. Naval Training Center, 284
  report, 159, 198                              US. Navy (USN),1 , 29, 33, 45, 64, 71,
                                                                       0
  rocket, 317                                        84, 178, 190-191, 203-204, 214, 218,
  rocket motor, solid propellant, 23,39,80,          253,287,305,334
    311312, 323                                   Polaris A-2,11,68
  space museum, 261                               Polaris A-3,6,19,279
  space program, 18,33,170-171,181,286,           satellite, 8,
    333                                           submarine, 330,397
   supersonic transport, 4,43,82                  space surveillance system, 102
   tests, 10, 19, 114, 117, 129,323, 328          supersonic transport, 4
  Thor. 129                                     US. Navy Engineering Experiment Sta-
  Ti& II, 66,74                                   tion, 334
   Titan 11%92,129,164,245, 278                 US.News and World Report, 199, 341
US. Arms Control and Disarmament
                                                USNS Croatan, 384, 391, 393, 395
  Agency (USACDA) . 5 9
                                                USNS Kingsport, 238
u.s.-A&y (USA),80, 92, 207, 239, 241,
                                                USNS Rose Knot, 197
     275, 322,392
                                                US. Public Health Service, 80, 230, 277
  contracts, 11. 328
  cooperation. 328                              U.S.S. Daniel Boone, 266
     iiternational, Canada, IO, 29              U S S Daniel Webster, 209, 307, 330
                                                 ...
     NASA,   182
                                                U.S.S. Enterprise, 2%, 307
  Corps of Engineers, 31, 116, 188, 274,
                                                U S S John Adams, 221
                                                 ...
        328
                                                U S S Nathan Hole, 11
                                                 ...
     contracts, 8,13,15,247,268,406
  launch, 68                                    U.S.S. Norton Sound, 218
  radar (Mar), 250                              U S S R (Union of Soviet Socialist Re-
                                                 ....
  XV-SA (VtOl), 251,391
                                                     publics) (see also Soviet Academv of
U.S. Army Yuma Proving Ground, Ark,                  Sciences, etc.) ,21, 188, 189, 190, i10,
  239                                                275, 283, 340,348,353,367, 394,396,
US. Board of Geographic Names, 22, 126               413,427
524                                       INDEX

U.S.S.R.-Continued                                  (missile), 47,70
                                                V-2
                                                    (helicopter, U.S.S.R.), 142
  achievements, 86,111-112,132,133,142,         V-8
                                                Vab. See Vertical Assembly Building
     152,172,190,254,283,322, 350,315-
    376, 442-443                                  (KSC).
                                                Vacuum chamber, 3
  aircraft, 41, 104, 133, 142,289
                                                Valkyrie- See *TO.
  astronomy, 198, 203-204, 315, 364, 436-
    437                                         Valley Forge, Pa., 75,304
                                                Valley Forge Space Technology Center
  bioastronautics, 130, 171, 172, 174-175,
     177-178, 179, 204, 209, 226, 248, 309,        (GE), 177,304
                                                Van Allen, Dr. James A., 37,266,388
    345, 350, 352, 355, 357, 359, 389, 393,
                                                Van Allen radiation belt, 50,103,173,178,
    396, 418, 419, 421, 443
                                                  252,273,325,435-436
  booster capability, 32, 35, 38, 1 1 122,
                                     1,
                                                Van Atta, Dr. Lester C., 427
     189, 195, 242, 302, 318, 351, 353, 355,
                                                van Neil, Cornelius B., 11
    359,379
  cooperation, international, 34, 42, 101-      Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 51, 254, 330,
                                                   launch. See Pacific Missile Range;
       102, 269,308-309
                                                        Western Test Range.
     comsat network, 122, 205-206, 255,
                                                   management, 164
       313
     Lil (Lunar Interplanetary Labora-          Vanguard (program), 377
                                                VANGUARD I (satellite), 107
       tory), 314
                                                Van Nuys, Calif., 368
  cooperation, US.-U.S.S.R., 2,41,59,116,
                                                VARC. See Virginia Associated Research
       128. 142. 195-1%. 203. 251. 295.
                           ,    I     ,     ,



                                                  Center.
       342; 379 '
                                                Varian Associates, 409
  bioastronautics, 204 208, 310, 342
                                                Variable-geometry wing, 428
  communications, 208, 215
                                                Vatican, 260, 293
    ECHO XI, 17, 17-18, 27, 54, 75, 97
                                                vc-1 o (U.K. transport), 158
  disarmament, 17, 21, 266, 437
                                                Vecchietti, George J., 51
  lunar exploration, 2, 59, 60
                                                Vehicle Antenna Test Facility (LBRC), 52
  meteorology, 204, 208, 349, 362, 366
                                                Vela Hotel. See Vela, Project.
  competition, US-U.S.S.R. See Space
                                                Vela, Project (ARPA),
    race.
                                                  launch, 153
  cosmonaut. 10.74.%.130.131.134.174-
                                                   performance, 27-28, 252-253, 255, 262,
     175, 1771178, 190, '209,' 213; 228, 248,
                                                     290
    282, 286,309, 34Q, 345, 348, 349, 352,
                                                Venezuela, 275
    355,359, 3 1 389, 393,396, 418, 427,
                 8,
                                                Ventilation, 57
    443
  launch (see also COSMOS v-LI; ELECTRON        Venus (planet), 74, 105, 176, 200, 297,
                                                     318, 364, 408
           POLET II; VOSKIIOD I; ZOND I
    I-N;
                                                  flights to, 120, 149, 184, 235, 246, 253,
       and II), 156, 171, 336, 385
                                                     262, 453
  lunar surface, 103, 180, 203, 426, 436-
                                                   surface, 132-133,180, 239,314,408
     437
                                                Vermont, Univ. of, 207
  manned space flight, 118, 190, 220, 282,
                                                Vernier, 121
       286, 302, 309, 3 0 348, 349, 350,
                         4,
                                                Vernier engine, 160
       357,359,385,393,3%
                                                Vernon, Sergei, 131
     to moon, 40, 64, 1 1 118, I25, 154,
                         1,
                                                Verrett, Dr. Jacqueline, 131
       156. 196, 199. 205. 221. 242. 268-
                                                Vershinin, Air Marshal Konstantin A., 41,
       26% 315,.353,354&5,367,362,365,
       374. 379                                   289
          .--
          ,
                                                Vertical Assembly Building (Vab) (RSC),
  planetary exploration, 105,112,120, 126,
                                                  209
     149, 152, 172, 176, 199, 200, 246, 253,
                                                Very low frequency. See Vlf.
     262, 315, 348,359,365, 399, 403
                                                Vespucci, Amerigo, 101
  radiation, 169, 171,245
                                                Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) ,295
  scientists, 253-254, 379
                                                VFW. See Veterans of Foreign Wars.
  space program predictions, 2, 171, 205,
                                                Vibration, 63
     220, 379
                                                Vibration test laboratory (nsc),102
  weapons, 250, 318, 323, 349, 381, 385,
                                                Vienop, Edna, 1
       388, 441
     Icbm's, 136-137, 170, 255                  Vinson, Rep. Carl, 69
U.S.S. stonewdl Jackson, 406                    Virginia Associated Research Center
Ussurisk, Siberia, 426                             (VARC), 159
U.S.S. Von Steuben, 430                         Virginia Military Institute (VMI), 188
U.S. Weather Bureau, 1, 43, 193, 240,251,       Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI), 159,
  Z5q 258,290,366                                 290
UTC. See United Technology Center.              Virginia, Univ. of, 159
Utrecht, Univ. of, 155                          Visual observations, 82
                                                                                    525
                                       INDEX

Vivian, Howard C., 82                          Warrior Constructors, Inc., 121
VJ i o 1 (West Germany Vtol) ,265              Warsaw, Poland, 308,309,311,313,314
Vlf (Very low frequency), 50,95                Washington Daily News, 144145,272,
VMI. See Virginia Military Institute.          Washineton. D.C.. 1. 2 . 2 . 4 . % 129.
                                                                    6120 .
vogel, Col. Lawrence w. (USA), 268, 274             140; 153, 165; 208, 262, 270,-293,  325
Voice of America, 373                            meetings, 4, 34, 63, 68, 78, 94, 111, 116,
Volcanoes, 180,411                                  140, 144, 1, 148, 149, 154, 155, 158,
                                                               %
                                                                                .‘
Vologda, U.S.S.R., 27                               183, 2 3 226, 2 4 237. 238. 242. 259,
                                                            2.      3.
von Braun, Dr. Wernher, 43, 66, 71, 73,             266 290,316;319;332.
   114, 173, 199, 232, 345, 349, 352, 433        press conferences, 13, 4 , 74-75, 131,
                                                                           1
von Ktirmtin, Theodore, Lecture, 230                148-149,260,317,320
von Ktirmtin, Theodore, Trophy, 315            Washington Evening Star, 8, 48, 325, 351
                                               Washington, George, Award, 75
von Neumann, John, Committee, 377
                                               “The Washington Merry-Go-Round”
Voris, Dr. Frank B., 168, 169
                                                  (newspaper column), 81
Vorkuta, U.S.S.R., 2 7
                                               Vashington Post, 21, 4 , 54, 57, 61, 81,
                                                                        0
Vorontsov, Yuri M., 348
                                                 342, 351, 423
VOSKHOD I (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 348,349,
                                               Washington Sunday Star, 188, 323
  350, 351, 352, 355, 357, 363, 365, 374,
                                               Washington Univ., 438
   381,389,3%,419,421,427,443, 458
                                               Washington World (magazine), 48, 181,
Vostok (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 111, 152,
                                                 224
   190,226,309,365,421
VOSTOK IU, 177                                 Water, 217,383
                                                 desalinization, 251, 256
VOSTOK IV, 177
                                               Water pollution, 229-230
VOSTOK V, 179
                                               Water Resources Research Center, 201
Voyager (program), 199, 208, 259, 295,
                                               Waterman, Dr. Alan T,322
                                                                     .
   437-438
                                               Watson, James Craig, Medal (NASI, 154
       See Virginia Polytechnic Institute.
VPI.
Vredefort, South Africa, 174                   Watts, cwo Joseph C., 394
v/stol (Vertical/Short-Takeoff-and-Land-       Wayne State Univ., 33,100,184
   ing) aircraft, 216, 303, 430, 437           Weapon system development, 186-187,
Vtol (Vertical Takeoff-and-Landing) air.            250-251,320,322,323
   craft, 66,223,251,391                       Weapons and Air Equipment Co., W. Ger.,
Wac Corporal (Army missile), 261                 52
Wackenhut Corp., 124                           Weapons platform, 392
Wagner, Dr. Bernard M., 226                    Weapons Research Establishment, Woom-
                                                 era, Australia, 270
Walker, Dr. Eric A., 12
                                               Weather (see also Meteorology), 146-147,
Walker, Joseph A., 321, 368, 377, 396
                                                    156-157
Walker, Robert P., 111
                                                 forecast, 2,5,62,112,333
Wall Street Journal, 8 . 8 . 93
                         4. 5,
                                               Weather Bureau. See U.S. Weather Bu-
Wall, self-sealing, 228
                                                 reau.
Wallops Station (NASA), 35, 65, 109, 132,
                                               Weather map, Tiros, 240
     1 6 292.323
       7 . -, --
                                               Weather observation network, US., WOth
  contract, 219,222,225
                                                 anniversary, 163
  launch
                                               Weather prediction system, global satel-
     re-entry experiment, 289-290
                                                 lite, 231
        Ram, 132,487
        Reentry Flight Demonstration, 3    ,   Weather satellite system, global, 3637,
           346,487                                  240
  satellite, 118,379,420                         operational. See Tiros Operational Sat-
   sounding rocket, 355                             ellite.
     Aerobee 160, 374 387                      Weather station
     Aerobee 1 5 0 4 304                         balloon, 218-219
     Aerobee 3008, 30                            nuclear powered, 49
     Arcas, Boosted, 99,305, 328               Weaver, Rep. James D, 50
                                                                      .
     Argo ~ - (Javelin), 15, 137, 3 3 378
                                     4,
                4                              Webb, James E., 43,67,81,101,154155,
     Nike-Apache, 11, 13, 14, 42-43, 62,            182, 189, 222, 237, 245, 256, 259, 302,
        14U, 202, 210, 222, 243, 249, 251,          304h 310, 312313, 322, 335, 340
        297, 3 3 344, 3 395, 408
              4,        %                        appropriations, 45-46, 9495, 95, 242,
     Nike-Cajun, 2243, 30, 4243, 47, 62,            300-301
        99, 141, 277-278, 283,287, 392           award by, 136,258
     scout, 256                                  award to, 185
Warhead, 37,125,255                              economy, 38,256
warren AFB, Wyo., 51                             JPL management, 137-138, 163,220
                                        INDEX

                                             Westinghouse Electric Corp., 68, 118,140,
Webb, James E.Pontinued
 lunar landing, manned, 99-100,316317,         148,158,168,202,327,384
                                             Wharton, Dr. George, 217
   343.367
                                             Wheat. 72
 NASA 'Electronics Research Center, 23-
                                             Wbipple, Dr. Fred L., 389
   24,37,67,292
                                             Whitaker, E. A., 223
 RANGER VI, 126, 137-138, 150, 163, 272
                                             White, Alvin S., 349
 space achievements, 9,183-184,223,344,
                                             White, Capt. Edward H., 1 (USAF), 263
   361                                                                   1
                                             White House, 1 , 76, 85,90, 133, 1 . , 143,
                                                              1                 40
                                               164, 183, 251, 258, 271, 273, 286, 287,
                                               316, 323, 388
                                             White, Dr. M. Samuel, 24
                                             White, Dr. Robert M., 1,101,1&
                                             White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) 3 N.
 suuersonic transuort. 119
                                                  Mex., 14,31,241,250,339
 U.3.S.R. space faunching, 357
                                              launch, 30, 124, 128, 144, 153, 192, 210,
Weber, Dr. Thomas B., 382
                                                  283, 299, 335, 363,368, 374, 381, 387,
Weber Aircraft Co., 367
                                                  422
Webster, Grove, 439
                                               test, 58
Weiehtlessness. effects of. 72. 208
 humans, 89, 129, 172,174-175, 179,243,           Apollo, 89, 90, 100, 175, 314
                                                  Athena, 338,406
    248,427,432,443,469
                                                  F-2,412
 insects, 72,171
                                                 sonic boom, 360
 plants, 72
 reptiles, 56-57                             White, Gen. Thomas D. (USAF, Ret.), 177
Weinstein, Dr. Roy, 22                       White, Gen. Thomas D., Space Trophy,
Weizmann Institute of Science, 55             325
Welch, Dr. Billy, 174                        Whiteman AFB, Mo., 51
Welch, Leo D., 242,255                       Wideband transmission, 3
Welder, 184,269                              Wiener, Dr. Norbert, 11,109
                                             Wiesner, Dr. Jerome B., 11,12, 22
Welsh, Dr. Edward C., 4, 6, 35, 40, 1 1
                                     1-
                                             Wildey, Dr. Robert L., 179
 112, 136, 186-187, 188-189, 190, 215-
                                             Wilkes, Mayor Jack S., 90
 216, 217, 254, 269, 279-280, 298, 315,
                                             William and Mary, College of, 159
 322,350,353-354,375376,384
                                             Williams, Capt. Clifton C., Jr. (USMC),
Wenk, Dr. Edward, Jr., 310
                                              237
West Coast, US., 5, 146, 225, 313
                                             Williams, Donald D., 1 1
                                                                    1
West Ford, Project (USAF), 116               Williams, Walter C., 18, 104, 130,265, 376
Welter, Capt. William A., Jr. (USA), 394     Williamsburg, Va., 350
West German Association for Rocket Re-       Williamsport, N.C., 42
 search Technique and Space Flight, 320      Wilson, Rep. Bob, 95
                                             Wilson, Prime Minister Harold, 349, 412
West Germany. See Germany, West.
                                             Wilson, Dr. Olin, 138
Western Aerospace, 88
                                             Wilson, Dr. Richard, 22
Western Devices, Inc., 291
                                             Wilson, Woodrow, School of Public and
Western Electric Co., 11,328                  International Affairs, 154
Western Operations Ofc (woo), NASA,
                         fie                 Wind, 15, 241
 102
                                              upper atmosphere, 14, 23,30, 42,47,99,
Western Materials Co., 216                        141,249,379.384
Western Test Range (WTR), formerly Air       Wind tunnel, 171,230
    Force Space Test Center (see also        Wing, design, 28, 189, 191, 198,239
   Pacific Missile Range and Vandenberg
                                             Wing-shaped craft, 290
    A F B ) , 164, 178, 239
                                             Winkler, Leopold, 82
 launch, 283
    missile                                  Wirtz, W. Willard, 70
      Atlas D, 217,4433                      Wisconsin, Univ. of, 212, 231, 275, 290,
      Atlas F, 265,430                        304
      Minuteman, 264,378                     Wise, Donald U., 28
      Titan 11, 337, 409
                                             Witkin, Richard, 66
   satellite missions, 182, 203, 205, 216,
                                             Witwatersrand, Univ. of the (Johannes-
      218, 238, 239, 244, 277, 285, 294,
                                              burg, S. Africa), 174
      296, 298, 316, 326, 340, 342, 354,
      361, 373, 378, 392, 406, 418, 426,     WMO. See World Meteorological Organi-
      427                                     zation.
western Union International, 412             Wolfe, Allen E., 353
Western Union Telegraph Co., 79, 143         Wolfe, Dr. John H., 435
                                                                                        527
                                           INDEX

                                                    test, 6, 57, 77, 103, 182,241,319
Women, speed record for, 181
                                                        heat-resisting materials, 264, 283-284,
Women’s Advisory Committee on Avia-
  tion (FAA), 164                                          329
                                                       heat-transfer, 14, 70, 174, 297, 305-
Women’s Space Symposium, Fifth, 63
                                                           306
Won& Thomas Jefferson, 85
                                                        noise, boundary layer, 174, 297, 305-
woo. See Western Operations Office,
                                                           306
  NASA.
Woodworth, J. L., 347                            XV--6A (VtOl), 251,391
                                                 x-19 (Vtol transport), 223
Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, 205,
                                                 x-20 (Dyna Soar), 8,78,206,208
  257,270,278
                                                    cancellation, 24,26
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 344
World Affairs Council of Northern Cali-             replacement of, 26, 44, 99,109, 146,263
                                                 X-248 (rocket motor), 135, 141, 147, 166
  fornia, 36
World Book Encyclopedia, 119                     X-258 (rocket motor), 137
World Book Encyclopedia Science Serv-            XB-70 (supersonic aircraft), 172, 3 4
  ice, 316,345                                   X E ~ O A (supersonic aircraft), 297, 323
World flight, first woman, 142                   x c - 1 4 2 ~ (V/stol aircraft), 216,437
World Meteorological 0 r g a n i z a t i o n     X H - ~ I A (compound helicopter), 420
   ( W M O ) , 37,84,251                         XH-5 1 N (helicopter), 216, 422
World War I, %,79,154                            Xerox Corp., 386
World War 11, 47, 59, 78, 112, 154, 203,         X-rav. 153.254.296-297
  254                                                uko f, 100,179-180
World Weather Center, 439                        X-ray telescope, rocket borne, 179-180
                                                 X-ray unit, miniature, 135
World‘s Fair, N.Y., 145,310
                                                 Yale Univ., 191
wow0 radio station, 145
                                                 Yarborough, Sen. Ralph, 116
Wright Aeronautical Div. (Curtiss-Wright
                                                 Yarymopych, Dr. Michael I., 90, 145
  Corp.), 438
                                                 Yeager, Col. Charles E. (USAF), l@, 390
Wright brothers, 46,155                          Yegorov, Dr. Boris Borisovich, 348, 355,
Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy, 387                359,427, %9
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, 167, 303, 318        Yerpylev, Nikolai, 81
                                                 Yeshiva Univ. (N.Y.), 155
WSMR. See White Sands Missile Range.
                                                 y F - 1 2 ~ ( ~ - 1 1 aircraft), 225, 254
WTR. See Western Test Range.
                                                 York, Dr. Herbert F., 35
Wydler, Rep. John W., 185
                                                 Yost, Charles F., 357
Wyld, James H., Memorial Award, 166              Young, Judge George C., 128, 133
Wyman, Rep. Louis C., 185,274                    Young, LCDR. John (USN), 134, 182 316,
X-5 (research aircraft), 191                        366.369
                                                 Young President’s Organization Eastern
X-15 (rocket research aircraft), 6, 122-
                                                     Area Conference, 338
      123, 145, 207, 258, 292-293,315, 320-
                                                 Young, Col. Robert P. (USA), 113, 258,
      321
                                                    268; 274
  award, 77,198,435
                                                 Young, Sen. Stephen M., 91
  flight
                                                 Zanzibar, 10,129,159
      canceled, 326, 383
                                                 Zero-gravity, 62,70,119
      successful
                                                 Zimenki Observatory (U.S.S.R.) ,75,85
         No. 1, 6, 29, 33, 118, 130, 156, 182,
                                                 Zimney Corp., 392
            227,352, 414
                                                 Zirconium, 19,153
         No. 2, 214, 222, 285, 321, 329, 331,
                                                 ZOND I (U.S.S.R. space prohe), 126, 127,
             380, 388, 399
                                                    128, 131, 138, 149, 165, 176, 200, 246,
         No. 3, 14, 70, 103, 174, 185, 241,
                                                    253, 262, 4 4   4
            264, 283-284, 297, 305, 329, 368,
             412.429                             ZOND II (U.S.S.R. space probe), 399,403,
  Memo of ‘Understanding (NASA-USAF-                412,424, 443,461
                                                 Zuckert, Eugene M., 8,44, 66,67,92,127,
      USN), 29
  modification, 66,263                               205,319,325,353
         “The aeronautical and space activities of the United States shall be
      coiiducted so as to contribute . , . to the expansion of human Kiiowl-
      edge of pheiiomeiia in the atmosphere and space. T h e Admiiiistration
      shall provide for the widest practicable arid appropriate dissemination
      of information concerniag its activities and the results thereof .”
                               -NATIONALAERONAUTICS SPACL ACTOF 1958
                                                 AND




 TECHNICAL REPORTS: Scientific and technical information considered
 important, complete, and a lasting contribution to existing knowledge.

 TECHNICAL NOTES: Information less broad in scope but nevertheless
 of importance as a contribution to existing knowledge.

 TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS: Information receiving limited distri-
 bution because of preliminary data, security classification, or other reasons.

 CONTRACTOR REPORTS: Technical information generated in con-
 nection with a NASA contract or grant and released under NASA auspices.
 TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS: Information published in a foreign
 language considered to merit NASA distribution in English.

 TECHNICAL REPRINTS: Information derived from NASA activities
 and initially published in the form of journal articles.
 SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS: Information derived from or of value to
 NASA activities but not necessarily reporting the results of individual
 NASA-programmed scientific efforts. Publications include conference
 proceedings, monographs, data compilations, handbooks, sourcebooks,
 and special bibliographies.




     Details on the availability of these publications may be obtained from:


                FIC AND TECHNIC

IO
                            Washington, D.C.     20546