                                                         NASA SP-4007




ASTRONAUTICS AND
A E R O N A U T I C S , 1966
Chronology on Science, Technology, and Policy




                        Text by
           Science and Technology Division
                  Library of Congress



                         Sponsored by
                      NASA Historical Staff
                        Office of Policy




                                                                 1967
         Screntrfic and Technrcal Information Divisron
         NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
                                                         WaJhington, D.C.
For Sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402
Price 8.50 (paper cover)
Library of Congrcss Catalog Card Nmbcr 66-60096
                            Foreword
                                             .   .
                                                 .
   At the opening of the tenth year in the era of man’s mobility in outer
space, we can look back on 1966 as offering convincing evidence that the
United States had gained great competence. This evidence included: five
orbital space flights by ten Gemini astronauts; four lunar missions under-
taking the orbiting of and softlanding on the moon; numerous contributions
to scientific knowledge by unmanned spacecraft and sounding rockets; and
further demonstrations of the practical utility of operational space systems,
including weather and communications satellites.
   During 1966, a record 100 American spacecraft were placed into earth
orbit or on escape trajectories. Thousands of revealing and useful pictures
of the earth were taken from space and of the moon from lunar orbit and
on its surface. The Gemini program ended with rendezvous and docking
experiments and extravehicular activity by the Gemini test pilots as the
Apollo R&D test flights leading to the manned lunar mission came into the
schedule. Thirty-five major scientific, technological, and operational mile-
stones were cited for 1966 by the President in his Report to the Congress on
aeronautical and space activities of the United States. This was one measure
of the American commitment to share in the peaceful exploration of space
for all mankind. Another was our support of the final steps toward a United
Nations space treaty, undertaken to ensure that the peaceful exploitation
of space had juridical basis in international law.
   Spectacular as some events in the space venture were in 1966, they
nonetheless came to have diminished novelty in the eyes of many laymen.
The multitude of both important and unspectacular space activities attained
almost an accepted and routine place. This volume, as well as its predecessor
chronicles, offers a ready reference on the major as well as the less-well-
known events. Beyond the welter of documented details on the complex
 nature of aeronautical and space related events and their impact, this
volume helps to provide a better perspective upon today as we contemplate
tomorrow. Such intent also serves future historians and analysts who
 cannot be unmindful of what is herein presented.
   When the Congress created the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration in 1958, it charged NASA with the responsibility to “contribute
 materially to . . . the expansion of human knowledge of phenomena in the
atmosphere and space’’ and to “provide for the widest practical and ap-
propriate dissemination of information concerning its activities and results
 thereof.” NASA has attempted to do this and to include documentation for
 the historical record. The relating of NASA history begins with this day-by-
 day chronicle and leads to more specialized studies and histories of the
 unprecedented task of extending man’s mobility and understanding beyond
 his planet. While a chronology cannot in itself serve as a full-fledged
 history, the size of this annual volume alone is illustrative of the scope
 and complexity of the historical task yet to be completed as memories fade
 and the records disappear.
                                                                 M.
                                                           EUGENE EMME
                                                            NASA Historian

                                                                    111
       Contents
                  PAGE
                    i11

                   vi1

                     1
                    39
                    75
                  125
MAY               161
JUNE              202
                  23 1
                  255
                  283
                  3 10
                  336
                  364

                  387
                  417

                  423
                  427
                  43 1
                              Preface
   Before the commentator or the administrator or the scholar can analyze
and interpret the record in his search for understanding and lessons, there
must be a factual account. This chronology, like its predecessors, is the
beginning of such a record. Drawn from open public sources, it has the
serious limitations of any work based largely on quickly available sources
and further of being done virtually on the heels of the events it chronicles.
But these limitations are offset by the assets of the historical method; by
the very catholicity of material and interests included it helps open new
vistas of relationship, of cause and effect. Because a chronology is limited
for the user who does not have a date for the particular item he seeks, an
extensive crossreference system is presented in the detailed index. And
to provide the broadest possible context, we have included worldwide space-
related material, to the extent it was available to us.
   The entire NASA Historical Staff in Headquarters participated in source
collection, review, and publication. The Science and Technology Division of
the Library of Congress was responsible for drafting of the text proper, in
the persons of Miss Lynn Catoe, Mrs. Anne Horton, and Miss Shirley
Medley. Miss Jane Adams and Mrs. Carmen Brock-Smith translated com-
ment edition into final manuscript. The index was prepared by Arthur G.
Renstrom, also of the Library of Congress. General editor of the volume
was Frank W. Anderson, Jr.; Mrs. Helen T. Wells was technical editor.
Creston Whiting (uss) provided timely translations of Russian materials.
Historians and historical monitors throughout NASA contributed slseful
materials. Validation was the constant concern of many busy persons
throughout NASA.
   Appendix A, “Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights, 1966,”
and Appendix B, ‘?MajorNASA Launches, 1966,” were prepared by Frank W.
Anderson, Jr. Appendix C, ‘Summary Chronology of Manned Space Flights,
 1966,” was prepared by William D. Putnam, Assistant NASA Historian for
Manned Space Flight. Mrs. Wells prepared Appendix D, “Abbreviations
of References.”
   This preliminary chronicle is but a first step in the historical process
 of documenting the dynamic and complex events of space exploration and
 exploitation. Comments, additions, and criticism are welcomed.

                                                   FRANK ANDERSON, JR.
                                                         W.
                                                    Deputy NASA Historian
                                                              Ofice of Policy
                                                                    VI1
                             January 1966

January 1: MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun named Dr. Jerry 6. McCall
    to organize and manage the Experiments and Applications Office-MSFC’S
    portion of Apollo Applications; Stan Reinartz would assist him. (MSFC
    Release 65-307)
0 The strongest nation will be the one that applies chemistry most effec-

    tively, wrote Science editor Philip Abelson in Saturday Review: “The
    long-range interests of this nation require a strong chemical profession
    and basic to it are strong chemistry departments in the universities.
    Yet, while NASA was receiving an annual $5 billion, a sum that repre-
    sented almost all the money asked by the agency, chemistry received
    only a small fraction of its requests. . . . In my estimation, chemistry,
    for the long haul, is ten to 100 times as important as space, yet it
    receives only about one percent as much money.” (SR, 1/1/66, 102)
January 2: Changes in organizational structure of NASA Hq. were effective
    this date. Most important change was establishment of an organizational
    unit called the Office of the Administrator, which included the Deputy
    Administrator and his staff, the Associate Administrator and his staff,
    and the Executive Secretariat. Dr. Robert C . Seamans, Jr., newly ap-
    pointed Deputy Administrator, was continuing to serve as Associate
    Administrator. Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator,
    serving as the principal assistant to Administrator James E. Webb and
    to Dr. Seamans, was responsible for policy planning and for general
    supervision of the agency’s work processes. The Executive Secretariat,
    headed by Col. Lawrence W. Vogel (USA), was responsible for channeling
    and scheduling work within the Office of the Administrator. Earl D.
    Hilburn continued as Deputy Associate Administrator.
       Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, Edmond C.
    Buckley, became Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data
    Acquisition. (Other Associate Administrators . were Dr. George E.
    Mueller, Manned Space Flight; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Space Science
    and Applications; and Dr. Mac C. Adams, Advanced Research and
    Technology.)
       Four Deputy Associate Administrators became Assistant Adminis-
    trators: William B. Rieke, Industry Affairs; D. D. Wyatt, Programming;
    Adm. W. Fred Boone, Defense Affairs; and John D. Young, Admin-
    istration. These were in addition to the four existing Assistant Admin-
    istrators :Richard L. Callaghan, Legislative Affairs ; Arnold W. Frutkin,
                                                                     1
2                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    International Affairs; Julian W. Scheer, Public Affairs; and Breene
    M. Kerr, Technology Utilization. Kerr also was serving as Assistant
    Administrator for Policy Analysis (formerly Policy Planning). (NASA
    Release 66-3; Organ. Chart, 1/2/66; NN 1132)
January 2: Dr. Clark Blanchard Millikan, director of Cal Tech Graduate
    Aeronautical Laboratories and pioneer in the development of multi-
    engine, high-altitude airplanes, jet propulsion, and guided missiles, died
    of a heart ailment. Millikan, chairman of the board of JPL in its early
    days, had been awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work in
    wind tunnel research during World War I1 and had been given the
    British King’s Medal. (NYT, 1/3/66,27; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/3/66; M&R,
    1/10/66, 13)
January 3: NASA awarded two nine-month study contracts to determine the
    impact of a proposed improved J-2 rocket engine on the S-I1and S-IVB
    stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle: (1)$148,000 contract to North
    American Aviation, Inc., developer of S-I1 stage; and (2) $225,000
    modification to an existing contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. MSFC
    Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory was seeking to simplify
    the J-2 and give it, and the stages it powered, more flexibility. (MSFC
    Release 66-1)
0 COSMOS LXXX, LXXXI, LXXXII, LXXXIII, and LXXXIV, launched Sept. 3, 1965,

    by U.S.S.R., would orbit the earth for more than 1,000 yrs., reported
    Pruvdu. COSMOS c, launched Dec. 17, 1965, would orbit for 10 yrs. and
    ELECTRON I, launched Jan. 30,1964, and ELECTRON 111, launched July 11,
    1964, would orbit for at least 200 yrs. Report said Soviet space tracking
    stations were receiving data from more than 20 sputniks. (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 1/3/66)
0 GSFC Nimbus Project Manager Harry Press told Aviation           Week that
    Nimbus B would move NASA’s       weather satellite program into a second
    generation research and development effort by starting the measure-
    ment of fundamental quantities in the atmosphere necessary in new
    analytical weather-forecasting formulas. Nimbus B, third and largest
    in NASA’s   meteorological satellite series, would carry seven major
    experiments: infrared interferometer spectrometer; satellite infrared
    spectrometer; image dissector camera system; high-resolution infrared
    radiometer; monitor for ultraviolet solar energy; medium-resolution
    infrared radiometer; and interrogation, recording, locating system. In
    addition, Nimbus B would carry Snap-19radioisotope thermal generators
    capable of producing 60 w of power to supplement solar panels and
    determine feasibility of radioisotope generators for ultimate operational
    weather satellite system. Scheduled for launch in 1967 with Extended
    Thrust Augmented Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, Nimbus B would use
    basic Nimbus spacecraft configuration, but would require strengthened
    structural elements because of its additional weight.
       Press said the two major control difficulties which had shortened
    the August 1964 NIMBUS I mission had been analyzed and corrected on
    Nimbus C, scheduled for launch in 1966. A larger solar array drive
    motor, equipped with heat-conducting strap that would lower operating
    temperature of motor almost 100°C and with improved grease, would
    be substituted on Nimbus C for smaller motor whose failure had left
    MMBUS 1% solar panels locked in near-vertical position when it ap-
    parently overheated and its grease failed to lubricate. Also, attempts
    would be made during Nimbus C mission to rely on the flywheels to
                                                                             3
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     dampen spacecraft oscillations and to use the gas thruster system as
     little as possible, Press said. NIMBUS I had spun about its roll axis when
    its depreciating power supply had caused its batteries to feed lower volt-
    ages to the attitude control electronics system and the thrusters had
    fired excessive amounts of cold freon gas. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 52, 53)
January 3: Report of the White House Committee on Meteorology concluded
    that global weather experiment using meteorological satellite and net-
    work of sensors on constant-altitude balloons, remote land stations, and
    ocean buoys could be deployed in four years for $50 million. Assignment
    of overall management responsibility given to single agency to begin
    design study was discussed in Aviation Week. Designated Ghost (global
    horizontal sounding technique), project would attempt to extend atmos-
    pheric measurements to that 90% of the earth’s surface not yet
    adequately covered, using meteorological satellite in 600-mi.altitude
    polar orbit to obtain pair of readings from all global points every 12
    hrs. In addition, 1,000 to 3,000 super-pressure balloons would be
    floated at six different atmospheric levels to measure wind, pressure,
    temperature, humidity, and overpressure.
        NASA Nimbus B meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in
     1967, would carry interrogation, recording, and locating system experi-
    ment (Iris) designed to perform ranging and data collection function on
    which Ghost was based. However, NASA would attempt only limited
    experiments with Iris involving a check of the system’s ability to locate
    fixed sensor packages, and track them on slow-moving and fast-moving
    platforms, Dr. Morris Tepper, Director, Meteorological Programs Div.,
    NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, told Aviation Week.
    Tepper said any agency providing its own transponders and funding its
    own equipment could participate in the Iris tests. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66,55)
0 Missiles and Rockets reported prediction of Japanese rocket engineer

    Dr. Hideo Itokawa that Japan might launch 60-lb. probes to Mars and
    Venus after orbiting its first satellite in 1968. Itokawa said the Mu
    series launch vehicle, under development by Univ. of Tokyo Institute
    of Space and Aeronautical Science, would produce enough thrust-
    400,000 1bs.-to launch interplanetary probes. (M&R, 1/3/66, 7)
0 T-38 aircraft of M/G Irving H. Branch (WAF), Commander of Flight Test

    Center, Edwards AFB, crashed over Puget Sound when attempting an
    instrumented approach to Boeing Field, Seattle, during rainy weather.
    Branch was enroute from Edwards AFB; his body was later recovered
    from Puget Sound by divers. (Seattle Times,1/6/66, 31)
During week o January 3: Representatives of U S . Dept. of Agriculture’s
                f
    Plant Quarantine Div. met with NASA’s      Planetary Quarantine Committee
    to discuss handling and disposal of soil and rock samples brought to
    earth from the moon or other planets. A Dept. of Agriculture spokesman
    warned that without precautions, insects and microorganisms from
    outer space could conceivably be brought to earth on returning space-
    craft and multiply unchecked in an environment that would not control
    them. (NYT, 1/9/66, 58)
January P: NASA MARINER IV, launched from ETR Nov. 28, 1964, for Mars
    flyby July 14, 1965, was 216 million miles from earth-greatest distance
    it would reach before gradually returning to within 30 million miles in
    1967-and still operating. Goldstone Tracking Station of NASA’s         Deep
    Space Network (DSN) tracked a signal from the spacecraft, but no
    attempt was made to receive data because of the extreme distance. DSN
4                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     would continue attempting to contact MARINER IV once a month to see
     if it was still operating. Daily engineering and scientific data from the
     spacecraft had been suspended Oct. 1, 1965, by ground command that
     set new space communications record of 191,059,922 mi.-more than
                                                        Release 66-7)
     twice the distance from earth to the sun. (NASA




January 4: Apollo spacecraft-command module, service module, and adapter section-
is raised up the gantry for mating to Saturn IR launch vehicle at Launch Complex 34,
Eastern Test Range.
                                                                           5
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 4: NASA awarded five contracts to Saturn contractors to continue
     studies to improve Saturn concepts of an intermediate vehicle with a
     payload capability between that of Saturn IB and the Saturn V. On
     Saturn V, Boeing Co. received $370,500; North American Aviation, Inc.,
     $329,624; and Douglas Aircraft Co., $96,730. Eight variations of the
     Saturn V vehicle would be examined. Boeing would be study systems
     integration contractor for all prospective configurations involving
     the S-IC stage, NAA for all others. On Saturn IB, Chrysler Corp.
     received $450,000; Douglas, $116,345. Six Saturn IB configurations
     would be studied. All five contracts would be directed by MSFC. (MSFC
     Release 66-3)
   Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., writing in the Baltimore Sun, observed that the
     ‘?next twelve months in space should give earthbound observers one
     very positive impression: men are really going to land on the moon
     in a few years. . . .” He discussed NASA missions for 1966: (1) four or
     five Gemini missions-two including Eva and none longer than two
     days-would attempt to rendezvous and dock with unmanned Agena
     target vehicles; (2) first of seven Project Surveyor attempts to softland
     on the moon a spacecraft to relay to earth high-resolution television
     pictures of the lurain and texture; (3) first of five Lunar Orbiter
     attempts to orbit the moon at low altitude taking pictures to determine
     the height and slope of moon’s mountains and craters by photometric
     techniques; (4) four Saturn IB launches-two           to launch Apollo
     command and service module models into nearspace, one to test the
     booster’s upper stage-S-IVB, and one to orbit the Apollo command
     and service module around the earth for two weeks; (5) first unmanned
     test flight of Saturn V launch vehicle; (6) launch of four Tiros Opera-
      tional Satellites into polar orbit for Weather Bureau; (7) launch of
      Pioneer probes into solar orbit; and (8) launch of Orbiting Geophysical
      Observatories, Orbiting Astronomical Observatories, and Orbiting
      Solar Observatories. (SehIstedt, BaIt. Sun, 1/5/66)
   USAF XB-70 No. 2, flying at 2,000 mph, reached 70,000-ft. altitude for
      three minutes in 112-min. test flight from Edwards AFB to determine how
      aircraft would handle during increasingly longer periods at top speed.
      Flight broke record set hy XB-70 No. 1 Oct. 15, 1965. (N.Y. Her. Trib.,
      1/4/66)
 0 NASA awarded two contracts for continuation of engineering studies relat-

      ing to a manned reusable space transport system: (1) nine-month,
      $237,000 contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. to study possibilities of
      developing a reusable transport system based on presently approved
      launch and space vehicles; (2) six-month, $51,000 contract to Martin
      Marietta Corp. for comparison study of launch modes for reusable
      launch vehicles. Both contracts would be under direction of MSFC.
       (MSFC Release 66-2)
 January 5: A ten-year lunar exploration program emphasizing manned
      missions was recommended in reports released by six working groups
      of scientists who had attended NASA 1965 Summer Conference on Lunar
      Exploration and Science in Falmouth, Mass., July 19-31,1965. Program,
      which would utilize capabilities already under development by NASA,
      would gradually include scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry,
      geophysics, and bioscience. One or two manned lunar missions and one
      manned lunar orbital mission would be conducted annually through
       1979, with astronauts remaining on the moon’s surface for longer
      periods after 1974.
6                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

        Reports recommended four requirements for period through 1974: (1)
    assurance of overlapping operation of instruments placed on moon by
    astronauts; (2) sufficient frequency of missions to provide continuity
    in experiments; (3) scheduling of adequate time between missions to
    permit necessary modification of experiments; and (4) gradually increas-
    ing staytimes of astronauts on moon. Top priority for early Apollo
    landing missions would be return of lunar material samples; second
    priority, emplacing Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (Alsep) ;
    third, traversing lunar surface to describe topographic and geological.
    features, supplemented by stereoscopic photography. Report urged
    immediate testing to determine amounts and effects of atmosphere escap-
    ing from Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and outgassing of astronaut
    suits. One Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Orbiter mission (Aa-mlo)
    was recommended prior to first Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar
    Surface mission (Aa-mls), with minimum of three manned spacecraft
    missions in polar orbit to make complete lunar survey; five or six Aa-mls
    missions through 1974 were suggested, with larger scientific payloads
    and stays for the astronauts of up to 14 days.
        Reports listed basic types of equipment necessary for exploration
    program: automatic position-recording systems to relay to earth or Lem
    movements of astronauts and roving vehicles; roving vehicles to carry
    one or two astronauts and scientific payload of at least 600 lbs.;
    manned lunar flying vehicle able to carry 300-lb. scientific payload
    about 10 mi. to study features not accessible with roving vehicle; one-
    inch drill capable of penetrating at least 10 ft. in rubble or solid rock
    to assist heat-flow studies and provide samples of possible biological
    interest. Scientific training for astronauts in specific rather than
    general areas was recommended, with emphasis on geology.
        For post-1974 period, the scientists recommended surface travel by
    astronauts up to 500 mi. from landing point and fixed-site investigations
    lasting from two months to a year for measuring geophysical phenomena
    that could vary with time; studying lunar surface processes; deep-drill-
    ing studies to obtain information on early moon history and crustal
    composition; construction and manning of large radio and optical
    telescopes. Roving vehicles for the post-Apollo Applications phase
    should have 500-mi. range, shelter for three-man crew, two-month
    mission capability, and no requirement to return to starting point.
     (NASA Release 66-4; Conference Rpt., NASA SP-88)
January 5 Twenty-one Long Tank Thors were purchased from Douglas
           :
    Missile and Space Systems Div. by USAF for use in its programs at
    Vandenberg AFB. Expected to succeed the present Thrust Augmented
    Thor (Tat), the Long Tank Thor would provide increased payload
     capability by enlarging the volume of Thor’s liquid propellant tanks;
    result would be a 20% increase in payload capability over Tat. Although
    its total thrust of 330,000 Ibs. would be essentially the same as that for
    Tat, the Long Tank Thor would have a burn time of 216 sec. as com-
    pared to 146 sec. for Tat. (AFSC Release 205.65)
* NASA announced appointment of Robert E. King, formerly director of labor
    relations for General Dynamics/Convair, as NASA Director of Labor Rela-
     tions. King would provide overall direction for NASA’s     external labor
    relations program; personally coordinate major policy issues and deci-
     sions affecting labor relations with DOD, AEC, and Dept. of Labor; and
     administer a positive labor relations program to prevent or resolve
                                                                            7
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    labor disputes between NASA contractors and their labor unions. He
    would report to William Rieke, Assistant Administrator for Industry
    Affairs. (NASA Ann.)
January 6: 170 usable terrain photographs from GEMINI v mission flown by
    Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., Aug. 21-29,1965,
    included pictures of South Africa which would provide valuable informa-
    tion about continental drift, GSFC geologist Dr. Paul D. Lowman said in
    interim report at NASA Hq. on 13scientific and technological experiments
    carried aboard GEMINI V. Color photos of South Africa’s Namib Desert
    revealed 7-million to 8-million-year-old rock formations. Presence of
    similar formations along east coast of South America could indicate two
    continents had once been closer together, Lowman explained. Photos
    also pinpointed “a major diamond area” between rock formations and
    the sand dunes. Kenneth Nagler, U.S. Weather Bureau, told the meeting
    that GEMINI v pictures, some in color, had provided meteorologists with
    more detail of cloud systems than had orbiting Tiros satellites. (Text)
  NASA officials accepted Gemini 8 spacecraft from McDonnell Aircraft
    Corp., St. Louis, after studying data supplied by nearly 6,000 sub-
    contractors involving close inspection of over 6,000 test points. The
    spacecraft, scheduled for launch in March, would be encased in a
    plastic shroud and flown to KSC in USAF 6-124 cargo plane Jan. 7.
     (Wilford, NYT, 1/7/66)
0 Of 351 astronaut applicants, 192, including all 6 female candidates, failed

     to meet minimum requirements, an MSC spokesman reported. The
     successful 15 would be announced in May. (MSC Roundup, 1/21/66, 3;
     AP, New Haven Register, 1/7/66)
  DOD and NASA signed agreement specifying funding arrangements,
     responsibilities, and general procedures to be followed in acquisition,
     modification, test, and associated administration of the Apollo/Range
     Instrumentation Aircraft (A/Ria) , which would provide telemetry and
     communication relay support for Apollo and other national missile
     and space programs. National Range Division (NRD) of AFSC would
     exercise overall management responsibility for A/Ria project. (Text;
     NASA NMI 1052.67)
e Dr. Seibert Dudley of the Univ. of California’s Visibility Lab., San Diego,
     said test equipment on the ground and in the GEMINI v spacecraft had
     definitely demonstrated that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles
     Conrad, Jr., had seen what they claimed they had seen below on earth
     during their Aug. 21-29, 1965, mission. On a one-man Project Mercury
     spaceflight May 15-16, 1963 (MA-9), Cooper had drawn skepticism
     for reporting he could see dust clouds, roads, and other small features.
      (AP, Houston Post, 1/6/66)
           decision to launch Mariner E-MARINER           1x1’s backup probe-to
  NASA’s
     Venus rather than Mars was criticized by William Hines in the Washing-
     ton Evening Star: “As a Venus probe, just about everything conceivable
     is wrong with Mariner-E. Its solar panels are too big, but without them
     its center of gravity would be all wrong; its earth-seeking radio antenna-
     essential for long-distance communication-is oriented the wrong way;
     it is protected against cold rather than heat; its instruments are de-
     signed to explore a small planet with a thin atmosphere rather than an
     earth-sized object with a dense one.
        “Another Mariner flight to Mars promises far greater return . . .than
     a jury-rigged mission to Venus.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/6/66)
8                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 7: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CIV with scientific instruments aboard
      for investigation of outer space, Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee,
      401 km. (248.4 mi.); perigee, 204 km. (126.1 mi.); period, 90.2 min.;
      inclination, 65”. All systems were reported to be functioning normally.
      (Krasrzayu Zvezda, 1/9/66, USS-T Trans.)
  I t was one minute after Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra, Jr., decided
      not to eject in the Dec. 12, 1965, Gemini VI launch failure at ETR, that
      his pulse rate increased, reported Gemini medical director Dr. Charles
      A. Berry in the American Medical Assn. News. Delayed reaction was
      viewed as supporting theory that fear follows action in an ernergency-
      particularly in the case of a highly trained subject. (MSC Morning
      News Flyer, 1/7/66)
* NASA and USN completed an agreement calling for studies by U.S. Naval
      Oceanographic Office to define a series of experiments aimed at enhanc-
      ing oceanographic and marine-technology research from manned orhit-
      ing spacecraft. Experiments would be considered for use in NASA Apollo
      Applications earth-orbiting missions and would employ existing or
      modified Apollo hardware. (NASA Release 66-6)
  Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda) -backup target vehicle for
      the Gatv-was in final stages of assembly at McDonnell Aircraft Co.,
      and would be shipped to KSC in early February for possible use in Gemini
      VI11 rendezvous mission scheduled for March, the New York Times
      reported. Atda would cost less than $1 million and could duplicate
      Gatv’s performance except for maneuvers in space. (Wilford, NYT,
       Ww6, 5)
  Weather modification is a reality, concluded the National Academy of
      Sciences’ Panel on Weather and Climate Modification after two-year
      review of scientific aspects of weather control. In a report submitted
      to NAS President Dr. Frederick Seitz, recommendations included :
       (1) immediate study by one agency of research and development in
      weather modification; (2) raising agency support from 1965 level of $5
      million to at least $30 million in 1970; (3) early establishment of several
      carefully designed, randomized seeding experimmts to assess seedability
      of different storm types; (4) careful monitoring and regulation of
      operational programs; and (5) full U S . support and leadership in estab-
      lishing advanced global observation system. Recognizing that research
      in the atmospheric sciences would contribute to the goals of weather
      modification, the committee urged that highest priority be given to
      studies of: atmospheric water budgets, initially on vapor transport
      over US.areas where potential of cloud seeding is important; boundary-
      layer energy-exchangeprocesses; theoretical models of condensation and
      precipitation machines; and meteorological effects of atmospheric pcllu-
      tion, including carbon dioxide. Report strongly urged that appropriate
      recognition be given to international implications of weather control.
       (Text; NAS Release)
* High-altitude test chamber at USAF Arnold Engineering Development
      Center was being expanded for test of “battleship” model S-IVB stage
                 Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles to verify stage’s
       of NASA’s
      reignition capability under simulated high-altitude conditions. Stage
      would arrive at Arnold from Sacramento in late January; series of 15
       tests expected to last six to nine months would begin in mid-1966.
       (MSFC Release 66-4)
                                                                           9
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 7: NASA awarded RCA two-year $7,837,000 contract for logistic sup-
    port of computers used to check automatically Saturn IB and V booster
    stages during manufacture and at launch site. Major equipment for
    the Saturn checkout systems would be the RCA llOA computer produced
    under separate contract with NASA MSFC. (MSFC Release 66-8; Marshall
    Star, 1/12/66, 1)
  Unidentified USAF satellite launched by Thor-Altair booster from Vanden-
    berg AFB did not achieve orbit. (U&. Public Registry, 5/31/66)
  Thorough knowledge of cosmic dust, particularly interplanetary dust
    particles near the asteroid belt, was necessary for space engineers to
    successfully design manned and unmanned probes, wrote M. J. S.
    Relton of Kitt Peak National Observatory in Science. He stressed the
    importance of cosmic dust in theoretical and observational astrophysics :
    “It is apparently an important factor in the process of star formation.
    The polarization of starlight which is induced by aligned particles of
    interstellar dust gives information about the magnetic field in galactic
    systems, including our own. . . . In the solar system, the presence of
    dust in planetary atmosphere may lead to misinterpretations of photo-
    metric and polarimetric data that would otherwise give important infor-
    mation about the total mass of the atmosphere. . . . And finally, dust is
    responsible for such interplanetary phenomena as the F corona,
    zodiacal light, gegenschein, and type-I1 comet tails. . . .” (Belton,
    Science, 1/7/66, 35-43)
* Murray Klein, Head of Drafting Section, GSFC, died of cancer. Klein had
    supervised the design and construction of buildings and facilities at
    NASA installations throughout the Nation. (Wash. Post, 1/8/66)
  usaF/Lockheed SR-71B trainer version aircraft was delivered to SAC’S
    4200th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing at Beale AFB. (O’Lone, Av. Wk.,
     1/17/66, 33)
January 8: GEMINI IV Astronaut Edward H. White 11 and GEMINI v Astronaut
    Charles Conrad, Jr., were among the ten outstanding young men of 1965
    announced by US. Junior Chamber of Commerce in Tulsa. (UPI,
     Wash. Post, 1/9/66)
0 Radio signal from Soviet deep space tracking station in the Crimea was

    bounced off Venus and received minutes later by Jodrell Bank Experi-
    mental Station, U.K. Experiment, part of a program arranged in 1963 by
    Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank, and Vladimir Kotelnikov,
    director of Soviet space tracking station in the Crimea, was repeated
    Jan. 9. (AP, IVYT, 1/14/66, 12)
January 9: Project managers for the Mariner series deep-space exploration
    missions to Venus and Mars were announced by Alvin R. Luedecke
     (M/G, UsAF-Ret.), Deputy Director of JPL: (1) Dan Schneiderman would
    manage the Venus project involving a single spacecraft to be launched
    in 1967, in addition to continuing his duties as MARINER IV project
    manager through 1967; (2) H. M. Schurmeier, former Ranger project
    manager, would manage the Mars project involving two new Mariner
    spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1969. Effective Feb. 1, Geoffrey
    Robillard would replace Schurmeier as Voyager capsule system manager
    in addition to continuing his present duties as deputy Voyager project
    manager. (JPL Release 372)
  U.S. Bureau of Standards chemists had developed an advanced rocket fuel
    which might be used in spaceflights to the moon and other planets. A
     mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen called “slush hydrogen,” the fuel
10                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    involved a freeze-thaw process which could be used to produce large
    quantities for storage. (NANA, Boston Sunday Globe, 1/9/66)
January 9: National Science Foundation must abandon its passive role and
    be more dynamic if scientific progress is to keep pace with society’s
    growing technological needs, concluded a report released by the Sub-
    committee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee viewed the revitaliza-
    tion of NSF as “an area of the government-science relationship in which
    Congress should provide a large share of the leadership essential to
    significant improvement in the Nation’s resources and development.”
    Some recommendations of the report: (1)NSF supplement its traditional
    philosophy with positive plans and programs; (2) character and func-
    tions of the National Science Board be strengthened; (3) authority of
    NSF’S director be widened; and (4) important executive and policy
    problems of NSF be acted upon administratively or legislatively in the
    near future. (Text, Committee Print)
  President Johnson was asked to invite a Russian cosmonaut to join an
    American astronaut in a space mission in an open letter in Parade
    magazine written by editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted that, officially,
    there had been little cooperation in space science between the two coun-
    tries, but said that “Russian and American scientists, guided by a tradi-
    tion that scientific research belongs to all men, had been eager to
    cooperate. On a person-to-personbasis, they had already exchanged more
    space data than their governments have officially sanctioned.” Gorkin
    envisioned joint space mission as proof that US. and U.S.S.R. could
    work together for ‘?thegood of all men on earth” despite disagreement
    on “how they want to live.” (Parade, 1/9/66)
  Since AEC’S plans to build a 200-billion electric volt (bev) atom smasher
    were being complicated by site and cost considerations, the Commission
    was considering three alternate proposals: (1) Cornell Univ. physicist
    R. R. Wilson’s suggestion for a “poor man’s’’ 200-bev machine costing
    about $150 million; (2) Columbia Univ. physicist S.Devons’ suggestion
    to increase the energy of existing 33-bev machine at Rrookhaven
    National Laboratory to 150-bev, costing about $150 million; and (3)
    incorporating changes in the 200-bev machine being designed by Univ.
    of California to lower costs. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/9/66, E9)
  Soviet rocket pioneer Vladimir Vasilyevich Razumov, presumed to have
    died in Stalinist purges of Leningrad during World War 11, had been
    located and interviewed by Leningradskaya Pravda reporters. Razumov
    had headed the Leningrad Jet Study Group of space enthusiasts until
     Stalin abolished it in 1935. His residence was not disclosed, possibly
    because of his continued association with missile manufacture. (NYT,
     1/10/66, 46C)
January 10: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
     Station carried 51-lb. payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude and impact
    88 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Payload instrumentation failed to
    function properly, however, and desired results were not obtained.
    Flight was last in a series of seven similar experiments conducted by
    NASA for Univ. of Illinois to measure seasonal chang3s and other effects
    in the D- and E-regions of the ionosphere. Previous six launches had
    been conducted successfully from Wallops Station in April, July, and
     /

     November 1964; and June, September, and December 1965. (Wallops
     Release 66-1; NASA Rpt. SRL)
                                                                           11
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 10: An explanation of white dwarf stars-based on study of spectra
    of four stars in constellation Orion gathered during October 1965 NASA
    Aerobee sounding rocket flight-appeared in report released by Dr.
    Donald C. Morton, head of Princeton Univ. rocket program. Results
    indicated that the four stars are hurling matter toward the earth at
    about 4 million mph. This loss of mass, extended over a long period
     of time, would eventually remove up to 95 per cent of the stars’ mass,
    according to Dr. Morton. They would then be white dwarfs. (NYT,
     1/11/66, 6)
  Reported that the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) , which
     met in Paris Nov. 24-26, had agreed that the TD-2 satellite, scheduled
     for launch in 1969 by Douglas Thor-Delta booster purchased from
     NASA, would carry nine solar-ionospheric experiments: (1) topside
     counter to measure radio waves; (2) solar Lyman-alpha radiation
     experiment; (3) a far ultraviolet spectroheliograph experiment; (4)
     x-ray crystal spectrometer; (5) solar particle flux experiments; measure-
     ments of (6) low energy electron fluxes; (7) energy and particle distribu-
     tion of charged ionospheric particles; (8) oxygen and nitrogen light
     emissions; and (9) neutral ionospheric constituents. The 880-lb.
     satellite would be launched into near-polar orbit with 620-mi. apogee
     and 218-mi. perigee. ESRO planned to launch TD-1 stellar astronomy
     satellite in 1968. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 33)
  US. domestic and international scheduled airlines would carry nearly
     160 million passengers and fly nearly 113 billion revenue passenger
     miles by FY 1971, according to FAA% five-year aviation forecasts. Pre-
     dicted airline activity would be almost twice that of FY 1965 when US.
     airlines flew 95-million passengers and 63 billion revenue passenger
     miles. (FAA Release 66-3)
  NASA was considering landing unmanned Lunar Excursion Module (Lem)
     equipped with an Apollo-type lunar television camera on the moon
     before the first manned mission, Aviation Peek reported. Photographs
     from the camera, which would be mounted externally and coupled with
     a scanning device to permit broad coverage, would provide mission
     planners with information on lunar surface characteristics. (Av. Wk.,
     1/10/66, 36)
  Negotiations by U S . Army Corps of Engineers to acquire the 14,981-acre
     Sudden Ranch properties adjacent to Vandenberg AFB marked beginning
     of massive expansion operation for Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)
     program, Missiles and Rockets reported. B/G Joseph S. Bleymaier,
     Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, AFSC Space Systems Div.,
     predicted that within five years, Vandenberg would have “continuous
     manned operations” involving 40 or more launches annually. (M&R,
     1/10/66, 35)
   Soviet life-support systems used in Vostok and Voskhod spacecraft
     appeared to use a sodium superoxide compound as a source of oxygen,
     Dr. A. TK’. Petrocelli, General Dynamics Corp., Electric Boat Div., told
     Missiles and Rockets. Petrocelli estimated the Russians had published
     three times more basic research papers than US. scientists on these
     materials and were continuing efforts to improve life-support systems
     by studying compounds such as new superoxides, peroxides, and
     ozonides. He said they were also searching for new and better carbon
     dioxide absorbers. (M&R, 1/10/66, 33)
12                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 10: Reported that the Westinghouse Apollo TV camera, designed to
     provide standard earth receivers near-continuous, live, black-and-white
     coverage of manned lunar missions, was also adaptable for: (1) use
     in Eva to aid in rendezvous and docking or close inspection of satellites;
     (2) full-color transmission to show true colors of lunar surface and
     space objects; and (3) instant transmission showing effects of con-
     tinuing spaceflight in a biosatelIite on monkeys and other subjects.
     (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 35)
0 Synchronous-orbit television relay satellite capable of providing direct

     service to home receivers for an area equivalent to one sixth of con-
     tinental US. could be launched before 1970, according to preliminary
     company-funded design studies conducted by RCA and GE and presented
     to NASA Hq. officials, Aviation Week reported. Both companies conceded
     the existence of technical problem areas, including the design of
     solar cell arrays 15 to 30 times larger than any previously attempted
     and the lack of a suitable launch vehicle for orbiting 6,000-lb. to
     8,000-lb. satellite, but believed solutions could be devised within the
     existing state-of-the-art. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 115)
  Sen. Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (D-Va.), replaced Sen. Joseph D. Tydings (D-Md.)
     on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. House
    Science and Astronautics Committee membership remained the same.
     (NASA LAR V/1)
  Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) inserted into the Congressional Record a
    tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator: “Dr.
    Dryden was highly respected by his colleagues both as an administrator
    and as a scientist-engineer. He will hold an eminent place when the
    history of man’s accomplishments in space is written. Although the
    country mourns his passing he wiu be long remembered for his many
    contributions to the good of his country.” (CR, 1/10/66, 29)
0 NASA appointed George J. Howick Director of Technology Utilization Div.

    He would succeed Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Deputy Assistant Administrator
    for Technology Utilization who, in addition to his other duties, had
    been serving as Acting Director of the Technology Utilization Div.
    Howick was formerly manager of industrial technology services for Mid-
    west Research Institute. (NASA Release 66-5)
0 GEMINI VII Astronaut Frank Borman and his family were welcomed by a

    parade in their hometown of Tucson, Ariz. Borman, who was given
    the keys to the city and told that a $300,000 planetarium would be
    built in his honor, was also praised in a special resolution passed
    unanimously by the Arizona legislature. He told a press conference he
    had joined the space program to go to the moon and “that’s what I
    want to do.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 1/9/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/11/66)
  No new communication-intelligibility problems were created in a reduced
    pressure environment when helium was added to same oxygen partial
    pressurc , reported USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, according to
    Missiles and Rockets. After conducting a series of 13 simulated flights
    involving 25 subjects and four chamber operators using 8,300 numbers
    and words and 2,200 words in sentences, researchers discovered that
    problems were no greater in 50-50 oxygen-helium atmosphere at 7 psi
    than in pure oxygen at 3.5 or 5 psi, and were often less. (M&R,
    1/10/66,33)
  Prof. Victor Bazykin, member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, said that
    Soviet VOSKHOD 11 Cosmonaut Pave1 Belyayev had received slightly more
                                                                           13
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    radiation (75 millirads) than had his copilot Alexey Leonov, who had
    received about 65 millirads, during the 26-hr. spaceflight Mar. 18, 1965.
    Bazykin said the walls of the spacecraft did not absorb radiation evenly
    and Belyayev was in a more exposed area. (M&R, 1/10/66)
January 10: USN “Southern Cross” program, attempt to convert fleet com-
    munications to secure, long-range over-the-horizon communications
    using techniques such as satellite relay or troposcatter, was undergoing
    reevaluation because of competitive pressure for funds for Vietnam war,
    Aviation Week reported. Youthern Cross” was sponsored by USN
    Bureau of Ships and administered by Naval Electronics Laboratory.
    (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 36)
January 11: Prime goal of space exploration was the development of scien-
    tific capabilities, but it was important to recognize the many other
    benefits accrued from the space program, NASA Administrator James E.
    Webb told YMCA meeting in Oklahoma City: “We are developing, in
    government, in industry, in our universities, the sinews and nerves our
    Nation needs for healthy growth. Scientific discovery is no longer the
    sole province of the lone inventor. It requires an all-systems endeavor
    that calls on all the resources of a nation.. . .
        “NASA reaches across all industry. About 90 per cent of NASA’s
    budget goes out under contract to American industry-to pay for work
    by almost 400,000 men and women in the factories and laboratories of
    20,000 prime and subcontractors. . . .’, (Text)
  AEC deliberately destroyed a Snap-1OA reactor at National Reactor
    Testing Station, Ida. Safety test, designated SNAPTRAN-2, was conducted
    to verify ability to “predict the consequences of an accidental nuclear
    excursion of a Snap reactor.” (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 200)
* Potential of manned space flight in Apollo Applications program was
                                                                              .
    examined by Peter Chew in National Observer. He suggested “. .
                                                                          .
    earth-orbiting astronauts . . . may be able to locate and track icebergs . .
    spot fish-feeding grounds . . . support oceanography . . . produce agri-
    cultural, mineral, and fresh water surveys.” Manned satellites could
    provide “worldwide television coverage” and serve as “relay points for
    deep-space communications.~’ (Nat’l. Obs., 1/11/66; CR, 2/8/66,
    A609-10)
0 FAA announced that Washington (D.C.) National Airport would be open

    to short-haul jet traffic April 24. (FAA Release 66-5)
January 11-12: USN was formulating plans for a Sealab 1 1 mission in an
                                                               1
    effort to expand and intensify its manned undersea activities, Under
    Secretary of the Navy Robert H. B. Baldwin reported at the “Symposium
    of Man’s Extension into the Sea” in Washington, D.C.
       James W. Miller, Office of Naval Research, reported that results of
    the Sealab I1 experiment had indicated that at ocean depths 600 ft. and
    below man could perform useful tasks such as salvaging ships and air-
    craft if he were equipped with electrically heated diving suits, diver-to-
    diver communications, and underwater swimming aids. Outside of
    Sealab 11, the aquanauts had been cold, frustrated, unable to talk to one
    another, limited in their visibiIity, and constantly in danger. Inside the
    capsule, they had experienced difficulty in sleeping and had had speech
    problems because of the helium atmosphere. There were no serious
    medical problems, and “an unprecedented amount of useful work was
    accomplished.” (Text)
14                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 12: President Johnson, in his State of the Union address to the
    joint session of Congress, proposed a “program to construct and to flight-
    test a new supersonic transport airplane that will fly three times the
    speed of sound-in excess of 2,000 miles per hour.” No mention of the
    space program was made in the address. This fact received comment in
    Aviation Week: “Mentioned or not, the National Aeronautics and Space
    Administration has decided to stake out a top spot in domestic prestige
                  ..
    after Apollo. . The agency now will take the initiative.” (Pres. Doc.,
    1/17/66, 31; Av. Wk.,      1/17/66, 25)
e Successful launching of Boosted-Dartsounding rockets carrying chaff pay-
    loads from Natal, Brazil, and NASA Wallops Station marked first meteoro-
    logical sounding rocket launchings conducted from North and South
    America the same day under coordinated NASA-COmiSSaO Nacional de
    Atividades Espaciais (CNAE) experimental program. Natal launch was
    first of a series of 32 launches planned by CNAE for 1966 as part of Inter-
    American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network
     (EXAMETNET). Brazil, Argentina, and US., cooperating in EXAMETNET,
    were planning a north-south chain of stations through the Western
    Hemisphere to conduct coordinated sounding rocket launchings to
    obtain experimental data on hemispheric weather patterns. (NASA
    Release 66-12)
  Ground-test version of S-11, North American Aviation, 1nc.-built 2nd stage
    of NASA’s Saturn v booster, was static-fired at Santa Susana Field
    Laboratory for 354 sec. in successful test of its engine-gimballing and
    liquid-oxygen-cutoff systems. S-11, which developed 1-million-lbs.thrust
    from five Rocketdyne J-2 engines, had been previously ground-tested
    for 18 sec. on Dec. 29, 1965. Firing was monitored by MSFC engineers.
     (MSFC Release 66-17)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb, discussing applications of space
    technology at a meeting of Dallas County Medical Society in Dallas,
    said that ccbyadding to our knowledge of space, and of man in space,
    . . . we are building a very large bank of knowledge that will serve
    generations of man in all major fields of activity.” In a news conference
    in Dallas, he said that the Soviet space program was ahead of the
    U.S.’s “and will be for the next year or two.’’ He said he felt the US.
    would beat the U.S.S.R. to a lunar landing, but was not as confident as
    12 mos. ago: “A year ago I would have said the Saturn V would be far
    bigger than anything they could do. I’m not so sure now. They have a
                              ..   . This year they have flown PROTON I and
    very vigorous program.
    11-both four times the size of Gemini-and they have announced a
    big new rocket.” Asked if the Proton series promised ability to maneuver
    like U S ’ S Gemini spacecraft, Webb replied: “Anytime you can put
    up a spacecraft that weighs 27,000 pounds, you’ve got a capability to
    do a lot of things you cannot do with a smaller craft. You can develop
    the maneuverability, but it’s hard to develop the large capacity of large
    spacecraft-and this is where we have been behind and are still behind.”
     (Text; AP, Denver Post, 1/13/66)
  Three NASA Gemini astronauts-Charles A. Bassett 11, Elliot M. See, Jr.,
    and Eugene A. Cernan-scheduled for a spring mission, completed a
    training program at Univ. of North Carolina’s Morehead Planetarium.
    They used a device that projected simulated Gatv against a stellar
    background. (WI, NYT, 1/13/66, 44)
                                                                         15
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 12: FRC awarded Martin Co. a six-month $200,000 contract to design,
    fabricate, and test a thermal protection system for X-15 experimental
    aircraft that would fly at speeds above 5,000 mph. The 300-lb. system
    would be based on Martin’s MA-25s silicon ablator and would maintain
    air-friction heating at well below the 1,200“Fsafety limit. Contract also
    called for establishment of refurbishment procedures. (NASA Release
    66-11; Martin Release)
0 Royal Aeronautical Society of Great Britain marked 100th anniversary.

    (J/RAS, 1/66)
January 12-13: “Technology gap” between US. and Western Europe was
    discussed at Paris meeting of industry’s scientific officials, sponsored by
    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) ,
    which comprised most non-Communist industrial countries. Recent
    OECD report had stated that US. research effort was at least twice as
    great as Western Europe’s and that Europe could catch up in civilian
    research only by extraordinary effort, but it could not catch up in mili-
    tary and space work. Specific proposals for international research cen-
    ters, international fellowships, and general increase in sharing of
    scientific effort and results were discussed. US. was represented by
    Office of Science and Technology Director Dr. Donald F. Hornig.
    (Mooney, NYT, 1/13/66,63)
January 13: Experimental Hibex (High-E Boost Experiment) missile booster
    was successfully fired on a vertical trajectory and responded in flight
    to preplanned maneuvers in last of series of 10 tests. ARPA said “all test
    objectives of the program were met”: to demonstrate feasibility of high-
    acceleration booster and ability to guide and control a high performance
    vehicle while undergoing trajectory maneuvers; to prove feasibility of
    igniting, burning, and launching a booster from an underground hard-
    ened silo; to institute turning maneuvers to demonstrate structural
    integrity of both vehicle and propellant. (M&R, 1/24/66,9)
0 National Park Service team inspected 18-sq.-mi. tract of proposed .park-

    land for Cape Canaveral National Seashore, adjacent to KSC. Team later
    met with NASA and USAF officials, Florida state personnel, and representa-
    tives of the East Central Florida Planning Council to prepare develop-
    ment plans. (Titusville Star Advocate, 1/14/66; Miami News, 1/25/66)
January 14: Ground-test stage S-IC-F, Boeing-built first stage of NASA’s
    Saturn V booster, was placed aboard the barge Poseidon at NASA Michoud
    Assembly Facility for shipment to KSC, where it would be assembled at
    Launch Complex 39’s Vertical Assembly Building with other ground-
    test vehicle elements: a 2nd stage (S-11-F); a 3rd stage (S-IVB-F); an
    instrument unit (IU-F); and a dummy Apollo spacecraft. Stage was ex-
    pected to arrive at KSC Jan. 21. (NASA Release 66-10; MSFC Release 66-18)
  Memorandum of understanding for cooperative meteorological sounding
    rocket experiments was signed by the Spanish Comisi6n Nacional de
    Investigacicjn del Espacio (CONIE) and NASA. Purpose of project would
    be to obtain synoptic information on wind, temperature, and pressure
    at altitudes between 18 and 36 mi. Sixteen Boosted-Dart and Arcas
    sounding rockets carrying chaff (tuned dipoles) or instrumented
    payloads would be launched from a range in Spain to be operated by
    the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (INTA) .
       CONIE would procure an Arcas launcher, sounding rockets, payloads,
    and other equipment. NASA would provide, on a loan basis, an MPS-19
    radar, van, Boosted-Dart launcher and additional equipment. NASA also
16                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     would train Spanish personnel in equipment operations and mainte-
     nance. Scientific results of project would be made available to world
     scientific community. (NASA Release 66-20)
January 14: NASA invited aerospace industries to propose definition studies
     of integrating experiment equipment to be used in spacecraft for
     manned Apollo Applications missions. Studies would define experiments
     integration work in the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn launch
     vehicle instrument units, and top stages of Saturn IB and V vehicles;
     they would include consideration of mission analysis, experiment equip-
     ment, installation and integration of equipment, specialized crew re-
     quirements, launch facility requirements, tracking, and other support
     requirements. Two or more firms would be selected for negotiation of
     parallel nine-month study contracts. (NASA Release 66-14)
  NASA Inventions and Contributions Board granted United Aircraft Corp. a
     waiver of title rights in all inventions made, or to be made, under NASA
     contract, which involved the RL-10 rocket engine. (KB)
  Two major changes effected by reorganization of activities of NASA LRC:
     appointment of Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, former head of the Agena
     Project office, as Assistant Director for Launch Vehicles and establish-
     ment of an Air-Breathing Engine Div., to be headed by J. Howard Childs.
      (LRC Release 66-2)
0 Astronaut Frank Borman returned to Gary, Ind., to help the city celebrate

     Frank Borman Day and start a pear-long observance of its 60th anni-
     versary. He said at a news conference that “it is inevitable” that the
     U.S. would lose a crew in its space program and that he hoped the public
     was “mature enough to accept the sacrifice.” (UPI, N.Y. Her. Trib.,
     1/15/66; AP, NYT, 1/15/66,22; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/66, A2)
Januazv 15: Sir Bernard Lovell. director of Jodrell Bank Ewerimental Sta-
     ti&, U.K., announced tha; Soviet space tracking statio; in the Crimea
     would send signals to Jodrell Bank via Venus for an entire 225-day
     Venusian year. Sir Bernard said that by following Venus during one
     complete solar revolution, scientists hoped to gain further information
     on exact distances of planets from each other and the sun; nature of the
     hidden surface of Venus; changes in the very slow rotation of Venus;
     and conditions in space between earth and Venus. (NYT, 1/16/66,24)
  Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, predicted in re-
     sponse to questions in an interview with the Chicago Tribune that there
     would be at least four Gemini flights during the year: “We may even
     get off a manned Apollo flight before the end of the year.” Duration of
     the flight would depend on success of test flights of unmanned Apollos.
      (Chic. Trib., 1/16/66)
  Second-stage flight prototype of Lockheed Propulsion CO.’S 156-in. solid
     motor was successfully static-fired at the company’s Potrero, Calif.,
     facility. Burn-time was 72 sec. for total 1-million-lb. thrust. Pressure
     was 655 psi and thrust vector control system made three complete
     cycles as programed. This was Lockheed‘s second and final firing under a
     $5.5-million USAF contract. (M&R, 1/24/66, 10)
  USAF XB-70 research bomber flew at 45,000-ft. to 47,000-ft. altitudes in
     test flight from Edwards AFB, to collect data for development of super-
                              NYT,
     sonic transports. ( m ~ , 1/16/66, 60)
   Sergey Pavlovich Korolev, “chief constructor of space systems for the
     Soviet Union,” died in Moscow during surgery, Tass reported. Korolev
     had been active in rocketry since the early 1930’s and had directed
                                                                            17
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    gathering of information from captured German rocket scientists after
    World War 11. As head of space system design for the Soviet Union,
    Korolev’s responsibilities had ranged from SPUTNIK I in 1957 to VOSKHOD
    11 manned spacecraft. He also designed the Luna series of unmanned
    spacecraft and possibly the Zond series. (Tass, 1/15/66; UPI, rush.
    Post, 1/16/66, A6; NYT, 1/16/66,82)
January 15: Boeing Co. announced plans to build and equip an $11-million
    laboratory at its Vertol Div. facility, Morton, Pa., for R&D of vertical
    takeoff and landing aircraft. (Boeing Go. Release)
January 16: Astronaut David R. Scott would attempt-during about 90 min.
    outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft-to crawl about using hand
    holds, move through space using a maneuvering gun with nine times
    the capability of that used by Astronaut Edward H. White 11, and
    unscrew bolts at small mechanic’s station on the spacecraft, NASA
    announced at MSC news conference. Gemini VI11 mission, designed to
    test man’s ability to maneuver in space and the first rendezvous and
    docking mission, would take place before the end of the first quarter of
    1966. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager, said “the main
    significance of the mechanical work is that he [Scott] will be evaluating
    a tool that is specifically designed for space.” The special tool contained
    a motor to eliminate need for twisting motion by the astronaut that
    would swing his body around when he was weightless. Target for the
    rendezvous and docking-Gatv or Augmented Target Docking Adapter
     (Atda)-had not been chosen. (AP, NYT, 1/17/66, 12)
       Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of MSC’S Apollo Spacecraft Office, said
    in an interview in Houston that the U S . would achieve its goal of land-
    ing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth before the end
    of this decade: ‘?NOnew inventions are needed. No breakthrough is
    needed. This certainly doesn’t mean that it is going to be easy. It is not
    going to be, but the technology needed to do the job is known now.”
    He stressed that the pace that had been set would have to be maintained
    until the goal was achieved. (Maloney, Houston Post, 1/16/66)
a CBS newsman Walter Cronkite received the annual TWA award for out-
    standing reporting of aerospace subjects at a ceremony in Phoenix,
    Ariz., sponsored by the airline. (AP, NYT, 1/18/66,62)
  NAS Space Science Board issued the first in series of three reports
    entitled Space Research: Directions f o r the Future. Report, prepared at
            request, outlined research objectives for planetary and lunar ex-
    NASA’s
    ploration in 1970-1985. Compiled by working group led by Dr. Gordon
    J. F. MacDonald of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at
    UCLA, Part I repeated NAS’ 1964 recommendation that top priority in
    post-Apollo program be assigned to unmanned exploration of Mars.
    Report suggested secondary importance be divided equally between de-
    tailed investigation of lurain and unmanned exploration of Venus, and
    completed priority list with other major planets, comets and asteroids,
    Mercury, Pluto, and interplanetary dust. Major recommendations were:
    launching an orbiting planetary observatory, delivering a drop sonde to
    resolve question of high Venusian surface temperature, developing
    fine-pointing control, accurate to 10 sec. of arc, for rocket guidance, and
    considering enlargement of NASA deep-space communication capabilities
    beyond present plans. To support outlined scientific program, report
    recommended : (1) increasing manpower and facilities available to lunar
    and planetary science programs; (2) development by NASA of substantial
18                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    program for observation of planets through ground-based telescopes;
    (3) early opportunities for experienced observational scientists to ex-
       ore the lurain; (4) joint study by NASA OSSA and OMSF of early use of
      aturn V for planetary exploration, with special emphasis on a Martian
    capsule landing in the early 1970’s; (5) increased attention by NASA to
    development of research and educational capabilities in theoretical
    sciences related to study of the solar system. Regarding funding of space
    research, the report said: rr. . . since we believe that the exploration of
    the solar system bears so directly on the major central scientific ques-
    tions of our time, we anticipate that unmanned experiments will probably
    provide the most significant contribution to the program of planetary
                     .
    exploration . . we recommend that the percentage of support of lunar
    and planetary exploration be maintained over the 1965-1985time period
    and be devoted predominantly to scientific objectives and that programs
    whose objectives are other than scientific be started only as additional
    resources become available.” It said there should be a gradual shi€t in
    emphasis from the moon to the planets, progressing toward nearly
    equivalent expenditures for lunar and planetary exploration in the 1970-
    1985 period. (Text; NAS-NRC Release)
January 17: NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA
    Wallops Station carried scientific payload to estimated 83-mi. (134-km.)
    altitude in GSFC experiment designed to measure spectral irradiance of
    the stars Sirius and Rigel. Control system, star tracker, and ultraviolet
    stellar spectrometer performed satisfactorily. Brief data periods, caused
    by failure of fine jet pressure regulator on control system gas supply re-
    sulting in high thrust, had possibly aided establishment of flux values
    at discrete wavelength intervals. (Wallops Release 66-4; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Urgency of NASA decision on post-Apollo program was discussed by Karl
    Abraham in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. He noted Saturn V’s potential
    for solar system exploration and many scientists’ fear of overcommit-
    ment to investigation of the moon. Among other factors involved,
    Abraham said, NASA “must consider how particular programs will affect
     its farflung field centers and their specialized work. . .some are so highly
     specialized that a sharp change of direction in rocketry or spacecraft
     and satellite objectives would tear them apart unless sufficient advance
     time were allowed for gradual changeovers to the new missions.”
     (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/17/66; CR, 2/10/66, A704)
  Air traffic control radar equipment which could automatically display the
     third dimension of aircraft position-altitude-would        go into service in
     New York City metropolitan area by late 1967, according to FAA. Present
     radar equipment employed by FAA air traffic controllers provided only
     two-dimensional-distance and direction-picture of air traffic. (FAA
     Release 66-6)
0 AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg said in a speech at Georgetown Univ.,

     Washington, D.C., that man might be able to create life “before the end
     of this decade.” Science, he said, has amplified man’s senses so thar he
     could now “see” stars beyond what was once thought to be the outer
     edge of the universe, rchear77     radio signals from the farthest galaxies
     (and one day might hear communications from intelligent beings far
     out in space), and observe magnetic fields and radiations to which his
     original senses were blind. Human beings are learning how to replace
     diseased organs and understand the nature of life itself, Dr. Seaborg
     noted. He said that even before man managed to create life, science
                                                                          19
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    might discover how to control mental illness, live and work under the
    sea and in the depths of space, and use the power of the atom to cut
    passes through mountains or fight cancer. (Text; AEC Release S-3-66)
January 17: Of President Johnson’s State of the Union message, Robert
    Hotz said in Aviation Week: “The President’s statement that he will
    ‘propose a program to construct and to flight test a new supersonic
    transport plane that will fly three times the speed of sound, in excess of
    2,000 mph.’ came as somewhat of a surprise in view of the stretched out
    program he had been sponsoring. Apparently, this statement means that
    some funds for actual prototype supersonic transport construction will
    be requested in Fiscal 1967, although the size of this request may dismay
    the management entrusted with the task of building the prototype in
    time to remain competitive with the Anglo-French Concorde.” (Hotz,
    Av. Wk., 1/17/66,21)
January 17-18: NASA launched five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from
    NASA Wallops Station between 5:39 p.m. and 6:31 a.m. Each rocket was
    programed to eject a vapor cloud of reddish or bluish color as its altitude
    increased from 30 to 130 mi. Experiments were to measure wind veloci-
    ties and directions at various altitudes; motion of the trails was photo-
    graphed from five camera sites within a 100-mi.radius of Wallops Island.
    Launchings were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to NASA
    Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Release 66-13; Wallops Release
    66-4; NASA Rpt. SRL)
Junuary 18: Scheduled test of Apollo Launch Escape System (Les) at WSMR
    was postponed indefinitely due to heavy cloud cover. Countdown for
    the Little Joe I1 had proceeded to minus 30 min. [See Jan. 20.1 (WI,
    NYT, 1/19/66,38)
  NASA Langley Research Center awarded a $5-million contract to Virginia
    Associated Research Center to operate NASA Space Radiation Effects
    Laboratory-a $15-million facility established by L ~ R Cfor research in
    support of national programs in space technology-through mid-1970.
     (LaRC Release)
0 HL-10 lifting body vehicle, designed and developed by NASA Langley Re-

    search Center to help solve control problems of future manned space-
     craft entering earth’s atmosphere, was formally delivered to NASA by
    its builder, Northrop Corp., in ceremonies at company’s Hawthorne,
    Calif., plant. The 22-ft.-longY4,600-lb., wingless, tri-finned research
    vehicle would be dropped from B-52 aircraft for flight tests at 45,000-ft.
    altitude and mach .8 (530 mph). (LaRC Release)
  Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), emphasizingthe need for expanded efforts
    in the field of oceanography, said before the National Space Club in
     Washington, D. C., that oceanography was becoming increasingly re-
     lated to space. He noted the recent NASA-Naval Oceanographic Office
     agreement whereby NOO would coordinate all investigations about pos-
     sible applications of manned earth orbital operations in the field of
     oceanography. He suggested that this program “be expanded formally to
     include unmanned operations as well.” He urged a national program
                                                             ..
     with national gods, “coordinated by one agency like .         [NASA]” and
     given adequate funds--“an all-wet NASA.” Karth said he did not think
     that post-Apollo programs, such as manned expeditions to Mars or to the
     moons of Jupiter would gain “general acceptance” until “we have solved
     the continually worsening home planet problems of hunger and poverty.”
     (Text)
20                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 18: U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space had proposed
    a world conference on outer space to be held in New York. The con-
    ference should examine the impact of space data on education and com-
    munications-issues of major importance even to poor and economically
    retarded states. (NYT, 1/20/66, 12; SBD, 1/31/66, 185)
0 Funeral of Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was held in Red Square.

    After eulogies by Leonid Smirnov, deputy chairman of the U.S.S.R.
    Council of Ministers; Mstislav Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R.
    Academy of Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary;
    and Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the funeral procession moved to the
    Kremlin wall where the urn containing Korolev’s ashes was placed in a
    niche.
       Commentary in the New York Times: “Death has finally declassified
    the role and identity of Academician Sergei P. Korolev, the man who
    provided the scientific and technical leadership of the vast Soviet rocket
    program. The extraordinary pomp of his state funeral in Red Square
    contrasted sharply with the almost complete anonymity imposed on him
    while he was alive. In the most fruitful years of his career, the man who
    led the Soviet Union’s march into the cosmos from the first sputnik to
    Leonov’s ‘walk in space’ was normally referred to in the Soviet press
    only as the mysterious ‘chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were powerful
    enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photo-
    graph the back side of the moon. But they were too weak to break the
    chains of secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause he
    deserved.” (Tass, 1/18/66; NYT, 1/20/66, 31)
January 19: On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Daniel B. Brewster (D-Md.)
    paid tribute to the late Hugh L. Dryden and proposed “that Wallops
    Island be renamed Dryden Island, asgin appropriate memorial to his im-
    mense contribution to space exploration.” Dr. Dryden was born on the
    Maryland Eastern Shore in Pocomoke City. (CR, 1/19/66, 583)
  ComSatCorp awarded a $60,000 study contract to France’s Centre National
    #Etudes des T616communications for engineering analysis of a system
    of phased communications satellites operating in 12-hr. 30”-inclined
    orbits. It would include analysis of a 12-satellite or 15-satellite system,
    amount of coverage, orbit stability, launch conditions, types of com-
    munications, and other factors required to maintain a given quality of
    service over a five-year period. Work would be performed within 180
    days. (ComSatCorp Release)
0 USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from

    WTR. (US.   Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
         contributions to multidisciplinary research in support of develop-
  NASA’s
    ment were discussed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb at a meeting
    of the West Point Society of the District of Columbia. Webb described
    how NASA programs fulfilled need pointed out by the late NASA Deputy

-   Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden in 1949 for cooperative research
    channeled ‘‘into directions permitting early application.” (Text)
  Fred J. Drinkwater 111, aerospace research engineer, scientist, and test
    pilot at NASA Ames Research Center, received the Flight Safety Founda-
    tion’s Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award for his “significant

-   contributions to the safety and efficiency of flight testing.” Award was
    established by United Aircraft Corp. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66, 13)
  Radiation, Inc., announced receipt of a $2-million contract to design and
    build a “data acquisition center” for the British-French 1,450-mph
                                                                           21
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Concorde supersonic aircraft scheduled to make its first fight in 1971.
    During early performance tests, data tape recorded in fight would serve
    as design checks for the aircraft’s builders. (NYT,1/20/66,58)
January 19: Electronic multispectral sensors-high-altitude scanners so sen-
    sitive they could tell when apples were ripe enough to be picked-had
    been developed for agricultural and forestry use, Boston Globe reported.
    Sensors were intended for use on orbiting spacecraft to give reports on
    an entire forest or farmland on one pass; they were being programed for
    a wide variety of applications, such as measurements of an entire district
    of orchards and grain fields. Signals would be converted into photo-
    graphic form for quick analysis. (Barton, Boston Globe, 1/19/66, 6)
January 20: Little Joe I1 launch vehicle boosted a five-ton unmanned Apollo
    spacecraft to 15-mi. altitude from WSMR in test of ability of Launch
    Escape System (Les) to rescue the spacecraft from an abort at medium
    altitude. Planned pitch-up maneuver was executed and satisfactory
    launch escape vehicle performance demonstrated; successful canard
    operation caused command module to stabilize in proper attitude. After
    jettison of the Les, the hard part of the boost protective cover, and the
    forward heat shield, command module made safe descent on its three
    main parachutes. Test, conducted at maximum-Q conditions, was
    slightly marred by telemetry failure. (NASA Release 65-348; WI, NYT,
    1/21/66,10; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/21/66)
* NSF’S Special Commission on Weather Modification issued a report recom-
    mending greatly increased research on international weather modifica-
    tion and the behavior of the weather and climate in general. Report also
    recommended thorough studies to gauge the biological, social, economic,
    political, and legal consequences of all kinds of weather modification-
    both “deliberate attempts to modify local weather conditions for the
    good of the total population” and changes that “man’s increasingly
    large and complex society bring about inadvertently.” Foundation’s
    report was a companion to one published Jan. 7 by NAS. (Text)
  H.R. 8210, a bill to provide US. tax immunity to the European Space
    Research Organization, was reported to the Senate by the Finance
    Committee. Floor action had not yet been scheduled. (CR, 1/20/66,719)
  Dr. Pyotr Kapitsa, director of the Institute of Physical Problems of the
    Soviet Academy of Sciences, deplored the productivity gap between U S .
    and Soviet science in an article in Komsomolskaya Pravda. He urged
    U.S.S.R. to weed out unproductive research workers periodically: “It
    would . . . be possible to transfer 15 to 20 percent of our staffs from
    science to industry every year and to take into research well-prepared
    and qualified youth. In this manner we would improve the quality of the
    scientific staffs and also not close the door of science in the face of the
    young.” He noted that the number of scientific research workers was
    dmost the same in the two countries-800,000 Americans compared
    with 700,000 in the Soviet Union-and said that US. scientists were
    responsible for one third of the world’s scientific output (in terms of
    research papers published) compared with only one sixth for Soviets.
     (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/20/66, 2; Science, 1/28/66, 432)
  NASA Assistant Administrator Breene M. Kerr presented a charter to the
    recently formed Northern Alabama Chapter of the American Society for
    Public Administration. Kerr announced NASA Administrator James E.
    Webb had been elected to succeed Harlan Cleveland as president-elect
22                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     of ASPA. Cleveland had resigned when appointed ambassador to NATO.
     (Marshall Star, 1/26/66, 1)
January 20: Blanche W. Noyes, FAA air marking specialist and veteran pilot,
     was awarded the Brazilian Medal of Merit of Santos Dumont at the
     Brazilian chancery in Washington, D.C., for outstanding and meritorious
     services to Brazilian aviation. Mrs. Noyes was the first American avi-
     atrix to receive the award. (FAA Release 66-8)
January 21: Full 2X-min. duration test of fourth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4)
     was conducted on MSFC’S East Test Area facility. S-IB-4 would leave
     MSFC in late January for Michoud Assembly Facility for post-firing check-
     out. (MSFC Release 66-25)
0 Astronaut Donald K. Slayton received an honorary Doctor of Engineering

     degree from Michigan Technological Univ. in ceremony at MSC. Degree
     was conferred “in recognition of high attainments in engineering.” As
     MSC Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, Slayton directed the
     Astronaut Office, Aircraft Operations Office, and the Flight Crew Sup-
     port Div. (MSC Roundup, 1/21/66,2)
0 Discussing Federal subsidization of scientific research in Science, Don K.

     Price, dean of Harvard Univ. Graduate School of Public Administration
     and new AAAS President, said: “We have to learn how to fit the research
     interests of free scientists into a pattern of public policy, and to take
     account of the need for balanced national development while building
     up our existing centers of high scientific quality. And we need, equally
     obviously, to devote our knowledge to the service of human welfare, as
     effectively as it has been enlisted in the service of national defense. We
     obviously have not yet learned how to do all these things. But we can at
     least begin, if we are not afraid to make some changes in some of our
     most stubborn political and administrative habits.” (Science, 1/21/66,
     290)
   France was planning to build rockets bigger than the missiles now being
     developed for her nuclear strike force, reported an article in Air et
      Cosmos. One purpose was to enable France to orbit a European comsat
     without the help of an American-built launch vehicle. A second goal
     would be to provide France with advanced, solid-fuel boosters that could
     carry one-ton thermonuclear warheads over intercontinental distances
     or orbit military surveillance satellites. (Air et Cosmos, 1/21/66)
 * K. T. Keller, retired president and board chairman of Chrysler Corp.,
     died in London. He had been a special adviser to DOD, in 1950 had been
     appointed director of guided missiles by Gen. George C. Marshall, then
     Secretary of Defense. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/22/66, B4)
January 22: COSMOS cv containing “scientific equipment . . . designed to
      continue the exploration of outer space” was launched by the Soviet
     Union, Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 324 km. (201 mi.);
     perigee, 204 km. (126.7 mi.); period, 89.7 min.; inclination, 65”. In-
     struments were functioning normally. (Tass, 1/22/66)
 0 Dr. George Veis of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory revealed

     that the earth’s mean radius, measured from satellite observations, was
     3,963.203 mi. Radius determination was based on analysis of more than
     46,500 observations of 13 different satellites. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 1/22/66)
   Advanced Minuteman ICBM was launched from a modernized Minuteman I
     silo at Vandenberg AFB as part of a series of tests to verify modernization
     procedures for upgrading of Minuteman I silos and control centers.
           NYT, 1/23/66,57)
      (WI,
                                                                          23
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 23: Environmental Science Services Administration (ESSA) of the
    US. Department of Commerce announced creation of an interagency
    committee to coordinate Government research efforts in clear air tur-
    bulence (Cat). (ESSA Release 66-3)
* NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight
    propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized
    by Congress in 1940, the NACA facility was originally called the Aircraft
    Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion
    Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former NACA
    Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when NACA facili-
    ties and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility
    became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional ap-
    propriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research
    and development laboratory valued at $200 million.
       Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said:
    “Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past
    decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but
    we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will
    live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe
         c
    at close range the interplanetary exploits of US. astronauts. The past
    25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and
    space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to
    attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500
    mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later
    Mars.” (LRC Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; WI, Miami
    Herald, 1/24/66)
0 NASA Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill

    Research Range carried 19-grenadepayload to 78-mi. (125-km.) altitude.
    GSFC experiment obtained temperature, wind, density, and pressure data
    during auroral condition at altitudes to 56 mi. (90 km.) by recording
    sound arrivaIs of explosions of all 19 grenades. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
January 24: President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY I967
    budget said in part: “Just over 60 years ago man entered the age of con-
    trolled flight. Today, men orbit the earth at speeds measured in thou-
    sands of miles an hour. In 1967, less than 6 years after this Nation set
    the goal of a manned landing on the moon within the present decade, we
    will begin unmanned test flights of the giant Saturn V rocket and the
    Apollo spacecraft-the complete space vehicle required for achieving
    that goal. Later on in the 1960’s, we will undertake the manned lunar
    mission itself.
       CC
         Our many space achievements-both manned and unmanned-have
    dramatically advanced our scientific understanding and technological
    capabilities. They have also demonstrated OUT remarkable progress in
    the peaceful exploration of space. In 1967, our large space projects will
    be progressing from the more expensive development phase into opera-
    tional status, and new projects of equivalent cost will not be started.
    Accordingly, expenditures of the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-
    ministration are estimated to decline by $300 million in 1967 [as opposed
    to the new authorization requested in the FY 1967.budgetI. This level
    will sustain our progress in space exploration and continue the advance-
    ment of science and technology.” (Text, CR, 1/24/66,861; Pres. DOC.,
     1/31/66, 88-9)
  President Johnson sent FY 1967 budget request to Congress including total
24                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    space budget of $6.8 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.012
    billion (NASA had originally requested $5.58 billion) ; DOD, $1.65 billion;
    AEC, $173.7 million; Environmental Science Services Administration,
    $27 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.8 million.
       NASA R&D program was a major area of reduced expenditure with re-
    duction of approximately$186 million (comparedwithFY 1966appropria-
    tion) mostly absorbed by the sharp drop in requirements for Project
    Gemini. With only three flights remaining to be made in FY 1967, the
    total budget dropped from $226.6 million in FY 1966 to $40.6 million
    requested for FY 1967. Sum included $19.1 million for the spacecraft
    and $8.5 million for mission support. There was also a reduction of some
    $54 million in lunar and planetary exploration and $12 million in physics
    and astronomy. Funding for Project Apollo increased slightly-from
    $2.967 billion in FY 1966 to $2.974 billion, including $1.2 billion for
    spacecraft (as compared with FY 1966’s $l.l7-billion level). $100 million
    requested for Apollo Applications (Aa) program-once considered the
    single program with any potential for new major funding-was not
    approved.
       Major portions of the DOD space budget would be spent on develop-
    ment of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)-which would be slowed
    down with no increase in funds over the $150 million allowed in FY
    1966; development and launch operations costs of the Titan I11 launch
    vehicle; continuation of the reconnaissance and Vela nuclear detection
    satellite programs; navigational satellite launches; and initial launch of
    a satellite by the Defense Communications Satellite System. DOD
    budget also provided for initiation of procurement of the FB-111B air-
    craft and development of a new short-range air-to-surface missile
            -
     @ram)
       AEC s budget allotment for space programs included $78 million for
    Project Rover; $39.5 million for testing of the Nerva engine system;
    and $8.2 million for testing of the Snap-8 nuclear reactor.
       ESSAYS Tiros weather satellite program would involve expenditures
    in FY 1967 of $17 million for spacecraft and launchings and approxi-
    mately $10 million for data acquisition, processing, and archiving.
       FAA’s FY 1967 budget request for $758 million contained $80 million
    for six more months of supersonic transport research. (Text; Wash.
    Post, 1/25/66, A10; Schmeck, NYT, 1/25/66,1; Av. Wk., 1/31/66,23,
     29,30; M&R, 1/31/66,25)
January 24: NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at
    NASA FY 1967 budget briefing that the “extremely stringent budget”
     ($5.012 billion) approved by President Johnson and the BOB was the
    result of pressing needs of the Vietnam war and the Great Society.
    Major loser in the NASA budget reduction was the Apollo Applications
     (Aa) program: “The option to go ahead or not [on the Aa program]
    will be made in 1968 [budget],” he said. Although NASA had wanted
    $5.58 billion to carry out its FY 1967 program, Seamans said, the $5.012
    billion would make it possible to continue ‘‘a good space program” with
    most of the projects intact. Yet, NASA did ‘bot have the funds we would
    like to see” for Apollo. He said the approved FY 1967 Apollo budget of
    $2.974 billion (compared to $2.967 billion in FY 1966) would give the
    US.“a chance of lunar landing in this decade,” but there were no funds
     “for major difficulties that might occur.” (Transcript)
e NASA had begun contract negotiations with TRW Systems to convert the
                                                                            25
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     prototype Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) into a flight observa-
     tory. Negotiations might also include option to fabricate an additional
     flight observatory. Contract was expected to be for $9 million. (NASA
     Release 66-16)
January 24: Major decisions on the future of space exploration facing the
     Administration received comment by William J. Coughlin in Msie      isls
                                       ..
     and Rockets: “History teaches us . that such exploration is more likely
     to come in waves, one overlapping the other, than in single units, each
     with a distinct beginning and a distinct end.
         “Man strives for the most distant objective within reach of his tech-
     nology. And as the first explorers try and try again on that far reach,
     others-at first other explorers and scientists, then those scouts of com-
     merce, miners and trappers, then businessmen, settlers and shop-
     keepers-follow in their wake to prove and develop what courage has
     proven attainable.” (Coughlin, M&R, 1/24/66, 46)
   NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
     carried instrumented payload to estimated 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude.
     Experiment conducted for Univ. of Michigan measured ambient air
     density from 19-75-mi. (30-120-km.) altitudes by radar track of two
     falling Mylar spheres ejected at plus 72 sec. Flight also measured solar
     heating effects by comparing diurnal variations of measurements. (NASA
     Rpt. SRL)
0 NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.

     Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy
     Council in Washington, D.C.: “We in NASA do not feel that the planning
                                                               ..
     of our space programs is the prerogative of NASA alone. . The partici-
     pants should include men from all walks of life-national, political, and
     intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all
      informed citizens-not just scientists and engineers nor those who are
      presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles
      and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: “The uprated
                                                      ...
      Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB]         is capable of placing
                               ..                              ..
      40,000 pounds in orbit. . The Saturn V launch vehicle . provides the
                                                                ..
      power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . The Apollo
      spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Com-
                      .
      mand Module . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey.
      The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines
      and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar
      orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly
      Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar
              .. .
      surface.      We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate
      of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight
      Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
 0 Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said surgeons would have to remove a

      callus, formed on his left forearm after he broke it in a July 1964
      motorcycle accident in Bermuda, before he could be considered for
      another spaceflight. Ability to rotate the arm properly was hampered.
       (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/66, A2;AP, Chic. T i . 1/25/66)
                                                        rb,
 * Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science
      Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the US. was
      the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S.R., U.K.,
      and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific
      revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal,
26                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the
    chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3)
January 24-26: At AIAA Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City,
    Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 AIAA president. Dr. C.
    Stark Draper, chairman of MIT’S Dept. of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
    gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of “informetics”
    i n modern flight systems.
       NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications
    Dr. Homer E. Newel1 chaired a special “Space Sciences Report” plenary
    session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the
    interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt
    Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as
    interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature
    did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ en-
    vironment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round
    trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus ccswingby,’y
    according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of
    Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days.
        Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal
    speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: “Yesterday, President
    Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress.
     ...   This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating re-
    sources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing com-
    mitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing com-
    mitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemploy-
    ment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s
    budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated
    year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of
    mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more
    than $5 billion for NASA’s in this enterprise have been requested. . . .
                               part
        “It is within this framework that the NASA program has been ham-
    mered out-not representing the sum of our program demands. How-
    ever, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past week-
    end, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space
    research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration
    and unmanned probes and satellites.
        “We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the
    planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so
    rich in other needs. . . .
        re
          We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer
    a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities
    are in hand instead of in the future.
       “. . . The program that we have laid out for NASA for the coming year
    will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It
    will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in
    space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up
    with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong com-
    petition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation
    for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide
    an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific
    investigation, technological application and operational experience. It
    provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and
    careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It
                                                                           27
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been
    built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true
    national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s
    minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between
    the intellect of man and the unknown.”
       Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convoca-
    tion by L/G James Doolittle (USAFR) : “On the second of December 1965
    the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders;
    aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its
    advancement; astronautics iost its great ambassador at home and at large
    and those fortunate of us-who had been privileged to know and work
    with him-lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate.
       “Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of
    his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person-a man who strove
    prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and
    courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked
                                                              ..
    hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. .
       “Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public
    servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all
    the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We
    will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and grati-
    tude, for excellence endures.”
       Goddard Award, AIAA’S highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P.
    von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson
    AFB, for “his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first suc-
    cessful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W.
    Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D.
    Lewis, Project Engineer, UAC Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for “their
    contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion
    instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of
    suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket en-
    gines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice
    president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 recon-
    naissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his “production of
    two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design in-
    novation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing tech-
    niques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S.
    ascendeney in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was
    given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for “basic
    research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases,
    and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; AIAA Re-
    lease; AIAA Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
January 25: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CVI with instrumentation to continue
    studies of outer space. Initial orbital data: apogee, 564 km. (350 mi.);
    perigee, 290 km. (180 mi.); period, 92.8 min.; inclination, 48.4’. On-
    board equipment was functioning normally. (”ass, 1/25/66)
  NASA MSC announced that Astronaut John Young would be command pilot
    of Gemini 10; pilot would be Astronaut Michael Collins. No date had
    been set for the Gemini X mission. (UPI, Wash. Daily News, 1/25/66)
* FS-3 nuclear reactor electric power system designed for use in space com-
    pleted a full year of generating electricity continuously and without
    external control. Test far exceeded known continuous power operation
    of a nuclear reactor power plant of any type. FS-3 was a prototype nu-
28                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    clear reactor space power system derived from the 500-watt Snap-1OA
    unit that became the world’s first nuclear reactor system to operate in
    space in April 1965. (AEC Release J-19)
January 25: Dr. Philip Morrison, MIT physics professor, called for $1 million
    from NSF for five telescopes identical to the one on Mt. Palomar, pres-
    ently the world‘s largest. He said that “properly situated in various parts
    of the world, these instruments could peer almost to the edge of creation
        .
    . . and perhaps unlock the secret of the origin of the universe.” Dr.
    Morrison spoke in a panel discussion on cosmology at MIT. (Hines,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/66, A20)
0 A 2,000-mph SR-71 (YF-12A) jet reconnaissance aircraft crashed in north-

    eastern New Mexico after an explosion during a routine flight from
    Edwards AFB. Lockheed test pilot James T. Zwayer was killed. Aircraft
    had been built for USAF by Lockheed as successor to the U-2 and had
    been undergoing tests since December 1964. (UPI, Wash. Post, 1/26/66,
    12; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/66, A5)
0 Wall Street Journal editorial on the FY 1967 budget: “For the first time

    since . . . [NASA] was formed, space spending will decline. The $300 mil-
    lion drop, to $5.3 billion [in expenditures], is attributed to lower de-
    velopment costs for some major programs and a decision not to initiate
    big new efforts.” (WSJ, 1/25/66, 6)
  International conference on outer space to mark 10th anniversary of first
    artificial satellite (1967) was proposed by U.S.S.R. Academician A. A.
    Blagonravov to working group of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses
    of Outer Space. European site was suggested for conference, which
    “would provide information for peoples in all countries and training for
    the developing countries.” (Rossi, CSM, 1/26/66)
0 Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office&f Science and Technology, said

    in an interview with Robert Cahn of Christian Science Monitor: “There
    are two kinds of breakthroughs. There are those which come through
    completely new insight and understanding, which is what we usually
    mean by a scientific breakthrough. You might consider as scientific
    breakthroughs the discovery of a new kind of nuclear force or the dis-
    covery of a new fundamental particle. Then there are the more common
     breakthroughs in technology-the harnessing of principles in new and
     unusual ways to achieve the ends you want. Sending a man to the moon
     and back is one of these.” (Cahn, CSM, 1/25/66)
January 25-27: House Committee on Science and Astronautics and its panel
     of advisers on science and technology held 7th annual meeting on
     “Government, Science, and Public Policy.” In keynote address, Vice
     President Hubert Humphrey urged closing of “gap between public
     policy and advancing science and technology . . . when NASA comes to a
     great university with a grant, it is like planting a field of gold. There is a
     harvest soon to be reaped, a whole new partnership that creates new
     wealth, the wealth of brain power, of scientific knowledge, and the end
     product.”
          Guest panelist Lord C. P. Snow, joint parliamentary secretary of
     U.K.’s Ministry of Technology, told Committee that U.K. had no inten-
     tion of becoming totally dependent on U.S. technology: “By and large,
     our technological position is uncomfortable, and we have got to change
            ..                                             .
     i t . before we get our economy sturdy again. . . It will take ten years
     to do all that has to be done. But it will be done.” Lord Snow also made
     these points: (1) if U.K. could not maintain a high competence in certain
                                                                           29
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    areas of advanced technology, she would lose her talented young men,
    “slide into somnolence and be no good” to herself, America, or the
    world; (2) the computer or cybernetic revolution would be the biggest
    revolution mankind had known; (3) mathematics would “take on a new
    relevance in all advanced societies.” Noting danger that allocational de-
    cisions for research in pure and appIied science may involve “too much
    concentration of power,” Lord Snow added: “The scientific results-
    not the technological results-. . . of observational and radioastronomy
    have been greater by an order of magnitude than the scientific results of
    space exploration.”
       In discussion period, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Cal Tech president, com-
                ..
    mented: “.      though I think I would agree with you generally, I hope
                                                                     ..
    you do not minimize the scientific results that have come from. recent
    space exploration flights-the understanding of the earth’s magneto-
    sphere, the nature of the solar wind, our closeup views of Venus, the
    Moon, and Mars have added a very substantial amount to our under-
                                                                     .”
    standing . . . of these objects and of interplanetary space . . When
    Lord Snow replied that %pace things are interesting, but not at the
    moment to the same degree” as radioastronomy, Dr. DuBridge said:
    ‘%ive us another 20 years.”
        Dr. Charles C. Price, Univ. of Pennsylvania chemist, pleaded for sup-
    port of more basic research in the areas of living systems and suggested
    that (‘the more applied agencies such as NASA, MH and AEC put increased
    emphasis on the support of fundamental research and education in
                  .”
    chemistry . . (Proceedings,House Comm. on Science and Astronautics,
    1125-27/66)
January 25-27: John S. Foster, Jr., DOD Director of Defense Research and
    Engineering, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Adminis-
    trator, told Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee
    on Government Operations, which had questioned DOD/NASA cooperative
    agreements, that cooperation was necessary to effect coordination and to
    plan for best possible use of national ranges. Cooperation had been es-
    tablished through May 1965 DOD/NASA Agreement on Tracking, Data
    Acquisition, and Communications Facilities which stated that the two
    agencies were to “achieve a maximum of mutual assistance, to avoid
     unwarranted duplication, and to realize economies wherever practical
    and consistent with mission requirements, by means of coordination
    and planning and efficient division of responsibilities.” (House, Hearings,
     Missile and Space Ground Support Operations)
January 26: Seven geophysical experiments were selected by NASA to be in-
     cluded in three 150-lb. Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages
     (Alsep) and one backup on initial Apollo landing missions: (1) passive
     lunar seismic experiment; (2) lunar triaxis magnetometer; (3) medium-
     energy solar wind experiment; (4) suprathermal ion detector; (5)
     lunar heat-flow measurements to provide information on distribution of
     radioactive elements and thermal history of the moon; (6) low-energy
     solar wind experiment; (7) active lunar seismic experiment to study
     tremors resulting from firing of mortar projectiles, designed to gather
     data on depths to 500 ft. (NASA Release 66-17)
0 Dr. Alexander 6. Smith, Univ. of Florida physicist and astronomer, dis-

     cussed applications of orbiting platforms and space probes in radio-
     astronomy at MSFC Space Science Seminar. Of current theories explain-
     ing powerful outbursts of radio noise from Jupiter, the “most plausible”
30                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    was that radiation was due to a cyclotron process, Smith said. “Recent
                                                                             ...
    thermal work seems to indicate that Jupiter is probably a hot planet,
    emitting more heat than it is receiving from the sun-2 to 4 times as
    much.” Smith, asked if his emphasis on orbital experiments meant it
    was unnecessary to go to the moon, replied: “If I had to choose my
    favorite site for low frequency radio astronomy, it would be the back side
    of the Moon, where one could put up large arrays and be screened by the
    bulk of the Moon from terrestrial interference.” (Transcript)
January 26: NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr.
    George E. Mueller spoke of reliability and quality assurance in the
    manned space flight program at the Annual Symposium on Reliability in
    San Francisco: “We have . . had to organize our mission reliability
    around the concept of a very exhaustive ground test program, with a
    detailed, recorded tracking of the history and experience of every part,
    from the original developer-fabricator’s plant, through the entire chain
    of subcontractor and contractor activities, to the final, completed article
    on the launch pad. By this thorough and repeated testing under every
    environmental condition that it is possible to simulate, and by under-
    standing and correcting each test failure or performance discrepancy,
    we believe we can achieve the required high reliability whereby we will
    be justified in conducting major missions on the second, third or fourth
    vehicle, rather than on the thirtieth or the hundredth as in Gemini and
    Mercury.” (Text)
  USN had issued to General Dynamics Corp. a $20-million supplemental
    agreement to an existing contract to install satellite communications
    systems aboard each of three former Navy tankers that would serve as
    ocean-going tracking stations for NASA’s    Project Apollo. (Gen. Dynamics
    Release 1267)
  Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., GEMINI VI command pilot, received a
    tiny gold harmonica from the Italian National Union of Mouth Organists
    and Harmonica Musicians for being “the first mouth organist in outer
    space.” (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/26/66)
0 Commentary in New York Times on difficulty of allocating limited funds for

    scientific research: “The eminent Soviet physicist P. L. Kapitsa has
    published an article [see Jan. 201 acknowledging that American science
    is still contributing far more to mankind’s knowledge than its Soviet
     counterpart. He attributes the United States lead largely to the wiser
    American technique for Government subsidy of research. . . .Ironically,
                                               .
    several months ago President Johnson. .directed that Federal funds be
    more equally distributed among the nation’s universities and geographic
    areas and that a larger proportion of this money be allocated to univer-
    sities for distribution as their administrators see fit, rather than directly
     to research scientists.
        “If the Kapitsa analysis is correct, the President’s order was a mistake
    and may lead to reduced productivity in American science.” (NYT,
     1/26/66,32)
  Detailed report on “Scientific and Engineering Manpower in Communist
     China, 1949-1963,” by Dr. Chu-yuan Cheng, of the Univ. of Michigan,
    was made public by NSF. Communist China had been strengthening its
    scientific and engineering fields by putting thousands of students through
    colleges and universities. Yet, these masses of young scientists were
    getting less comprehensive training than older generations of scientists
    and also lacked sufficient experience to engage in top level research. In
                                                                          31
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    1963, many of China’s leading scientists were 60 or 70 yrs. old and en-
    gaged in basic and creative research. The success or failure in bridging
    the gap between the mass of young scientists and the older scientists
    would determine whether Communist China would become a scienti-
    fically advanced power in the next decade or two, Dr. Cheng said. (Text)
January 26: U.K. had made a successful underground test of a major com-
    ponent of its own nuclear warhead for American-supplied Polaris
    missiles, it was disclosed. Prime Minister Harold Wilson told the House
    of Commons the test would lead to a considerable savings in costs. An
    earlier test had been unsuccessful. (NYT, 1/26/66, 39)
January 26-29: American Physical Society met in New York. Dr. Charles H.
    Townes, Nobel rize-winner and MIT provost, said in a dinner speech
                    B
    that the manne lunar landing planned for the end of this decade was
    both economically and scientifically feasible. “Furthermore,” he
    continued, “the task probably will be accomplished within time and
    money limitations set four years ago. These envisage a moon landing by
    late 1969 at a total cost of about $20 billion.” Townes announced the
    appointment of “an important ad hoc Science Advisory Committee”
    aimed at obtaining “the most fruitful relationship between NASA and the
    scientific community.” Headed by Prof. Norman Ramsey, the new group
    would “consider many . . . problems, concentrating particularly on how
    to carry out the most efficient and rich scientific program and what ways
    will allow the scientific community, including universities, professors,
    and students to participate most easily and effectively in the interesting
    possibilities which are now emerging.”
       In a panel on the origin and possible death of the universe, P. J. E.
    Peebles and David Wilkinson of Princeton Univ. and Robert W. Wilson
    of Bell Telephone Labs. told about evidence indicating that space was
    permeated by black body radiation. If this were so, it would support the
    “big bang” theory of the origin of the universe which held that at first,
    all was a mass of dense energy; then came expansion powered by much of
    the energy. The original energy would have the properties of the energy
    emitted by a black body-light, heat, and radio waves proportionate to
    its temperature. Because no other explanation existed for the energy
    the Princeton and Bell scientists had detected uniformly distributed
    over space, and because black body characteristics were so clearcut,
    they believed confirmation could be achieved within a year.
       Yuval Ne’eman of Tel Aviv Univ. proposed a new theory to explain the
    quasar (quasi-stellar radio source) : the force represented by the tend-
    ency of the universe to expand had been suppressed in some parts of the
    universe; thus, these areas were highly dense. But because this tendency
    is not suppressed under all conditions, it sometimes bursts forth and
    matter tears free of the intense gravitational attractions. When this
    happens, enormous amounts of matter and energy are emitted and
     observers on earth detect the event as a quasar.
       Scientists in a panel discussion on scientific data said the task of
     coping with the scientific information explosion should not become
     exclusively a Government responsibility. Discussion was based on
     December 1965 report of Federal Council for Science and Technology
     recommending that the Government-with participation of private
    groups-establish a national document handling system to help keep
    scientists abreast of new knowledge.
       In a discussion of planetary exploration, Cal Tech Prof. Robert B.
32                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Leighton, scientist in charge of the televising by MARINER IV of Mars
     (July 14, 1965), said there was still hope the TV pictures would yield
     information about Mars’ canals: “When we know more nearly where the
     camera was pointed-because it is not known very clearly now . . . we
   , may be able to say that this picture was taken at a place very near where
     a canal goes across.” Leighton said he had agreed to collaborate with
     Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of UCLA on a television experiment for
     the Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Venus in 1967. (Texts;
     Wash. Eve. Star, 1/27/66, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/66, A4;
     Weil, Wash. Post, 1/27/66, A2, 1/29/66, A6, 1/30/66, A7)
January 27: NASA’s    PIONEER VI interplanetary space probe had reported its
     first major solar events and the highest solar wind velocity it had
     measured since launch Dec. 16, 1965: a stream of solar particles was
     rushing past the spacecraft and the earth at about 1,440,000 mph. This
     compared with the highest solar wind speed ever measured by a NASA
     spacecraft-EXPLORER XVIII-of about 1,675,000 mph. (NASA Release
     66-21)
0 Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs

     and US. representative to the Working Group of the U.N. Committee
     on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, supported U.S.S.R. proposal for
     an international conference in 1967 to commemorate the first decade
     of space exploration, further international cooperation in space, and
     promote the practical benefits of man’s exploration of space. He sug-
     gested four topics for the conference: (1) appraisal of contributions of
     scientific research in space to practical applications and international
     cooperation; (2) opportunities for participation in space exploration
     through space research and cooperative projects; (3) applications and
     economic implications of space research; and (4) impact of space
     exploration on education. (SBD, 1/27/66, 170)
0 Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D-Ark.) spoke satirically on the floor of the Senate

     on priorities of space, as opposed to social problems, in allocation of
     natural resources. He labeled as “small minded, selfish, and sentimental”
     the Americans who “tell us there is no real hurry about going to the
     moon when tens of millions of Americans . . . spend their lives in dirty,
     dangerous, and unhealthy cities, when hundreds of millions more are
     condemned to degraded lives of poverty and early deaths of preventable
     diseases.” He cited a recent article in Britain’s Punch that reproached
     those Englishmen who would complain about giving up an iron lung and
     artificial limbs to provide the aluminum for space vehicles “as if a
      nation’s prestige lay in its free artificial legs, and not up there”-in the
      sky. (CR, 1/27/66, 1209)
0 North American Air Defense Command (NORAD)-nelVe                 center of North
     American air and space defense-took formal possession of new head-
      quarters built 1,200-1,400 ft. into the solid granite of Cheyenne
     Mountain, Colo., to insure survival of a retaliatory capability in the
      event of nuclear attack. Eleven interlinked, steel-framed, steel-
      sheathed, three-story buildings constituting the command post were
     mounted on coil springs that would protect equipment frDm ground
      shock of nearby thermonuclear blast. (Eng. Opp., 2/66, 20-28)
January 28: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unani-
      mously approved nomination of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as NASA
      Deputy Administrator. (Transcript)
0 Glenn Reiff, Manager of Mariner/Pioneer             program in NASA Hq. OSSA,
                                                                         33
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    summarized in an article in Science the “steps taken to combine the
    scientific instruments with the other vital elements of the [MARINER IV]
    spacecraft to create a spaceworthy craft capable of a reliable 10-month
    mission.” He said over “1600 type-approval and flight acceptance tests
    were performed on the assemblies, and some 113 failures were reported.
    As a result, more than 75 design changes were incorporated.” (Reiff,
    Science, 1/28/66, 413-18)
January 28: Saturn V crawler completed first successful load-carrying
    run at KSC since track support roller bearings had been crushed during
    7.9-million-lb.-load test July 25, 1965. Crawler lifted 447-ft., 10.6-
    million-lb. launcher umbilical tower No. 1 (Lut) and moved it N mi.
    in about nine hrs. KSC Procurement Director Michael Haworth revealed
    costs for two crawlers ordered would total $14.2 million, $5.1 million
    more than original $9.l-million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with
    Marion Power Shovel Co. (M&R, 2/7/66, 34)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a letter to MSFC Director Dr.
    Wernher von Braun that after “careful review” he had approved an
    agreement between MSFC and Lodge 1858, American Federation of
    Government Employees (AFL-CIO) . Mr. Webb noted that agreement,
    negotiated after MSFC employee vote May 19, 1965, for AFGE representa-
    tion, was “a forward step in the NASA Employee-Management Coopera-
    tion Program.” (Marshall Star, 2/2/66, 1-2)
  USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR with Scout booster. (U.S.
    Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
  Commenting on the Federal budget for FY 1967, Science said it was the
    first budget since the middle 1950’s which had not carried a request for
    an increase in total funds for research and development: ‘“rhis down-
    turn in what for about a decade has been a steadily ascending curve
    reflects the major rationale of the new budget: to provide funds to
    support a military buildup in Southeast Asia without underfinancing
    new education and welfare programs enacted during the past two sessions
                  . . .” (Science, 1/28/66, 425)
    of Congress.
* Possibilities of studying the ocean, its storms, currents, shoals, and
    marine life from orbiting spacecraft were being actively explored by
    the Naval Oceanographic Office in cooperation with the NASA Natural
    Resources Program Office, reported Harold M. Schmeck, Jr., in the New
    York Times. Early studies had included observations that might have
    direct practical usefulness and others that could give man a more
    comprehensive picture of the forces determining climate: photographs
    taken from manned spacecraft at altitudes over 100 mi. could be used
    to correct maps and give accurate indications of water depths over shoals
    and near shore; a global iceberg patrol might be possible from manned
    or unmanned spacecraft; monitoring of sea roughness by radar would be
    useful for shipping; measurements to detect major upwellings of deep
    ocean currents might be valuable to the ocean fishery industry; studies
    of river outflow could be valuable in water pollution control. (Schmeck,
    NYT, 1/29/66,7)
  Close tie between President Johnson and Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director
    of the Office of Science and Technology (OST) and science adviser to the
    President, was discussed in Science. During the first six or so months of
    Hornig’s term “the President and the White House inner circle had an
    unclear notion of how they might employ OST” with the result that
     “some of the science staff members complained that they were bored,
34                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    and that OST was underemployed or involved with trivia.” But a
    transition had taken place, and as Hornig began his third year of service,
    “OST and its surrounding bodies-the        President’s Science Advisory
    Committee and the Federal Council for Science and Technology-are
    heavily involved in policy formulation, coordination of the technical
    aspects of the Great Society programs, and troubleshooting in a variety
    of areas.” (Science, 1/28/66, 431)
January 28: A “commercial missile” that could transport 170 passengers
    from Bombay to New York in 39 min. was described at the Pacific Area
    Travel Association Conference in New Delhi by B. F. Coggan, corporate
    vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co. He said the rocket-which would
    reach a speed of 17,000 mph-would be a bell-shaped vehicle 114 ft.
    high with a diameter of from 33 to 49 ft. It would weigh more than three
    million pounds at liftoff. Passenger compartment would have 45
    individual passenger couches arranged on each of four decks; during the
    period of weightless flight, passengers would be held to the couches by
    belts. On a typical flight plan, Coggan said, the rocket would reach
    125-mi. peak altitude. Then, it could hover and maneuver horizontally
    before landing on four extendable legs. (NYT, 1/29/66, 54)
0 FAA and the Agency for International Development (AID) had signed a new

    agreement under which FAA would continue to provide aviation assist-
    ance to foreign countries through AID. Civil Aviation Assistance Groups
     (CAAG) manned by 84 FAA aviation specialists would work in 17 countries
    under AID sponsorship. They would advise and assist these countries in
    planning and organizing management and development of all phases of
    their national civil aviation. (FAA Release 66-9)
January 29: Senate confirmed appointment of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,
    as NASA Deputy Administrator. (CR, 1/29/66, 1469)
0 Fourth flight Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) left NASA MSFC for Michoud

    Assembly Facility aboard the NASA barge Palaemon for post-captive-firing
     checkout. (MSFC Release 66-27)
0 Many first-rate scientists in the US. did not receive enough financial

    support to allow them to develop their fullest effectiveness in research
    work, NSF Director Dr. Leland J. Haworth said in NSF’S annual report.
     “This lack of support is a detriment to the national scientific capacity,”
    he added.
        Discussing progress in the biological and medical sciences, the
    report said that science was in the midst of a fourth biological revolu-
     tion. It termed this revolution comparable in importance and ultimate
     impact on mankind to the three earlier revolutions in mankind’s
    knowledge that led to development of agriculture, to understanding of
    infectious disease and its control, and to the understanding of bio-
    logical evolution. Report referrred to current biological research
     clarifying mechanisms of heredity and development of all earth’s
     creatures. (Text)
January 30: Minneapolis Tribune polled 600 Minnesotans on whether US.
     or U.S.S.R. led in space exploration. 79% believed US. was ahead;
     11% gave lead to U.S.S.R. June 1965 poll had indicated that 59%
     thought US. led, while 24% considered U.S.S.R. in front. Increased
     confidence in U.S. position was attributed to success of GEMINI VII-VI
     rendezvous Dec. 15, 1965. 68% thought men could reach the moon
     and return safely, 56% believed US. would be first to do it, and 25%
     considered trip impossible. (Minn. Trib., 1/30/661
                                                                          35
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

January 31: LUNA IX was launched by U.S.S.R. on a trajectory toward the
     moon, Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally. Launch
     was apparent attempt to softland on the lurain. (Pravda, 2/3/66,
     USS-TTrans.)
   Eighth anniversary of first US. satellite, EXPLORER I. Despite predic-
     tions of a lifespan that would not exceed five years, satellite continued
     to orbit the earth every 103.9 min. Other orbital parameters, as of
     Jan. 15, were: apogee, 956.9 mi. (15,406 k . ; perigee, 211.9 mi.
                                                     m)
     (341 km.). (MSFC Release 66-26)
   President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on
     United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, calling 1965 “the most
     successful year in our history.” He said in the transmittal letter:
     “As our space program continues, the impact of its developments on
     everyday life becomes daily more evident. It continues to stimulate our
     education, improve our material well being, and broaden the horizons of
     knowledge. It is also a powerful force for peace.” He cited US. ac-
     complishments in the Gemini, Ranger, Mariner, and Early Bird pro-
     grams. “Research and development in our space program continued to
     speed progress in medicine, in weather prediction, in electronics-and,
     indeed, in virtually every aspect of American science and technology.”
     Among chief aeronautical developments report cited “design refine-
     ment and wind-tunnel testing” of Sst and decision to build C-5A jet
     transport. Among successful US. launches during 1965, DOD had 67
     satellites, 34 of which were unidentified. Military space programs were
     discussed, including Project West Ford; Manned Orbiting Laboratory
      (Mol) ; Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project; and the
     geodetic Secor satellites. Research was under way on the best means
     of determining physical characteristics of “uncooperating objects in
     earth orbit” through observation by ground-based radar. The section
     on AEC said that a third pair of Vela radiation-detection satellites
     launched in July 1965 was watching for nuclear explosions in space
     and measuring x-ray emissions from the sun. In a separate chapter
      of the report, the NASC said: “This Nation’s space achievements during
      the year were so distinctive in quality and quantity as to cause people,
      at home and abroad, to conclude the United States had attained the
      space leadership of the world.” The Council said that in many respects
      this conclusion was correct “but it would be incorrect and unwise to
      minimize the vitality and size of the space program of the U.S.S.R.”
      (Text; CR, 1/31/66, A419; Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 149)
 * Highlights of AEC’S annual report to Congress for 1965: studies were
      made on large nuclear-poweredwater desalting facilities, including study
      of requirements of New York-New Jersey metropolitan area; Snap-lOA,
      first nuclear power reactor unit to be placed in orbit, functioned in
      space for 43 days before electronic component failures shut it down;
      two AEC-instrumented vela satellites for nuclear test detection were
      launched, raising the total now in orbit to six; 27 underground nuclear
      tests were conducted. (Carey, Wash. Post, 2/1/66, A2)
          Rocketdyne Div. at Edwards AFE was struck by AFL-CIO United Auto
 0 NAA’S

      Workers in a wage dispute. An estimated half of the 227 workers in
      UAW bargaining unit stayed off their jobs. &.A. Times, Wash. Post,
      2/1/66, A9)
 During January: Series of tests was being completed by NASA MSC’S Landing
      and Recovery Div. to check out direction and finding equipment for
36                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    homing an Apollo spacecraft for post-landing location and recovery.
    Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo
    boilerplate spacecraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Apollo
    Survival Radio transmitting signals. Homing runs were made from
    altitudes of 28,000 ft. to 500 ft. to determine range of direction finder
    receiver onboard a USAF HC-130H air rescue aircraft with the Apollo
    Recovery Beacon and Survival Radio on the spacecraft in the Gulf.
    Equipment had performed as expected with line-of-sight acquisition
    of boilerplate Apollo on all homing runs by the aircraft. (MSC Roundup,
    1/21/66, 3)
During January: Eulogies for the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy
    Administrator, and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace 11, NASA Director
    of Space Medicine, appeared in Air Force an$ Space Digest:
       Walter T. Bonney said of Dr. Dryden: “Hugh Dryden was a deeply
    religious man. He held that man’s life at its fullest is a trinity of
    activity, physical, mental, and spiritual. Throughout his life he
    preached the compatibility of religion and science, and he lived what
    he preached. No less, he was a realist; and so, as in 1954, he would
    often remind his listeners that: ‘I am not one of those few who believe
    that we can abolish the use of force in the world. As a nation we
    find it necessary to build great military power. I am confident that
                                                                    . ..
    such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of the world    than
    military weakness.’
        “In 1947, he was called to direct the work of the National Advisory
    Committee for Aeronautics. His tasks were enormously difficult-radi-
    cally new and expensive research facilities had to be provided, but
    even more important, learning the nature of the intricate problems of
    flight in the new speed ranges and methods for their solution demanded
    new concepts of team activity and functional coordination. His leader-
    ship, disarmingly light and unobtrusive, was amazingly perceptive and
    effective. Facilities were obtained and changes were made; the period
     1947-58 became what might be truly called NACA’S golden age.
        “With establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Admini-
    stration (of which NACA was the nucleus), he undertook the role of
    scientific leader, reporting to the Administrator, and made of it a
    position of paramount influence. He rejoiced in the US policy that
     activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes and worked
     to promote international space cooperation; but no less, he saw in US
     exploration of space an activity essential to the strength and security
     of the nation. As perhaps never before, his great wisdom and his un-
     excelled mastery of the art of the possible were in those later years
     valued and used to their fullest.”
        Editor John Loosbrock said of Dr. Lovelace: “In widening circles,
     the full import of Randy’s untimely death becomes apparent. The Air
     Force Association and the Aerospace Education Foundation have lost a
     distinguished leader. The medical profession is poorer for the passing
     of a brilliant surgeon, an imaginative researcher. The United States
     Air Force will miss his sound advice and pioneering efforts in the
     special kind of medical knowledge that is required for those who fly-in
     air and in space. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration
     must find new leadership for its space medical effort. The entire
     nation and the world itself will find that Randy Lovelace’s death leaves
     a large and well-nigh unfillable niche.” (AFISD, 1/66)
                                                                           37
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

During January: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA
     Administrator, paid tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, in Applied
     Mechanics Reviews on Dr. Dryden’s scientific and engineering accom-
     plishments. Dr. Bisplinghoff noted that the NACA, under Dr. Dryden’s
     leadership, ‘‘produced a vast body of new knowledge which made possi-
     ble routine supersonic flight and laid much of the ground for space
     flight that was to come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other
     place, the impact of Dryden’s leadership on the nation’s destiny. The
     development of high-speed wind-tunnel facilities and a companion
     competence for theoretical research within the NACA contributed, in
     the opinion of the author, more than any other single factor to the
     leadership of the United States in supersonic flight. . . .” (AMR, 1/66,
     1-5)
0 An air-transport vehicle that had attracted the special interest of NASA

     aeronautics research was the personal airplane, Charles Harper, Director
     of Aeronautics Div., NASA OART, wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics.
     Attempts were being made to devise aircraft whose control commands
     would provide a response “wholly natural to the operator” and which
     could be operated with no more special training than required for the
     automobile. Recent scientific developments spurred by spaceflight
     activity were being assessed with regard to the problem. (Harper,
     A&A, 1/66,24)
   In Reader’s Digest article, William Hines, science editor of the Washington
     Evening Star, charged and documented what he described as a banding
     “together in a unique alliance, [of] NASA and the Urban Renewal
     Administration” to build NASA Electronics Research Center in Cam-
     bridge, Mass., at the cost of several citizens’ rights. He said: “It was a
     splendid arrangement. The glamor of a Federal space center would
     grease the way for urban renewal which, realistically, didn’t otherwise
      stand a chance of tearing up this thriving industrial area. NASA had
      captured a prize piece of real estate at a bargain-basement price-
      roughly $4 million-thanks to the fact that urban renewal would pay
      most of the ‘real’ cost of the land and would take on the expense and
      dirty work of removing the occupants. And the Cambridge-Boston area
      was going to have all that money spent there.
         “There was only one catch: nobody had bothered to ask the opinion
      of the 94 businessmen and their 3,500 employees who were on the
      Kendall Square chopping block. Most didn’t realize what had happened
      until they read the newspaper headlines on August 21: $60-Million
      NASA Plant To Be Built in Kendall Square.’ ” (Reader’s Digest, 1/66,
      99-104)
0 European Space Research Institute (ESRIN) had begun operations in a

      temporary locatio6 in the Park Hotel, Frascati, Italy. A center of the
      European Space Research Organization (ESRO) , it would work initially
      on plasma physics and its application to spacecraft control as well as
      plans for proposed ESRO astronomical observatory. Permanent facilities
      were planned near the Italian Atomic Energy Authority’s research
      center. (M&R, 1/24/66, 7)
 * Report of the first US. Space Industry Trade Mission, which visited
      Europe under sponsorship of the National Space Club, indicated that
      European space industry offered “a potentially attractive market,” and
      concluded that US. aerospace industry could best develop its European
      market potential by “the sale of materials, components and subsystems;
38                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    licensing or technical support; outright investment in European firms;
    and joint ventures with European firms.” (Text)
During Januaiy: Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and
                                                                   .
    Technology, said in International Science and Technology: “. . a tech-
    nological society has to have first-rate research in progress-in some
    cases for immediate application and in other cases simply because
    we realize more and more that we have to depend on how much we
                                                               .
    know and understand in order to build a new society . . So research,
    as research, is an important goal, and in accomplishing it we end up
    supporting two-thirds of all the research going on in the graduate
    schools of the country. . . . We’re supporting some 26,000 students a
    year, indirectly, through research grants. And now through direct
    federal grants and fellowships we’re supporting a little more than that
    many again. So that even if we had no plan whatever, we already have
    a mighty effect on the higher educational system.” (Znt. Science and
    Tech., 1/66, 66-70)
* NSF Reviews of Data on Science Resources indicated, in a preliminary report
    on research and development in American industry for 1964, that the
    aircraft and missile industry was responsible for 44% of total net
    increase in R&D performance funds from $6.6 billion in 1956 to $13.4
    billion in 1964. Report attributed 17% of increase to the electrical
    equipment and communication industry, noting that performance of
    R&D in those two fields was “strongly influenced by the requirements
    of the Federal Government in the areas of defense and space explora-
    tion.” Only those two industries received more Federal than company
    financing for R&D; in 1964, 90% of aircraft and missile industry’s R&D
    funds came from Federal Government, and 62% of those of the electrical
    equipment and communication industry. Aircraft and missile industry
    employed 30% of total number of R&D scientists and engineers;
    January 1965 figure of 101,200 for these personnel showed decline
    of 7,700 from January 1964. Electrical equipment and communication
    industry accounted for 22% of total-74,800 scientists and engineers
    as of January 1965, 600 less than previous January. (NSF, Reviews of
    Data on Science Resources, 1/66)
0 Dr. George P. Woollard, president of the American Geophysical Union

    and director of the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics, said in AGU Transac-
    tions that there was a “crisis in science” requiring bold Government
    action. Stating that less and less of NSF’S budget was going into basic
    research, Dr. Woollard called on Congress to assess the overall scientific
    needs of the country, including “ambitious” programs in various fields
    proposed by NSF and NAS panels. “Research proposals that were good
    enough five years ago to obtain NSF support now would not stand a
     chance,” he said. “They would be turned down not because the projects
    lacked significance but because funds are short and only the most estab-
    lished and influential researchers win out.” (AGU Transactions, 1/66)
                             February 1966

February 1: Two large telescopes orbiting 20,000 mi. above earth and oc-
    casionally requiring man to service them in space should be the ultimate
    goal for the national program in space astronomy, according to Space
    Research: Directionsfor the Future (Part 11), second report of NAS Space
    Science Board’s Summer Study (Woods Hole, Mass., 1965). Report,
    compiled by a working group of astronomers headed by Dr. George P.
    Woollard, Univ. of Hawaii, said 120-in.-dia. optical telescope and radio-
    telescope with extended aperture of 12 mi. would aid study of many
    basic scientific problems in astronomy. It recommended that NASA sup-
    port, in addition to Orbiting Astronomical Observatories (Oao) and
    Orbiting Solar Observatories (Oso) : more rapid growth of ground-
    based solar astronomy in accordance with 10-yr. projection of needs for
    large optical and radiotelescopes contained in a 1964 report by the
    Academy; specialized instrumentation for ground-based solar astron-
    omy; doubling of sounding rocket launches for research in optical, solar,
    and x-ray and gamma-ray astronomy and for improvements in their
    guidance and flight stability; laboratory studies for more efficient detec-
    tion and recording of radiation in all readings of the electromagnetic
    spectrum; substantial increases in balloon flights for radar and for x-ray
    and gamma-ray astronomy; and development of systems to reach
    altitudes higher than present 100,000- to 150,000-ft. limit for balloon-
    borne payloads. (Text; NAS Release)
  Surveyor soft-landing retrorocket system was successfully tested by
    Hughes Aircraft Co. and JPL at Holloman AFB. After test vehicle was re-
    leased from balloon at 1,450-ft. altitude, three throttlable liquid engines
     operated by terminal descent guidance system’s radar and autopilot
     control slowed vehicle to simulated landing 500 ft. above ground, par-
    tially demonstrating performance required to softland on the moon.
    Three engines were then shut down and parachute system deployed to
    lower vehicle to ground. In actual mission, Surveyor would cut off its
     engines 13 ft. above moon’s surface and free-fall remainder of distance
     to avoid unsettling lunar dust with rocket engines’ exhaust. Test was
     second successful operation of the three liquid-fueled engines under
     radar control. (NASA Release 66-24; Marshall Star, 2/9/66, 9)
0 NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, each carrying payload

     of 19 acoustic grenades, from three launch sites-Point Barrow, Alaska,
     Churchill Research Range; and NASA Wallops Station-to gather data
     on atmosphere between 20- and 60-mi. altitudes over widely spaced
                                                                      39
40                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    geographic areas. Grenades were ejected and detonated at programed
    altitudes, yielding information on wind directions and speeds and atmos-
    pheric densities, pressures, and temperatures. Rocket launchings were
    first in series of nine planned for February. Similar experiments would
    be conducted throughout the year to observe atmospheric conditions
    during different seasons. (Wallops Release 66-9)
February 2: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with 300-lb. Princeton Univ.
    payload was launched from WSMR to 108-mi. (175-km.) altitude to meas-
    ure ultraviolet radiation from the star Alpha Virginis, popularly known
    as Spica. Although rocket performed satisfactorily and payload was re-
    covered, no stellar spectra were obtained because of arcs in the guidance
    voltage system which may have prevented acquisition of the star. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
  USAF launched unidentified satellite by Thor-Agena D booster from Van-
    denberg AFB. (M&R, 2/7/66, 11; U S . Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
  Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara and U.K. Minister of Defence
    Denis Healey signed memorandum providing for cooperation in R&D
    for U S . Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project-system of
    up to 22 comsats in near-synchronous, equatorial orbit. U.K. would
    provide, operate, and fund several ground terminals for communica-
    tions tests and experiments using DOD comsats free of charge. (DOD
    Release 87-66)
0 Prototype unfolding tool box containing 16 geological tools for astronauts
    to examine and obtain samples of lunar rock was delivered to MSC by
    Martin Go. Box would also provide storage area for rock samples. Tools
    included battery-powered drill; dust scoop; sample-weighing device;
    hand-held magnifier designed for use through spacesuit visor; surveying
    instruments and rangefinder; and retriever to pick up small specimens of
    rock which pressure-suited astronaut could not reach. (MSC Release
    66-9)
0 MSC awarded $70,000 contract to Rodana Research Corp. to develop emer-
    gency medical kits that would “satisfy all inflight and training require-
    ments for the Apollo Command Module and the Lunar Excursion
    Module.” Two training units would be delivered for each flight, in addi-
     tion to one mock-up and six prototype models; they would contain
    loaded injectors, tablets, capsules, ointment, inhalers, adhesives, and
    compressed dressings. (MSC Release 66-8)
0 Proposal for an “international research program for the establishment of
    contact with extraterrestrial civilizations” was sent to International
    Astronomical Union by unidentified Soviet astronomers, Tass reported.
    The scientists believed search for extraterrestrial life should concen-
    trate first on radiation from stars within 1,000-light-yr. radius from the
    three nearest galaxies. Kommunist, party’s major theoretical journal,
    said that question of the existence of other civilizations, and the es-
    tablishment of contact with them was one of three “fundamental mob-
    lems” confronting astrophysics. (Zorza, Wash. Post, 2/5/66, A7; AP,
    NYT, 2/3/66,9)
0 Parachutist Nick Piantanida, launched in a balloon from Sioux Falls, S.D.,

    reached 123,000-ft. altitude-unofficial manned-balloon-altitude record
    -but failed to achieve world’s free-fall record when his spacesuit oxygen
    hose froze and he was ordered to descend in the balloon’s gondola.
    Piantanida, who had planned to jump from 120,000-ft. altitude, free-
                                                                           41
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    fall to 7,000 ft., and then parachute to earth, said he had wanted to prove
    that a trained parachutist could free-fall from 100,000-ft. altitude with-
    out stabilizing devices. Experiment was second failure by Spaco, Inc.,
    private firm developing space survival and bail-out equipment. (Balt.
    Sun, 2/3/66)
February 2: AEC announced plans to develop a radioisotope-poweredcardiac
    pacemaker for treatment of heart block. Proposed instrument, fueled
    with plutonium-238, would be inserted in the body by surgery and
    would have a minimum operating life of 10 yrs. Currently available
    battery-powered cardiac pacemakers had operating lifetimes of three to
    five years. (AEC Release 5-26)
  European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO) Secretary-General
    Renzo di Carrobio, addressing members of “Britain in Europe” com-
    mittee in London, contrasted “present hesitancy” on space programs in
    Europe with positive U S . position. Americans, Carrobio said, were aware
    of economic benefits from technological applications of space research
    and were “making great efforts to ensure that the spin-off from their
    heavy investment in space research is put to good use in the industrial
    sector.” He noted that U S . $5-billion space budget meant $26 per capita
    annual expenditure, while Europe spent $200 million annually or $1.15
    per person. (Science,3/18/66,1372-4)
February 3: ESSA I (Tiros OT-3), first meteorologicalsatellite in Tiros Opera-
    tional Satellite (Tos) series, was launched from ETR for Environmental
    Science Services Administration (ESSA) by NASA with three-stage Thor-
    Delta booster into nearly polar, sun-synchronous orbit to provide cloud
    coverage of entire sunlit portion of the earth at least once daily. Before
    achieving orbit, spacecraft performed three precise “dogleg” ma-
    neuvers initiated by airborne autopilot system, injecting it into orbit:
    apogee, 523 mi. (842 km.) ;perigee, 433 mi. (697 km.) ;period, 100 min.;
    inclination, 97.9”. During first orbit, ESSA I was spin-stabilized at 10
    rpm with spin axis in plane of orbit. Entering second orbit, spacecraft
    responded to ground control command to begin turning on its side into
    cartwheel position. Maneuver was expected to be completed 24 hrs.
    after launch; television cameras would be turned on 36 hrs. after launch.
    Cartwheel shaped, ESSA I contained two W-in. vidicon cameras mounted
    180” apart on each side so they could view earth every six seconds.
    Camera system could send pictures directly to command and data ac-
    quisition stations at NASA Wallops Station and Gilmore Creek, Alaska,
    or store photos on its tape recorder for readout when satellite passed
    within 1,500-mi. radius of a ground station.
       ESSA I (Environmental Survey Satellite No. 1) was 11th successful
    Tiros (Television Infrared Observation Satellite) to be launched by
    NASA in 1 attempts. It was first of two Tos operational meteorological
               1
    satellites planned and financed by ESSA to provide daily cloud-cover
    pictures to ground stations on a global basis. ESSA (at that time US.
    Weather Bureau) had also funded TIROS x (OT-1), launched by NASA
    July 2, 1965. (NASA Proj. O f ;ESSA Release 66-7; UPI, NYT, 2/4/66, 37)
                                 f.
  First soft-landing on moon was made by U.S.S.R. when LUNA IX spacecraft
    softlanded an instrument package near Ocean of Storms west of the
    Reiner and Marius craters. Instrument package began relaying tele-
    metric signals to earth immediately and Tass said “information re-
    ceived from the station is being processed and studied.”
       Landing sequence, as later described by Tass, began 8,300 km. (5,155
42                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    mi.) above moon approximately one hour before touchdown when
    LUNA IX was oriented vertically to the moon. At 77-km. (47-mi.) altitude,
    48 sec. before touchdown, radar system aimed at lunar surface turned
    on the retrorocket and shock-absorbing system was prepared. Less than
    one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to less than
    10 mph, instrument capsule was ejected. Rocket crashed and 4 min.
    10 sec. after instrument capsule had landed, its petal-like covering and
    antennas opened and radio transmissions began.
       Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced LUNA IX had transmitted
    facsimile pictures of the moon from the time it landed at 1:45 p.m. EST
    until 2:05 p.m. EST, gone off the air, and then resumed signals shortly
    after 9:OO p.m. EST. Soviet spokesman declined to confirm report.
    British scientists were unable to translate signals into pictures but re-
    corded them on magnetic tapes.
       U.S.S.R.’s four previous attempts to softland spacecraft on the moon
    had failed: LUNA v, launched May 9, 1965; LUNA VI, launched June 8,
    1965; LUNA VII, launched Oct. 4, 1965; and LUNA VIII, launched Dec. 3,
    1965. (Tass, Pravda, 2/4/66, 1, USS-T Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post,
    2/4/66, Al, A13; Grose, NYT, 2/4/66, 1, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star.
    2/4/66, Al, A6; 2/6/66, A14)
February 3: President Johnson sent a telegram to Nikolay Podgorny, Chair-
    man, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R., on the success of
    LUNA IX: “You and the people of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
    are to be congratulated for the great success of Luna 9. Your accomplish-
    ment is one that can benefit all mankind. And all mankind applauds it.
    Your scientists have made a major contribution to man’s knowledge of
    the moon and of space.” (Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 166)
  Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Applica-
    tion) was successfully tested for the first time by NASA and AEC at Nu-
    clear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Four hours after
    initial ignition, engine restarted itself under test conditions simulating
    lower temperatures of space, thereby demonstrating its capability to
    start using only self-contained energy. Engine system was tested below
    peak power and temperature levels: exhaust temperature was 2,000”F
    compared with 3,500”Fdesign temperature; reactor power was 440 mw
    compared with 1,100-mw design power. Test was first of a series sched-
    uled by NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office as part of the Rover
    program to develop nuclear propulsion for space exploration. (AEC Re-
    lease 5-35; Atomic Energy Programs, 1966)
0 First static test firing of production version of Apollo spacecraft launch-

    escape solid-propellant rocket motor, key component of emergency
    Launch Escape System (Les), was conducted at Redlands, Calif., by
    Lockheed Aircraft Corp. All test objectives were met, with motor pro-
    ducing scheduled 155,000 lbs. thrust for programed eight seconds to
    become first major Apollo spacecraft subsystem to complete NASA quali-
    fication tests for future manned flights. (Lockheed Release)
0 Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 7 hrs. 23 min. apart from

    NASA Wallops Station reached estimated 81-mi. (131-km.) and 95-mi.
     (152-km.)altitudes. Experiment, conducted for Univ. of Michigan,
    measured ambient air density from 19-75mi. (30-120 km.) by radar track
    of two falling Mylar spheres ejected from each rocket at +72 sec.
    Spheres ejected as programed in first launch, but radar was unable to
    track first sphere until +14 min. Preliminary indications were that it
                                                                           43
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    did not inflate properly. Radar tracked second sphere for 18 min. During
    second launch, both spheres ejected and inflated properly, and radar
    tracking was continuous for 20 min. Diurnal variations of the measure-
    ments were compared to measure solar heating effects. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
February 3: Statement reaffirming US. demand that liability for individual
    air passenger fatalities be raised from $16,600 to $100,000 was delivered
    by chief US. delegate A. F. Lowenfeld at a special meeting of Interna-
     tional Civil Aviation Organization in Montreal. Lowenfeld said US.
    might withdraw from Warsaw Convention if higher liability limit were
     rejected. (NYT, 2/4/66, 53)
  “Informed British and French sources” predicted costs of developing
    supersonic airliner Concorde would reach $1,112,000,000 compared
     with August 1964 estimate of $924,000,000. Development costs were
     being divided equally between the two countries and sources said that
                          .
     “despite rising costs . . the two Governments are going ahead.” ( WSJ,
     2/4/66,19; Farnsworth, NYT, 2/4/66,53)
  According to count by North American Air Defense Command’s (NORAD)
     Space Defense Center, NASA’s    launch of ESSA I (Tiros OT-3) meteorologi-
     cal satellite brought total of objects currently in orbit to 1,000. Of 209
     earth-orbiting payloads, U.S. had 162; U.S.S.R., 41; France, two; U.K.,
     two; and Canada, two. NORAD counted nine US. deep-space probes and
     debris of eight others; U.S.S.R. had ten, with debris of two more. Re-
     maining objects were “space debris” or “junk.” Space Defense Center
     had catalogued 1,982 objects, but nearly half had decayed or had been
     intentionally deorbited. (NORAD Release 66-2-2)
February 4 Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended ceremony at NASA
            :
     Hq. celebrating successful launch of ESSA I, ESSA’S first operational
     meteorological satellite. During ceremony, first pictures taken by ESSA I,
     launched by NASA from ETR Feb. 3, were released; NASA Administrator
     James E. Webb administered the oath of office to NASA Deputy Admin-
     istrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and the Vice President presented
     NASA Exceptional Service medals to Dr. Morris Tepper, NASA Director
     of Meteorological Programs ;Herbert I. Butler, NASA Chief of Operational
     Satellites, GSFC; and David S. Johnson, ESSA Environmental Satellite
     Center Director. Vice President Humphrey praised the spirit of coopera-
      tion between NASA and Dept. of Commerce, noting that ‘‘science leaves
      no room for jurisdictional disputes.” He said of NASA’s     Administrator
      and Deputy Administrator: “I know of no two men who are more dedi-
      cated to our space program than Jim Webb and Bob Seamans. Their
      devotion is almost sacrificial.” (NASA Release 66-29)
* NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S.
      McNamara signed a Memorandum of Understanding establishing
      Manned Spsce Flight Policy Committee, joint NASA-DOD committee
      which would meet regularly to determine top-level policy, ensure co-
      ordinated planning, and resolve matters concerning mutual participa-
      tion in and support of manned spaceflight programs which could not be
      resolved at lower levels. Co-chairmen of the committee would be Dr.
      Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. John S.
      Foster, Jr., DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering. Mem-
      orandum superseded Jan. 21,1963, agreement between the two agencies
      on Gemini program. (NASA Release 66-26)
   Reorganization of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA)
     CC
        to involve its operating offices more deeply in planning the use of
44                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    manned spaceflight capabilities for scientific exploration of space” was
    announced by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applica-
    tions Dr. Homer E. Newell. Several individual programs were reassigned:
    Pioneer interplanetary probe program from Lunar and Planetary Pro-
    grams to Physics and Astronomy Programs; geodetic satellite program,
    including Geos and Pageos, from Physics and Astronomy Programs to
    Space Applications; management of programs leading to acquisition of
    scientific data through remote sensing from Manned Space Science Pro-
    grams to Space Applications; Manned Space Science Programs office
    was renamed Manned Flight Experiments Office/ossA, to super-
    vise all OSSA manned flight support. Dr. John R. Clark, who had been
    Director of OSSA (Sciences), was named Deputy Associate Administrator
    for SSA (Sciences). Robert F. Garbarini, who had been Director of OSSA
    (Engineering), was named De uty Associate Administrator for SSA
                                    dp
    (Engineering). All OSSA advance study effortsunder Advanced Missions
    Staff would report to Dr. Clark. Acting director of that staff would be
    Dr. John E. Naugle. (NASA Release 66-27)
February 4: Soviet officials acknowledged that LUNA IX photos were being
    received in U.S.S.R. and said first LUNA IX photo would appear in Feb. 5
    edition of Zzvestia. (Wash. Post, 2/5/66, A6)
  Two photographs of the moon produced at Jodrell Bank Experimental
    Station by feeding radio transmissions from LUNA IX into newspaper
    telephoto machine were shown on British television. Each picture took
    eight minutes to receive and was recorded at 100 lines to one inch for
    finished 10-by 11-in. photo. Sir Bernard Lovell, station director, said in
    a television interview that photos “seem to destroy the theory that the
    moon’s surface is covered with dust several feet thick. There may be a
    few inches of dust, but the pictures tend to confirm the view of the
    moon’s surface as hard, spongelike pumice stone substance.
       “It would be perfectly satisfactofl for landing not only heavy
    vehicles but also men.”
       Lovell ointed out rock-like pinnacles estimated to be 10- to 20-ft.
              Y
    tall; smal stones, some less than one inch in diameter; the curved
    horizon of the moon; and sharp shadows which indicated the sun was
    casting the shadow. He emphasized, however, necessity of knowing the
    pro er scale before photos could be meaningfully interpreted. Lovell
       B
    sai LUNA IX had landed in a location which would receive sunlight for
    14 days, thereby permitting solar power to replenish its batteries.
    (Wush. Post, 2/5/66, Al, A6; Sullivan, NYT, 2/5/66, 1, 10)
0 Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, director of Univ. of Arizona Lunar and Planetary

    Laboratory, told the New York Times in a telephone interview that he
    thought from photos released by Jodrell Bank Experimental Station
    LUNA M was resting in a shallow crater and the 10- to 20-ft.-high rocks
    described by Sir Bernard Lovell were the result of distorted foreshorten-
    ing of the most distant rocks and features. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/5/66, 1,
    10)
  US. space officials did not feel that LUNA IX’S successful soft-landing on
    the moon indicated US. was behind U.S.S.R. in the “moon race,”
    reported John Wilford in the New York Times. Vice President Humphrey,
    NASC Chairman, told Wilford in an interview that ‘(so many systems and
    programs are involved that it is very difficult to say who’s ahead and
    who’s behind.” Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator,
    admired the Soviets’ “solid, aggressive and expanding” space program
                                                                           45
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    and conceded that although US. program was broader-based “the Rus-
    sians are awfully good at picking goals and going after them.” Wilford
    said US. space officials were unwilling to speculate on who would make
    first manned lunar landing, but foresaw no significant changes in U.S.
    program because of LUNA IX’S success. Dr. Seamans said Surveyor proj-
    ect would not be curtailed and could not be speeded up: “We’ve got to
    gather our own data because we can’t count on the Russians to release
    their own data. Besides, we want to land in other places on the moon.
    Hopefully, we can exchange data with the Russians.” (Wilford, NYT,
    2/5/66, 11)
February 4: International scientific community commented on LUNA IX’S soft-
    landing on the moon. Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL, offered
    congratulations and said: “The difficulty of the task is attested to by
    the number of previous attempts to accomplish a soft landing on the
    moon. The success of this mission has already added to our knowledge
    of the lunar surface. We now await with interest the scientific data
    which will be received in the next few days.” Heinz Kaminski, chief of
    Bochum Observatory, West Germany: “American space flight tech-
    nology is on a high level of perfection which the Russians just can’t
    match.” Dr. L. R. Shepherd, president of British Interplanetary Society:
       [Soft-landing on the moon is] much more difficult than the orbit ren-
    dezvous achieved by the Americans.” Dr. Shotaro Miyamoto, chief of
    Kyoto Univ. astronomical observatory, Japan: “Soviet landing means
    men and materials will now be sent to the moon and its development
    accelerated.” (NYT, 2/5/66, 11; 2/6/66, E l l )
  International press commented on LUNA IX’S soft-landing on the moon.
    New York Times: “Two facts indicate the magnitude of the advance that
    has now been made. One is the known failure of four earlier Soviet
    rockets to make the soft landing finally achieved by Luna 9. The second
    is the unhappy history of efforts in this country to build the Surveyor
    vehicle, which is intended to perform moon reconnaissance of the type
     in which the Soviet ship is pioneering. The Surveyor project is currently
    far behind schedule. The first fight is not planned until later this year,
     and it is impossible even to forecast when a Surveyor will duplicate the
     soft landing of Luna 9.
        “The whole process demonstrates again the wastefulness of the
     Soviet-American moon race. Were the United States and Russia co-
     operating fully, rather than competing, the hundreds of millions of
     dollars spent on Surveyor would have been applied to progress in fields
     still inadequately explored by either country.”
        Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo: “It is possible to say that the Soviet Union
     is considerably ahead of the U S . in the moon development program. It
     is regrercable that the two nations have failed to exchange information
     and technology for the development of outer space.”
        La Nazione, Florence: “If the Russians already know how to land on
     the moon, they still don’t know how to effect a crendezvous’ in orbit.
     The inverse holds, naturally, for the Americans. This means that both
     are still faced by formidable problems and that the great contest is still
     open.”
        Times o India, Bombay: “At this rate it is not unreasonable to pre-
                f
     sume that a Russian-manned probe will land on the moon and return
     in about a year from now, beating the Americans to it by about three
     years.” (NYT, 2/6/66, E l l )
46                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 4: Speech by the late H. J. Bhabha, director of Tata Institute,
    Bombay, and chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission, at
    January 1965 meeting of the International Council of Scientific Unions
    in Bombay, appeared in Science. Bhabha explained the Indian Radio-
    astronomy Group and described new 32-parabolic-dish facility near
    Bombay for solar radioastronomy work and project to build large cylin-
    drical radiotelescope at Ooty. Bhabha was killed in an airplane crash
    at the top of Mt. Blanc, Jan. 21. (Science, 2/4/66, 544-5)
FebruuT 5 U.S.S.R. released LUNA IX’S photographs of the moon for first
           :
    time and criticized distortion of photos publicized by Jodrell Bank
    Experimental Station. Photos, shown on an eight-minute television
    program, were analyzed by scientists Vladimir Yurovsky, Yuri Mbelou-
    son, and Ivan Koval. Moon’s surface appeared very uneven with many
    small depressions and mounds. Surface near the station had not sunk
    into the soil to any substantial degree. No visible traces of dust were
    evident. At bottom of first picture, part of spacecraft, including antenna
    and two-faced mirror which reflected the lunar surface, could be seen.
    A small stone believed about 6% ft. from the craft could have been a
    meteorite or could have fallen from a hill, in which case “we could pre-
    sume there are some processes of movement on the moon’s surface,”
    scientists concluded.
       Tass announced details of LUNA IX’S structure and flight: 3,482.6-133.
    spacecraft was an airtight package carrying radio system, program-
    timer, thermal-regulation system, power-supply sources, and television
    system ensuring 360” view of the landscape. Antennas mounted on out-
    side of craft were set to open automatically after it had settled on lunar
    surface. Complete with shock-absorbingsystem and metal screens shaped
    like petals to protect it during touchdown, 220-lb. instrumented payload
    detached itself from engine immediately before landing, and two units
    landed at some distance from each other.
       Anatoli A. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Commission for
    Ex loration and Use of Outer Space, was critical of Jodrell Bank‘s
    pubplication of LUNA IX photos and said that Jodrell Bank lacked the cor-
    rect vertical and horizontal scales: “The horizontal scale of the British
    photographs had been shrunk by approximately 2.5 times.”
       Photos released by MOSCOW,      vivid in detail and contrast, showed a
    landscape less pinnacled and strange than that in British versions.
     (Sullivan, NYT, 2/6/66, 76; Grose, NYT, 2/6/66, 1, 76; AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 2/6/66, A14)
* U.S. monitors had received photographs transmitted from the moon by
    LUNA IX,Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, told the press:
    “We have obtained some information regarding those Luna 9 pictures
    from our own sources. Such data are currently under study and evalua-
    tion. I believe it is important for the public to know that we do not rely
    solely on Soviet releases or Jodrell Bank pronouncements for our in-
    formation.,’ (NASC)
  ComSatCorp requested FCC permission to launch satellite which would
    relay network television programs from their point of broadcast to
    afliliated stations for transmission to home sets. Request also asked that
    similar proposal submitted to FCC by American Broadcasting Co. (ABC)
    May 13, 1965, be dismissed. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/5/66, A5)
0 Mystery of how the universe began could be solved within 15 to 20 yrs.

    if US.would use the $100 million spent on one manned Gemini mission
                                                                            47
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    for five new 200-in. telescopes, MIT professor Dr. Philip Morrison sug-
    gested at New York meeting on cosmology. Morrison said three or four
    telescopes equal to the one at Mt. Palomar could be built for the $60-
    to $80-million cost of one Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao)
    and would provide more information on the origin and nature of the
    universe than the satellite. Meeting was sponsored by American Insti-
    tute of Physics and National Assn. of Science Writers, Inc., with NSF
    support. (NYT, 2/5/66)
February 6: “The lunar research program by means of Luna 9 has been ful-
    filled and successfully concluded,” Tass reported after LUNA IX had com-
    pleted 48 hrs. of active life transmitting a total of 10 panoramic photo-
    graphs of lunar surface. Several hours after the announcement, Jodrell
    Bank Experimental Station reported it had received 2% more photos of
    poor quality.
        Third picture transmitted by LUNA IX’S instrument package Feb. 4 was
    shown on Moscow television. During transmission, camera was inclined
    toward horizon and sun was to the east. Part of spacecraft was visible in
    the lower left-hand corner of the picture and another part in the lower
    light, but out of focus because of short distance from camera lens.
    Soviet astronomer Nikolay Barabashov told Tass photographs confirmed
    his theory that moon’s surface was “highly pitted, porous and probably
    covered with numerous rocks and fragments.” LUNA IX “has proved be-
    yond doubt that the upper layer of lunar soil is a spongelike rough-
    textured mass scattered with individual sharp-edged fragments of vari-
    ous sizes.” (NYT, 2/7/66, 1, 15; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/66, Al, A5)
February 7: In summary of NASA-USAF X-15 flight operations, FRC revealed
    that the three rocket-powered aircraft had completed 253 fight opera-
    tions since first glide fhght June 8, 1959: 156 were actual flights, eight
    were planned captive flights, and 89 were canceled because of weather
    or mechanical problems. The three aircraft had flown over 24 hrs. of
    free flight; 6 hrs. 29 min. faster than mach 3; 4 hrs. 13 min. above mach
    4;56 min. above mach 5; and 11 sec. above mach 6. On nine separate
    occasions, five different pilots had flown over the 50-mi. astronaut quali-
    fying altitude: L/Col. Robert M. White, L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth,
    and Capt. Joseph H. Ehgle, all USAF; and Joseph A. Walker and John B.
    McKay, both NASA civilians. Four flights terminated in emergency land-
    ings, two of which seriously damaged the aircraft, but all three aircraft
    were still being flown. One flight had been made with modified X-15 No.
    2 using external propellant tanks. Six current X-15 pilots included:
    L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, Maj. William J. Knight, and Capt.
    Joseph H. Engle, all USAF; and William H. Dana, John B. McKay, and
    Milton 0. Thompson, all NASA civilians. (FRC Release 2-66)
0 Jodrell Bank Experimental Station received signals transmitted from Soviet

    space tracking station in the Crimea via Venus. Experiment, similar to
    one conducted Jan. 8, was part of a program between Jodrell Bank and
    Soviet station to send signals via Venus for an entire 225-day Venusian
    year. (Reuters, Fa&.Post, 2/8/66, A8)
0 NASA Lunar Orbiter, scheduled to orbit moon in spring 1966, might photo-

    graph LUNA IX to gain perspective dimensions of lunar surface and de-
    termine spacecraft’s size and extent of damage caused by landing, the
    New York Times speculated. LUNA IX’S landing area, the Ocean of Storms,
    was not included in original Aight plan of 10 regions to be photographed.
     (NYT, 2/7/66,4)
48                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




February 7: Research pilots of the X-15, in front of X-15 No. 2 at Edwards, Calif.:
Capt. Joseph H. Engle (WAF), Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (USAF),John B. McKay (NASA),
Capt. William J. Knight (USAF),
                              Milton 0. Thompson (NASA), William H. Dana (NASA).
                                                        and

February 7: Contact Feb. 6 with LUNA IX after its scheduled research had been
     completed was explained by Tass: “Since the craft still had a certain
     amount of power left in excess of rated level an additional 2-hr. com-
                                   ...
     mutation session was held.
        “During the transmission period the station exhausted practically
     all its remaining supply of electric energy and further radio communica-
     tions with Luna 9 will be discontinued.”
        Moscow television showed photos of a circular panorama of the lunar
    landscape obtained from LUNA IX’S television system during communi-
     cations period Feb. 6. Panorama showed LUNA IX to be resting on com-
    paratively even area of the lunar surface close to the equator on the
    eastern extremity of the Oceanus Procellarum. Surface of moon around
    station was very uneven with many hollows and hillocks. Some stone-
    type formations were scattered at different places, Small cavities could
    be seen in different parts of the panorama, specifically at its right end.
    Slightly hilly area could be seen along the horizon. Parts of the space-
    craft, including antennas of receivers, transmitters, and dihedral mirrors
    reflecting sections of the lunar surface, were visible in forefront of
    panorama. At the bottom, lying on the ground, was section of rocket
    which had been thrown aside during landing. (Grose, NFT, 2/8/66, 1,
    20; AP,Wash. Eve. Star92/7/66, AI., A5)
                                                                           49
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 7: House passed H.R. 6125 amending Air Museum Act to authorize
    construction of a National Air and Space Museum in Washington,
    D.C., to replace the National Air Museum. Museum, to be completed
    in five years at an estimated $41) million, would house permanent ex-
    hibits of space exploration and be part of the Smithsonian Institution.
    The NASA Administrator would serve on its advisory board. (NASA LAB
    V/W
  Dr. Gerald W. Johnson, Lawrence Radiation Laboratories, was named
    director of Naval Laboratories. (DOD Release 114-66)
0 AEC had developed standby capability to test nuclear weapon research

    devices at high altitudes and in space if the 1963 international test ban
    treaty were abrogated, Aviation Week reported. Standby capability,
    based on large launch vehicles developed as nuclear device carriers and
    small instrumentation rockets for diagnosis, would concentrate on at-
    mospheric testing of ICBM and a d I C B M systems and effects of nuclear
    detonations on these systems. (Av. Wk., 2/7/66, 31)
  LUNA E’S revelations of the moon’s surface had deprived Iranian poets
    of a source of inspiration thousands of years old, Ebrahim Sahba,
    speaking for the Iranian Poets Assn., told AP: “Now, with the ugly and
    coarse surface, Iranian poets must search for something else to describe
    beauty.” (AP,Wmh. Post, 2/8/66, A8)
February 8: Boeing Co. delivered first of eight Lunar Orbiter spacecraft-
    an 85-lb. test model-to KSC for engineering ground tests. (Boeing Co.;
    Bus. Wk., 2/12/66)
  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) , meet-
    ing in Paris, was urged by an advisory group on fundamental research
    to establish from 15 to 20 new centers for advanced study and research
    which would serve scientists from any member country. Each center
    would concentrate on one field and would be established at the univer-
    sity in a member country that had shown the highest achievement in
     that field. In addition, a program of international fellowships could
     provide funds to outstanding researchers. (Sci. Sew., NYT, 2/8/66,14)
February 9: NASA launched 210-lb. Reentry E payload by Scout booster from
    NASA Wallops Station to evaluate char integrity of low-density phenolic
     nylon heat-shield material and test its effectiveness in withstanding
     actual reentry conditions. In addition to four stages of Scout launch
     vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to instrumented payload as
     velocity package. First two Scout stages lofted payload to 54-mi. (87-
     km.) altitude. Remainder of vehicle coasted upward to 110-mi. (177-km.)
     altitude and at peak of trajectory, during 3rd-stage burn, guidance system
     began positioning vehicle for desired reentry angle. Fourth stage fired
     during descent, and then velocity package motor ignited, driving reentry
     payload to a velocity of more than 18,000 mph through earth‘s atmos-
     sphere. Payload impacted 1,150 mi. downrangein the Atlantic; recovery
     was not attempted.
         Throughout flight, continuous telemetry channel furnished data be-
     fore and after the one-minute communications blackout caused by
     reentry, and aircraft photographed visible portion of reentry. Delayed
      telemetry system, used successfully on previous flights to transmit dur-
     ing blackout period, failed to operate because of a transmitter malfunc-
      tion, but data furnished by continuous channel on post-blackout con-
50                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    ditions would permit evaluation of total performance and correlation
    w t previous ground tests. Flight, fifth in series of experiments in Scout
     ih
    Reentry Heating Project designed to investigate heating environment of
    a body reentering earth‘s atmosphere at 18,400 mph, was directed by
    ~ R C (NASA Proj. off.; NASA Release 66-18; WaIlops Release 66-8)
            .
February 9: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill
    Research Range reached 111-mi. (178-km.) altitude. GSFC experiment,
    first in series of three, successfully measured number and energy dis-
    tribution of electrons i energy range of 1-300kev, which produce visual
                             a
    aurora. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from
    WTR. (US.    Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
  Soviet aircraft designer Oleg K. Antonov, interviewed in Kiev by five
    Western European journalists, said U.S.S.R. was developing An-154, a
    double-decked, 724-passenger aircraft. It would be larger version-
    nearly 50 ft. longer-of An-22 and would use four turboprop motors.
    Two preproduction models of An-22 were undergoing flight tests, An-
    tonov said, and Aeroflot expected it to be in cargo service by 1968.
    (Nying Review International, 5/66,544)
February 10: In a White House ceremony, President Johnson awarded the
    National Medal of Science to 1 scientists, including the late Dr. Hugh
                                      1
    L. Dryden, former NASA Deputy Administrator. Dr. Dryden was cited for
    his “contributions as an engineer, administrator, and civil servant for
    one-half century to aeronautics and astronautics which have immeas-
    urably supported the Nation’s preeminence in space.” Mrs. Dryden ac-
    cepted the medal-first ever awarded posthumously-for her husband.
       President Johnson told recipients that “in a nation of millions and a
    world of billions, the individual is still the first and basic agent of change.
    Without the unfettered curiosity of individual men probing and reach-
    ing for new truth our planet would be a dry and dreary place.” (Pres.
    Doc., 2/14/66; NYT, 2/11/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, A2; Balt.
    Sun, 2/11/66)
  Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Alexander
    Lebedinsky, .professor; and Alexander Vinogradov, geochemist, held
    2%-hr. televised press conference in Moscow on the LUNA IX mission.
    KeIdysh said U.S.S.R. had mastered the soft-landing technique and was
    planning more soft-landing missions in 1966 to obtain information on
    physical conditions on the moon, composition of lunar rock, and varia-
    tions in lunar temperature. He said the next major challenge would
    be designing a spacecraft capable of returning men to earth from the
    moon and called for US. “cooperation not competition” in a program
    for manned lunar landing. LUNA IX’S mission was “only to photograph
    the surface of the moon and measure cosmic radiation,” Keldysh said.
    The full panorama of the lunar surface included 6,000 lines and was
    transmitted to earth in 100 min. Spacecraft contained no solar bat-
    teries.
       Lebedinsky revealed that LUNA IX had “shifted between the second
    and third transmissions of the panorama, and as a result, the inclination
    of the phototelevision camera changed several degrees, while the camera
    itself shifted its position several centimeters.” Keldysh added: “It may
    be that the station landed on an unstable small stone, or perhaps the
    ground settled slightly. Such a very small deformation could occur
    because of temperature changes on the moon or a certain mechanical
                                                                            51
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    impact by the station itself." He expressed confidence that the lunar
    surface could support manned spacecraft.
       Lebedinsky said LUNA IX had measured rate of radiation in outer space
    at 30 millirads a day and that the spacecraft had detected additional radi-
    ation on lunar surfaceapparently produced by nuclear reactions from
    cosmic rays hitting moon's upper layers-but he did not disclose
    amount. Vinogradov reported that lunar surface was hard, porous,
    volcanic cracked rock, but acknowledged that other areas might be
    different. Keldysh announced that VENUS XI and VENUS 111 spacecraft,
    launched Nov. 12 and Nov. 16, 1965, respectively, were scheduled to
    approach Venus March 1. (Wmh. Post, 2/11/66; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66;
    Sullivan, NYT, 2/11/66, 17)
February 10: Apollo/Saturn AS-201 successfully completed countdown
    rehearsal at ETR in preparation for scheduled Feb. 22 suborbital flight
    test. (AP, Wash. Post, 2/10/66)
0 NASA launched two sets of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, each carry-

    ing payload of 19 acoustic grenades, about 12 hrs. apart from three
    launch sites-Point     Barrow, Alaska, Churchill Research Range, and
    NASA Wallops Station-to     gather information on atmosphere between
    20- and 60-mi. altitudes over wideIy spaced geographic areas under day
    and night conditions during winter. Grenades were ejected and detonated
    at programed altitudes, yielding information on wind directions and
    speeds, atmospheric densities, pressures, and temperatures. (Wallops
    Release 66-9)
* U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CVII containing scientific equipment for investi-
    gation of outer space. Orbital parameters: apogee, 322 km. (200 mi.);
    perigee, 204 km. (126.7 mi.) ;period, 89.7 min.; inclination, 65". Equip-
    ment was functioning normally. (Tass, 2/10/66)
  U.K. would build $84-million prototype nuclear-power reactor of the
    breeder type-designed to produce large amounts of new fissionable
    atoms-at Dounreay in northeast Scotland, Technology Minister Frank
    Cousins told the House of Commons. Sir William Penney, head of
    British Atomic Energy Authority, told news conference he hoped to
    have commercial models of the breeder power station in operation by
    1980. (NYT, 2/10/66; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, Al)
February 11: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CVIII carrying scientific instruments
    for continued space research into orbit with 865-km. (537.2-mi.)
    apogee; 227-km. (141-mi.) perigee; 95.3-min. period; and 48.9" inclina-
    tion. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 2/12/66)
  NASA and Swedish Space Research Committee (SSRC)       signed Memorandum
    of Understanding to conduct pulsed laser radar experiments to deter-
    mine relationship of noctilucent clouds to height, distribution, and
    scattering properties of cosmic dust and aerosol particles. SSRC would
    provide optical equipment and design and construct light transmitter
    optical system; NASA would provide laser head, power supply, and other
    equi ment. Each agency would bear the COSL of the equipment it would
         P
    supp y and the responsibilities it would undertake. Results of experi-
    ments would be made available to scientific world. (NASA   Release 66-35)
  Device to alter wavelength of a laser beam to tune it for specific tasks such
    as communications, surgery, analysis of materials, or industrial appli-
    cations was patented by Bell Telephone Labs. physicists Drs. Joseph A.
    Giordmaine and David A. Kleinman. In patented method, laser beam
    would be passed at a calculated angle through a special crystal so that
52                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    frequency of the emerging light would be a multiple of original beam’s.
    (Jones, NYT, 2/12/66,33)
February 11: Breadboard of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Appli-
    cation) was tested by NASA and AEC at Nuclear Rocket Development
    Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Initial fixed-drum start tested control drum
    response; maximum power reached was 230 mw, compared with reactor’s
    1,100-mw design power. Test duration was nine minutes, and maximum
    exhaust temperature was 1,540’F. After a second low-pressure start
    was aborted, system was given normal start; in 22-min. test it reached
    350-mw maximum power and 2,130’F maximum temperature. Nerva
    engine had been successfully started twice on Feb. 3. (Atomic Energy
    Programs, 1966, 186)
* Theoretical possibility of self-supporting tapered cable extending 22,000
    mi. into space from earth and from extraterrestrial rotating or revolving
    bodies was examined in Science report by John Isaacs, Hugh Bradner,
    and George E. Bachus, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, and Allyn C.
    Vine, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Cable, referred to as a
    “skyhook,” would be extended downward from a satellite in synchro-
    nous orbit, become an extension of the satellite, and be held in place by
    the balance between centrifugal and gravitational forces that keeps any
    satellite in orbit. Authors of the report conceded in a telephone inter-
    view with Harold Schmeck of the New York Times that “present-day en-
    gineering is not yet up to the task of making a cable strong enough and
    light enough for the sky hook project from earth.” (Science, 2/11/66,
    682-3; Schmeck, NYT, 2/12/66, 12)
  DOD would use Titan I11 booster to launch 23 comsats in three launch
    groups to form a global communications system, M/G Ben I. Funk,
    Cmdr., AFSC’S Space Systems Div., told National Assn. of Manufacturers
    in New York. Orbiting about 18,206 mi. above earth, satellites would
    form system “of high reliability and reasonably long life, secure against
    interference, and with sufficient capacity to handle a high volume of
    unique and vital military traffic,” Funk said. He also revealed that USAF
    was seeking solutions to problems of reusable boosters, maneuvering
    reentry, lighter-weight materials, and higher performance fuels. (Text,
     Av. Daily, 2/15/66)
February 12: France failed to launch research satellite from Hammaguir
     Range because of malfunction in ignition system of three-stage Diamant
    booster. At T-0 in countdown, the Diamant booster remained on
    launching pad. (Reuters, NYT, 2/13/66,3)
0 NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.

    Mueller, outlining the NASA manned spaceflight program at American
     Assn. of School Administrators meeting in Atlantic City, discussed the
                                                                       .
     benefits to man on earth of the Apollo Applications program: “. . man
     would have the capability of establishing world-wide, real-time television
     by placing large antennas and powerful transmitters into synchronous
     orbit; of establishing control towers in space both for aircraft and
     ocean-going ships; of using space observations to identify and exploit
     earth‘s natural resources; and of controlling the weather.” (Text)
* Three US. scientists were elected to Soviet Academy of Sciences: Dr.
     Severo Ochao, Nobel Prize-winningbiochemist, New York Univ. College
     of Medicine; Dr. Richard Courant, mathematician, New York Univ.;
     and Dr. Herman F. Mark, chemist, Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn.
                                                                               53
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Total U.S. membership was now six; five Soviet scientists were members
    of US. National Academy of Sciences. (Schwartz, NYT, 2/12/66,2)
February 12: US. embassy confirmed that West Germany was negotiating
    with several unidentified American aircraft companies for technical as-
    sistance in removgin flaws from the F-104G Starfighter jet aircraft.
    Since beginning of 1965,29 Starfighters had been destroyed in accidents
    and 16 Luftwaffe pilots killed. (NYT, 2/20/66,9)
February 13: Agena rocket stage identical to one at KSC which NASA planned
    to use as target vehicle in the March Gemini VI11 mission suffered an
    explosive start in ground firing at USAF Arnold Engineering Develop-
    ment Center. Failure, which followed five successful test firings, was
    similar to explosion which canceled Gemini VI mission Oct. 25, 1965.
     (UPI, r u s h . Post, 2/14/66)
February 14: Benefits of U.S. space program were emphasized by NASC
    Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh at AIAA meeting in St. Paul.
    He cited in particular space program’s contributions to education,
    saying, “it has added immeasurably to total available knowledge of man,
                                              . ..
    of the earth, and of the solar system.           Funds have flowed from NASA
     .. .to our educational institutions in the form of scholarships and fellow-
    ships, in the form of new laboratories, and research opportunities. It is
    estimated that from this one source about 1,000 new Ph.D.’s are added
                                                ..      . ..
    annually to this resource of the Nation. and             it has been a catalyst
                                                                     .
    and a stimulus to education throughout the whole country. . .’, (Text)
0 Threat of contamination of Mars made search for that planet’s indigenous

    life, at any stage of evolution from prebiotic to extinct, an urgent under-
    taking, according to Biology Working Group’s section on exobiology in
    third and final report of NAS Space Science Board Summer Study (June-
    July 1965) at Woods Hole, Mass. Report, Space Research: Directions for
                                    “. .. the exploration of Mars, with initial
     the Future, Part Three, said:
     emphasis on the detection and characterization of possible Martian life,
    should constitute the major scientific goal of the United States space
    program in the period following the manned lunar landing.” High prior-
     ity in field of environmental biology was given to study effects of weight-
     lessness, with particular attention to “synergistic or antagonistic effects
     from simultaneously imposed stresses of radiation and weightlessness.”
         Orbiting research facilities with six- to eight-man crews to study effects
     of prolonged space flight preceding extended manned missions were
     recommended by Medicine and Physiology Working Group. Report
     urged series of manned flights, ground-based studies, and biosatellite
     experiments to yield data for planetary exploration.
         Group examining NASA-university relations urged increases in train-
     ing budget and facilities and research grants, plus a program providing
     graduate students-with flight opportunities. (Text)
a D. Brainerd Holmes, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for
     Manned Space Flight (1961-1963) and now with Raytheon Co., re-
     flected upon his NASA experience at National Space Club luncheon in
      Washington, D.C. “NASA has done weIl” to date but today deckions
     must be shaping up for continuing space exploration beyond the lunar
     landing by an American by 1970. “Whither now NASA?” the ques-   was
      tion, Holmes said, and in the democratic process of decision an informed
                                                                                job
     public must play a vital part. He asserted that it was not only NASA’s
      to inform but the duty of everyone aware of the significance and
      challenge of space exploration to the future of the U.S. (EH)
54                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 14: NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) ascent engine test
      completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center. (AEDC)
    Col. Jack Bollerud (USAF)was named Acting Director, Space Medicine,
0

           Office of Manned Space Flight, and would assume all duties as-
      NASA
    signed to the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace. He would also continue to
    discharge the functions of Deputy Director, Space Medicine, a position
    he had held since May 1965. (NASA Hq. Bull., 2/14/66, 2)
  Vice President Hubert Humphrey designated Col. Donald W. Paffell
                                                                   Hq.
    (USAF) Assistant for Aeronautics and Space Matters. (USAF Bull.,
            his
    2/14/66,2)
0 Development of sealed cities enclosed by domes “utilizing the sealed

    [space] cabin concept on a more grandiose scale, such as the astrodome
    environmental module” to assure mankind an environment free from
    air and water pollution, was urged by Dr. Eugene Konecci, of NASC staff,
    at the National Cybernetics Foundation symposium on “Ecological
    Technology-Space,        Earth, Sea,” at the Smithsonian Institution.
    Konecci envisioned self-sufficient community “modules” of several
    thousand persons consisting of “a series of astrodomes enclosing the
    atmosphere,” which would be cleansed and regenerated continuously.
    Each community would have ‘‘its own self-contained, recirculating
    water supply’’ and facilities for converting sewage back into useful
    products. Food would be largely synthetic, but there would be “meat
    factories” in which animals would be raised “in modern air-conditioned
    surroundings and fed the high nutrient feeds provided through bio-
    synthesis.” (UPI, NYT, 2/15/66,23)
0 DOD awarded General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. $4-million contract to

    refurbish and update 23 retired Atlas ICBM’s launch upper-stage ve-
                                                  to
    hicles for Abres (Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems), Nike target,
    and scientific satellite programs. (General Dynamics Release)
February 15: President Johnson announced he would send Astronauts
    Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman, command pilots of the Dec.
    4-18 GEMINI VII/VI mission, on a three-week, eight-country tour of the
    Far East to demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values
    of US. space program and to visit Far Eastern countries which had co-
    operated with US. in space programs. Astronauts would leave Feb. 21,
    and visit Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines,
    Australia, and New Zealand.
       The President had sent GEMINI IV Astronauts James A. McDivitt and
    Edward H. White 11, to the Paris Air Show in June 1965; GEMINI V
    Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on an African
    tour in September 1965; and John Glenn, first American to achieve
     orbit, on a European tour in October 1965. (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 221;
    NYT, 2/16/66, 54)
0 NASA converted its contract with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.

     for development of Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) from cost-plus-hed-
    fee to cost-plus-incentive-fee. Under new four-year contract, which
    would bring total cost to $1.42 billion, Grumman would deliver 15 flight
    articles-four more than in previous contract-10 test articles, and two
    mission simulators. (NASA    Release 66-37)
  USAF launched three unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster
    from WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 148)
  Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Appro-
     priations’ Independent Offices Subcommittee, died of cancer. A member
                                                                             55
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    of the House for almost 30 yrs., Thomas had been deeply interested in
    Congressional funding for NACA, NSF, and NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star,
    2/15/66, B8)
February 15: In speech at Univ. of Missouri on impact of Federal research
    and development expenditures on American colleges and universities,
    Leo S. Tonkin, Executive Director of D.C. Commissioners’ Council on
    Higher Education, cited statement by two NASA employees on problems
    involved in awarding research grants. Dr. Thomas P. Murphy, Deputy
    Assistant Administrator for Legal Affairs, and Dr. Thomas W. Adams,
    Socio-Political Specialist for Office of Policy Planning, said in a paper
    presented at 1965 annual APSA meeting: “Can a mission-oriented agency
    use geography as a criterion in awarding grants, recognizing full well
    that it concomitantly will sacrifice time, quality, and money in the
    process? When grants are given to one institution on grounds other than
    merit, there is little basis for denying similar grants to other universities
    which would not normally merit them.” (Text; CR, 2/23/66)
0 Two gallons of fuel exploded inside drum near Saturn IB launch pad at

    ETR, but there were no injuries and no damage to the booster or launch
    complex, AP reported. Saturn IB was scheduled to launch unmanned
    Apollo spacecraft on Feb. 22. (AP, NYT, 2/16/66, 52)
February 16: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill
    Research Range reached 130-mi. (209-km.) altitude in second of three
    GSFC experiments to measure number and energy distribution of auroral-
    producing electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev. Satisfactory data were
    recovered despite malfunction of one detector. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Multi-foil high-performance insulation system to reduce supercold propel-

    lant “boil OF’ space had been successfully tested for 96 hrs. at MSFC
                     in
    in a vacuum chamber at pressures approaching the vacuum of space.
    Since liquid hydrogen propellant, already used in Saturn IB and Saturn
    V upper stages, was being considered as a propellant on longer-duration
    missions, cryogenic technology was being extended at MSFC to meet the
    needs of future space exploration programs. (MSFC Release 66-41)
* Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky, who orbited earth in U.S.S.R.’s VOSTOK v
    June 16-19, 1963, discussed problems of flight to the moon in Aviatsiya
    i Kosmonautika and suggested three possible methods for flight: (1) a
    launch directly from earth with a very powerful carrier rocket to provide
     escape speed for a huge payload including the spacecraft and facilities
    for return flight; (2) a launch from earth orbit with separately fueling
    low-power rockets orbiting the lunar spacecraft; (3) a landing from an
     orbit near the moon (such as that planned for US. Apollo project)
    which would “insure more dependable contact between landing capsule
     and the main ship.” Bykovsky said work “is in full swing” to design
    maneuvering instruments, but U.S.S.R. would send a manned space-
     craft to the moon only when the cosmonauts’ return to earth was
    guaranteed. (Tass, 2/16/66)
* Joseph C. Satterthwaite, former State Dept. foreign service officer, was
     sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb for inter-
     national affairs “in the general area of Western Europe.” (NASA Release
     66-39)
February 17: French-built instrumented scientific satellite, DIAPASON 1
     (D-IA), was successfully launched from Hammaguir Range with three-
     stage Diamant booster. Initial orbital data: apogee, 2,753.5 km. (1,710
     mi.); perigee, 503.1 km. (312 mi,); period, 118.6 min.; inclination,
56                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1%6

    34.04’. Designed with a three-month lifetime, the 20-in.-dia., 49-lb.
    satellite would transmit information on earth‘s magnetic field and test
    France’s tracking stations. Bretigny Tracking Center near Paris was
    receiving satellite’s radio transmissions normally.
       This was second launch of a French-made satellite by France’s Dia-
    mant booster. First was Nov. 26, 1965, when A-I satellite carrying radio
    and radar transmitter, but no scientific equipment, was orbited. (French
    Embassy Release; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/66, A l ; Wash. Post,
    2/18/66, A13)
February 17: NASA launched 49-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for
    Rice Univ. to 116-mi. (186-km.) altitude from NASA Wallops Station with
    Nike-Apache sounding rocket to test theory that intense electrical cur-
    rents flow at high altitudes over the earth and are strongest at about
    120-mi. altitude. Data from magnetometer designed to detect magnetic
    field caused by the currents were telemetered from the payload to ground
    stations at Wallops during flight. (Wallops Release 66-11; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications
    Edgar M. Cortright, testifying before the House Committee on Science
    and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications,
    stressed importance of selectivity in planning space science program:
    “We have been looking at Apollo applications for some time to identify
    those areas of scientific activity where the man can be a real asset to the
    experiment, and the areas that interest us most are astronomy; natural
    resources, which is looking down at the Earth with various types of
    detectors; biology, which is concerned with long-duration weightless
    flight, from both a fundamental biological point of view and in prepara-
    tion for longer flights; and, of course, continued lunar exploration.
            ...
       Ct
             man is not an asset in space science experiments in all cases. You
    have to be extremely selective to find those cases where he will be an
    asset, and they do exist. We think that astronomy in the seventies is one
    such area; also biology, Earth resources, and continued lunar explora-
    tion. But in the particles and fields work it is unlikely that man will be an
    asset, and it is unlikely that he will play the major role in applications
    where what we really want is long lifetime.” (NASA Auth. Hearings,
    57-8)
  NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.
    Mueller told the Business Council in Washington, D.C., that ‘‘so far as
    overall manned space flight manpower is concerned, we have passed our
    peak” in engineering, we’re “reaching our peak in manufacturing,” and
    we’re “at our peak in total manpower costs.” He added: “One of the
    anomalies of the space program is that we must begin to ‘go out of
    business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle. . . . By the time
    manned flights begin, the employment level will be quite low in com-
                                                          . .”
    parison with the peak, which occurred in 1965. .
       Commenting on post-Apollo plans, he said: “The budget for the
    coming fiscal year permits NASA to hold open the option for a program to
    procure additional flight vehicles beyond those now programmed, SO as
    to employ the Apollo hardware and capabilities at least through 1971.
    If we do not exercise this option, in the decision for the [FYI 1968
    budget we will have to begin a phase down of the manned space flight
    activities and the ‘mothballing’ of some of our facilities.” (Text)
0 AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg predicted at Univ. of Texas lecture

     that if man decided to colonize the moon or planets, he would need
                                                                            57
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    nuclear energy to make the environments habitable for human beings
    and large nuclear reactors to provide “planet conditioning”-an outer
    space version of air conditioning. I n addition, reactors could furnish
    power “to extract water from the rock, to help produce synthetic food
    and to extract minerals and other materials from the surface.” Dr.
    Seaborg said he foresaw in the more immediate future the use of nuclear
                                                       “. . . it is desirable to
    power plants on manned orbiting laboratories:
    operate these stations at the relatively low altitudes of between 100 and
    200 nautical miles. For these low orbits the smaller exposed area of
    nuclear power systems results in greater reductions in the atmospheric
    drag-and in the pounds of propellant required to keep the station in its
    assigned orbit. An unmanned scientific or defense system which has to
    operate close to the Earth will similarly have the advantage of low
    atmospheric drag if nuclear power systems are used.” (Text; AEC Release
    S-6-66)
February 17: Program to seek basic principles of sonic booms-including
    flights over U S . communities-was being prepared by a top-level, four-
    man Government committee, Evert Clark reported in the New York
    Times. Program hoped to obtain at least preliminary answers before Sept.
    1 so that limitations on boom making could be written into Sst develop-
    ment contracts. Committee members: Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of
    Office of Science and Technology (OST) and Presidential science adviser;
    Dr. Nicholas Golovin, OST; Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara;
    and Dr. John R. Dunning, dean of Columbia Univ.’s School of Engineer-
    ing and Applied Science, (Clark, NYT, 2/18/66, 8)
  Use of personal radar units by astronauts to counteract optical illusions
    which they might encounter while assembling a space station or explor-
    ing the moon was recommended by Cambridge Univ. Prof. Richard L.
    Gregory, author of Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing, in a New
    York press interview. Gregory believed astronauts might experience
    spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s srructural elements gleaming
    luminously in sunlight or sharply etched against a jet black background.
    In addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception
    which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astro-
    nauts with tones, heard through earphones, of a variable pitch which
    would be determined by a beam from radar unit each man would wear.
    Variations in pitch would indicate distance to different objects and
    astronaut’s rate of approach or retreat from them. Gregory was conduct-
    ing his research at New York Univ. on a senior foreign scientist fellow-
    ship financed in part by NASA. (Osmundsen, NYT, 2/17/66,31; Houston
     Chron., 2/16/66)
  Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of Laboratory for Theoretical Studies at GSFC,
    received one of the Arthur S. Flemming Awards presented annually to
     10 outstanding young men in Government service. (NASA Notice)
* Certificate promoting the late Dr. William Randolph Lovelace 11, to rank of
    major general in US. Air Force Reserve was presented to his eldest
     daughter, Mrs. John Sellman, at USAF Satellite Test Annex, Sunnyvale,
     Calif., by M/G Ben I. Funk, AFSC’S Space Systems Div. Cmdr. Dr. Love-
     lace, former NASA Director of Space Medicine, died with his wife and
     their pilot in an aircraft accident near Aspen, Colo., December 1965.
     (AFSC Release 43.66)
  Question whether “superrocketsyy the Apollo manned space program
                                       for
     should have liquid or solid stages was no longer debatable, said William
58               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Hines in the Washington Evening Star; the solids had been “forced
    through studied neglect to default.” He continued: “This is not to
    suggest, however, that the whole liquid-solid debate is moot.
       “Between Saturn I-B’s 35,000-pound orbital capability and Saturn
    V’s 250,000 pounds is a huge gap; between Atlas-Centaur’s 2,300-pound
    escape capability and Saturn V’s 95,000 pounds is a gap that is even
    greater, proportionately.
       “A wide variety of scientific and manned payloads can be envisioned
    as fitting within these gaps. A flexible booster system based on large
    solid rockets of varying lengths and flight characteristics could fill the
    gaps quickly and at reasonable cost; liquid systems could not.” (Hines,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/66, A6)
February 17: T . R. May, vice president of Lockheed-Georgia Co., disclosed
    plans to build commercial version of the C-5A military fan jet which
    could carry up to 900 passengers and thus reduce fares drastically.
    May, speaking at an Air Force Assn. seminar in Salt Lake City, said
    Lockheed “fully expects” to have the aircraft, designated the L-500,
    “flying commercial routes” in the early 1970’s.
       Lockheed-Georgia Co. had received a $1.4-billion DOD contract Sept.
    30,1965, to develop and build the C-5A-a military carrier that would be
    world‘s largest aircraft. Delivery was scheduled for mid-1968. (DJNS,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/66, D1; NYT, 2/18/66, 53M)
  FAA proposed a series of changes in cockpit procedures and crew training
    on the Boeing 727 jet aircraft that had had four fatal crashes since
    August 1965-all as the aircraft were preparing to land--“to assure
    ourselves that an aircraft coming in visually at night will not suffer
                             ..
    the consequences of the . others.” Changes, designed to ensure crew
    awareness of their descent rate, were discussed at an all-day meeting
    of experts from FAA and 17 airlines operating the Boeing 727,
       FAA Deputy Director of Flight Standards Cliff W. Walker said: “We
    do not know what caused these accidents. We have searched, searched,
             .
    searched . . and we have not found any cause to be suspicious of the
    727’s airworthiness.” (Hudson, NYT, 2/18/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    2/18/66, A2; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/18/66, Al)
  Soviet Tu-1lGworld’s largest aircraft-crashed on takeoff from MOSCOW~S
    Sheremetyevo Airport for Brazzaville, Congo Republic, when its wing
    hit a snowbank. Unofficial Soviet sources said 48 of 70 persons aboard
    were killed. Tass reported the ‘‘cata~tr~phe” “caused by sharp
                                                      was
    worsening of weather conditions.” It was the first known crash of a
    Tu-114, which could carry 220 passengers, had longest range of any
    commercial aircraft, and had been in regular service about eight years.
     (Tass, 2/18/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/66, A5; AP, NYT, 2/18/66,
    1)
  U.S.S.R. charged at 17-nation disarmament conference in Geneva that
    the crash of an American nuclear bomber in Spain in January was
    “flagrant violation of international law and of the 1963 Moscow Treaty”
    which banned all but underground tests. U.S.S.R. claimed flight vio-
    lated the treaty because “it is common knowledge that the most
    important purpose of this treaty was to prevent radioactive contamina-
                                                  ...
    tion of the atmosphere, outer space, and water.     The southern coast of
    Spain and adjacent sea areas have been radioactively contaminated by
    American nuclear weapons.” U.S. chief delegate William C. Foster
                                                                            59
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     rejected the allegations as “false” and countercharged that U.S.S.R.
     was guilty of a “propaganda” maneuver. (Tush. Post, 2/18/66, A16)
February 18: President Johnson submitted NSF’S report on weather modifica-
     tion research to Congress and said “highly encouraging steps are being
     taken toward establishing safe and effective programs for modifying
     the weather.” The President, a supporter of weather-control research,
     said: “We can now begin to see the day when such programs ma
     become operationally feasible.” (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 233; N Y 3
     2/19/66,29)
   NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying on NASA
     N 1967 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science
     and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, discussed
     use of Apollo/Saturn systems in proposed ApoIlo AppIications (Aa)
     program: “In the last half of FY 1966 and during F 1967 we will
                                                                Y
     define those new and useful missions that will be able to take advantage
     of exciting opportunities provided by the capabilities of the developed
     and available flight hardware. Together with Project Voyager, a major
     new unmanned system for the exploration of the planets, the Apollo
     Applications effort represents that next family of major flight missions
     which we will be recommending for approval and authorization in the
     coming years.”
        He cited three basic elements of Aa effort foreseen by NASA: “We
     believe we can improve the basic Apollo space vehicle capabilities with
     minor modifications to extend the manned time in orbit from 2 weeks
     to 45 days and longer; we can procure additional spacecraft and launch
     vehicles for new, or follow-on, missions beyond the time frame of the
     current Apollo schedule; if the program can be carried out along the
     lines of our most optimistic scheduling, we will find that, within the
     approved and programmed Apollo schedule, there are u to nine vehicles
                                                            B
     that can be used for alternate missions in the perio 1968 to 1970.”
     (NASA Auth. Hearings, 5-6)
  .25 scientific experiments for sixth Orbiting Geophysical Observatory
     (OGO-F), scheduled for launch into polar orbit in 1968, were selected
     by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space
     Science and Applications, on recommendation of OSSA’S Space Science
     Steering Committee. Fifty-five scientists at U.S. and foreign universi-
     ties, industrial firms, and Government laboratories would make correla-
     tive experiments of near-earth space phenomena based on data from the
     OGO-F experiments. (NASA Release 66-36)
February 19: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CJX with “scientific instruments
     to continue the study of outer space.” Orbital parameters: apogee,
     309 km. (192 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (130 mi.); period, 89.5 min.;
     inclination, 65”. Instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass,
     2/ 19/66)
0 Television system on U.S.S.R.’s    LUNA IX, which transmitted first pictures
     from moon Feb. 3-6, weighed less than 1.5 kgs. (3.3 lbs.), disclosed the
     Soviet designers of this equipment in an Izvestzh interview. Since the
     TV camera had to “distinguish minute details of the surface and
     transmit to earth simultaneously the landscape around the spot where it
     landed,” a miniature Vega photocamera with lens that could “photo-
     graph at distances from two meters to infinity without focusing” had
     been used. First “radio communication session with the moon” began
     within 4 min. 10 sec. after the soft-landing and first television reportage
60                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    began within seven hours. Complete panoramic scanning took 100
    min. Future probes of moon’s surface would use camera coupled with
    microscope for minute study of the lurain. (Zzvestiu, 2/19/66, 1)
February 20: MSFC engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr.,
    entered lunar vehicle simulator to begin 14- to 21-day final laboratory
    validation tests on interior chamber d&gn and investigation of human
    factors of an enclosed cabin environment. Cabin, 10-ft. cylinder with
    7-ft. diameter and 5-ft. ceiling, had stations for performing various
    tasks-eating, sleeping, taking sample measurements, and completing
    geophysical assignments. Study, conducted by Honeywell, Inc., under
    NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART) sponsorship,
    would determine: (1) functional relationships between physiological re-
    sponses and behavior and the time required to perform assigned tasks; (2)
    how to design lunar roving vehicles to provide crew mobility and utilize
    cabin space; and (3) how to increase proficiency in performing required
    tasks during extended lunar exploration. Engineers would be isolated
    as if on moon, wear long-johns or spacesuits, and eat dehydrated food,
    but would have radio communications for receiving instructions and
    equipment to record physical condition continuously during test.
           Release 66-449
    (MSFC
  NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research
    Range carried instrumented payload to 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude.
    Conducted for Johns Hopkins Univ., experiment measured auroral
    spectral emission lines in the upper atmosphere as a function of altitude.
    Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA     Rpt. SRL)
  GEMINI v spacecraft in which Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles
    Conrad, Jr., orbited the earth Aug. 21-29, 1965, went on display at
    Buenos Aires (Argentina) Municipal Airport as part of a U.S.-sponsored
    exhibit on U.S. advances in space. (USIA; Reuters, Wash. Post, 2/21/66,
    A6)
  Soviet cosmonauts had had their “psychic state” monitored by an instru-
    ment that also registered “the slightest nervousness or lack of con-
    fidence,” Ogonyek reported. Instrument, first tried on Cosmonauts
    Andrian Nikolayev and Pave1 R. Popovich during Aug. 12, 1962,
    VOSTOK 111-VOSTOK IV tandem maceflight, showed them nervous before
    launch, but with nervousnes; disaGearing during flight. (AP, Phil.
    Eve. Bull., 2/21/66)
February 21: Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., consultant to NASA
    Administrator James E. Webb, attended dinner in Rangoon, Burma,
    given in his honor by Burma’s Foreign Minister U Thi Han. In Burma
    on a good-will tour, Glenn earlier had given an illustrated lecture on
    US. space program. (AP,     NYT, 2/22/66, 4)
* Russian-born Igor I. Sikorsky, “father of the helicopter,” was honored as
    Air Force Man of the Year by the New York chapter of the Air Force
    Assn. He was cited especially for the outstanding work helicopters had
    done in the Vietnam war. (N.Y. News, 2/21/66)
February 22: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS ex containing two dogs-Veterok
    and Ugolyek-on whom “biological investigations” would be con-
    ducted, Tass announced. Initial orbital data: apogee, 905 km. (562 mi.) ;
    perigee, 187 km. (116 mi.); period, 96.3 min.; inclination, 51.54O.
    Equipment was functioning normally.
       Tass noted COSMOS cx launch marked first time since period prior to
    Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin’s April 12,1961, VOSTOK I spaceflight that dogs
                                                                          61
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    had been launched and added that “further study of outer space, the
    moon and the inner planets of the solar system” was impossible without
    further development of %pace biology and medicine.” Announcement
    was first indication that satellites in Cosmos series were equipped to
    carry anything but instruments. (Tass, 2/23/66; Pravdu, 2/24/66, 1,
    USS-T Trans.)
February 22: Launch from ETR of first unmanned Apollo spacecraft, scheduled
    for Feb. 23, was postponed because of cloudy, uncertain weather that
    would hamper visual and long-range photographic coverage of liftoff.
    (NYT, 2/23/66, 20; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, Al; Hines, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 2/23/66, A6)
  Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., began eight-nation
    good-will tour of Asia with four-day visit to Japan. (NYT, 2/23/66)
* White Paper released by U.K. Defence Minister Denis Healey said RAF
    would buy 50 F-111 variable wing bombers from U S . for 2.1 million
    pounds ($5,880,000) each and that plans for new British aircraft
    carrier had been dropped. F-111 aircraft operating from land bases
    would take over the strike-reconnaissance and air-defense functions of
    carriers. First Sea Lord, Adm. Sir David Luce, resigned in protest;
    Navy Minister Christopher Mayhew had resigned Feb. 19. (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 2/22/66, Al; Lewis, NYT, 2/23/66, 1, 5; Meyer, Wash. Post,
    2/23/66, Al)
February 22-23: American Astronautical Society met in San Diego.
       Reconnaissance satellites, adapted for peaceful observations of earth’s
    surface, would bring revolutionary scientific and economic advances,
    willis B. Foster, Director of Manned Space Science in NASA’s office of
    Space Science and Applications, predicted: “Remote sensing from space
    has unique capabilities, particularly in the opportunity it provides for
                                                                .
    repetitive synoptic coverage of the earth’s surface. . . Spaceborne
    sensors will add to the knowledge of the figure of the earth, its mass
    distribution, and its magnetic and gravity fields. Movement of glaciers,
    growth of deltas, growth of crops, and even growth of populations can
    all be followed with this type of survey.” (Text)
       Austin M. Stanton, president and board chairman of Varo, Inc., said
    features of space such as airlessness, weightlessness, extreme tempera-
    ture, and radiation could be “exploited as a completely new realm” for
    manufacturing. He said the earth might ultimately be encircled by a
     “vast doughnut-like ring 150,000 miles in circumference,” of articulated
     orbiting manufacturing facilities : “As a businessman, I propose that the
                                                              ...  It will not
     time is ripe for a profitable industrial venture in space.
    be difficult to persuade investors to venture into buying stock in the
    new companies for three reasons: the predictions of the early advocates
     of astronautics have been fulfilled; the efforts of space agencies have
                                          ...
    been spectacularly successful; and           the communications satellite
     venture seems sound.” (Hill, NYT, 2/27/66, 60)
       The massive investment in technology and manpower created by
     space programs could be used to handle pressing problems associated
     with anticipated population growth on earth, suggested Dr. Peter A.
     Castruccio, director of IBM’s advanced space ro rams. Satellites could
    survey earth from space, pinpoint tillable fan! and examine staple
     crops using infrared techniques to detect diseases invisible to the
    naked eye. Seas could be mapped, isolating concentrations of fish
     and edible seaweed, and growing consumption of water offset by
62                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    using satellites to map snow fields and glaciers. Underground rivers
    could be detected from space by measuring the tiny difference in soil
    temperatures above them; such streams were estimated to have 3,000
    times the water present in all known rivers. Other fields, such as weather
    control and geological survey searches for fuel and minerals, could also
    be handled from space. (M&R, 2/28/66,9, 12)
       “The ultimate goal of weather modification and control may be
    realized only if man himself is placed in a Space Meteorological Lab,”
    suggested Sidney Sternberg, vice president and general manager of
    Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. He said the “ability and bandwidth of
    transfer of information between experiments and experimenter could
    not be duplicated by unmanned observations.” (M&R, 2/28/66, 12)
February 23: Second 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor (SL-2),
    Nation’s largest, was successfully test-fired for NASA in Dade County,
    Fla., by Aerojet-General Corp. Fueled with polybutadiene, aluminum
    and ammonium-perchlorate and fired nose down in a 150-ft.-deep pit,
    motor developed within 1% of the predicted 3.5-million lbs. thrust and
    burned for almost precisely the planned 126 sec. Test showed repeat-
    ability of the firing, proved that manufacturing techniques were
    reliable, and demonstrated that the motors could be produced at a
    predictable cost. First 260-in. motor (SL-1) was successfully fired for
    two minutes Sept. 25, 1965, producing 3.6-million lbs. thrust. Strength
    of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propel-
    lant, insulation, and the ablative nozzle were tested.
       Large solid motor project was designed to demonstrate feasibility of
    building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current
     use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into
     space. (NASA Release 66-31; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A5; Hines,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 2/24/66)
  Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub-
    committee on Advanced Research and Technology, NASA Associate
    Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C.
    Adams said: “During 1965 we flew the three X-15 airplanes 32 times,
     setting a new activity record. These aircraft comprise a unique research
                                                                         .
     facility capable of providing data during actual hypersonic flight. . .
       “At the end of 1965, the three X-15 airplanes had been flown 156
    times. . . .”
       Referring to rocket reactor tests, Adams said: “The KIWI-NERVA-
    Phoebus operations during 1965 demonstrated an altitude equivalent
    specific impulse of over 750 lb-sec./lb., equivalent thrust of over 50,000
    lbs., and total duration of 4200 seconds, or over an hour. The experi-
    ments have shown that rapid starts and restarts can be made and that
    operation is stable over a wide range of conditions.
        “On February 3, 1966, we made the first power run with a complete
    nuclear rocket engine system. Although the major components were
    spread out and connected in a ‘breadboard’ fashion, the system started
    and operated as a unit with no external power. On February 11, the
    system was operated again. We feel that these runs are very significant
    milestones in the nuclear rocket programs.” (NASA Auth. Hearings,
     50, 57)
        Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr.
  NASA
     Homer E. Newel1 summarized achievements and status of NASA’s
     physics and astronomy programs at hearings before the House Com-
                                                                                    63
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




Feburary 23: Test firing of NASA’s
                                260-in. solid-propellant rocket motor at Aerojet-General
Corporation’s Dade County, Fia., facility.

     mittee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science
     and Applications. Dr. Newel1 said that from a scientific point of view,
     Explorer program had been “one of the most cost effective means of
     accomplishing the scientific objectives in space physics and astronomy.’’
     During 1965, “seven spacecraft were successfully launched including
     Alouette 11, our second international project with Canada, and FR-1,
                                                                . .”
     the first cooperative satellite project with France. .
       Of the OGO program he said: “. . . as of early January 1966, data
     acquisition from OGO-I included 3,522 hours of real-time wideband
a                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    telemetry, approximately 800 hours of special-purpose telemetry, and
                                             ..
    2,800 hours of onboard data storage. . Good quality magnetic field
    data” were contributed by the OGO II mission to the World Magnetic
    Survey of the International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY). Results of OGO I
    and OGO II missions had proven the operational capability of the space-
    craft and underscored the validity of the concept of a laboratory for
    correlative geophysical studies. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 114, 147,
    159)
February 23: NASA had awarded a $38,000 contract to US. Public Health
    Service on best approach to control and early diagnosis of viral infection
    in astronauts during space flight. Dr. Walter Kemmerer, MSC’S monitor
    on the virus control study, said in an interview: “We want to have
    techniques to enable us to prevent this from happening, and to detect
    that it is happening. Also, we want to know how to prevent one astronaut
    from transmitting it to another inside the spacecraft.” (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 2/23/66, Al)
  Charles H. Ruby, president of the Air Line Pilots Assn., charged FAA had
    implied pilots were to blame for four recent Boeing 727 jet aircraft
    crashes although investigations were incomplete. He referred to “pre-
    mature and seriously questionable public assessment” of the 727 during
    a Feb. 17 FAA meeting at which FAA said the aircraft was airworthy and
    had no serious defects: “We don’t believe this [cause determination]
    can be expected to be achieved with total objectivity by closed door
    meetings of parties with a substantial stake in the outcome.” Ruby added
    pilots feIt the 727 was basically a “good and safe aircraft.” (WI,
    Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A2)
February 23-24: Gemini Mid-Program Conference was held at MSC to
    summarize Gemini program to date with emphasis on results obtained
    from first seven Gemini missions. Conference, attended by more than
    600 persons, was conducted in the middle of the Gemini program rather
    than at the end so that scientists and the aerospace industry would have
    earlier access to Gemini experiences for application to other space
    programs.
       Gemini program director Charles W. Mathews announced that NASA
    had canceled plans for land landings of Gemini spacecraft because of
    ‘‘development time constraint”; U.S. spacecraft would continue to make
    ocean landings “for the foreseeable future.” (Text; Houston Post,
    2/24/66)
February 24: First Saturn V launch vehicle (S-IC-1) underwent second
    successful captive firing at MSFC for 85 see. (MSFC Release 66-48)
          second space-tracking station near Canberra, Australia, was
0 NASA’s

    officially opened by Minister of Supply Denham Henty. Rep. George P.
    Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and
    Astronautics, attended ceremony and praised Australia’s contribution
    to US. space program saying: “We wiIl explore space together for the
    benefit of mankind.” (NYT,2/25/66,3)
0 Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space

    Flight, testified in support O f NASA’s FY 1967 budget authorization before
    the House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Manned Space Flight
    Subcommittee. Questioned by Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario
    (D-Conn.) about the Apollo program schedule, Dr. Mueller said current
    budget request left no room for a major problem; any test failure would
    be directly reflected in a schedule dip. In connection with possible
                                                                           65
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    further use of Apollo/Saturn V                   nd the lunar landing mis-
                                                     decisions on the FY 1968
    sion, Dr. Mueller stressed nece
    budget. Industrial research, development, and manufacturing employ-
    ment had already reached its peak and, ironically, would begin to decline
    sharply before the first manned flights with Apollo/Saturn hardware.
    Facilities now becoming operational would be scheduled for “moth-
    balling” within two years if no further use were planned for capability
    beyond the lunar landing, Dr. Mueller said. (NASA Auth. Hearings,
    279-384; MSF Historian)
February 24: NASA’s   lunar and planetary programs were discussed by NASA
    Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications
    Edgar M. Cortright, testifying before the House Committee on Science
    and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: “It
    is important to note that the Mariner IV photographs do not determine
    whether life exists on Mars. Even before the flight of Mariner IV, it was
    known that pictures taken at this resolution could not give any direct
    evidence of life forms. . . .
       “We propose to continue the exploration of Venus and Mars begun
    so well with Mariners I1 and IV, respectively, by utilizing for the 1967
    Venus op ortunity an appropriate modification of the spare spacecraft
              K
    from the ariner IV program. This will be launched on an Atlas-Agena
    vehicle.”
       Cortright presented prepared statement by Associate Administrator
    for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell summarizing
    comsat and sounding rocket launches: “The first launching by NASA of a
    satellite for the Corporation [ComSatCorp] took place on April 6, 1965,
    when the Early Bird satellite was placed in orbit using a thrust-aug-
    mented Delta launch vehicle. The launching was carried out under an
    agreement between Comsat and NASA, signed in December 1964, which
    detailed the services to be performed by NASA, financial arrangements,
             .
    etc. . .
       “Although the original agreement gave Comsat options for as many
    as seven additional launchings through March 1967, none of these
    options has been exercised. In the meantime, Comsat has inaugurated
    the HS-303A program, and has advised NASA that it will require two or
    three HS-303A launchings in 1966, beginning in August. The HS-303A
    is larger and heavier than Early Bird, and will need the capabilities of
    the thrust-augmented improved Delta launch vehicle. Otherwise,
    launch services are expected to be similar to those provided in support
    of the Early Bird.
       “The Corporation is now negotiating for development and procure-
    ment of spacecraft for the eventual global system. These spacecraft are
    expected to be deployed beginning in 1968.”
       Referring to the NASA sounding rocket program, Dr. Newell said:
    “Since 1959 to the present NASA has launched 668 sounding rockets for
    scientific investigations in space and 516 of these were for investigations
    in the areas of physics and astronomy.” He mentioned as significant the
    International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY) Mobile Launch Expedition carried
    out in spring 1965 using an aircraft carrier as a launching platform:
    rockets carrying instrumented payloads were launched off west coast of
    South America from 5” north latitude to 60” south latitude with the
       eatest concentration of Eghts at the geomagnetic equator near Lima,
    Feru. 45 Nike-Cajun/Nike-Apache rockets and 32 single-stage Arcas
66                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    rockets were flown carrying experiments furnished by NASA, USN, USAF,
    universities, and industry. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 233-4, 359, 375-6)
February 24: Charles W. Harper, Director, Aeronautics Div., NASA Office of
    Advanced Research and Technology (OART), testified before the House
     Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced
    Research and Technology on the NASA aeronautics program. Citing the
    need for close coordination between scientific groups within Govern-
    ment, he said: “Recognizing the Air Force interest in hypersonic flight,
    a proposal was made to the Air Force Systems Command Headquarters
    that the two agencies prepare a single coordinate program representing
    a national effort in hypersonic technology with each agency supporting
    that portion most appropriate to its capabilities. The proposal was
     accepted. . . . Technical approval of general plans is through the NASA
     OART Office and the AFSC RTD Office and generation and coordination of
    program details are developed through appointed technical groups from
    the NASA and Air Force research centers. To date this coordination
     activity has been very effective. . . .”
        As major elements of NASA’s aeronautics program, Harper listed:
                                      1967
     (1) a continuing effort in advanced research; (2) major effortin support
     of Sst with emphasis on flight operations and advanced propulsion; (3) a
     substantial increase in research in propulsion systems appropriate to the
     whole speed range, from V/Stol to hypersonic speeds with special
     attention directed to the noise problem and supported by two new
     facilities; (4) a substantially increased effort in V/Stol research sup-
     ported by construction of the first research facility to be built expressly
     for conducting research on problems unique to V/Stol aircraft. (NASA
     Auth. Hearings, 170-1, 179)
  Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., met with Japanese
     space scientists in Tokyo and presented Japanese Premier Eisaku Sato
     with a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph of their
     GEMINI VII/VI rendezvous in space. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/66, A l ;
     Wash. Post, 2/25/66)
0 Two solid-fueled Minuteman ICBMS were launched simultaneously from

     Vandenberg AFB, to evaluate multiple-firing techniques which could be
     used “under combat conditions at operational bases.” This was first
     salvo launch down WTR. (SAC Release 6-17)
0 AFSC announced that all-weather landing systems (Awls) developed by
     USAF and FAA would be installed on all C-141 Starlifters within two or
     three years to enable the huge fan jet cargo-troop carriers to land safely
     under adverse weather conditions with a minimum of ground-landing
     aids. Awls would program aircraft’s flight path, speed, angle of approach,
     and attitude; generate and provide data to pilot or autopilot; and be
     nearly self-sufficient. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had been contracted by
     AFSC in May 1965 to design, install, test, and obtain FAA certification for
     Awls and produce a flying prototype aircraft by spring 1966. (AFSC
     Release 6.66)
0 Lunar surface photograph from U.S.S.R.’s LUNA IX mission “fully coincided

     with the photograph of a model of the moon designed by scientists at
     Kharkov University’s laboratory several years ago,” Tass announced.
     Nikolay Barabashov, chief of university’s observatory, hypothesized
     that “the relief at the landing site of the Soviet station is typical of the
     entire lunar surface,” which he claimed was “porous, spongelike, and
     su5ciently firm to hold a rather heavy body.” (Tass, 2/24/66)
                                                                          67
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 25: NASA postponed third attempt to launch unmanned Apollo
    spacecraft with Saturn IB booster 44 sec. before scheduled liftoffbecause
    of continuing bad weather. (Wash. Post, 2/25/66, A7; WSJ,2/25/66,1)
  Testing of Agena stage-halted following Feb. 13 hard start of Agena
    prototype-was resumed at Arnold Engineering Development Center in
    preparation for Gemini VIII/Agena docking mission. (SBD, 2/28/66,1)
* ComSatCorp asked FCC for authority to build six advanced synchronous
    satellites-four to be launched and two as backups for development of
    global commercial communications system. Proposed satellites would
    weigh 250 lbs., and have 1,200 voice-quality telephone channels and
    five-year operational life compared with 85-lb. EARLY BIRD 1’s 240 voice-
    quality channels and 18-1110. planned life. (ComSatCorp Release;
     WSJ, 3/1/66, 32)
  NASA EXPLORER XXIX (Geos-A) geodetic satellite, orbited Nov. 6, 1965, had
    developed problems which affected planned investigations: accurate
    measurement of spacecraft’s attitude had become difficult; had precise
    attitude information could not be included in Mutual Visibility Program
    for observing stations. Failure of one of four flashing lights had re-
    duced utility of some observing cameras, and interference had occurred
    between SECOR transponder and Doppler beacons. (NASA Proj. Off.)
* Estimated 7.5 billion microscopic meteorites hit earth daily, but only about
    90 large meteorites weighing up to 10 lbs. struck earth each year,
    NationaI Geographic Society said. (NGS Release, 2/25/66)
  Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) asked FAA to refund $200,000
    which company had deposited to reserve delivery on Sst being developed
    under FAA contract. This was first Sst cancellation request. (AP,
    NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
February 26: NASA’s Apollo/Saturn AS-201 mission was successfully launched
    from ETR at 11:12 a.m. EST. Unmanned Apollo spacecraft (009) was
    boosted into suborbital flight by two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle
     (SA-201) to qualify command moduIe (Cm) heatshielding and service
    module (Sm) of spacecraft-launch vehicle combination and major
    spacecraft systems. Liftoff and powered flight events were as programed.
    After ignition of liquid-hydrogen-powered 2nd stage (S-IVB), launch
    escape tower was jettisoned and recoverable cameras ejected. After
    seven-minute burn, 2nd stage and instrument unit separated from
    spacecraft; spacecraft reached 310-mi. (499-km.) altitude. Descending,
    service module performed ullage maneuver, firing reaction-control
    system rockets for 30 sec. to increase spacecraft’s reentry speed; Sm’s
    main propulsion engine was fired twice-once for 100 sec. and once
    for 10 sec. Sm was jettisoned and Cm reentered at 27,500 fps-2,000 fps
    faster than Apollo reentry from earth orbit-testing ability of space-
    craft’s ablative heat shield to withstand reentry heat of about 4,000’
    F. Three main parachutes deployed at 12,000-ft. altitude, lowering Cm
    to splashdown in Atlantic at 11:51 a.m. EST within 35 mi. of target.
    Recovery was by helicopter from carrier U.S.S. Boxer. Spacecraft was
    in “good” condition.
       Mission was first launch of Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft. Saturn
     IB, uprated version of Saturn I, was being developed under direction of
    MSFC and Apollo spacecraft, under direction of MSC. (NASA Release
    66-32; NASA Proj. Off.; MSC Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2; Stern, Wash. Post,
    2/27/66, Al, A8; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 2/27/66, Al, A6; Wilford,
    NYT, 2/27/66, 1, 60)
68                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




February 26: NASA's Saturn IB booster launches unmanned Apollo spacecraft down
                   first
the Eastern Test Range.
                                                                           69
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 26: At KSC post-launch conference, NASA Associate Administrator
    for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller commented on AS-201:
    “This test was of extreme importance to the eventual manned lunar
    landing in that it provides us with the hst test of the ablative char-
    acteristics of the heat shield protection for the Apollo spacecraft. It is
    the one test that we were unable to perform on the ground-the one
    test, therefore, that was a qualification test and which will be repeated
    again on 202, which is the next flight in the Apollo system.” (MCS
    Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2)
0 NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan,

    carried sodium payload to 124-mi. (200-km.) altitude in experiment
    conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Com-
    mittee to measure wind direction and speed at 50- to 124-mi. (80- to
    200-km.) altitudes. No photography was possible since sodium flash,
    observed at +60 sec., was not followed by sodium cloud release. (NASA
    Rpt. sm)
  Prerecorded pictures of dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, transmitted from
    Soviet satellite COSMOS cx launched Feb. 22, were shown on Moscow
    television. Announcement described the dogs as subjects of biological
    studies and said such studies “will precede every new and important
    step of man in space.” Tass said “the condition of the space dogs is
    quite excellent.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/27/66, USS-T Trans. ; Pravda,
    2/27/66,6, USS-T Trans.)
0 Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received rousing

    welcome on arrival at Seoul, South Korea. Many flag-waving school-
    children had to be restrained by policemen during welcoming ceremonies
    at City Hall. (NYT, 2/27/66, 14; N.Y. J/Amer., 2/27/66, 28)
  Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (MSC
    Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations) received gold medallions
    from Gov. Warren P. Knowles in Madison, Wis., after two-day home-
    coming celebration. Lovell, who had attended high school in Milwaukee,
    in turn presented state with Wisconsin flag he had carried for 14 days
    in space during GEMINI VII flight Dec. 4-18, 1965. Slayton was born in
    Sparta, Wis. (AP, Chic. Trib., 2/25/66)
February 27: Two Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from
    Ascension Island, 24 and 36 hrs. after Feb. 26 Apollo reentry test.
     Experiment, conducted by GSFC and Univ. of Michigan’s Space Physics
    Research Laboratory, was designed to measure pressure, temperature,
     density, and winds at altitudes of 19-75 mi. (30-120 km.) using pitot-
     static probe. First flight obtained necessary data for Apollo support
    program, attaining-82-mi. (131-km.) altitude. No useful data were ob-
     tained by second flight, because of breakup during 2nd-stage burn.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Scientists were considering “capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear
     propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, re-
    ported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said “experts” believed
     cccaptureof an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send
    manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts
    would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor
     to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to “produce long-duration
     burn but because of asteroid‘s low gravity would not have to be very
    powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT,
    2/27/66, E7)
70                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 28:     ESSA 11 (Tos OT-2), second meteorological satellite in Tiros
      Operational Satellite (Tos) system, was launched by NASA from ETR
      for ESSA with three-stage Thor-Delta booster. Launch vehicle performed
      three “dogleg” maneuvers before injection into near-polar, near-circular,
      sun-synchronous orbit. Initial orbital parameters : apogee, 885 mi.
       (1,425 km.); perigee, 843 mi. (1,357 km.); period, 113.5 min.; inclina-
      tion, 101.16”.
         A cylindrical, 18-sided polygon, 290-lb. ESSA 11 was equipped with two
      Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) camera systems for photograph-
      ing local cloud cover. During first orbit, spacecraft was spin-stabilized
      at 10.9 rpm with bottom of spacecraft toward earth; during second orbit,
      orientation maneuvers initiated by ground command began to turn
      satellite on its side; after 18 orbits-approximately 33 hrs. after launch
      -ESSA 11 would be in cartwheel position. Combination of cartwheel con-
      figuration and near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit would permit 100%
      photographic coverage of earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours with
      a given area photographed at the same local time each day. Primary
      objective of ESSA 11 (Environmental Survey Satellite No. 2) flight was to
      provide direct readout to worldwide network of Apt receiving stations.
          ESSA financed, managed, and operated the Tos systems. GSFC managed
      NASA participation in the project. Tracking operations were responsibility
      of STADAN. First satellite in Tos system, ESSA I, was launched Feb. 3.
       (ESSA Release 66-14; NASA Proj. Off.; AP,Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66, A l ;
      UPI, Wash. Post, 3/1/66, A E  L)
    NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Committee
e
      on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as it began hearings on NASA’s FY
       1967 budget authorization, said U.S.S.R. would become unchallenged
      leader in space exploration unless US. soon decided to support post-
      Apollo missions. Webb reviewed U.S.S.R.’s very active year in space
      and said: “More important to us than any other indication from Soviet
      space activity is the clear commitment to a long-term effort. The fact that
      they are making such a commitment shows the importance they attach
      to advancing their capabilities in space. Unless we soon decide to follow
      through with a strong program in the years after we have achieved a
      manned lunar landing, we cannot avoid a gap in our flight schedule
      while they forge ahead as the unchallenged contestant in the field.”
          Webb noted FY 1967 budget for NASA reflected a Presidential decision
       “to hold open for another year decisions which cannot be delayed
      beyond the period of the FY 1968 budget.’’ He added: “The programs
      we are now carrying out so successfully, the new knowledge we are
      acquiring so rapidly, the ending of the period of uncertainty as to what
      both Russian Cosmonauts and American Astronauts can achieve in
      space, and the growing utilization of the long term values that our
      investments have created in reliable launch vehicles, spacecraft, and
      assembly test and launch complexes, all point toward decisions to
      use rather than lose the values we have worked so hard and spent so
      much to create. And so I believe that our presentation of this 1967
      Budget marks not just assertion to you that we have built well as we
      have created a foundation for space power, but also marks the beginning
      of a momentous era in which we must decide how we will use this power
      in future years.”
                                                   “. . .
         He assessed the national space program:          we have demonstrated
      that we can do the tasks we set out to do. An important value of the
                                                                            71
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    space program is this demonstration of national capability in science
    and technology. That we have this capability is no longer a matter of
    opinion but a demonstrated fact that is clear to all who concern them-
    selves with the power nations can and do develop for many purposes
    from the mastery of a new environment or a new technology. We have
    put it on view for all the world to see. The world knows today that the
    United States can digest the space-related problems of long lead-times,
    can hold its position in a demanding competition, and can forge ahead
    simultaneously in both aeronautics and space and in those advanced
    technologies of which space is the leading symbol.” (NASA Auth.
    Hearings, 15-17)
February 28: Testifying to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sci-
                       FY
    ences on NASA’s 1967 budget, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert
    C. Seamans, Jr., said: “We are presenting the budget that reflects our best
    balancedprovision for four essential priorities,priorities which must rank
    together as the core of the NASA program: The need to press forward
    the development of the Nation’s capability for major Manned Space
    Flight operations, to be demonstrated by a manned lunar landing within
    this decade.
        “The need to continue those important projects in space sciences and
    space applications that are already underway and that have already made
    such valuable contributions to our fundamental understanding of the
    universe and to the use of space systems for human benefit.
        “The need to maintain the flow of advanced research and technology
    effort that is at the heart of the Nation’s ability to undertake future
    projects in aeronautics and space explorations.
        “The need to take certain steps now to avoid an otherwise certain
    gap in future space capabilities and achievements.” (NASA Auth.
    Hearings, 64-65)
  Summarizing NASA’s     launch vehicle and propulsion program in testimony
     before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub-
     committee on Space Science and Applications, NASA Associate Admin-
     istrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell
     reported that in 1965 “there were 18successful orbits out of 20 attempts
     for a 90% success record.” Looking to the future, Newell said: “in
     order to assure that the launch vehicle space transportation evolves
                                                                    .
     a logical and economical fashion for the more demanding. .missions
     which are beyond the capability of present vehicles, it is essential that
     some effort continuously be put into advanced studies of future vehicles
     and into some of the critical launch vehicle technoIogy areas.”
        He described research in behavioral biology, outlining prospective
     experiment to determine whether for pocket mice in earth orbit
      “circadian rhythm of either temperature or locomotion changes when
     all geophysical variables other than light and temperature are either
     removed or sensed by the animals with a period of about 90 minutes
      (orbital period) instead of 24 hours.”
         By the end of FY 1966, NASA’s    sustaining university program would
     be supporting 64 projects at 54 institutions throughout US.,Dr. Newell
      testified. In FY 1967 it would support approximately 70 projects at 60
      universities at a cost of $12 million. It was expected that 3,681 students
      would be in the predoctoral training element of the program by Septem-
     ber 1966 and the number of participating universities would be 152.
      (NASA Auth. Hearings, 487, 568, 581, 589)
72                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 28: Gemini Astronauts Charles A. Bassett I1 and Elliot M. See, Jr.,
    were killed when their T-38 aircraft overran St. Louis Municipal Airport
    in rain and fog and crashed into the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. building
    which housed Gemini 9 and 10 spacecraft. The jet, cleared for an
    instrument landing, was left of center in its approach to the runway
    when it turned toward the McDonnell complex 1,000 ft. from instru-
    mented Ianding strip. It struck the roof of Building 101, bounced into
    an adjacent courtyard, and exploded. Several McDonnell employees in
    Building 101 were treated for minor injuries. See and Bassett, enroute
    to McDonnell for two weeks training in space simulator, were followed
    later by Gemini IX backup crew Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A.
     Cernan, who landed safely. NASA Hq. officials announced that the back-
     up crew would fly the Gemini IX mission on schedule. (Wagner,
     Wash. Post, 3/1/66, Al, A4)
  Discussing the Apollo/Saturn IB program’s future, Dr. Joseph Shea,
    director of Apollo spacecraft development at MSC, told Missiles and
    Rockets that the hoped-for early end of the program (after a total of
    seven flights, including four manned missions) would depend on avail-
     ability of the Saturn V booster, as well as success of Saturn IB missions:
     “We plan to end the series at Apollo-207 if the Saturn V is available
     on schedule. If not, we will probably continue with Saturn IB flights for
     the Apollo-208 and 209 missions.” (Taylor, M&R, 2/28/66, 17)
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff believed U.S.S.R. was accomplishing much more in

    advanced weaponry than Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was
    giving them credit for, reported Aviation Week. Gen. John P. McConnell,
     USAF Chief of Staff, was said to be especially concerned about Soviet
     developments in antimissile missiles and their radars, maneuverable
     warheads for ICBMS, military space systems, and advanced aircraft.
     During hearings on the FY 1966 budget, General McConnell had said the
     decision on whether to proceed with full-scale development of the
     advanced manned strategic aircraft (Amsa) should be made in FY 1967.
     Aviation Week pointed out McNamara did not make that decision in the
     the FY 1967 budget and dropped Amsa one category-from engineering
     development to advanced development. Also, in a posture statement
     before the Senate Armed Services Committee’s Defense Appropriations
     Subcommittee, McNamara appeared to contradict Secretary of the Air
    Force Dr. Harold Brown’s view that the FB-111 was only a stop-gap
     bomber until Amsa was approved. Comparison of Boeing B-52C through
    F models, McNamara reportedly said, showed “the FB-111 is not an
     interim aircraft but is, indeed, a truly effective strategic bomber.”
     (Wilson, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 16)
  Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman and their wives met
     with Chinese Nationalist President Chiang Kai-shek in Taipei, and gave
     him a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph taken in
     space. Chiang gave each astronaut wings of the Chinese National Air
     Force. Astronauts then flew to Bangkok, Thailand, to begin a three-day
     visit during which they would give a series of lectures and be received
     by the King and Queen of Thailand. (AP,Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66,
     A2; NYT, 3/1/66, 19)
  AFSC awarded General Electric Co., Pratt & Whitney Div., United Aircraft
     Corp., and Curtiss-Wright Corp. contracts totaling $41,750,000 for
     development of vectored-thrust cruise propulsion system (lift-cruise
     engine) for aircraft systems including V/Stol. (AFSC Release 13.66)
                                                                           73
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

February 28: William J. McWiIliams, president of Republic Su ply Co., was
                                                             wp
    sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. ebb and NASA
    Secretariat. (NASA Release 66-46)
  ComSatCorp requested FCC authority to build six 250-lb. advanced syn-
    chronous satellites, for global commercial communications system.
    Launches would begin in 1968. (ComSatCorp Release)
0 Comparing U S . and U.S.S.R. Mars exploration efforts in Science, Bruce C.

    Murray, Gal Tech Associate Professor of Planetary Science, and Merton
    E. Davies, RAND Corp., said of NASA’s     MARINER IV July 14, 1965, flyby:
    “The American scientific community should, and evidently does, feel
    proud and gratified that the Mariner mission to Mars, through successful
    utilization of national resources, not only accomplished a remarkable
                                                                  .. .
    technological feat but also discoveredextraordinary new facts      beyond
    the reach of earth-based instruments.” Authors termed “disappointing”
    US. decisions to terminate Mariner program, fly extra Mariner C space-
    craft to Venus in 1967, drop plans for 1971 Voyager launch, and “fill
    the gap” with an abbreviated 1969 Atlas-Centaur program. U.S.S.R.,
    they noted, had spent “between five and ten times as much on flight
    programs for planetary exploration” as U.S. and, in spite of “six con-
    secutive failures in their efforts to explore Mars,” may have developed a
    reliabie 2,000-lb. spacecraft for Mars flyby. Authors predicted U.S.S.R.
    would launch two Zond spacecraft in December 1966: “It will be sur-
                                 .
    prising to us if at least one. . does not reach the lanet and return new
                                                       P
    facts about it.” They suggested 1971 as earliest ikely date for Soviet
    landing of survivable payload on Martian surface and concluded that
    by 1967 “the U S . will be ready to make an enduring national commit-
    ment to the exploration of the planets, and be ready to demonstrate
    intellectual appreciation of discovery as well as enthusiasm for tech-
    nological achievement.” (Science, 2/25/66, 945-54)
Week of February 28: NASA delegation extended President Johnson’s invita-
    tion for European participation in U.S. manned and unmanned space
    programs in discussions with officials of West Germany, France, U.K.,
    and Italy. Delegation had been instructed not to make any offers or
    commitments but to express potential opportunities of participation in
    future US. space flights on equal basis with U.S. scientists. (Normyle,
    Au. Wk., 2/28/66, 23)
During February: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of MSFC Research Projects
    Laboratory, summarized progress in development of electric propulsion
    in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The first laboratory experiments with
    electrostatic thrustors began in 1958. In the early thrustor models,
    power efficiencies and propellant-utilization efficiencies were 20-30%;
    lifetimes did not exceed a few hours; ion-current densities were less than
    1 milliamp/cmZ; the probIem of beam neutralization was unsolved-
    was not even well understood. Mission applications seemed far in the
    future. Today, only seven years later, electrostatic thrustors are very
    close to flight readiness. Two systems, the ion-bombardment system
    and the surface-ionization system, have reached power efficiencies and
    propellant efficiencies above 90%; they produce ion currents of about
    20 milliamp/cm2. Beam neutralization has proven in the laboratory as
    well as in actual s ace tests, and engine lifetimes of several-thousand
                       ;P
    hours have been emonstrated. With a few more years of refinement
    and quality engineering, these ion thrustors will be ready for extended
                                         ..    .” (A&A, 2/66, 71-2)
    missions into interplanetary space.
74                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

During February: Arnold Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for Interna-
    6onal AfFiirs, noted two viewpoints on achieving Soviet cooperation in
                                                          .
    space research in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “. . the one holds that
                  .
    the answer . .lies in finding a suitable device, either bilateral or inter-
                                                               ...
    national-a new idea, an imaginativeapproach, a twist            for example,
                                                        . ..
    a proposal for an international space laboratory.
        ‘“rhe other view is that the device is substantially irrelevant and that
    it is the basic relationship between the two countries, the basic political
    and military realities, which will determine at any given time whether
    cooperation is feasible or not.” (A&A, 2/66, 20)
  Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, former NASA Associate Administrator for
    Advanced Research and Technology and new AIAA president, wrote his
    first “President’s Message” in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “One of the
    dilemmas of modern times is that science and technology can do a multi-
    tude of things-many of which the community may not necessarily
    desire and so will not support. As professionals we have tended to pre-
    occupy ourselves with the potential of science and technology rather
    than the expressed needs of the community. A responsible professional
                                      ...
    society of the future must find        the wisdom among its members to
                                                                           ..
    relate its technologies to human needs. A wise professional society .
    will convey the legitimate aspirations of its thinkers and men of action
                                    . .”
    to the community at large. .         (A&A, 2/66, 29)
  Japan scheduled launch of her first earth satellite for March 26 with
    four-stage, 8.6-ton Lambda booster. Planned orbit would have 723-km.
     (480-mi.) apogee and 290-km. (180-mi.) perigee. If successful, Japan
    would become fourth nation to orbit spacecraft. (NYT, 2/27/66, 33;
    UPI, r a s h . Post, 2/27/66)
  Commenting on national space goals in the post-Apollo period, Henry
    Simmons said in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “NASA over the past year
    quietly shifted its emphasis from an AAP exploiting already financed
    Apollo hardware for alternate missions to a much vaster AAP involving
     outlays on the scale of the Apollo lunar effort itself to support an in-
    tensive follow-on effort extending perhaps to 1975. Some NASA Centers
    engaged in the Apollo program, and particularly the Marshall Space
    Flight Center, are already confronted with the prospect of unemploy-
    ment among their most skilled andvaluable design personnel. ‘We are right
    now in the position where over the next six months the engineers who
    did the original design on the Saturn and probably a year from now
    those who did it on the Apollo will be out of work,’ NASA Administrator
    James Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space
                                                                             .”
    Sciences during its hearings last August on post-Apollo goals. . .
     (A&A, 2/66, 5)
  ARC scientists who had produced organic material in simulated Jupiter
    atmosphere said presence of some form of life on Jupiter and other
    planets was possible, but unlikely. They would continue experiments to
     find out more about chemical processes that occur at very low tempera-
     tures. (UPI, NYT, 2/19/66, 44)
  MSFC was using seven vessels to transport Saturn IB and Saturn V rocket
     stages and components too large for conventional road, rail, or air
     transport between manufacturing, test, and launch sites. MSFC’S marine
     transportation had grown from one craft in 1960 to present size of six
    river and ocean-going barges-Promise, Palaemon, Little Lake, Pearl
     River, Orion, and Poseidon-and one ship-usrvs Pt. Barrow. (MSFC
     Release 66-36; Marshall Star, 2/16/66)
                             March 1966

March 1: U.S.S.R. VENUS 111 spacecraft ‘‘reachedY7 surface of Venus at
                                                   the
    1:56 a.m. EST to become man’s first space probe to land on another
    planet, Tass announced. Observers believed the 2,116-lb. spacecraft,
    launched Nov. 16, 1965, had crash-landed. “Regular radio communica-
    tions,, had been maintained with VENUS 111 throughout the flight but
    were lost as the probe approached the planet; no telemetric data were
    received in final moments before impact. Announcement said com-
    panion spacecraft VENUS 11, launched Nov. 12, 1965, had passed within
    14,900 mi. of Venus Feb. 27, and was continuing in solar orbit. (Later,
    on March 5, U.S.S.R. revealed that communications with VENUS II were
    lost as the spacecraft approached Venus.) 2,123-1b. VENUS 1 had flown
                                                                 1
    its entire course without a corrective maneuver ‘‘insured only by its
    correct launching on an interplanetary trajectory,” but the course of
    VENUS 1 1 had been adjusted in Dec. 27, 1965, midcourse maneuver to
            1
    make possible precise rendezvous with planet. “The experiment con-
    ducted through the work of the automatic stations Venus 2 and 3 allowed
    the solution of a number of absolutely new tasks of interplanetary flights
    and the obtaining of new scientific data,” Tass said. Man’s closest
    previous contact with Venus had occurred Dec. 14, 1962, when NASA’s
    MARINER 1 (launched Aug. 27, 1962) had passed 21,648 mi. from its
               1
    surface and had relayed back scientific data. The brief Tass statement
    said VENUS 111 carried pennant bearing Soviet coat of arms to the
    Venusian surface. Further details of the spacecraft’s instrumentation
    were to be revealed later [see March 51.
       Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank ExperimentaI Station,
    called the landing “a vivid technical feat” but regretted that “the
    Russians should have endangered the future biological assessment of
    Venus by contaminating the planet.” (Pravda, 3/2/66, 1, 4; Grose,
    NYT, 3/2/66, 1 ; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, Al; Simons, Wash. Post,
    3/2/66, Al)
0 U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS CXI unmanned satellite with scientific equip-
    ment to continue space investigations, Tass announced. Orbital data:
    apogee, 226 km. (140 mi.); perigee, 191 lun. (119 mi.); period, 88.6
    min.; inclination, 51”. (Tass, 3/1/66)
  Edgar M. Cortright, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space
    Science and Applications, testifying before the House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Appli-
    cations in support of NASA’s 1967 authorization, discussed the merits
                                 FY
    of the Apollo and Surveyor programs: “The scientific advantages of
    having Surveyors in the program along with Apollo is the ability to

                                                                    75
76                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    sample more sites and to determine what areas of the moon are worth
    visiting by man, for example, in addition to going to sites that man is
    not likely to for the next decade or more-up near the poles and certain
    of the mountain regions.
       “We would like to help develop this total strategy of exploration of
    the Moon in a sensible way. We think automated equipment continues
                                ..
    to have a role to play. .
       “I think there is nothing we can fly on Surveyor that would improve
    or even come close to equalling what can be done by the Apollo once it
    gets there. In other words, bringing a sample back is so much better than
    doing analyses on the lunar surface.” (Transcript)
March 1: Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., headed six-man panel of investi-
    gators that began attempt to reconstruct St. Louis crash of T-38 jet
    plane in which Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett I1
    died Feb. 28. MSC Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney told UPI that full
    report would not be completed for “at least six weeks.”
       The tragedy prompted Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R-Wash.) to urge the
    House Committee on Science and Astronautics to investigate flight
    training of astronauts, particularly the number of hours of flying time
    required and the justification for such requirements. (UPI, NYT,
    3/2/66,22; NASA LAR V/36)
 The Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A.
    Bassett I1 received editorial comment.
       Washington Evening Star: “Yesterday’s tragedy is all the more
    shocking in that it needn’t have happened at all. . . .
          It is assumed that Bassett was ‘logging flying time’ . . . See, a civilian,
       rc

    was not eligible for flight pay but as an astronaut was encouraged to
    keep his hand as an airplane jockey,
       “It is difficult to see why it is necessary for military men on astro-
    naut duty to fly airplanes to qualify for ‘hazardous duty’ pay. . .
       cr
         Let’s save our spacemen for space, and let’s make it a bit easier for
    them by amending the military pay act to give uniformed astronauts
    those few hundred extra dollars a month just for being astronauts.”
     (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A6)
                                   ..
       Houston Post: “There is . an element of irony in the fact that two
    men preparing for a highly hazardous space mission should die in this
    prosaic manner, but actually, under the procedures that are followed
    in space flights, there are just as great risks on the surface of the earth
    and in its atmosphere as in space, and they probably are much more
    numerous. If air travel is safer than land travel today, space travel is
    probably even safer . . .” (Houston Post, 3/2/66)
       Missiles and Rockets: “By emphasizing the everyday risk taken by all
    the astronauts in the course of training, the deaths of Capt. Freeman,
    Mr. See and Maj. Bassett have almost certainly lessened the outcry
    against the space program in the event of similar losses during space
    operations.
       “Each time an astronaut steps into a military jet aircraft, he is running
                                                                     .
    a risk perceptibly greater than that he takes in space. . . [NASA] takes
    the greatest of care to assure that manned spacecraft launches are as
    safe as the best engineering talent in the nation can make them. A
    launch atop a Titan 11, hazardous as it may be, cannot compare with
    the danger inherent in groping through low fog for an elusive runway
    in a jet aircraft.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/14/66, 54)
                                                                         77
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

March 1: NASA had selected Fairchild Hiller, General Electric Co., and Lock-
     heed Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of contracts totaling $450,000 for
     parallel six-month feasibility studies of missions for five possible
                                                                .
     second-generation Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) Spacecraft
     would contribute information useful for orbiting data-relay satellites,
     deep-space tracking, navigation satellites, data collection, galactic
     probes, and communication with aircraft, other satellites, ships and
     ground vehicles, and broadcast satellites. (NASA Release 66-45)
* Establishment of National Natural Disaster Warning System to provide
     warnings of hurricanes, tornadoes, tidal waves, floods, and other
     natural hazards was announced by the White House in response to
     proposal by Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor. Warning System
     would ccmakeeffective use of present technology and existing facilities
     for the distribution of all warnings over a single authentic channel
     between the warning agency and the public”; it would eventually provide
     around-the-clock weather intelligence reaching hundreds of communi-
     ties which had not previously had adequate warning service. (Pres. Doc.,
     3/7/66, 303)
   The advancement of military technology contributed greatly to the civilian
     economy with “higher reliability, new management techniques, new
     materials, improved manufacturing methods, better instrumentation,
     and the expansion of technical fields such as cryogenics and micro-
     electronics,” AFSC Commander Gen. B. A. Schriever told a Rotary Club
     meeting in Honolulu. He cited in particular the development of long-
     range air transportation “which clearly has both military and com-
     mercial value” and discussed the progress that had been made in some
                           “. .  . current experiments with oxide-dispersed
     key technical areas:
     metals for strength at high temperatures show a 40 percent improve-
     ment over the findings of two years ago. Boron fibers for composite
     materials have already been produced with a 20 percent greater aver
                                                                         ”I;.”
     strength than they were predicted to attain by 1970. Their month y
     production is more than 20 times the total supply that existed three
                ..
     years ago. .
        “When we turn to the propulsion area, we find that a new aircraft
     engine is presently under test, which surpasses the gains predicted for
      1970 in bypass ratio, high temperature capability, and reduced specific
     fuel consumption. The supersonic combustion ramjet, or SCRAMJET, is
     showing great promise for airbreathing vehicles at speeds of mach 6
      or greater. Supersonic combustion has already been repeatedly demon-
                                                               . .”
     strated at simulated speeds of mach 6 in test facilities..      (Text)
* Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill, Chief of In-Flight Sciences for NASA OSSA’S Manned
      Space Science Div., was one of six Government career women who
      received the Federal Woman’s Award at a banquet sponsored by Wood-
      ward and Lothrop, Inc., department store. (Wush. Post, 2/7/66, C2)
 * British Royal Society had been quietly conducting exchange of scientists
      with Chinese Communist Academy of Sciences for last three years,
      Royal Society spokesman told the press in London. About 15 British
      scientists had visited China during three-year period and varying
      numbers of Chinese had visited U.K. for periods ranging from several
      months to two years. At present 25 Chinese were studying wide range
      of scientific subjects at British institutions. (Schmidt, NYT, 3/2/66,
      13)
78                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

March 1-3: “Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting
    sponsored by USAF Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Go. was
    held in Orlando.
       Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with
    three USAF space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space
    would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: “These costs
    will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that
    because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to
    automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,
    3/1/66, A4)
       Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a
    disabled spacecraft because “it is a problem we all know will one day
    confront us,” Col. Emil 6. Beaudry, vice commander of USAF Air Rescue
    Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there
    was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in
    space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability
    of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: “There
    is no reason today-or certainly in the near future-why an opera-
    tional rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the
    event of distress or tragedy during manned flights.
       “For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great
    weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a
    rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any
                   .. .”  (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66)
    way required.
       NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his “jet shoes” to aid
    astronauts during extravehicular activity: “This device may be thought
    of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner
    as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are
    activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged
    toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate
    an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes,
    which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested success-
    fully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRc. (Wash. Eve. Star,
    3/2/66, A18)
       Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick
    reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would
    Cause astronauts working in space to “confuse spheres with points of
    light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and
    disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a
    bracket of strong lights “looking over the shoulder” of a working
    astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash.
    Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5)
       Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell
    had developed a rocket propellant “flying pogo stick” for transporting
    men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo
    stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket
    nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder
    movements. (UPI, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
       The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during
    Gemini VI11 mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by
    Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s
    power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because
    man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm foot-
                                                                            79
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    ing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a hand-
     held tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al)
       In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASC staff, warned
    that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight:
     “They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the
    near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected
    Russia to launch a “major manned program in the near future,”
    possibly a manned laboratory. (UPI, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
                  PIONEER VI interplanetary probe, launched Dec. 16, 1965,
March 2: NASA’s
    passed near earth after 76 days of near-perfect operation in solar orbit.
    Probe was 84,190,800 mi. from the sun, passing 7,775,600 mi. closer
    than earth does, and in earth’s orbital plane on a course which would
    ultimately take it within 75.6 million mi. of the sun. Devised to study
    interplanetary space, PIONEER VI had telemetered 250 million readings
    from its six scientific instruments covering 3,300 separate measure-
    ments and taken 2.5 million readings of 100 engineering measurements.
    It had also registered solar wind speed of 1,636,000 mph on Feb. 23,
    close to highest speed previously recorded of 1,675,000 mph by
    EXPLORER XVIII in earth orbit. Preliminary scientific findings would be
    presented to American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C.,
    April 19-22. Pioneer project was managed by ARC. (NASA Release 66-43,)
  Vice President Hubert Humphrey, accompanied by NASA Administrator
    James E. Webb and NASC Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, flew
    by helicopter to GSFC for three-hour tour, during which they watched
    GSFC technicians receive first photos from ESSA 11 meteorologicalsatellite.
    Successful operation of ESSA 11 officially created world’s fist fully
    operational weather-forecastingsatellite network. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    3/2/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/3/66)
9 NASA successfully launched two companion sounding rockets five minutes

    apart from NASA Wallops Station for simultaneous measurements of
    properties of the neutral atmosphere, ionosphere, and solar radiation
    intensities at 120- to 380-mi. altitudes. Aerobee 150A sounding rocket
    with 180-lb. AFcRL-instrumented payload to measure solar ultraviolet
    radiation and electron temperatures as function of altitude reached
    142-mi. (229-km.) altitude. While Aerobee 150A was still in flight, four-
    stage solid-propellant Javelin boosted instrumented payload to 380-mi.
    (611-km.) altitude to obtain simultaneous measurements of neutral gas
    densities, temperatures, and composition; ion densities and composition,
    and electron temperatures and densities. Data from both flights were
    telemetered to the ground and would be correlated to study effects of
    solar radiation on ionosphere and upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release
    66-12; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Discovery of two powerful x-ray galaxies which might indicate existence
    of a whole family of celestial objects was reported by Naval Research
    Laboratory physicist Dr. Herbert Friedman at a news conference in
    Washington, D.C. The two galaxies-Cygnus A and M-87-were among
    the strongest of the 10,000 galaxies that emit radio signals and had
    been detected previously only by optical telescopes and by their radio
    emissions. “The startling thing about these extra-galactic sources is
    that their x-ray output is 10 to 100 times greater than their combined
    output of light and radio waves,” Dr. Friedman said, and he suggested
    that an x-ray satellite or a “fence-like array of 1,OOO Geiger counters
    erected on the moon” could identify the sources. The discovery sup-
80                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    ported theory of an “exploding universe” whose evolution over billions
    of years, and in the future, would be characterized by violent cosmic
    explosions far beyond the relative calm of the Milky Way. Dr. Fried-
    man, E. T. Byram, and T. A. Chubb obtained data from an April 1965
    Aerobee sounding rocket fight. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/66, 2; S’           imons,
    Wush. Post, 3/3/66, A3)
March 2: In a special message to Congress, President Johnson urged the
    establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept. of Transportation consolidating
    FAA and several other Federal agencies and functions “to serve the
    growing demands of this great Nation, to satisfy the needs of our
    expanding industry and to fulfill the right of our taxpayers to maximum
    efficiency and frugality in Government operations.” The President
    repeated the proposal made in his State of the Union message Jan. 12
    for US. program to construct and flight-test 2,000-mph supersonic
    aircraft. He requested $200 million in FY 1967 to initiate prototype
    phase, including completion of design competition, expanded economic
    and sonic boom studies, and start o prototype construction. U.S.
                                               f
    planned to conduct first flight tests by 1970, he said, and to introduce
    the aircraft into commercial service by 1974. The President also directed
    his Science Adviser to work with NASA, FAA, Dept. of Commerce, and
    Dept. of Housing and Urban Development to devise an “action pro-
    gram” to attack the problem of aircraft noise--cca growing source of
    annoyance and concern to the thousands of citizens who live near
    many of our large jetports.” (Pres. Doc., 3/7/66, 304-12)
 I n statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
    Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator
    for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965
    mission results: “The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications
    missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three,
    applications satellites ; three, deep-space probes ; and two were vehicle
    developments. Science and applications experiments have also been
    carried on five manned missions.
       “The list of U S . space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX
    took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the
    first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained
    from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers.
    Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained
    the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered
    character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended
    the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since
    been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various
    measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere
    constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational
    commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the
    Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by TOS was pro-
    vided by TIBOS IX early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent
    pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint
    reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary
    space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific
    experiments in space, producing excellent usable results.
       “During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the
    investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space
    experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship
                                                                            81
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets wh
    coast of South America. Over 90 per c
    launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding
    data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and mag-
    netic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed
    the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure
    of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with
    the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of
    the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray
    wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
March 2: NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acqui-
    sition, Gerald M. Truszynski, testified before the Senate Committee on
    Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “TO provide effective support of
    flight projects, NASA has established a worldwide network of tracking
                                       ..
    and data acquisition stations. . This network, at the present time,
    consists of ground stations which are operational or under construction
    at 28 locations. These stations are located in the United States and 16
    foreign countries and territories. They represent a total capital invest-
    ment of over $600 million and are operated by more than 2,500 highly
                                                                  ..
    trained NASA, contractor, and foreign national personnel. .
       “Many of the stations being used for Gemini support will also be
    used for Apollo. Capabilities are being added at these stations while
    other stations are being established. The network for support of Apollo
              .. .
    missions      will consist of 10 fixed land stations with 30-foot antennas,
    three stations with 85-foot antennas, 1 transportable station, 5 instru-
    mentation ships, and 8 instrumentation aircraft. In addition, three
    85-foot antenna stations normally used for deep space missions will be
                                   .
    used for support of Apollo. . .
       “Our efforts are directed toward having the network fully qualified for
    lunar mission support in 1967.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings,
    383, 387)
0 Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, NASA Director of Research, OART, in testimony

    before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub-
    committee on Advanced Research and Technology, discussed the
    development at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center of a new automatic
    programmer called AMTRAN (Automatic Mathematical Translator) : ‘‘In
    this system, keyboards and cathode ray oscilloscopes, by which mathe-
    matical commands and replies to and from a central digital computer
    may be transmitted and received, can be located near the desk of the
    mathematician, and operated directly by him. Experiments have indi-
    cated that this new AMTRAN computer system may reduce the time
    required for solutions of certain problems by a factor of 100. An
    additional economical advantage of AMTBAN is that sets of keyboards
    and display screens, all working through the same central computer,
    may be located in a large number of locations for direct and immediate
    use.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 600-02)
  FCC adopted a Notice of Inquiry inviting comments by interested parties
    to be submitted by Aug. 1, 1966, on five specific questions concerning
    legality, compatibility with the Communications Satellite Act of 1962,
    and economic and technical feasibility of proposed FCC authorization
    of nongovernmental communications satellite facilities. (Text)
  U.S.S.R.’s ZOND III interplanetary probe, launched July 18, 1965, was
    153,520,000 km. (95,397,328 mi.) away from earth in heliocentric
82                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    orbit gradually receding from the sun, Tass announced. All equipment
    was said to be functioning normally. (Tass, 3/2/66)
March 2: Harold B. Finger, Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space
    Power Div., speakingat the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, summarized
    the history and development of electricity in space exploration and pre-
    dicted it would play an increasingly important role in the future of the
    space program: “It is important to remember that the program of space
    exploration is still young and there is still a vast sea and many space
    objectives to explore and to learn about. The highest power levels used
                                                         .
    in space so far have been only a few kilowatts.. .” Orbital research
    laboratories, lunar bases, broadcast satellites, and interplanetary
    s acecraft, he said, would require increasing levels of electric power.
    (!iextl
0 U.S. scientists were questioning whether VENUS 111’s landing on the planet

    had been a mistake, reported Walter Sullivan in the New York Times.
    He noted that the Nov. 28, 1965, issue of Zzvestia had reported the two
    probes would pass on different sides of Venus and that Mstislav Keldysh,
    president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had told a Moscow press con-
    ference Feb. 10 that both probes would ‘‘approachyy planet about
                                                             the
    March 1, but that no “soft” landing would be attempted. Marvin Miles
    of the Los Angeles Times reported that U.S. scientists, emphasizing the
    difficulty of knowing the exact track of distant planets, said that a small
    trajectory error could have caused a crash-landing even though a flyby
    might have been programed. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/2/66, 22; Wash. Post,
    3/3/66, A21)
  Report of Feb. 15 firing of French ballistic missile 1st stage from Les
    Landes launching site south of Bordeaux, France, published in Air et
    Cosmos and confirmed by French Ministry of Armed Forces, indicated
    base was operational, Washington Post reported. Development of the
    base, intended to bridge the gap between the scheduled 1967 closing
    of Hammaguir Range and the 1968 opening of the French Guiana base,
    had been kept secret and “it had not been realized that the base was
    anywhere near ready for use,” Post suggested. (Wash. Post, 3/3/66,
    A16)
0 Rupert Wildt, professor of astrophysics at Yale Univ., had been named

    to receive the Eddington Gold Medal-highest award of Royal Astronom-
    ical Society of England. (NYT, 3/3/66, 58M)
  Home-built photo-receiver set of RCA electronics engineer Wendell
    Anderson in Morristown, N.J., received photos of North Atlantic storm
    taken by ESSA I meteorological satellite-first known usable pictures
    ever received from an orbiting satellite on home-made set. Equipment,
    which included 25-yr.-old ham radio, 20 ft. of copper tubing, television
    antenna, mast, sheet of chicken wire, wooden laundry hangers, sawed-
    off rolling pin, and $25 microscope, cost $600-$31,000 less than an
    ESSA ground station. Anderson used antenna to pick up signals on ham
    radio, taped signals on recorder, reducing them to series of electrical
    impulses that could be changed into light signals, then beamed light
    through reverse end of a microscope onto spinning sheet of film to
    record photos. (O’Toole, NYT, 3/3/66, 31)
March 3: Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle
    Application) successfully ground-tested for first time at full power-
    1,100 mw, corresponding to 55,000-lb. thrust in space-by NASA and
    AEC at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Two
                                                                           83
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    and one-half hours after initial ignition, engine was restarted and run
    for 15 min. at varying power levels, reaching a maximum at slightly
    less than full power. Nerva engine had operated successfully up to
    partial power-40 mw-Feb. 3. (AEC Release J-54; Atomic Energy Pro-
    grams, 1966, 186)
March 3: Seven scientific experiments for the 1967 Mariner mission had
    been selected by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator
    for Space Science and Applications, on recommendation of NASA’s
    Space Science Steering Committee: (1) ultraviolet photometer, (2)
    S-band occultation, (3) dual-frequency radio occultation, (4) trapped
    radiation detector, (5) helium vapor magnetometer, (6) plasma probe,
    and (7) celestial mechanics. (NASA Release 66-42)
  President Johnson submitted ComSatCorp’s third annual report to
    Congress. In transmittal message he said that many satellite communi-
    cations facilities would be used by the Government only “to meet its
    unique and vital national security needs which cannot be met by com-
    mercial facilities.” He said the capacity of Government facilities “shall
    at all times be limited to that essential to meet such unique needs.”
       Report cited ComSatCorp’s 1965 accomplishments: operation of
    EARLY BIRD I comsat in synchronous orbit above Atlantic; initiation of
    program to furnish communications service for Apollo manned space
    program and to expand commercial service; beginning of construction
    of terminal stations in Washington state and Hawaii; pursuit of
    expanded research and development programs, including program to
    establish global commercial satellite system by launching synchronous
    satellites in 1968; and issuance of requests for proposals to study
    multipurpose satellites. (Text; ComSatCorp Release; Pres. Doc.,
    3/7/66, 315)
0 Harold B. Finger, Director, NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div.

    and Manager, AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed
    NASA and AEC programs to provide nuclear energy systems for space
    applications before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space
    Sciences: “A major new program initiated by the AEC at NASA’s      request
    during 1965 is the development of the SNAP-27 isotope-thermoelectric
    generator to power experiments that will be left on the Moon by the
    Apollo astronauts. This Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package
                                           .
     (ALSEP) is intended to transmit data . . for at least a year. The SNAP-27
    isotope power supply will provide 50 watts to the experiments and will
    weigh about 40 pounds. It will use a single plutonium loaded fuel
    capsule which will be inserted into the generator on the lunar surface
    by the astronauts.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 541)
0 Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data

    Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and
    Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology,
    reviewed NASA’stracking and data acquisition network program:
    “During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of
    Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini
    missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three
    manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly
                                                             ..
    successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December..
       “During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given
    time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still
    transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during
84                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is
    expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting
    Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Tech-
    nology Satellite.
       “In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is esti-
    mated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the net-
    work stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive
    workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronom-
    ical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and
                                         ...
    Orbiting Geophysical Observatory.
       “During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully
    supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase
    of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at
    Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger
    missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the
    surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and trans-
    mission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year
    1965,85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid,
                                                                          ..
    Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support. .
       “The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted
    the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of
    228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the
    projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up
    pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support
    the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new two-
    way communications record of 191 million miles between network
                                   ..
    stations and the spacecraft. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone
    facility received a signal from the Maainer IV spacecraft over a distance
    of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
March 3: Canine alternates of Soviet space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek orbiting
    earth aboard COSMOS cx appeared on Moscow TV with physician-
    cosmonaut Dr. Boris Yegorov. Wearing space jackets to which pickups
    and feeding devices were attached, dogs showed no signs of anxiety
    when Yegorov placed them in a cabin similar to COSMOS cx and demon-
    strated a number of instruments and apparatus used onboard COSMOS
     cx such as pharmacological preparations painlessly introduced into
    dog’s aorta through tube and cuffs with built-in sensors. (Tass, 3/3/66)
0 NASA Aerobee 15OA launched from NASA Wallops Station carried AFCRL-

     instrumented payload to 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in experiment to
     measure incident solar radiation. Rocket vehicle coning motion made
     accurate solar pointing and consequent data acquisition possible only
    60 per cent of the time. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Legislation (H.R. 13266) to provide for building prototype of a commercial
     supersonic transport (Sst) without using Federal funds was introduced
     in the House by Rep. Frank T. Bow (R-Ohio). Bow proposed that
     responsibility for development of aircraft be shifted from FAA to a new
     Supersonic Transport Authority empowered to sell public $1.5 billion in
    development bonds. Bonds would not be obligations of the Government,
    but Government would guarantee payment in event of default. Bow said
     his plan would avoid large appropriations of public funds and provide
    sound basis for determining industry’s share of development costs when
     commercial product was realized. (CR, 3/3/66, 4640)
9 U S . plan for halting spread of nuclear weapons was unacceptable to
                                                                            85
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

             because it did not bar non-nuclear nations from sharing in an
    U.S.S.R.
    international atomic force or ban transfer of atomic arms to army units
    of non-nuclear nations, Soviet negotiator Semyon K. Tsarapkin told 17-
    nation disarmament conference in Geneva. Tsarapkin joined U S .
    delegate Adrian S. Fisher in rejection of demand by nonaligned nations
    that nonproliferation treaty contain pledge by nuclear powers to
    liquidate their atomic arms. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/4/66, Al7)
March 4: NASA had signed supplemental agreement with Boeing Co. convert-
    ing Saturn V 1st stage (S-IC) contract from fixed-price to incentive-fee.
    Contract, currently valued at $850,114,303, was first Saturn stage con-
    tract to be converted to incentive type. (MSFC Release 66-49; NASA
    Release 66-48)
* Five NAA Rocketdyne 5-2 engines designed to power Saturn V’s S-I1 stage
    successfully underwent second consecutive full-duration test firing
    aboard “battleship” test vehicle at Santa Susana, Calif. Engines were
    fired for 360 sec. and developed 650,000-lbs. thrust-comparable to
    1,000,000-lbs. thrust in flight operation. (NAA Skywriter, 3/11/66, 1)
  Prof. Emilio Segre of Univ. of California, Berkeley, reviewed postwar
                             .
    physics in Science: ‘r. . many illustrious men of science, physicists in
    particular, have made the mistake of thinking that the end of physics
    was in sight. They have consistently been proved wrong by the opening
                                    .
    up of completely new fields. . . Space exploration and the study of the
    interior of the earth are new departures. Here we do not yet see any
    new phenomena, but we are penetrating in unexplored regions. It is
    possible that these regions will not yield anything extraordinary, such
    as extraterrestrial life. However, they present phenomena on scales
    impossible to reproduce in the laboratory, and a change in orders of
    magnitude is a well-known source of surprises. Furthermore, we must
    not forget that particle physics originated with the study of cosmic
    rays.” (Science, 3/4/66, 1052-5)
9 US. and other scientifically advanced nations have a solemn and urgent

    duty to help less-developed countries on their way by providing both
    knowledge and materials, wrote Frederick Seitz, president of National
    Academy of Sciences, in Science, but the ‘‘success of this partnership . . .
    will ultimately depend on the extent to which those in the less-developed
    lands are willing to sacrifice themselves and their way of life to the
    pursuit of technological development. One of Homi Bhabha’s [late
    director of Tata Institute, Bombay] great contributions to India lies in
     the willingness he had to mold old traditions to new patterns of
     development.” (Seitz, Science, 3/4/66)
  Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr. (Cdr., USNR), and Charles A. Bassett I1
     (Maj., USAF), killed-Feb. 28 when their T-38 jet training plane crashed in
     St. Louis, were buried in Arlington National Cemetery with full military
     honors in two separate ceremonies. Fifteen astronauts attended, 12 of
     whom served as pallbearers. See and Bassett had been selected as prime
     crew for the Gemini IX mission scheduled for spring 1966. (Hoagland,
      Wash. Post, 3/5/66, B1; AP, NYT, 3/5/66, 9)
  FAX would advance from Oct. 15 to Sept. 1, 1966, date for submission of
     final design proposals by two airframe and two engine manufacturers
     participating in supersonic transport (Sst) development program,
     announced B/G J. C. Maxwell, director of FAA Sst Devleopment. FAA
     expected to complete its evaluation of the competing designs by Dec. 31
     as scheduled. Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. were competing
86                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    for airframe contract; General Electric Co. and Pratt & Whitney Div.
    of United Aircraft Corp., for engine contract. (FAA     Release 66-23)
March 4: Launch Umbilical Tower No. 3 at KSC was lifted by crawler trans-
    porter and moved to Pad A of Launch Complex 39-three miles away
    -for placement on pedestals in checkout of procedures for Saturn V
    launch operations. (KSC    Historian)
0 Dr. Norman F. Ness of GSFC Laboratory for Space Sciences described in

    Science the new view of earth’s magnetic field afforded by satellite
    mapping. Among developments in space physics, he pointed out studies
    in planetary magnetism leading to comparison of earth with a “magnetic
    comet” and results obtained by MARINERS 11 and IV indicating the
    unique strength of earth’s magnetic field, compared with those of Venus
    and Mars. He noted the importance of these data and other satellite
    measurements for paleomagnetic research. (Science, 3/4/66, 1041-52)
0 FCC authorized ITT World Communications, Inc., to provide live television

    coverage of recovery operations for March 15 Gemini VI11 mission. A
    portable station aboard U.S.S. Boxer would use EARLY BIRD I comsat as
    it did for GEMINI VII and VI recoveries. (UPI,NYT, 3/5/66, 13)
March 5 Agena target vehicle similar to one to be used on March 15
         :
    Gemini VI11 rendezvous and docking mission had apparently passed
    series of test firings necessary to qualify for flight, Charles W. Mathews,
    NASA Gemini program manager, told AP. Data from tests conducted at
    USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tenn., were being
    evaluated. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/6/66)
  After trip from Seal Beach, Calif., aboard USNS Pt. Barrow, S-11-F facilities
    stage-nonflight version of Saturn V/Apollo launch vehicle’s 2nd
    stage-arrived at KSC for use in testing launch facilities. Stage would
    be mated with two other facilities stages and an Apollo spacecraft
    mockup to form the 365-ft.-tall Saturn V launch vehicle. This would
    mark first time all major components would have been joined in the
    Saturn V configuration. (MSFC Release 66-47)
  Failures of VENUS 11 and 111 space probes were admitted by U.S.S.R. Tass’s
    original announcement had reported that a “softlanding” had been
    planned for VENUS 111, but a corrected announcement which appeared
    two hours later eliminated the word “soft” and failed to confirm that
    the spacecraft had ejected its sterilized capsule. Tass said the descend-
    ing apparatus had consisted of parachute system and 23.6-in. sphere
     containing instruments to measure Venusian surface temperature and
    pressure, to which “heat-resistant substance had been applied ensuring
    protection from high temperatures when braking in the dense layer of
     the atmosphere.” VENUS 11 had failed to transmit photos or televise the
    planet’s sunlit side as programed because of a breakdown in its com-
    munications system: “The last radio communications with stations
    Venus 2 and Venus 3 as they approached the planet were not held for
     reasons that had not been established.”
        Both VENUS 1 and VENUS 111 carried equipment to measure inter-
                       1
    planetary magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and streams of low-energy
     charged particles, in addition to special “traps” to determine magnitude
     of solar plasma and micrometeorites; however, slightly different instru-
    mentation was used to obtain cross-reading of the data. Both spacecraft
     were similarly constructed with one section for flight equipment and a
     second for auxiliary equipment. Second section in VENUS 11 carried
     television photographic device for use during flyby. Tass said VENUS 11
                                                                           87
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    was to have flown “close to Venus on the side lighted by the sun at a
    distance not exceeding 40,000 km. (25,000 mi.) ; VENUS 1 1 was to have
                                                               1
    landed on the surface of Venus in the center of the visible disc of the
    planet.” 89 successful radio exchanges had been held with the space-
    craft; data had been recorded to “obtain a high accurate forecast of the
    movements of both stations,” Tass said. (Pravda, 3/5/66, USS-T Trans.;
    NYT, 3/6/66, 78; rash. Post, 3/6/66, A14)
March 5: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s statement to House
    Armed Services Committee that the “Manned Orbiting Laboratory
    development program should proceed on a deliberate and orderly
    schedule” received comment by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal ofthe
    Armed Forces: “ ‘Deliberate’ is an excellent word in this context; ac-
    cording to one definition . . . it means ‘leisurely in movement or
              .                       .
    action. . .’ In these terms MOL . . shows promise of becoming one of
    the most deliberate projects of all time.
       ‘‘ ‘Orderly’, though, is not such a good word. Last summer DOD ap-
    proved hardware development and set a manned flight target of 1968,
    then in a matter of months, reneged on the schedule by whacking almost
    a quarter of a billion doIlars out of the planned funding program.
    McNamara made no mention of a new schedule, but other sources indi-
                                                       .
    cate that late 1969 is now an optimistic target . .
       “The SecDef reported that the MOL funding figure for fiscal 1967 is
    $159 million. This, together with remaining funds from the $150 million
    allocated in the current fiscal year, will provide for ‘design, definition,
    system integration, development of specifications and determination of
    firm cost proposals . . . scheduled for completion during this coming
    spring and summer, after which contract will be awarded for full-scale
    development of hardware.’ . . .” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 3/5/66, 8)
    ver 100 scientists, including U S . space officials, would visit Greece to
    observe annular eclipse May 20, during which lunar shadow on earth
    would make 99 per cent of the sun invisible in that area. Joint NASA-
    Greek National Committee for Space Research project would launch
    seven GSFC-instrumented Boosted Arcas rockets from USNS Range
    Recoverer stationed several miles off-shore from Koroni in southern
    Peloponnesos. Experiments would investigate ionization below 56 mi.
    due to eclipse-caused “changes in solar ultraviolet and X-ray flux.’’
    Data would be coordinated with those obtained by nine Arcas and
    Centaure rockets which European Space Research Organization (ESRO)
    would launch from Euboea, Greek island in Aegean Sea. (NYT, 3/6/66,
    10; NASA Release 66-108; Wallops Release 66-22)
* Astronaut James Lovell and nuclear submarine U.S.S. Benjamin Franklin’s
    crew exchanged mementos of a joint experiment conducted during Dec.
    4-18 GEMINI VII mission. Benjamin Franklin, with two seconds to fire a
    Polaris missile so it could be seen by GEMIM VII Astronauts Lovell and
    Borman as they passed over Cape Kennedy, fired perfectly, enabling the
    astronauts to track the missile visually. In a ceremony aboard the sub-
    marine docked in Newport News, Va., Lovell was presented gas generator
    plate from the Polaris missile and crew received the NASA patch from
                                   (m,    Wash. Sun. star, 3/6/66)
    Lovell’s GEMINI VI1 spacesuit.
March 6: USAF announced it was designing an expandable sidewall folding
    aircraft tire which would deflate after aircraft had taken off, and inflate
    before landing. New tire concept, being developed by B. F. Goodrich CO.
    for AFSC’s Flight Dynamics Laboratory, would give large aircraft better
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
88

    ground flotation capability through increased contact between tire and
    ground, making rough field landings easier, and permitting control of
    tire pressure. (AFSC Release 197.65)
March 6: USAF awarded Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., $46,000 contract to
    continue studying methods of eliminating six-minute communications
    blackout caused when friction of the atmosphere envelops reentering
    spacecraft in a ball of hot, electrically charged gases. Dr. Ronald Row,
    Sylvania Electronic Systems Applied Research Laboratory, told the New
    York Times in a telephone interview of the development of a device to
    simulate the flow of charged gases around typical spacecraft antenna.
    He said Sylvania was considering shortening pulses of signals so they
    could penetrate gases or covering antennas with plastic or ceramic
    shrouds that would shield them from gases and heat but still permit
    radio signals to penetrate. (Wilford, NYT, 3/7/66, 19)
During week of March 6: Possibility that residents of communities afflicted
    by jet noise might develop psychotic symptoms because their dreams
    were interrupted at night was suggested by Dr. Julius Buchwald,
    psychiatrist, and Dr. Howard M. Bogard, psychologist, at a hearing held
    by New York State Assembly’s Mental Hygiene Committee. Dr.
    Buchwald said that everybody dreams at least five times a night. If a
    person is awakened and prevented from having his dreams, psychotic
    symptoms from mild to ccmore    severe” could occur, including paranoidal
    delusions, psychoses, hallucinations, and suicidal and homicidal im-
    pulses. Dr. Bogard said persons prevented from dreaming would “tend
    toward true psychoses.” He urged study of whether residents near air-
    ports ‘‘lose out on dream time,” whether such communities become
     “disoriented” by people leaving, and whether family life is disrupted
    because of interruptions of ordinary communications. (Hudson, NYT,
    3/13/66,66)
March 7: All primary mission objectives of first unmanned Apollo Saturn IB
    mission Feb. 26 were achieved and flight was very satisfactory according
    to initial evaluation of test results, NASA announced. Guidance and
    control systems performed well; both S-IB and S-IVB trajectories
    and velocities were normal and no structural problems were found in
    either stage or instrument unit. Quality of data received at ground
    stations was excellent and few losses occurred in expected 1,300 meas-
     urements telemetered.
       All spacecraft systems and subsystems performed as planned with
     two exceptions: (1) one of the main parachute harness legs failed to
     sever after landing, thus retaining chute attached to module; and (2)
     Service Module (Sm) propulsion system exhibited below nominal per-
    formance during both firing periods resulting in reentry speed about
     500 mph less than 18,500 mph expected, but sufficient to evaluate
    performance of heatshield for orbital missions. Earth landing system
    functioned properly to safely recover Cm, and unsevered parachute was
     recovered for post-mission examination. Spacecraft would be flown to
     Downey, Calif., for detailed inspection by NASA and NAA Apollo officials
     and tests for improvements. (NASA Proj. Off.; MSFC Release 66-51)
0 NASA Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Breene M. Kerr,

    reviewing NASA technology utilization program for 1965 in testimony
    before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee
     on Advanced Research and Technology, stated that the total number of
    NASA Tech Briefs now published was more than 600. He continued:
                                                                            89
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    “We anticipate publication of approximately 700 Tech Briefs during
                          ...
    calendar year 1966.         we estimate the average Tech Brief is seen by
                                  ..                                       ..
    more than 10,000 persons. . Industry interest in our program is .
    indicated by the fact that approximately 1,500 persons visited our Field
                                                                     ..
    Center Technology Utilization Offices during calendar 1965. . Two
    additional Regional Dissemination Programs have been started in the
    last year, one at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and the
    other at Southeastern State College in Durant, Okla. One hundred and
    thirty-one companies are now paying annual membership fees at our
                                            .                         .
    established computer-based centers. . . Of real significance . . is the
    fact that approximately 3,000 companies have received some degree of
                                       .
    service from these centers. . . We have also recently concluded an
    interagency agreement with the Small Business Administration whereby
    several of that organization’s field offices, under an experimental
    program, will be providing NASA technology to selected small business
    concerns.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634-9)
March 7: Series of small balloons was launched ‘from Christchurch, New
    Zealand, in joint U.S.-New Zealand pilot project to examine feasibility
    of Global Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost)-plan for using satel-
    lite to locate and read out information from large number of balloons
    floating around earth at constant altitudes. Balloons, circling hemisphere
    at 20,000-ft., 40,000-ft., and 80,000-ft. altitudes, would be tracked by six
    stations equipped with high-frequency receivers, stop watches, and sun
     tables. Program would determine whether small superpressure balloons
     could fly for extended periods; test temperature, humidity, pressure,
    and radiation sensors which might be used in operational Ghost system;
     learn whether balloons would cluster in certain areas; and acquire data
     on planetary circulation in Southern Hemisphere at various altitudes.
     Called Southern Hemisphere balloon experiment, project was sponsored
     by ESSA and NSF and had the endorsement of U.N. World Meteorological
     Organization. Data would be analyzed by National Center for Atmos-
     pheric Research and Information and shared with all participants and
     interested nations. (ESSA Release 66-17)
* Sen. Fred R. Harris (D-Okla.), speaking on Senate floor in support of
     Sen. Carl T. Curtis’s (R-Neb.) resolution calling for National Science
     Foundation to set guidelines for wider and more equitable distribution
                                   “. . .
     of Federal R&D funds, said:          expenditure of this money can and
     should be an investment in the future of each of the several states,
     without regard to geographic location or the accident of history.”
      (CR, 3/7/66,4917)
March 7-11: Third Annual Space Congress of the Canaveral Council of
     Technical Societies held at Cocoa Beach, Fla., was attended by more
      than 1,000 scientists and engineers. Astronaut-aquanaut M. Scott
      Carpenter was principal opening day speaker. (KSC Historian)
March 8: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried
     high angular resolution x-ray collimators to estimated 103-mi. (165-km.)
      altitude in NASA-heriCan Science and Engineering, Inc.-MIT experiment
      to determine size and location of strong x-ray sources in Scorpius.
      Rocket and instrumentation performed successfully [see May 231.
      (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Solar electric propulsion of unmanned spacecraft to Mars appeared entirely
      possible by the mid-1970’~~   reported JPL researchers John Stearns and
      Donald W. Ritchie at AIAA meeting in San Diego. Four 55-ft.-long
90                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    folding rectangular solar-cell panels would furnish power that could be
    harnessed to a set of small ion-chamber engines to propel spacecraft
    with approximate 7,000-lb. payload toward Mars. Trip would take about
    300 days and culminate in orbit around Mars. Report also envisioned
    850-day mission by solar-electric-propelled spacecraft to and beyond
    Jupiter in late 1970’s. (JPL Release; NASA Release 66-53)
March 8: NASA Langley Research Center awarded General Electric Co.
    $3,000,000 incentive-type contract to build the sixth spacecraft in
    NASA’s Scout-launched reentry heating flight series. The 13-ft. conical
    spacecraft would be launched to measure heating rates associated with
    turbulent air flow close to vehicular surface, which could not be
    simulated with ground equipment. (LBRC Release; NASA Release 66-54)
  ComSatCorp petitioned FCC to deny ITT’S request to construct a fourth
    satellite earth station in Puerto Rico. ComSatCorp said “public interest
    would best be served” if it, rather than ITT, owned the station, and
    revealed plans to seek permission to construct and begin operating the
    facility by mid-1968. (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/1/66, E l l ; NYT, 3/12/66,22)
0 Reps. William Green (D-Pa.) and Earle Cabell (D-Tex.) were appointed to

    House Committee on Science and Astronautics, replacing Reps. Bob
    Casey (D-Tex.) and Brock Adams (D-Wash.), who resigned. (NASA LAR
    VI411
 Lt. Valentina Tereshkova, who made 48-orbit VOSTOK VI spaceflight in
    June 1963, was promoted to major in the Soviet Air Force, reported
    Krasnaya Zvezda. March 8 was U.S.S.R. International Woman’s Day.
    (Reuters, NYT, 3/9/66, 6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/66, A2)
March 9: Seven US. scientists had consented to serve on joint US.-U.S.S.R.
    Editorial Board provided for in agreement on space biology and medicine
    reached by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives Oct. 8,
    1965, in New York City: Melvin Calvin, Univ. of California, Berkeley-
    US. co-chairman; Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of Kentucky; Dr. Robert W.
    Krauss, Univ. of Maryland; Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech; Dr. John P.
    Marbarger, Univ. of Illinois; Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, NASA; and Wolf Vish-
    niac, Univ. of Rochester. Agreement provided that Editorial Board, co-
    chaired by a Soviet and a U S . scientist, would supervise collection.
    preparation, and publication of materials on space biology and medicine.
    It would select compilers to assemble and prepare materials and authors
    -approximately equal number of Soviet and US.-to write the mate-
    rial. Work was expected to be published in several volumes, in both
    English and Russian, between 1967 and 1968. Cost of work performed
    by each country would be borne by that country. (NASA Release 66-49)
  Successful mock launching of Gemini 8 spacecraft at ETR in preparation
    for March 15 three-day rendezvous and docking mission. Astronauts
    Neil Armstrong and David Scott spent two and one-half hours in
    Gemini capsule during simulated spaceflight. (UPI,NYT, 3/10/66, 10)
  NASA had awarded Lockheed Propulsion Co. $96,000 contract to evaluate
    solid-propellant motor which could stop and restart spacecraft propul-
    sion units on command. Current solid-propellant rocket motors did not
    have this capability. On future space missions concept could be applied
    to midcourse correction, probe separation, and orbit and space-probe
    injection. Lockheed, under contract to JPL, would conduct 18 test firings.
     (NASA Release 66-56)
  USAF had established and would implement in FY 1967 procedures for the
    management of DOD’S secondary payload space activities, Dr. John S.
                                                                            91
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Foster, Jr., DOD’S Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told
     closed hearing of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
     Program would provide for operation of a central business office which
     would accept requests for DOD launch support of space experiments from
     NASA, other armed services, and other DOD nonservice R&D activities.
     Arrangements for secondary payloads on USAF vehicles had previously
     been handled on an informal basis. (M&S Daily, 3/9/66)
March 9: ComSatCorp proposed to FAA an aeronautics satellite to handle
    complex communications for airlines and aid in FAA’s traffic control.
                                                            air
    Two-channel, 210-lb. satellite would be launched in late 1967-two or
     three years earlier than previous proposals-into 22,300-mi.-altitude
     synchronous orbit to provide more reliable very-high-frequency radio
     communications over North Atlantic area currently served by high-
     frequency radio system affected by bad weather and sunspot activity.
     (UPI, Vash. Post, 3/11/66, D6; Cooke, WSJ, 3/10/66, 32; Clark, NYT,
    3/10/66, 19; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/66, A8)
e USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR with Thor-Agena D booster.
     (US.    Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 148)
e Flight operations through national airspace system in 1965 surpassed all
    previous years, according to annual FAA Air Traffic Activity Report. The
    292 FAA airport traffic control towers reported 37.9 million takeoffs and
    landings during the year-an 11% increase over 1964. Largest increase
    -nearly 34%-was in general aviation (nonairline) flying; airline
    activity increased by only 14%. (FAA Release 66-25)
March 10: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testifying on the NASA FY
     1967 budget request before the House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics, said that the gap between the U S . and Soviet space programs
     still remained and “this budget will not close it. We are as much as 2
    years behind the Soviet Union in certain important aspects of space
    power. In . . . 1965, they launched 52 Cosmos satellites; successfully
     orbited a 3-man spacecraft; demonstrated a communications satellite
     capability with 2 Molniya spacecraft; and orbited the heaviest payload
     by anyone in the world to date, indicating they have developed a new
    launch vehicle with some 2% to 3 million pounds of thrust. Since the
    beginning of 1966 they have achieved a successful soft landing on the
    moon and they have reached Venus with two probes.
        ?r
          The Soviet program shows every evidence of a continuing major
                                                                      ..
     commitment to long-term, large-scale operations in space. .           The
    massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup and a long-term program
    underlines the importance they attached to advancing their space capa-
    bilities. It will require a strong and increasing effort initiated no later
    than fiscal year 1968 and vigorously pushed in the years after the United
    States has achieved a manned lunar Ianding to prevent them from forg-
    ing ahead as the unchallenged leader in space. . . .” (Testimony; NASA
     Auth. Hearings, 5)
  Soviet space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, approaching the end of their 16th
    day in space aboard COSMOS CX, were in “quite satisfactory condition,”
    Tass reported. “This is indicated by telemetered data such as pulse,
    respiration, electrocardiograms, and others--as well as observation of
    the dogs during television transmission session.” (Tass, 3/10/66;
    Reuters, Chic. T i . 3/11/66)
                       rb,
  MSFC engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr., ended 18-
    day stay inside lunar vehicle simulator to test interior chamber design
92                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     and investigate human factors of an enclosed cabin environment. During
     experiment they performed assigned tasks inside chamber, went outside
     in spacesuits to simulate going onto lunar surface to gather rock samples,
     and performed emergency tasks when the compartment walls were
     ‘‘punctured by meteoroids.” Results of experiment, conducted by
     Honeywell, Inc., might be used in developing hardware needed in future
     exploration of moon. (MSFC Release 66-56)
March 10: NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $230,000 contract to determine
     alternate approaches and concepts for measuring horizon radiance
     characteristics over earth’s surface-knowledge essential for design of
     space vehicle guidance and control systems. LaRc-directedstudy, includ-
     ing investigation of factors affecting horizon radiance profiles, analysis
     of measurements and evaluation of possible flight techniques, would
     support Project Scanner rocket flight tests. (LaRC Release; NASA Release
     66-57)
0 USAF Agena D rocket launched from Vandenberg AFB with Atlas booster

     Feb. 15 exploded into at least 40 pieces which fell from orbit during
     seven-day period, UPI reported. There was no indication that the payload
     itself was damaged: “It is no longer in orbit, but it may have been a re-
     connaissance satellite which was brought down and recovered,” UPI
     explained. Explosive gas in the otherwise empty Agena apparently was
     detonated accidentally after booster had fired. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 3/11/66)
   GEMINI IV Astronaut Edward H. White 11, first American to walk in space,
      told AP that the most important word of advice he had given Astronaut
      David Scott, scheduled for extravehicular activity during the March 15
      Gemini VI11 mission, was: “Don’t get in a hurry.
         “Take things slow and try not to hurry and rush, because you can’t
      do things in a real rapid manner up there. It’s better to go on the slow,
      deliberate approach.” (AP, Chic.Trib., 3/11/66)
   U.S.S.R. would soon launch single spacecraft with six cosmonauts farther
      into space than man had ever ventured, possibly to the inner Van Allen
      radiation belts about 500 mi. (805 km.) above earth, Veda a Techniku
      Mladezi, Czechoslovakian technical journal reported. Last manned space-
      flight was that of VOSKHOD 11 with cosmonauts Alexey Leonov and Pave1
      Belyayev on March 18, 1965. (Av. Wk., 3/14/66, 34; Simons, Wash.
      Post, 3/10/66, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/10/66, A l )
March 11: Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced
      Research and Technology, outlined the highlights of NASA’s            1965
      advanced research and technology program before the House Committee
      on Science and Astronautics, citing significant contributions to such
      national programs as the supersonic transport (Sst) and the USAF C-5A
      transport, and listing major accomplishments: landing studies of reentry
      lifting bodies, second Fire experiment to measure heat transfer at high
      reentry velocities, two successful firings of 260-in. solid-propellant
      rocket motor, series of successful nuclear rocket firings, 2,600-hr.
      endurance test of an ion engine, and endurance tests of the Snap-8
       nuclear engine which “demonstrated altitude specific impulse of over
      750 1b.-sec./lb.-almost   twice chemical rocket values-and a thrust of
       over 50,000 pounds. Accumulated running time for the reactor tests was
      over 4200 seconds. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 169-78)
 0 Quasars are relatively small objects 10 million to 1billion yrs. old and 30
      million to 300 million light years from earth that have been shot at super
      speeds out of another galaxy by a titanic explosion, astronomer Dr.
                                                                             93
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Halton C. Arp, Mt. Palomar Observatory, contended in Science. Alp’s
    theory contradicted prevailing view that quasars could enable man to see
    the ends of time and space and possibly glimpse the secrets of creation
    because they were on the rim of the u n i v e r s e 1 0 or more billion light
    yrs. away-and were almost as old as the universe-8 billion yrs. Astron-
    omers believed that the quasars’ “red shifts” in light-changes toward
    red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away-were caused by
    extremely rapid motion away from our own galaxy. Arp suggested that
    quasars might be very dense and compact, exerting a strong gravitational
    attraction for their size which could shift wavelengths to produce ‘‘red
    shifts.” (Science, 3/11/66; Weil, ZVush. Post, 3/12/66,2; Sullivan, W T ,
    3/11/66, 28; Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/11/66)
March 11: NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George
    E. Mueller, testifying on FY 1967 budget authorization before the
    House Committee on Science and Astronautics, stated that NASA had
    reached a manpower peak of 300,000 people in the manned spaceflight
    program: “We have passed our peak in engineering, we are reaching our
    peak in manufacturing, and we are at our peak in total Manned Space
                                      .
    Flight manpower resources. . .
       “A striking anomaly of the space program is that we begin to ‘go out
                                                              ...
    of business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle.      The program
    to develop the uprated Saturn I launch vehicle illustrates this situation.
    The decline in manpower on this program has been underway for several
    months, but the first flight took place only 2 weeks ago-and the first
    manned flight is almost a year away. By then, the employment level will
    be almost half the peak Ievel of 1965.”
       Reviewing NASA plans for a manned project after Apollo, Dr. Mueller
    cited five major program alternatives under study. The alternatives
    “placed emphasis on (1)direct economic benefits to mankind, (2) lunar
    exploration and science, (3) planetary exploration, (4) maximum effort
    in all program areas, and (5) a program balanced over the whole spec-
    trum of alternatives, which could be shifted as required to meet national
    needs.
       “We have not made a decision upon which of these courses we will
    embark.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 32-3, 148)
0 Performance of Apollo Command Module (Cm), launched Feb. 26 from

     ETB on AS-201 flight, was successful enough to obviate any delay in
    schedule for a 1969 manned lunar expedition, Dr. Joseph Shea, manager
    of MSC Apollo Spacecraft Office, told Gladwin Hill of the New York Times.
    The Cm, on display at North American Aviation, Inc., in Downey, Calif.,
    remained structurally intact, and the few minor technical problems that
    had developed during flight were not serious enough to cause any
    engineering problems in the assembly-line production vehicles for sub-
    sequent phases of the testing program, Dr. Shea said. “This was the
    first major confirmation of design processes and it went quite well.”
     (Hill, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
o Prince Philip of U.K. toured MSC for three hours, accompanied by depart-
    ment heads explaining the apparatus used in spacefight. With assistance
    of Astronaut James A. McDivitt, the Prince spent 30 minutes in an
    astronaut training craft, twice steering it into simulated orbital ren-
    dezvous with an Agena rocket. “It was all a fascinating experience,”
    he said later. “When you are inside, everything seems to be out of
    context.” Dr. Robert Gilruth, MSC Director, presented Philip a British
94                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    flag which had been carried aboard GEMINI VII during its Dec. 4-18
    space mission with the intention of presenting it to the Prince during
    his tour. (MSC Roundup, 3/18/66, 8; Waldron, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
March 11: France’s report for the Register of the U.N. Committee on the
    Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of her successful Nov. 26,1965, launch of
    A-1 scientific satellite from Hammaguir Range, marked first such report
    by nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. (Text)
March 12: Gemini 8 hatch difficulty which threatened to delay March 15
    mission was solved by Astronaut David R. Scott. After KSC technicians
    had discovered that 65- to 70-lbs. pull pressure was required to close
    cabin door because of too-thick sealant around hatch edges, Scott worked
    with hatch-closing mechanism until he was satisfied he would have no
    difficulty closing the door in space. Officials preferred to have required
    pull pressure at 40 to 45 lbs., but mission rules would tolerate 80 lbs. If
    hatch could not be closed properly, astronauts would be unable to repres-
    surize their cabin.
       Mission review board of NASA, USAF, and industry officials reaffirmed
    March 15 launch date after studying all factors of the flight: Titan I1 and
    Atlas-Agena boosters, Gemini 8 spacecraft, control centers at KSC and
    MSC, global tracking network, and recovery forces. (AP, Balt. Sun
    3/13/66)
  Meteorite crater 1,476 ft. in diameter and with an average depth of 100 ft.
    -third largest crater on record-was discovered in the western foothills
    of the Chilean Andes by geological team led by Dr. William A. Cassidy,
    Columbia Univ. Lamont Geological Observatory, and Joaquin Sanchez,
    Instituto de Investigaciones de Geologicas de Chile, NSF announced.
    Crater, which lies in an area 1,000 ft. above sea level accessible only by
    foot, was discovered while team was investigating a depression shown in
    an aerial photograph. Crater’s age had not been determined. (Chic. Trib.,
    3/13/66)
  Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, in Toronto to address the Canadian Aer-
    onautics and Space Institute, said a t a news conference that although
    computers predicted that only one of the first three manned U S .
    attempts to land on the moon would be successful, human judgment
    would perhaps prove them wrong. He said computers had predicted
    the loss of two of seven astronauts on the Mercury program but none
     was killed. (AP, Denver Post, 3/13/66)
  Soviet biologist Norair Sissakian, believed to have played key role in
    designing life-support systems for animal and human passengers in
    spacecraft, died suddenly. His official obituary, signed by Communist
     Party leader Leonid Brezhnev, Premier Alexey N. Kosygin, President
     Nikolay Podgorny, former President Anastas I. Mikoyan, and all other
     members of 12-man ruling presidium of Soviet Communist Party, refer-
     red to his important contribution to “the formation and development of
     a new science-space biology.” Sissakian would be buried in Moscow’s
     Novodevichye Cemetery March 14. (Tass, 3/13/66; Pravda, 3/14/66,3)
0 Sir Sydney Camm, British aircraft designer who designed the RAF Hurricane

     fighter used in World War 11, the Hunter fighter, the P-1127 Vtol air-
     craft, and other combat aircraft, died in London. Sir Sydney, honorary
     fellow and member of council of Royal Aeronautical Society, had
     received the Society’s Gold Medal in 1958 and had been selected to
     receive the Guggenheim Medal, highest US. aeronautical award, in the
     spring. (NYT, 3/14/66, 31)
                                                                           95
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

March 13: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill
    Research Range was third and last fiight [see Feb. 9 and 161 in series of
    GSFC experiments to measure number and distribution of electrons in
    energy range of 1-300kev, which produce visual aurora. Although radar
    lost track early in flight and peak altitude was not available, rocket per-
    formance was near predicted and series was considered completely
    successful. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Formation of Science Advisory Committee, composed of astronomers,
    biologists, physicists, and geologists from eight universities, to advise
    NASA on conduct of future space projects was announced by NASA Admin-
    istrator James E. Webb. Chaired by Dr. Norman F. Ramsey, Harvard
    Univ. physicist, c o w i t t e e would work directly with Dr. Homer E.
    Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applica-
    tions, but would study future space activities on NASA-wide basis,
    including manned and unmanned flight programs. In particular, it would
    review how best to conduct such programs as Voyager planetary space-
    craft, including automated biological laboratory, post-Apollo lunar
    exploration program, and National Space Astronomy Observations-
    projects recommended by NAS Space Science Board. (NASA      Release 66-55)
  U S . would land a man on the moon before 1970 and before the Russians,
    predicted Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., at a news conference held
    with Astronaut Frank Borman in Sydney, Australia. Schirra said US.
    space program had completed three basic requirements for a manned
    lunar landing: 14-day spaceflight, ability to rendezvous in space, and
    controlled reentry into earth’s atmosphere. Astronauts Schirra and
    Borman were visiting Australia on their eight-nation good-will tour of
    Asia. (Reuters, NYT, 3/14/66, 6 )
  Gradual and unusually frank disclosures by U.S.S.R. confirming failures
     of VENUS 11 and VENUS 111 missions were discussed by Evert Clark in the
    New York Times. He noted Soviet scientists’ admission that VENUS 111’s
     trajectory would have missed the planet by 37,500 mi.-passing Venus
     when neither object would have been visible in Moscow-had its
     trajectory not been corrected by Dec. 27 radio command, and that VENUS
     111 had failed to eject landing sphere covered with heat-protective
     material to measure temperature and pressure at planet’s surface.
     (Clark, NYT, 3/14/66, 7)
  U S . physics was facing severe shortage of funds necessary to sustain
     progress in research and education, concluded NAS Physics Survey
     Committee in its report Physics: Survey and Outlook. Report recom-
     mended that physics support by Federal agencies be increased by 1969
     to two and one-half times the 1963 $500-million level for physics and
     astronomy. Assessing US. strength in six subfields, report noted for
     astrophysics “a pressing need for more observational facilities.” Based
     on 1964-65studies by an 18-member group headed by George E. Pake,
     Provost of Washington Univ., St. Louis, report stated: “Our strength in
     observational astrophysics with optical telescopes has long been estab-
     lished with the 200-in. telescope on Mount Palomar, but we have many
     more bright astrophysicists and astronomers than have access to the two
     US telescopes most suited for frontier research. Our relative strength
     will be altered with the implementation of plans for construction of
      several large telescopes in the Soviet Union. Any nation can, by placing
     a large telescope in the Southern Hemisphere, assume leadership in the
     observational astronomy of stellar evolution and cosmology, because
96                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    the Magellanic Clouds are the nearest of all external galaxies. The
    United States has taken the initiative in the expensive but highly prom-
    ising field of space-based optical and x-ray astronomy.
        “In radioastronomy the United States now has an impressive group
    of major radio telescopes, but the US position is not preeminent. Even
    the new instruments nearing completion at the California Institute of
    Technology and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory are inferior
    to existing instruments in Australia and the Soviet Union and to large
    new crosstype arrays nearing completion near Sydney and Moscow. The
    US position in space physics and cosmic radiation is good, with some
    question whether present conditions permit further strengthening of
    that position. Research on gravitation is at present not a large sector
    of research, but the US effort is of very high quality and is being increas-
    ingly recognized.” (NAS Release; Science, 3/18/66, 1363-6; Physics
    Today, 4/66, 23-36)
March 14: Gemini VI11 launch would be delayed at least 24 hrs. because of a
    leak in a unit of the spacecraft’s environmental control system and an
    overflowing fuel tank in the Atlas booster, NASA announced. Launch was
    reset, NASA announced March 15, for March 16. (Wilford, NYT,
    3/15/66, 17; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/15/66; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,
    3/14/66, 1)
  Global television relayed by US. and U.S.S.R. satellites could be used as a
    political instrument, threatening the independence of some countries
    and causing far-reaching changes in world relationships, warned
    Eurospace, organization of 160 European aerospace industries, in a
    memorandum released in London. When ordinary home television sets
    began to receive programs from these satellites “the national inde-
    pendence of developed countries without similar means of expression
    might be threatened by this persuasive new weapon,” memorandum
    said. Eurospace warning, released three days after an announcement
    that U.K. and other European nations had joined US.-dominated
    Intelsat consortium to launch system of world-spanning comsats by
     1968, urged Europe to play its own major role in space “before it is too
    late.” Intelsat’s space communications system would utilize Early
    Bird-type satellites which Eurospace did not consider “powerful enough
    to have noteworthy political or economic repercussions.” (Reuters,
     Wash. Post, 3/15/66, A16)
a Two meteorologists from US. National Environmental Satellite Center
    were in Geneva to discuss with their Soviet counterparts a cooperative
    approach on gathering weather information by satellite, including in-
    formation exchange about meteorological satellite design and operation,
    Aviation Week reported. Full review of US.-U.S.S.R. agreement was
     scheduled for May. (Av. Wk., 3/14/66, 25)
0 U S . might achieve a manned lunar landing by 1968, Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper,

    director of Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, told
     Phoenix Gazette. “There is nothing on the moon’s surface to prevent a
    landing and subsequent take-off. The surface is crunchy but solid. It
     will support the Lem (Lunar Excursion Module), and man can walk on
     it with relatively little trouble,” Kuiper added. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/15/66)
0 Investigations    of seals’ habits might yield valuable information for
     astronauts exploring the moon, particularly with regard to enduring
     extremes of cold and lack of oxygen, Dr. Carleton Ray, New York
     Zoological Society, told the New York Times. Ray, who recently returned
                                                                           97
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
    from Antarctica expedition sponsored by the Society with NSF aid, said
    that of pertinent interest would be ‘%easons why seals can endure
    tremendous cold, sleep under water without breathing, and use what
    appears to be a remarkable echo-sounding system for navigating in total
    darkness under thick ice to return to isolated breathing holes needed
    sporadically to help them remain submerged in a state somewhat akin
    to semihibernation.” (Devlin, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
March 15: U S . delegate to the Geneva disarmament conference Adrian
    Fisher urged U.S.S.R. to reconsider President Johnson’s offer of a
    “verified freeze” of the production of missiles and other strategic
    vehicles for launching nuclear bombs as a “logical first step in the con-
    trol of the growth of inventories of strategic nuclear vehicles.” Soviet
    delegate Semyon K. Tsarapkin had rejected the U S . plan March 3.
     (NYT, 3/16/66, 10)
* Compaiiia Telefdnica Nacionale de Espaiia (CTNE)-the Spanish national
    telephone company under NASA contract-awarded ITT contract to
    establish a ground station terminal complex on Grand Canary Island to
    support communications for U S . Apollo mission. Stations, equipped
    with 42-ft. parabolic antenna reflectors, super-cooled low-noise ampli-
    fiers, and 10-kw transmitters, would furnish multichannel telephone
    and telegraph service. (ITT Release)
0 New York Univ. announced completion of New York Univ.-NASA aerospace

     laboratory in Bronx was scheduled for June 1966. One-story, 15,000-sq.-
     ft. facility constructed with $582,000 NASA grant would include wind
     tunnel capable of duplicating speeds of up to 14 times the speed of
     sound for four seconds; models of supersonic transports, spacecraft,
     and other advanced aerospace designs would be tested there. (NYT,
     3/16/66,55)
a A laser to function as a ground-based device to recharge an orbiting
     satellite’s batteries was suggested by Dr. Charles H. Townes, MIT, and
     Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow, Stanford Univ., co-inventors of the laser, in a
     paper before the Optical Society of America’s meeting in Washington,
     D.C. Report predicted exploitation of the laser would grow into a
     billion-dollar industry by 1970. (Clark, NYT, 3/16/66, 45M)
* Employment in aerospace industry would increase to 1,266,000 by June
      1966-a gain of 94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported
     Karl 6. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn. Aircraft em-
     ployment was expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space
      employment remaining relatively stable. (Aerospace News, 3/15/66)
March 15-1 AAS-NSC Fourth Goddard Memorial Symposium-“Space Age
             6:
      in the Fiscal Year 2001”-was held in Washington, D.C.
         Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, delivering
      the first Annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture, stressed the importance
      of the contributions of men such as Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Dr.
      Hugh L. Dryden to the dramatic development of the space program:
      “The history of NASA reflects much of Dr. Dryden’s understanding of
      how progress can be made and what the conditions are that produce
      effective responses to the challenges being faced. A pivotal concept that
      has guided NASA administration has been that of the relation of the
      research and development project to many rapidly growing disciplines
      of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own
      defined immediate ends. A project is a disciplined and organized effort
      directed to a specific objective; one of its principal characteristics is
98                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     that it has a schedule. As such a project provides a creative and driving
     force in the total achievement of science, engineering, and technology
       . . .” (Text)
        Wesley A. Kuhrt, United Aircraft Research Laboratories, predicted
     interplanetary and translunar tourist travel for FY 2001: “A six-day
     round trip to the moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered‘clipper’ ships
     would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an 18-month trip to Venus, the
     passenger would pay $32,000. Steerage class to Mars, a two-year under-
     taking, would cost $35,000. But for $70,000 a passenger could ride the
                                                                    .”
     Mars Express to and from the red planet in 1 months. . . All fares
                                                       1
     assumed the Government would underwrite the cost of developing the
     spacecraft, Kuhrt said. Other predictions made at the symposium in-
     cluded teams of superhuman astronauts bred over several generations
     as a result of present studies in genetics and molecular basis of life;
     communications between ordinary persons in their homes and anyone,
     anywhere; versatile robots to perform human tasks; cosmic cargo
     transported at $10 per pound; network of satellites to link everyone in
     the world so they could speak in their native languages via rapid auto-
     matic translating computers;and man-shaped robots sending back three-
     dimensional pictures to human masters hundreds of miles away.
     Harvard astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that the trip from other
     galaxies had already been made and that earth had already been visited
     from space at least once. (Text)
        Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) told a luncheon audience that “we
     must lay out basic objectives far enough ahead that they will serve as
     relatively fixed goals-or in non-technical terms, as dreams. Such an
     early dream of man was to fly like a bird; later, we gradually translated
     this dream into making it easy for everyone to fly in an aircraft. We
     have these dreams and they affect our progress strongly. . . . ”
        To meet these ends, Karth recommended forming a “Hoover-type”
     Commission to review planning and decision-makingsystem in the area
     of science and technology. In addition he cited the need for “frequent,
     systematic, large-scale surveys and analysis of science and tech-
     nology from the near-term to the distant frontiers of knowledge. . . .”
     (Text)
                                             Age Society” would be like in 2001,
        In a prediction of what the ccSpace
     NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told the symposium:
     “The major development over the coming years will be the speed of
     change. We already have great difficulty maintaining our perspective
     regarding the change which has taken place during the last 8 or 10 years.
     Well, that rate of change is like the tortoise pace compared with what
                               ...
     is coming in the future.
        “Some with fertile imaginations foresee the time when there will be
     large scale emigration from earth to growing settlements on the moon
     and the planets. While I see the great growth in the ability to travel to
     such distant spots safely and speedily, I see little likelihood of any
     sizable movement of population even though nuclear reactors would
     furnish much of the competence to make conditions in such places both
     livable and productive. My reason for not predicting such movement
     is due to the simple belief that living conditions are going to be so
     improved here on earth that few would want to leave. . . .
        cc
           As for space travel, we can certainly let our imaginations soar, as we
     are now only in the infancy of growth. The space child has barely
                                                                            99
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    learned to walk. The future with its space travel being almost as common
                                                  ..  . but it will come. inter-
    as airplane travel is today i s yet to come
    planetary trips, at speeds many times what we now attain, will take
    place in craft as reusable as the jet plane is today, with at least as many
                         ..
    passengers aboard. .
        “One more thing I can predict with great confidence. The debate on
    the worthwhileness of space technology and space exploration-still
    continuing on the part of those of little vision-will have disappeared
    completely within a decade or so. The benefits will have become so
    obvious and the potential so exciting that even the most near-sighted
                                                ..”
    will be aware of the rich space harvest. .         (Text; We& Push. Post,
    3/16/66, AID; BoEmann, N . Y. Her. Trib., 3/16/66)
       Importance of materiaIs science and space vehicle technology was
    discussed by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research
    and Technology, NASA Hq. OART. “The structural designer of future
    launch vehicles will face many new and challenging problems. Launch
                .
    vehicles .. [will be] larger, complex, and more costly. If we are to reuse
    these launch vehicles without having to spend large sums of money
    either to bring them back or to refurbish them after recovery, major
    advances will be required in structural and materials technology.”
    Development of new materials and methods, such as “superinsuIations”
    ‘ oprevent heat leakage; stronger shielding materials to protect space-
      t
    craft from meteoroids and intense radiation; advanced lifting-body
    designs for greater reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which
    could be reassembled in space, would play a major role in US. space
    program before the year 2000, he said. (Text)
        Dr. CharIes S. Sheldon 11, NASC staff member, discussed overall
    economic outlook for space age up to F 2001. Sheldon noted that US.
                                              Y
    space program took about one per cent of gross national product and
    estimated that “Soviet Union is putting about two per cent of their GNP
                          .
    into space efforts . . .The close tie with military rocketry has speeded
    space development in these recent years, but it has also saddled space
    technology with an expendable ammunition philosophy rather than
    aiming at the lower operating costs of a recoverable transport
                    .
    philosophy. . .
        “Today we probably are headed toward an age of conservation, and
                                    .
    one of deliberate recycling .. the task of the remainder of this century
    may include the development of closed ecological systems for long-
    duration space fight, and on a different scale, heroic measures to recycle
    waste water and to reprocess industrial and consumer wastes into re-
                        ..
    usable products. .
        “If our urbanized society requires closed ecological systems even
    here on Earth, we can, in effect, air condition whole cities.”
        Discussing weather modification and climate control, he said:
        ..
    “. whether we bend nature itself, or create new sealed urban units,
    each almost self-sufficient in its ability to control its temperature, clean
    and recycle its air and water, and put all other wastes to productive
    use, some such heroic measures will be needed as this century runs out.”
     CTeXt)
March 16: Gemini VI11 rendezvous and docking mission-world‘s first space
    docking-began at ETR with launch of 7,000-1b. Agena Target Vehicle
     (Gatv) by Atlas booster at 1O:OO a m . EST, followed 100 min. later by
    launch of GEMINI ‘6111 by two-stage Titan I1 booster with Astronauts Neil
100                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      A. Armstrong, command pilot, and David R. Scott, pilot. Primary ob-
      jectives of the mission-sixth manned flight in the Gemini series-were
      rendezvous and docking of GEMINI VIII spacecraft with GATV and per-
      formance of extravehicular activity (Eva) for one orbit.
         GATV was injected into near-circular orbit with 186-mi. (299.5-km.)
      apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; GEMIM VIII entered initial orbit
      with 128.8-mi. (206.4-km.) apogee and 74.9-mi. (119.5-km.) perigee.
      Near third apogee, Armstrong fired aft thrusters, circularizing space-
      craft’s orbit at 168-mi. (270-km.) altitude. Trailing GATV by 139 mi.,
      Armstrong received intermittent lock-on between GEMINI VIII radar and
      GATV’s companion transponder. After sighting GATV at 66-mi. range
      at 04:12 GET, Armstrong fired thrusters and Scott read out computer
      data until 05:15 GET,   when they switched from catch-up to rendezvous
      mode. At 150 ft. from GATV,        Armstrong reported he had matched
      velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions at that point were
      so favorable that Armstrong passed under GATV and came up 80 ft. in
      front of it, where he was able to read some data on GATV’s status
      display.
         Successful docking was confirmed at 6:33 GET. Plan had been to re-
      main docked with GATV through 7%-hr. sleep period until beginning
      Eva, but at approximately 7:OO GET Spacecraft-GATV combination began
      to roll and yaw violently. Unable to stabilize joined spacecraft, Arm-
      strong fired GEMINI VIII’S thrusters to undock and maneuvered away
      from the GATV. Once freed, however, GEMINI VIII began to roll even more
      rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw rates increased, approaching one revolution
      per min. For three minutes, the astronauts fought to control GEMINI VIII;
      finally, with OAMS turned off, Armstrong fired his Reentry Control
      System (RCS)rockets in final attempt to counteract violent roll. This
      maneuver was successful and eight minutes later, at 7:25:30 GET,the
      spacecraft was stabilized. Within a matter of minutes, the problem was
      isolated to the spacecraft’s No. 8 thruster, which had fired inter-
      mittently while GEMINI VIII was docked with GATV and stuck open until
      Armstrong managed to turn off OAMS. It was later determined that a
      short circuit was probable cause of thruster’s malfunction. Premature
      use of reentry rockets forced Gemini flight director John D. Hodge to
      order an emergency landing, with recovery planned in the western
      Pacific during seventh revolution. (Safety rules of the Gemini program
      required immediate landing of any spacecraft once its Rcs squibs were
      blown; if the flight were allowed to continue, danger of Rcs fuel deple-
      tion would jeopardize firing of RCS rockets, vital to safe return of
      spacecraft and crew.)
         Spacecraft landed 500 mi. west of Okinawa in regular emergency
      recovery area at approximately 10:23 p.m. EST-~O hrs. 42 min. after
      launch. Landing was onIy three miles from intended impact point.
      Within minutes USAF frogmen parachuted from USAF C-54 rescue air-
      craft and placed flotation collar around capsule. At 1:30 a.m. EST cap-
      sule and astronauts were hoisted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard
      F. Mason.
         Despite early termination, GEMINI VIII mission accomplished one of
      two primary objectives-rendezvous and docking. Original flight plan
      had specified four GEMINI VIII-GATV dockings and two hrs. 15 min. of
      extravehicular activity by Astronaut Scott. Five scientific, four tech-
      nological, and one medical experiment were to have been conducted.
      Flight had been scheduled to last 44 revolutions-approximately 73 hrs.
                                                                              101
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-52;Wilford,NYT, 3/17/66,1;Waldron,
   NYT, 3/17/66, 20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, 1 ; Simons,Wash.
   Post, 3/17/66, 1; Au. Wh., 3/31/66, 30-32)




March 16: Astronauts David Scott and Neil Armstrong awaiting recovery in the Pacific
Ocean after their GEMINI VIII space flight.


March 16: President Johnson issued statement after GEMINI VIII carrying
    Neil Armstrong and David Scott had splashed down safely following
    difficulties encountered in flight: “They are disappointed that their
102              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    mission could not continue, but Gemini 8 accomplished the first docking
    in space-a major step on the course we have set. The information they
    have acquired will help us to perfect the spacecrafts that will carry us
    even further.
       “From their skill and strength we all take heart, knowing that the
    personal qualities of the astronauts and their colleagues will ultimately
    prevail in the conquest of space. We are very proud of them.” (Pres.
    Doc., 3/21/66, 400)
March 16: COSMOS CX, launched Feb. 22 with dogs Veterok and Ugolyek
    aboard, landed safely in U.S.S.R. Tass reported that though “the state of
    the animals after landing is good,” both dogs had suffered heart beat
    irregularities that had become more pronounced toward the end of the
    22-day flight. Respiration rate had changed insignificantly. During
    initial period of weightlessness, some disruption of coordination had
    been revealed in       rocking of the head.” One of the dogs had been
    “subjected to all the complex of irritants to indicate the reaction and
    functional ability” of the cardiovascular system; the other was used for
    control and comparison. Electronic sensors had provided continuous
    checks on blood pressure, pulse and respiration rates, and other data.
    Dogs had been fed a paste injected into their stomachs by a pneumatic
    device. Spacecraft had carried 300 thermoluminescent dosimeters to
    measure radiation doses in relation to shielding and ten sets of nuclear
    emulsions to determine the composition of radiation. Scientific in-
    formation obtained from the flight, which took the animals through the
    Van Allen radiation belts once during each of COSMOS CX’S 330 revolu-
    tions, ‘5-equired special processing after which final conclusions about
    the state of the animals and inferences about plans for future studies
    will be drawn.” (Tass, 3/16/66; Av. Wk.,      3/28/66, 28)
  President Johnson received 1966 Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy
    Award of the National Space Club at White House for “his efforts in
    shaping the space program from its infancy while a US. senator and as
    chairman of the National Space Council while Vice President and for
    providing the leadership for this nation’s preeminence in space as
    President,” and affirmed: “We intend to land the first man on the sur-
    face of the moon and we intend to do this in the decade of the sixties.”
        He also said: “I think if I were writing my own epitaph this morning
    I perhaps would prefer to be remembered, for the period I was Vice
    President, more by this one thing than any other. President Kennedy
    asked me to attempt to organize and give direction to the Space Agency.
     I interviewed about 19 men through the United States and finally
     selected Jim Webb. I prevailed upon him to come and begin this
    undertaking.
        “Within 15 minutes from the time I called the President originally,
    Jim Webb was out here being announced as the new Space Adminis-
     trator. I have been very proud of that announcement ever since.
        “Your modesty, humbleness, your great executive ability, your great
    courage, your Marine spirit and determination have made us the envy
     of the world, Mr. Webb, and we salute you publicly.
        reDr. Goddard was a great prophet, a true prophet. To some it seems
    almost incredible that a year before Lindbergh had ever flown the
    Atlantic he was dreaming and working to take us up into the stars. Like
    so many prophets, he was long without honor in his own country, but
    he never lost faith because his faith was founded on fact. He could turn
                                                                       103
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    aside the rebuffs of the shortsighted; he could laugh at the jokes of
    his detractors.
       “I just wish today that he could be here with us to observe what we
    have just seen. I don’t think he would be the least surprised by the
    progress we have made. I think he would be very proud.” (Pres. Doc.,
    3/21/66, 399; SBD, 3/8/66,49; CR, 3/21/66, A1621)
March 16: The late Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard launched the first liquid-
    fueledrocket from Auburn, Mass., 40yrs. ago. Annuallyon the anniversary
    of the first flight, Goddard is honored by the National Space Club at a
    memorial banquet in Washington, D.C. In 1962, Vice President Johnson
    predicted that within 25 yrs. there would be a permanent base on the
    moon. Vice President Hubert Humphrey, delivering the 1966 address,
    emphasized that the space budget must be tightly planned: “I feel the
    necessity for cost consciousness. This is the need, to put it another
    way, of getting the most space for the tax dollar. These are times when
    we must exert high discipline in public expenditure and our space
    program cannot be exempt from that discipline.” Humphrey said he
    could foresee “dramatic achievements ahead” in space exploration,
    notably: (1) exploration of the lurain and possible establishment of
    one or more permanent bases there; (2) development of ‘‘a whole family
    of earth-orbiting stations, supplied by regular ferry services”; (3)
    development of “recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneu-
    verable spacecraft; (4) building of spaceports around the country; (5)
    improvement of propulsion methods so that planetary trips could be
    made in a week or less; (6) “launching of unmanned probes to every
    part of the solar system-and perhaps manned planetary expeditions as
    well.” (Text; CRY 5/4/66)
       National Space Club Press Award “in recognition of his exceptional
    photographic documentation of the manned space flight program” went
    to NASA photographer William P. Taub; Astronautics Engineer Award
    was given to Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews “for his
    contribution to the nation’s manned space flight program as ’ii key
    engineering pioneer to investigate the feasibility of manned space
    flight, culminating in Project Mercury. .. and in the successful Gemini
    program, as well as in the establishment and refinement of the Apollo
    configuration”; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for “mak,ing a
    major advance in the state of the art of space systems” was presented
    jointly to MSC, USAF Space Systems Div., McDonnell Aircraft Corp.,
    Martin Co., Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., IBM Corp.,
    and Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay
    Award was made to Airman 2/C Frank H. Winter for “Danish Rocketry
    in the 19th Century”; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to
    university of recipient’s choice) “in recognition of the need for higher
    scientific education of American youth of exceptional merit” was
     awarded Benjamin N. Early, a senior at Howard Univ., Washington,
     D.C. (Text; Program)
0 NASA turned ESSA 11 (Environmental Survey Satellite) over to ESSA for

     operation in accordance with June 30, 1964, agreement between NASA
     and Dept. of Commerce. NASA had supervised design and construction
     of the satellite, conducted launch operations (Feb. 28), and tracked
     spacecraft after orbit was achieved; Dept. of Commerce had handled
    mangement and funding. (NASA Release 66-62)
0 Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Appli-
104               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    cation) was tested by NASA and AEC at Nuclear Rocket Development
    Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Control positioning error in initial ignition
    led to automatic flow shutdown. In 18-min. test following second,
    low-pressure start, reactor reached design power of 1,090 mw and
    exhaust temperature reached 3,630”F maximum. Test was fourth in
    series which began Feb. 3 and marked system’s eighth and ninth start.
     (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
March 16: Smithsonian Institution had photographed reflections of GEMINI
    VIII and GATV from tracking station 20 mi. north of Johannesburg on
    spacecraft’s first orbit. Photographs were described by station manager
    as being “not of the space vehicles themselves, but of the sunshine
    reflected by them. They will appear on the film as dots.” This was
    reportedly first time such photographs had been taken. (AP, NYT,
    3/18/66, 8)
0 Rep. Mark Andrews (R-N.D.) introduced a resolution calling for NSF to

    make recommendations for wider geographic distribution of Federal
    funds for research and development. (CR, 3/16/66, 5755)
March 17: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXII with scientific instruments aboard
     for continued space research, Tass announced. Orbital parameters :
     apogee, 565 km. (350.9 mi.) ; perigee, 214 km. (132.9 mi.) ; period, 92.1
     min. ; inclination, 72”. All systems were reported to be functioning
     normally. (Tass, 3/17/66)
0 NASA selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $17-million cost-plus-

     incentive-fee contract t o manufacture four Apollo Lunar Surface
     Experiments Packages (Alsep). The 170-lb.packages containing scientif-
     ic instruments to measure lunar surface characteristics and atmosphere
     would be carried to moon in Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) on initial
     Apollo landing missions and would transmit data back to earth for six
     months to one year after crew’s departure from lunar surface. Contract
     would be managed by MSC. (NASA Release 66-63)
0 Heinz Kaminski, chief of the Bochum Observatory, West Germany, said

     the emergency abort March 16 of the GEMINI VIII mission showed that
     control systems onboard the spacecraft as well as on the ground were
     versatile enough to cope with even the most serious trouble: “The
                                                                       .
     Americans now have realistic data on space emergencies and. .the
     mission has been very successful. The emergency has been a blessing
      in disguise.” (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 3/18/66)
 0 Tass told the Soviet people that GEMINI VIII had achieved history’s first

      docking in space, and added: “But its program was carried out only
      partly. Its main elements-more practice in linking up, a lengthy stay
      by an astronaut outside his ship and the maneuvering of the ship and
                              unsolved.” (UPI, NYT, 3/19/66, 41)
      astronaut-remained
 0 Taped conversations between Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and ground
      controllers disclosing the drama of the emergency but revealing nothing
      of the difficulty that had caused emergency landing March 16 of GEMINI
      VIII were released at MSC press conference. There was no indication of
      panic aboard the spacecraft during motion. In an “almost matter-of-fact
      tone,” Armstrong had reported to MSC: “Well, we consider the problem
      serious. We are toppling end-over-end. . . . We cannot turn anything
      off.” It was announced there would be no public discussion of their
      mission by Armstrong and Scott for at least nine days during which
      they would rest and undergo debriefing at KSC.
         MSC Director Robert R. Gilruth announced that preparations for the
                                                                        105
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    May 26 Gemini IX launching would continue ‘‘just as if nothing had
                             .
    happened to GEMINI VIII. . . While we are expending every effort to find
    the cause of the GEMINI VIII occurrence, preparations will move ahead for
    Gemini IX so when the results of this flight become available, we’ll be
    as far along as possible with Gemini IX.” (Waldron, NYT, 3/18/66,20;
    Simons, Wash. Post, 3/18/66; AP, Wash. Post, 3/18/66)
March 17: Problems that beset eight of the U.S.’s 12 manned space flights
    were listed by AP: July 21, 1961, before any American had achieved
    orbit, Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom had had to swim for his life when the
    hatch blew off the LIBERTY BELL 7 after it had landed at sea; Feb. 20,
    1562, Astronaut John H. Glenn had had to take partial manual control
    of FRIENDSHIP 7 when a small jet thruster failed; May 24,1962, Astronaut
    M. Scott Carpenter was forced to use the horizon when a short circuit
    cut off the device which told him attitude of AURORA 7; May 15-16,
    1963, drinking water leaked into the cabin of FAITH 7, and ground
    stations, fearing the automatic reentry system might have been short
    circuited, directed Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper to fly the spacecraft
    manually in reentry-the first astronaut to do so; June 4-7, 1965,
    Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White 11, because of
    malfunctioning computers, controlled GEMINI IV reentry on instructions
    from the ground; Aug. 21-29, 1965, Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and
    Charles Conrad, Jr., flew GEMINI v through 120 revolutions after it
    seemed a fuel pressure problem might force them down after six; Oct.
    25, 1965, Gemini VI mission was canceled when the Agena target
    vehicle exploded before going into orbit; March 16, 1966, Astronauts
    Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott brought GEMINI VIII under control
    from a spin that had reached at least one rpm and landed it almost
    exactly in the planned emergency zone. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
0 Press commented on the GEMINI VIII mission.

       New York Times: “The docking maneuver thus successfully pioneered
    is of the utmost importance. It is through combining the loads brought
    into space by individual rockets that the great structures can be built
     that will be necessary for man’s activities in the cosmos in the years
     ahead. Tomorrow’s stations in space will serve as laboratories for
     astronomers and other scientists, as terminals for transshipment of
    passengers and freight between short-range and long-range rockets,
     and unfortunately-if the future resembles the past-also as military
     bases reflecting in the sky the tensions and hostilities of earth. But
     whatever purpose they serve, these islands in space will have been
     made possible by repeated use of the same maneuver that Astronauts
     Armstrong and Scott performed for the first time last night.”
        Washington Post: Ypace feats have become so commonplace and
     have been carried out with such precision that we tend to forget about
     the hazards. The abrupt but fortunately safe return of Gemini 8 is a
     timely reminder that space is still a frontier and that the exploration
     remains at best an inexact science.
        “That Astronauts Armstrong and Scott enierged unharmed from their
     awesome experience with their space capsule out of control is a tribute
     not only to their own cool judgment but also to the extraordinary
     competence of Space Agency officials. Americans listening to reports
     of the emergency must have applauded collectively when the crewmen
     made a successful reentry. They survived a predicament in space which,
     had it been on a highway, would have meant disaster.”
 106               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

         Washington Evening Star: “In addition to its docking achievement,
      the mission was a success in the sense of demonstrating the care with
      which emergency devices were built into the space ship and the thor-
      oughness of the planning for rescue operations in event of a forced
      landing. It is possible, indeed, that more can be learned from a mission
      that goes wrong than from one which is successful all the way.
         “Incidentally, there is a commentary on our times in the fact that
      while the suspense-filled space story was unfolding, Batman was being
      shown on television. The ABC network interrupted the program with
      special news announcements, and was rewarded with more than 1,000
      phone calls from complaining viewers.” (NYT, 3/17/66, 36M; Wash.
      Post, 3/18/66, A20;Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, A16)
 March 17: Discussing the urgency of NASA’s      deciding “what to do in space
      after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,”
                                                                .
      William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: “. . it is hard to
                              ..   . by a leading Russian space official several
      forget a hint, dropped
      years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very
      well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having
      cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline-if it is a
     deadline-is now less than 20 months away.
        “But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for
     that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the
     US.with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing
     an automobile-what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines,
     Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
  USA-USAF-USN X-22A V/Stol airplane, designed and built by Bell Aero-
    systems Co. under Navy contract, completed 10-min. first flight at
     Niagara Falls (N. Y.) International Airport. The four-engine, dual-
    tandem, ducted-propeller craft made four takeoffs and landings, reaching
    25-ft. maximum allowable altitude. While hovering, Bell test pilots
    Stanley J. Kakol and Paul Miller, Jr., executed a 180” counterclockwise
    turn and reported that X-22A responded to “all control commands.”
    After planned 225-hr. flight test series, Bell would deliver their two
    X-22A research aircraft to a tri-service group at Patuxent Naval Air
    Test Center, Md., for further evaluation. (Bell Releases 3/17/66,
    4/4/66-20)
        S. Bhagavantam, scientific adviser to Indian Defense Ministry,
0 Dr.

    reported at a news conference that India had developed a “limited
    guided missile.” He said that tests of the missile, which could be fired
    from aircraft, had been completed and arrangements were being made
    to produce it for Indian armed forces. (AP, NYT, 3/19/66, 3)
* Eighth anniversary of launching of VANGUARD I, second US. earth satellite.
     (NASA Historian)
March 18: Astronauts Armstrong and Scott landed safely in Honolulu after
    KC-135 jet aircraft carrying them from Okinawa to KSC lost oil pressure
    in its number two engine about 800 mi. east of Hawaii. Armstrong and
    Scott had earlier received an enthusiastic reception-with brass band-
    when they disembarked at Okinawa from recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard
    F. Mason for flight to Honolulu. (UPI, Wash. Post, 3/19/66, A4; AP,
    NYT, 3/18/66, 21)
  USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster
    from WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
  Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology and
                                                                            107
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     science adviser to the President, in memorandum to President Johnson
                                                                             ..
     said: “In October 1965I convened an ad hac Jet Aircraft Noise Panel.
     I am pleased to be able to present to you the report of this Panel entitled
     ‘Alleviation of Jet Aircraft Noise Near Airports.’ ” Principal recom-
     mendations were: (1) initiation of Federally-supported studies of
     expected scope of noise problem through 1975 and of public and rivate
     programs needed to combat the problem; (2) creation of a federal
     task force to analyze the problem; (3) development of valid, broadly
     applicable standards of noise measurement; (4) pursuit of definitive
     technical study to reduce noise levels; (5) establishment of task force
     to investigate methods for Federal participation in program for com-
     patible land utilization near airports; (6) initiation of program to modify
     operating procedures and techniques that would reduce engine noise
     without compromising safety. (Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 404)
March 1 : First anniversary of the VOSKHOD 11 mission when Soviet Cos-
         8
    monaut Aleksey A. Leonov became the first man to float in space.
    Interviewed on Radio MOSCOW,       Leonov said his space walk had caused
     the spacecraft to begin rotating unexpectedly: “Down on earth we had
     trained for every emergency, but not for this since we had thought
    my weight of 176 pounds would have no effect on a six-ton ship. Yet,
    my weight caused the ship to rotate.”
        Pravda disclosed that VOSKHOD 11, carrying Leonov and Col. Pave1 I.
    Belyayev, had landed outside the target area in a snowbank near the
     city of Perm in the Ural Mountains: “Searchers took more than 24
    hours to reach the cosmonauts and another 24 hours and a 12-mile
    ski trip before the men could be lifted out of.the forest by helicopters.”
     (Tass, 3/18/66; rash. Post, 3/19/66, A4; WI, NYT, 2/21/66)
* Catalog identifying and locating every known star in the heavens down
    to the ninth magnitude, providing astronomers with instant reference
    to the entire sky, was published by GPO. Compiled by Smithsonian
    Astrophysical Observatory under NASA grant, 2,7OO-page, four-volume
    catalog unified 50 different sources to provide position, photographic
    and visual magnitude, spectral type, and other essential data for
    250,000 heaveniy bodies. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 5/5/66, 21)
  Speaking in Denver at Colorado Women’s College, Dr. Nancy G . Roman,
    NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said a primary reason for
    lack of women in space was that few had the scientific training. Even
    NASA’s women professionals were few compared to their number
            300
    in other agencies, she said. Young women interested in a career in
    space science were advised to concentrate first on the basics of their
    preferred area “because the fundamentals of the science used in space
    study are no different from those in more traditional fields. Equally
    important is to learn how to think, to face and solve problems and how
                                                             ....
    to fmd the facts we need, not just remember them                 Space as a
    career depends on the individual who’s considering it. It is glamorous-
    and it’s also dirty work.” Dr. Roman said she was sure there would be
    women astronauts “if manned space flights continue as we expect
    them to.” (von Ende, Denver Post, 3/19/66)
9 Douglas Aircraft Co. conducted successful acceptance test of fourth

    flight Saturn S-IVB (204) at its Sacramento Test Center. Stage was
    fired for about 455 sec. (Marshall Star, 3/23/66, 7)
March 19: Statement from MSC on GEMINI VIII mission said that “a short in
    the circuits controlling a spacecraft yaw thrustor has been pinned down
108              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    as the probable cause of the difficulty which cut short the flight of
    GEMINI VIII.” MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said data ruled out any
    possibility of pilot error and that “in fact, the crew demonstrated re-
    markable piloting skill in overcoming this serious problem and bringing
    the spacecraft to a safe landing.” NASA Associate Director for Manned
    Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who had participated in review of
    data, joined Dr. Gilruth in saluting Astronauts Armstrong and Scott and
    commended the evaluation team for “coming up with the answer” in
    less than 72 hrs. following the incident. “This will give us time to study
    the Gemini 9 configuration and make any adjustments necessary in
    order to press forward with our Gemini flight test program.”
       16-mm. color films taken by an automatic camera mounted on
    Armstrong’s window in the GEMINI VIII were made public by NASA. Films
    showed maneuvers of GEMINI VIII in docking with GATV and gyrations of
    the spacecraft after the malfunction. (Text, NYT, 3/21/66, 19; AP,
    Balt. Sun, 3/21/66)
March 19: Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott arrived at KSC to
    begin an intensive three-day conference with Gemini project officials to
    attempt to reconstruct events leading to their loss of control of the
    GEMINI VIII spacecraft March 16. Scott told a crowd at the airstrip that
    “the lift off, launching, rendezvous, and docking were really tremendous.
    We were really looking forward to the whole mission.” Armstrong
    agreed, adding: ‘?We had a magnificent flight in the first seven hours.
    It was a magnificent launch-without a doubt one of the best there’s
    ever been.” (AP, NYT, 3/20/66, 82)
* Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) said in a speech before the American
    Society of Tool & Manufacturing Engineers in Westbury, N.Y.: “Two
    years ago I asked Administrator Webb for NASA’s        future space plans
    and was told that none existed. I pointed out then that such plans were
    essential. Last year, we received assurance that the presentations of the
    fiscal year 1967 budget would reveal such plans. But none has been
    issued. Instead, NASA Administrator Webb has told us ‘the future of the
    NASA program lies largely in the decision for fiscal year 1968.’ . . .
       cr
          Our space program began in an atmosphere of perplexity and fear.
    Our adversaries in Russia had chosen a new arena for the struggle of
    international power and prestige. They threatened to achieve impressive
    capabilities which we would be unable to match. But, characteristically,
    the United States rose to the occasion in one of the biggest sustained
    technological efforts ever seen. Today, the U.S.S.R. is denied many of
    the options for surprising space spectaculars which they once had.
    From month to month, one country or the other may seem to be leading
    the so-called space race, but our proven capability shows that we are
    not to be placed at any military or strategic disadvantage.
       Cf
          Therefore it is time again for public opinion to assert itself. What
    do we want to do with this hard won space capability?” (Text)
  USAF successfully launched Nike-Javelin combination carrying a payload
    of plume measurement instrumentation seconds after launch of its
    target-an Atlas-D ICBM-from Vandenberg AFB. Launch was first in
    High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program in which
    data on infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with
    missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products were telemetered
    back to Vandenberg telemetry station. (UPI, Chic. Trib., 3/20/66, 22;
    UPI, NYT, 3/19/66, 82; UPI, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)
                                                                          109
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

March 20: Tokyo Uniu. Space and Aeronautics Institute announced it had
    launched a two-stage meteorological sounding rocket, last in a series of
    15, from test center in Uchinoura, Kyushu-600 mi. southwest of
    Tokyo. (AP, NYT, 3/21/66, 27)
0 Astronomers at Bochum Observatory, West Germany, reported they had

    sighted a giant new sunspot at the approximate center of the solar disc.
    Visible to the naked eye in early morning or just before sunset, sunspot
    had 88,000-mi. dia. and was expected to affect weather conditions and
    radio communications on earth during the next few days. Sunspot was
    unexpected since 1966 had been designated “year of the quiet sun” and
    scientists had expected only a minimum of solar disturbances. (WI,
    Chic. Trib., 3/21/66)
  Pratt & Whitney Div., United Aircraft Corp., announced that JTF-17A
    engine developed under FAA supersonic transport engine competition
    would be tested at company’s West Palm Beach, Fla., center. Twin-spool
    turbofan engine would develop 50,000-lbs. thrust-more than twice
    amount generated by current commercial engines-by burning fuel in a
    full-length fan exit duct. (P&w; NYT, 3/20/66, 83)
  Benefits from atomic test-ban treaty signed in July 1963 by U S . and
    U.S.S.R. were reported. Fallout from strontium 90, which might cause
    bone cancer or leukemia, was decreasing; iodine 131, believed harmful
    to the thyroid gland, had virtually disappeared from the milk supply
    three years ago. (AP, Crowley, Wash. Post, 3/20/66, A6)
0 Proposal by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Lab. that a

    scanning system be mounted in a lunar crater to report to earth the
    precise location of x-ray sources as they appeared over the crater’s rim
    because of the moon’s rotation, was discussed by Walter Sullivan in the
     New York Times. Recent rocket observations [see Mar. 21 had disclosed
     objects, some of them otherwise invisible, that strongly emitted x rays-
    part of the spectrum which cannot penetrate earth’s atmosphere. “A
    systematic survey of the sky in this wavelength,” Sullivan said, would
       open an entirely new window on the universe.” (Sullivan, NYT,
     CC


     3/20/66, 8E)
e Commentary in the Washington Sunday Star: “One of the saddest lessons
     of Gemini 8 is that bureaucrats will be bureaucrats. . . . NASA officials
     suppressed for about 18 hours tape recordings of ground-to-orbit con-
     versations under circumstances that strongly suggest their only reason
     for the suppression was to make sure nothing embarrassing was on the
     tapes.
        “For as long as the United States has been active in space, it has cul-
     tivated an image of openness in contrast to the Russians’ obsession with
     secrecy. The overnight gag on tape recordings-which turned out to be
     legitimate items of news interest-only served to tarnish this image of
     candor.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 3/’20/66, G1)
  Endorsement of suggestion in Jan. 9 open letter to President Johnson that
     he invite “a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut for a
     space ride in a two-man capsule” was reported by letter’s author, Parade
     editor Jess Gorkin. Newspapers throughout the world had publicized
     the idea and written favorable editorials. Le Figaro (Paris) had given it
     front page coverage. Melbourne (Australia) Herald had said the idea
     had “great merit.”
        Asahi Shimbun (Tokyo): “As long as America and Russia accelerate
     space development separately, there will be much money wasted. Both
110               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    countries will probably suspect that the other party is engaged in
                                                   .
    space development for military purposes. . . If the United States and
    the Soviet Union cooperate and ‘all the families of the earth’ pitch in
    to further space development, war on earth will gradually become
    absurd.”
       New York World Telegram: “What do we have to lose? If we succeed
    and the two men orbit the earth together the psychological effect will
    be tremendous. If Russia turns down the idea, we will be on sounder
    moral grounds.” (Gorkin, Parade, 3/20/66)
Durin week o March 20: Several hundred sightings of unidentified flying
              f
      %
    o jects (Ufo’s) near Ann Arbor, Mich., were reported. Rep. Weston
    Vivian (D-Mich.) said he would ask DOD to make an investigation.
    (WI, NYT, 3/22/66, 19; WI, NYT, 3/23/66, 22; Hines, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 3/23/66, Al; WI, Wash. Post, 3/25/66, AZO; AP, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 3/25/66, Al)
March 21: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXIII with scientific instruments
    aboard for investigation of outer space, Tass announced. Orbital
    parameters: apogee, 327 km. (203 mi.); perigee, 210 km. (130 mi.);
    period, 89.6 min.; inclination, 65”. All systems were reported to be
    functioning normally. (Tass, 3/21/66)
e NASA announced final results of Feb. 23 test firing of 260-in.-dia. solid
      ropellant rocket motor by prime contractor Aerojet-General Corp. in
    bade County, Fla.: maximum chamber pressure was recorded 40 sec.
    into test, with peak thrust level of more than 3.5 million lbs.; motor
    burned 114 sec. near peak thrust before tapering off; total useful
    thrust time was 129.9 sec.-only .1 sec. more than engineering pre-
    dictions; maximum chamber pressure was 601 Ibs. psi compared with
    predicted 604 lbs. psi. Only difficulty was delayed operation of quench-
    ing system which caused charring damage to nozzle expansion cone.
    Program was managed by LRC. (NASA Release 66-61)
  Twelve astronauts were selected for future NASA missions and two others
    assigned earlier were shifted to a different mission. Prime crewmen
    for the Apollo earth-orbital mission scheduled in the first quarter of 1967
    were Virgil I. Grissorn, Edward H. White 11, and Roger B. Chaffee;
    backup crew was James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L.
    Schweickart, NASA civilian employee. Prime crewmen for the Gemini
    XI mission scheduled in the last quarter of 1966 were command pilot
    Charles Conrad, Jr., and pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr.; backup crew was
    Neil A. Armstrong, command pilot, and William A. Anders, pilot.
       James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup crew for the
    Gemini XI mission, were reassigned as backup crew for Gemini IX,
    Original Gemini IX backups Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan
    became prime crewmen for that mission after the Feb. 28 deaths of
    Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett 11. (NASA Release
    66-67)
a NASA and DOD signed memorandum of agreement establishing Manned
    Space Flight Experiments Board (MSFEB) to coordinate scientific,
    technological or nonmilitary experiments on DOD and NASA flight
    missions. Board would recommend approval or disapproval, assign-
    ment, and relative priority of experiments submitted, after screening,
    by sponsoring NASA or DOD Program Offices. Dr. George E. Mueller,
    NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would act as
    chairman; other members would be Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associ-
                                                                        11
                                                                         1
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    ate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Mac C.
    Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and
    Technology; Daniel J. Fink, DOD Deputy Director for Strategic and
    Space Systems; and Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC Commander.
    (Text; NASA NMI 1154.4, 4/27/66)
March 21: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Andoeya,
    Norway, carried scientific payload to estimated 133-km. (82.6-mi.)
    altitude. Experiment, conducted by GSFC and Norwegian Defense Re-
    search Establishment (NDRE), was designed to obtain measurements at
    high spectral resolution of D-region composition, using a new spectrom-
    eter based on ion cyclotron resolution principles. Instrumentation
    functioned properly,. and clamshell nose cone ejected at programed 55
    sec. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
e Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor announced appointment of Dr.
    George S.Benton, Chairman of Dept. of Mechanics at Johns Hopkins
    Univ., as director of ESSA’S Institutes for Environmental Research.
    Dr. Benton, an authority in atmospheric, oceanographic, and hydro-
    logical sciences, would assume his new duties in July. (Dept. of Com-
    merce Release 66-60)
  Merger of NASA Apollo Applications program with the USAF Manned
    Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) was urged in a report by the House Com-
    mittee on Government Operations’ Military Operations Subcommittee:
    “Inasmuch as both programs are still research and development projects
    without definitive operational missions, there is reason to expect that
    with earnest efforts both agencies could get together on a joint program
                                                                         ..
    incorporating both unique and similar experiments of each agency. .
    Such a merger should be effected within the existing scale of priorities
    which accords to the military experiments greater urgency.” (H.R. No.
    1340, 46)
  President Johnson announced appointment of five new members to four-
    year terms on President’s Science Advisory Committee: Dr. Ivan L.
    Bennett, director of dept. of pathology, Johns Hopkins Univ.; Dr.
    Sidney D. Drell, professor of physics, Stanford Univ.; William R.
    Hewlett, president, Hewlett-Packard Co.; Dr. Charles P. Slichter,
    professor of physics, Univ. of Illinois; and Dr. Charles H. Townes,
    provost, MIT. (Pres. Doc., 3/28/66, 421)
0 Rocket Propulsion Research Laboratory at AFSC’s Arnold Engineering

    Development Center was completed. (AEDC)
e Lockheed-California Co. revealed that F-104 Starfighter had taken off
    from a Zero Length Launch (Zell) platform in 1963 at Edwards AFB,
    using a Rocketdyne booster rocket in combination with aircraft’s
    General Electric 5-79 engine. After 80-min. flight, Lockheed’s pilot
    Ed Brown said of no-runway takeoff: “It was one of the easiest. . . I
    ever made.” The secret tests, conducted under contract to the German
    Air Force, had been made public following Luftwaffe announcement that
    new series of Super Starfighter Zell tests would be carried out at
    Lagerlechfeld Base, near Munich. (Lockheed Release, 3/21/66)
e A space rescue service, “preferably under cooperative auspices of the
    United States and the Soviet Union,” was urged in a New York Times
    editorial: ‘‘Its function would be to send space craft, on very short
    notice, to aid a space vessel marooned in orbit and incapable of return-
    ing to earth under its own power. In some cases the need might be for
    additional rocket fuel or replacement parts; in others the primary
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
112

    function might be to save lives by taking aboard the crew of a disabled
    capsule.
       “. . . with relatively little development, tow-trucks of the cosmos
    may be a regular part of the safety arrangements for each new step on
    the road to the moon.” (NYT, 3/21/66, 30M)
March 21: Reporting on a January Thiokol Chemical Carp.-sponsored Trendex
    poll on public opinion of the U.S. space program, William Coughlin
    wrote in Msie and Rockets: “Some 77% of those interviewed now favor
              isls
    the program as against only 20% opposed to it. This is a dramatic gain
    from 1963, when only 59% were in favor of the lunar landing and 39%
                      .
    were opposed. . .
       “In the four cities in which the latest poll was conducted-Cincin-
    nati, Syracuse, Pasadena and Des Moines-the public appears to be
    far ahead of the Administration in its assessment of the importance of
    military space. The response was: defense and security, 38%; scientific
    and non-military benefit, 35%; and opportunities for economic growth
    and employment, 18%.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/21/66, 46)
e GEMINI VIII Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott returned to
    their families in Houston after debriefing at K S C . (AP, NYT, 3/22/66,
    18)
March 22: President Johnson requested Congressional approval of amend-
    ment adding $200 million to pending request for $80 million in FY 1967
    budget for FAA’s Sst development program. In a letter transmitting
    BOB amendment to Speaker of the House John W. McCormack, Presi-
    dent Johnson said funds would be used “to complete the design com-
    petition, for expanded economic and sonic boom studies and for the
    start of prototype construction.” Work carried out with these funds
    would “bring us closer to a supersonic transport which is safe for the
    passenger, superior in performance to any comparable aircraft and
    profitable for both the airlines and the manufacturers.” (Text, Pres.
    Doc., 3/28/66, 431)
  Construction of a $3.5-billion radiotelescope of 10,000 steerable dish
    antennas was proposed by Dr. Bernard M. Oliver, outgoing president
    of IEEE, at the Institute’s convention in New York. It could gather
    1,000 times more radio energy than the largest radiotelescopes now in
    use and could detect radio signals emitted in space 200 light yrs. away.
    Dr. Oliver said the telescope should be built by NASA as a ‘(natural
    adjunct to the manned and unmanned exploration of space.” (NYT,
    3/23/66,38)
  AEC announced selection of Martin Co. for an estimated $10-million con-
    tract to develop Snap-29-nuclear power source for short-lived earth
    orbital space missions, Generator would be planned to produce 400
    watts of power-nearly ten times the output of any radioisotope space
    power source now being developed by AEC. Weighing about 400 lbs.,
    it would be fueled with plutonium 210 and would draw power from
    decay of the radioactive fuel without mechanical generators. (AEC
    Release J-69; Martin Co.)
0 Heat shields on the unmanned Apollo spacecraft that underwent reentry

    test Feb. 26 had developed three “hot spots,” NASA announced. Problem
    would be corrected with improved insulating compound. No delay in
    Apollo program was anticipated. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, A29)
0 USAF announced Dr. J. Allen Hynek, chairman of Northwestern Univ.’s

    Dearborn Observatory and scientific consultant to USAF’S Project Blue
                                                                           113
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Book, would investigate reported Ufo sightings in the Ann Arbor,
    Mich., area. (UPI, NYT, 2/23/66, 22)
March 22-25; Air Force Assn. held its 20th annual convention in Dallas,
    Tex.
       USAF Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell told the meeting that
    U.S. and U.S.S.R. had enough long-range nuclear weapons to make a
    nuclear war between them extremely costly for either side, but that
    a stalemate did not exist between them: “It follows that each country
    has its own nuclear threshold, that is, the point or level of restraint
    above which it may no longer be deterred from war. This threshold is
    by no means static but dynamic, as it is determined by a number of
    factors which are both variable and unpredictable.” McConnell said
    the strategic superiority of USAF during the past 20 yrs. had kept
    the nuclear threshold of all potential aggressors at a safe level. (Text)
       USAF’S first priority-continued   maintenance of strategic superiority
    over any potential enemy-required a mixed force of missiles and
    manned bombers, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told
    the convention. “We will continue to need manned bombers in our
    strategic forces as far ahead as any of us can see, and I think that should
    include at least the entire decade of the 1970s.
            .
          . There is no doubt about the technical feasibility of advanced
       W.

    manned bombers of all sorts of designs. The questions which have to be
    answered. . . are how we propose to use such a weapon system and
    how it fits in to the missions of assured destruction and damage limita-
                .                                                           .”
    tion. . . This issue is under intensive study by the Air Staff. . .
     (Text)
       A Citation of Honor-Air Force Assn.’s highest award-was pre-
    sented to B/G Joseph s. Bleymaier for “outstanding management
    achievements while directing the Air Force’s development program for
    the Titan 111-C space booster,’’ and to SSD’S 655th Aerospace Test Wing
    at Patrick AFB, for “successful missile and space launches, including
    six Gemini launches which placed ten astronauts in orbit and achieved
    the first manned rendezvous in space.” (AFSC Release 48.66)
March 23: House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Space Science and
    Applications Subcommittee recommended cancellation of NASA’s           pro-
    posed 1967 Venus mission and proposed that $42 million of otherwise
    programed money be used in the Voyager program to speed explora-
    tion of Mars-crashlanding a probe on that planet in 1969. Sub-
    committee action would go to full Science and Astronautics committee
    in form of report on FY 1967 budget authorization for NASA’s          OSSA
    Such reprograming action was new in space effort. Subcommittee
    Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said: “Congress is for the first
    time asserting its prerogatives, using its judgement, setting priorities of
    its own.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, 6)
* President Johnson, in World Meteorological Day statement, said: “This
    day symbolizes for us-and for all mankind-a new dawn of hope for
    a better, safer, and more meaningful life. It looks to the time when all
    our science and technology, and all the wonders of the space age, will
    give us the power of which man has always dreamed-not the power
    of one nation over another, but the power of the human race over the
    forces of nature.
       “The instrument of this program is the World Meteorological
    Organization-a specialized agency of the United Nations with a
114               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    membership of 127 countries. Through the World Meteorological
    Organization, the concept of a World Weather Watch is now taking
    shape. On this occasion, I am proud to say that the United States
    strongly supports international cooperation in this vital field.” (Pres.
    Doe., 3/28/66,439)
March 23: NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill
    Research Range carried instrumented payload to estimated 180-mi.
    (290-km.) altitude. GSFC experiment measured magnetic and electric
    fields and low-energy electrons and protons in a visible aurora. Rocket
    aspect measurement and evaluation of a xenon flashing light for trajec-
    tory determination were secondary objectives. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Lowell T. Wingert, AT&T vice president, wrote a letter to ComSatCorp

    urging discussions on development of a large-capacity communications
    satellite for “long haul domestic communications of all types,” to be
    owned and operated by ComSatCorp with “equitable access to domestic
    common carriers” in return for “bearing their share of ComSatCorp’s
    charges.” He called for ComSatCorp and other interested communica-
    tions users “to undertake a joint study promptly with the hope of
    placing this newest type of communications facility into early domestic
    use.” (NYT, 3/25/66, 48; AT&T Release)
  First captive flight of M2-F2 lifting body vehicle was made from Edwards
    AFB to check out systems in flight while M2-F2 remained mated to
    B-52 launch aircraft. (NASA Release 66-89)
March 24: Initial tests of Grst liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen turbo-
    pumps for NASA’s     1.5-million-lb.-thrust M-1 rocket engine technology
    program had been successfully completed at LRC. Pumps, driven by
    200,000-hp gas generator, were largest ever built for handling propel-
    lants for high-energy rocket engine. (LRC Release 66-10)
* A $50-million, l8-mo. flight research program involving AFSC’S supersonic
    XB-70 experimental aircraft was scheduled to begin in spring 1966,
    AFSC announced. Joint USAF-NASA effort would acquire experimental
    data on flight dynamics, flight loads, structures, propulsion and air
    induction, and environmental factors. Overall direction would be by
    AFSC’s Aeronautical Systems Div. (ASD) ; technical direction would be
    by NASA. (AFSC Release 15.66)
0 First of fleet of nine, 135-ft. NASA barges for transport of liquid hydrogen

    and liquid oxygen had been placed in service on inland waterways
    between New Orleans and MSFC’S Mississippi Test Facility, Air Products
    and Chemicals, Inc., announced. Company had designed double-walled
    cryogenic tanks for mounting on modified existing hulls according to
    requirements of NASA, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and Coast Guard.
    The three 25O,OOO-gal.-capacity hydrogen barges and six 105,000-gal.-
    capacity oxygen barges could carry “the largest quantities of the two
    liquids ever transported in individual vessel^.^^ Docking facilities in
    test stand area at MTF would permit pumping of liquids directly into
     rocket fuel tanks. (APN Release, 3/24/66)
0 NASA Nike-Cajun meteorologicalsounding rocket launched from Sonmiani,
    Pakistan, carried 25-grenade payload to estimated 84-mi. (135-km.)
    altitude. 20 grenades successfully ejected and exploded in experiment,
    conducted for British National Space Research Committee and Pakistan
     Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee, to obtain wind,
     temperature, and other meteorological data at 31-93-mi. (50-150-km.)
     altitudes. All grenade flashes were photographed by K-24 ballistic
                                                                         115
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    camera network; 20th explosion occurred at about 54 mi. (87 km.).
     (NASA fipt. SBL)
March 24: NASA would negotiate two incentive-fee contracts totaling $315
    million with Boeing Co. and North American Aviation, Inc., for procure-
    ment of additional Saturn V 1st (S-IC) stages and F-1 rocket engines:
    Boeing Co. would supply five S-IC stages, costing $165 million; North
    American Aviation, Inc., would handle production, support, and sustain-
    ing engineering of 33 F-1 engines for $150 million. (NASA Release 66-69;
     WSJ, 3/25/66, 10)
  GEMINI VIII’S GATV had developed a “pretty serious problem,” MSC Agena
    systems engineer Melvin Brooks revealed. The trouble, apparently in
    a yaw hydraulics system, had developed when mission controllers
    decided to fire the rocket system by remote control to shift the orbit
    from 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee to
     circular orbit at 253-mi. (407.33-km.) altitude-leaving it as a rendez-
    vous target for the flight of future Gemini spacecraft. Rocket reached
     330-mi. (531-km.) and then 442-mi. (701.6-km.) altitudes. Brooks called
     these “pretty serious offheadings, serious misalignments.” Eventually,
     the desired orbit of 253 mi. (407.33 km.) was obtained. GATV was ex-
     pected to drop gradually to orbit of about 184 mi. (296.3 km.).
        GEMINI VIII flight director John D. Hodge said short circuit that had
     locked a yaw thruster on the Gemini instrument module into wide-open
     position, forcing emergency landing of the spacecraft March 16, had
     not been found. (UPI, NYT, 3/25/66; WSJ, 3/25/66, 1)
March 25: In answer to charge that the “rush of Jodrell Bank Observatory
     to distribute Luna IX pictures and of scientists both in the U.S. and
     U.K. to comment on the pictures can only be considered a breach of
     ethics [see Feb. 4 and 5 ,” Sir Bernard Love11 said in an open letter in
                               1
     Science: “We did not ‘rush’ to distribute the Luna IX pictures in
     advance of the Russians. Our pictures came off the facsimile machine
     several hours after the Russians had convened a large press conference
     in Moscow to show the pictures which Luna IX had transmitted the
     previous night. Why they did not do so, or publish them in Izvestia the
     following morning remains a mystery. As for commenting on the
     pictures before the Russians, my only remarks were that the lunik
      seemed to be resting on a hard surface with little evidence of dust, and
      these comments had previously been made by scientists in Moscow.
     Any suggestion that we published a scientific analysis of the results
      before the Russians is absurd.” (Science, 3/25/66, 1477)
* Series of power tests for breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine
      for Rocket Vehicle Application) was completed by NASA and AEC at
      Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Final 16-min.
      test studied duration capability at approximately design power and
      temperature--1,130 mw and 3,715”F. Engine system had been started 10
      times during series [see Feb. 3, 11,March 3, and 161 and had operated
      for 110 min., including 29 min. at nominal full power. (Atomic Energy
      Programs, 1966, 186)
   USAF successfully carried out second launch from Vandenberg AFB in
      High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program to
      investigate and measure infrared radiation and emission characteristics
      associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products.
      Nike-Javelin combination carrying payload of plume measurement was
      launched seconds after launch of its target, a Titan I1 ICBM, and data
116               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966-

    were telemetered back to Vandenberg station. Preliminary reports
    indicated that missile was on target for preselected Pacific target area.
          NYT, 3/26/66, 27; UPI, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)
    (WI,
March 25: USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR with Scout booster.
    (US.  Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
a Low-level penetration flight of 1,201.8 mi.-longest      to date-was made
    by a USAF F-111A variable-sweep-wing fighter from Edwards AFB to
    General Dynamics Corp.’~Fort Worth, Tex., plant. L/Col. R. C. W.
    Blessley, director of F-111 joint test force at Edwards, flew three-hour
    nonstop mission at an even 1,000 ft. above uneven terrain varying
    from 500-ft. to more than 10,000-ft. altitude. (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release)
0 Provisional analysis of LUNA IX’S photographs by Gerard P. Kuiper,

    Robert G. Strom, Rudolph S. Le Poole, and Ewen A. Whitaker of the
    Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory appeared in
    Science. Referring to theories that spacecraft landing on the lurain
    might encounter electrostatic dust problems, the scientists said:
    “There is no evidence that this process is important since the Luna IX
    components visible on the record appear in a very clean condition.
    Also, the camera pictures are clear and sharp and no stray light appears
    above the horizon. Apparently the optics remained clean upon exposure
    a few minutes after landing. The cleanness of the lunar surface may
    also explain the absence of a visible dust cloud from the impacts of
    Rangers VI, VII, VIII, and IX.” (Science, 3/25/66, 1561-63)
0 Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astrophysicist and scientific

    consultant to USAF’S Project Blue Book, discussed at a press conference
    the findings of his investigation of reported Ufo sightings in Hillsdale
                                                                            .
    and Dexter, Mich., near Ann Arbor: “The majority of observers . .
    reported only lights. They have not described an object. Both sightings
    were in swampy areas-a most unlikely place for a visit from outer
    space. The glow was localized here. It could have been due to the
    release of variable quantities of marsh gas.” Rotting vegetation in
    swamps produces the gas, Dr. Hynek said, “which can be trapped by
    ice and winter conditions. When a spring thaw occurs, the gas may be
    released in some quantity, producing flames which could be yellow,
    red, or blue-green.” In the Hillsdale case, he added, the sighting might
    have been assisted by youths “playing pranks with flares.” Hynek’s
     conclusions were disputed by several of those who had made the
    sightings. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/66, A3; Rugaber, NYT, 3/26/66,
    31)
a Rep. Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he would ask the House Armed
    Services and Science and Astronautics Committees to consider “full-
    blown” investigations of unidentified flying objects. Several hundred
    people in Michigan had reported mysterious lights during the past
    week. Ford said that if swamp gas had caused the lights as investigators
     suggested, “USAF should have no hesitancy in explaining that to a
     committee.” (Clark, NYT, 3/27/66, 61)
0 Detection of low exposure ages in four iron meteorites-from        4 million
     to 50 million years-was reported in Science by Dr. James C. Cobb,
     Brookhaven (N.Y.) National Laboratory geochemist. Radioactivity
    measurements of 18 iron meteorites revqled four with unusually low
    amounts of stable isotope argon-38, compared to normal amounts of
    radioactive product argon-39. Both “are produced by interactions of
     cosmic rays with the meteorite while it is in space.” Dr. Cobb’s calcula-
                                                                         117
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    tion of exposure age, based on ratio between the two isotopes, “pro-
                                             ..
    vided definite evidence of an overlap . between the chondrites and
    the iron meteorites.” Iron meteorites previously had been thought to
    range in age from 120 to 2,200 million years, except for Braunau
    meteorite estimated at 4.5 million years. (Science, 3/25/66, 1524)
March 25: Evidence that Soviet scientists and engineers had acquired a deter-
    mining voice in decision-making was presented to the Midwest Slavic
    Conference by Colgate Univ. professor Albert Parry. He cited a report
    of a plenary session of the MGSCOW   Communist Party Central Committee
    in which surprise was expressed that the capital’s 700 scientific estab-
    lishments, with more than 350,000 scientists, engineers, and techni-
    cians, were escaping party control. Prof. Parry said he saw in Siberia’s
    new science city in Novosibirsk the final and irrefutable proof of the
    emergence of the Soviet scientist as a dominating force in society:
    “The experience in Siberia’s science city in collecting and integrating so
    many divergent institutes and laboratories in one place; the role of
                                                .
    computers in cutting across disciplines . . all this is sufficient proof
    that Russia’s science and technology cannot be so readily or lastingly
    thwarted by the party hierarchs from free and easy cross-fertilization
    and thus from one more step to independence and political influence.”
     (Handler, NYT, 3/27/66, 10)
0 W. Cameron Roberts, Jr., director of Atlantic Research Corp.’~  Production
    Div., died of a kidney ailment. Roberts, an expert on solid-propelIant
    and meteorological rocketry, had conducted extensive research for
    U.S. upper-air and space programs, and was co-inventor of Arcas-one
    of world’s most widely used meteorological rocket systems. (Wash.
    Post, 3/27/66, B10)
March 26: GEMINI VIII Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott
    received Exceptional Service Medals from NASA Deputy Administrator
    Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in ceremonies at MSC. Armstrong received
    a quality step increase in his Civil Service pay, and Major Scott (USAF),
    promotion to lieutenant colonel by President Johnson.
       At a televised MSC news conference, Armstrong said he and Scott
    developed some “anxiety” but that they never for a moment thought
    they could not return the spacecraft tc earth. Both Scott and MSC
    Director Robert R. Gilruth said that if the trouble had occurred over
    a ground tracking station, mission might have been salvaged. Mal-
    function would have been localized immediately and the information
    relayed to the astronauts. As it was, they had had no idea what was
    wrong or even whether the trouble was with the GATVIGEMINI VIII or
    the spacecraft alone. (Waldron, NYT, 3/27/66, 64L; Hines, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 3/27/66, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/27/66, Al)
  Secretary of Agricultcre Orville Freeman announced that the Department
    had awarded a contract to NASA for use of remote-sensing equipment in
    large-area surveys. Photographic and other instrumentation carried in
    spacecraft would identify types and conditions of soil; detect plant
    diseases in early stages; determine a crop’s vigor and agents which
    could cause loss of water; indicate whether soils were suitable for
     certain crops; pinpoint moisture and salt content; and detect con-
    ditions such as drought and insect infestation. (DA Release 918-66)
March 27: NASA Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched
    from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried 25-grenade payload and dummy
    trimethyl-aluminum (TMA)canister weighing 25 Ibs. to estimated
118              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. 23 grenade flashes were photographed by
    K-24ballistic camera network in experiment conducted for British
    National Space Research Committee and Pakistan Space and Upper
    Atmosphere Research Committee to obtain wind, temperature, and
    other meteorological data between 31-93 mi. (50-150 km.). (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
March 27: FAA lost its first customer for supersonic transport (Sst), paid
    Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) $200,000 refund requested by
    company on Feb. 25. Panagra was one of eight US. and 14 foreign
    customers which had deposited money to reserve delivery positions for
    Sst. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
  Possibility that a random or deliberate radio signal caused GATV’S attitude
    control thrusters to fire during GEMINI VIII docking period March 16
    was being studied by electromagnetic interference experts, Richard
    Lewis reported in a Denver Post article. “So far in the space age,”
    Lewis said, “there has been no record of any radio-controlled space
    vehicle being manipulated by any power other than the one that
    launched it.” Other explanations were that a signal sent to GATV to
    turn on its tape recorder might have activated the thrusters, or that a
    docking jar had caused intermittent short circuit. (Lewis, Denver Post,
    3/27/66)
0 Soviet aircraft designer Col. Alexander Aykovlev said in Krusnaya Zvezda

    article that U.S.S.R. was planning a supersonic passenger and cargo
    aircraft with cruising speed of 1,560-1,900 mph. (Reuters, Chic. Trib.,
    3/28/66)
  Light aircraft of polyester plastic had been built and successfully tested
    by Wassmer Aviation (France), AP reported. Called the WA-50, four-
    seater aircraft had a 150-hp engine, could attain 180 mph, and weighed
    about one metric ton when loaded. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/27/66)
March 27-30: FCC Chairman E. William Henry warned the broadcasting
    industry that the day might come when direct-broadcasting satellites
    would outmode “overnight” local radio and television stations. Speak-
    ing to the National Assn. of Broadcasters in Chicago, Ill., he said
    direct-broadcast satellites were still only   tiny cloud on the horizon,”
    and there remained “mountains of unsolved problems. . . . But smaller
    clouds have often traversed higher peaks and released a torrential down-
    pour of new technology and new service on the ground below. The
    resultant floods have swept aside the older order.” (WSJ,3/30/66, 5)
       ComSatCorp president Joseph V. Charyk told the NAB convention
     that communication by satellites would recast the (‘nature of the world:
    It may profoundly influence the means of distribution to local stations
    throughout this country. It may establish new arrangements and new
    patterns that will have a profound effect on the national television and
    radio picture.” Charyk said this development was likely to result from
    satellite linkage with metropolitan communications centers. Linkage
    would include “color television and stereophonic FM radio, aural and
    visual telephone service, high-speed facsimile data and newspapers,
    library reference, theatre and transportation booking services, access
    to computer facilities, shopping and banking services of all types, and
     centralized charging and billing.” (Text)
March 28: First fully successful launch and air-snatch recovery of the Air-
    Launched Air-Recoverable Rocket (Alarr) was made over WSMR. A
                                                                          119
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    modified MB-1 Genie carrying instrumented payload for upper at-
    mosphere research, Alarr was launched from F-4C Phantom I1 jet
    fighter at 49,000-ft. altitude. Rocket reached 150,000-ft. altitude and
    180-lb. payload immediately separated. C-130B transport operating from
    Edwards AFB made successful mid-air recovery of payload at 5,000 ft. in
    second pass at target. Test, conducted for Kirtland AFB, was to develop
    new technique for high-altitude space probes : launch aircraft’s speed
    would serve as first stage of a rocket-eliminating need for a launch pad;
    descending payload would be recovered to prevent damage or loss.
    (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/29/66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8)
March 28: Speech by Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wisc.) on need for research
    and development on socioeconomic problems such as transportation,
    construction, and waste management was inserted in the Congressional
    Record: “We should not allow heavy concentration of research and
    development in the three fields of space, defense, and atomic energy to
    blind us to the potential for research and development in civilian
    technology. . . .
                                                              .
       “But much of the growth and success of these three . . ‘giants’ must
    be explained in terms of the remarkable men associated with them. . . .
       “We think of Admiral Rickover and the nudear submarine. Of Jim
    Webb and the space program. . . . Of the personal sponsorship of
    Presidents Kennedy and Johnson €or our manned landing on the
    moon. . . .” (CR, 3/28/66,6529)
* Maj. Donald E. Keyhoe (USMC, Ret.), director of the National Investiga-
    tions Committee on Aerial Phenomena, demanded at a press conference
    in Washington, D.C., that Congressional inquiry be made into Ufo’s
    and USAF’S handling of investigations of reported sightings. NICAP had
    long charged USAF with suppression of evidence and censorship.
    (Carmach, Wash. Daily News,3/29/66; Young, N.Y. JIAmer., 3/29/66,1)
  Redeye, USA’s    shoulder-fired antiaircraft missile system designed for
    forward-area defense against low-flying aircraft, had successfully
    completed Arctic phase of service testing at Ft. Greely, Alaska.. (Gen.
    Dyn. Corp. Release)
March 28-30: AIAA-sponsored “Stepping Stones to Mars” meeting was held
    in Baltimore. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, in a speech read by
    NASC Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, called for international
    cooperation in man’s efforts to land on Mars: ‘r. . . it is indeed worth
    considering the possibility of having man’s first voyage to Mars become
    a truly international undertaking. We in this country are eager to share
    the thrills and the benefits of space exploration with other nations. This
    enterprise is of such tremendous, such breath-taking scope that there
    is ample opportunity for many nations to contribute to it, each in its
    own way. There are many imaginative and ingenious scientists and
    engineers in other countries, and we welcome their ideas on how Mars
    may best be reached and explored.’’ (Text)
        Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of MSFC Research Projects Laboratory,
     told the conference that “all technologies are sufficiently developed to
    make flight [to Mars] in 1986 appear possible.” Five Saturn V launch
     vehicles would carry the components of electrically powered Mars
     spacecraft and of Nerva 11-powered nuclear earth-escape stage into
     300-mi.-altitude earth orbit. After assembly and checkout, nuclear
     stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity.
     Flight time to Mars on a direct transfer trajectory would be 145 days;
120               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     280 days would be required to return to earth. Spacecraft would enter
     high earth orbit outside Van Allen radiation belt and astronauts would
     be brought back to earth by commuter rocket. Dr. Stuhlinger said: “Of
     the key developments still necessary, the electrical power system un-
    doubtedly requires the major technological and funding effort.” Co-
    authors contributing to the paper presented by Stuhlinger were Joseph
    C. King and Dr. Russell D. Shelton of MSFC Research Projects Labora-
    tory and Gordon R. Woodcock, MSFC Advanced Systems Office. (MSFC
    Release 66-67)
       LRC scientist J. Reece Roth described an electric rocket life-support
    system that would supply interplanetary crews with meals which, when
    metabolized, would serve as fuel for spacecraft’s engine. According to
    Roth’s concept, some or all of the propellant, in the form of food, water,
    and oxygen, would be metabolized by crew to carbon dioxide, water, and
    solid wastes. CO, and water could then be used as propellant for an
    electric engine while solid residues would be small enough to be stored
    or discarded. Propellant reserve could be used for food, navigational
    corrections, and radiation shielding-enhancing safety of the crew.
    Weight savings from integrated propulsion and life-support system
    would be so great, Roth said, that a somewhat less efficient thruster
     could be used with no overall loss in performance. (LRC Release 66-12)
       Human experience most similar to one-to-three year space flight was
    life on submarine, according to Dr. S. B. Sells, Director, Institute of
    Behavioral Research, Texas Christian Univ. Dr. Sells presented results
    of NASA-sponsored study designed to formulate problems of “group
    organization, structure, and interpersonal interaction of crew members
    in the environmental circumstances of a typical space mission .’, Fifty-
    six social system characteristics of extended space flight-such          as
    motivation, status, background, training, and command structure of
    crew, as well as conditions of confinement, isolation, and environmental
    hazards-were compared with those of 11 other social systems. (Text)
       NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applica-
    tions Edgar M. Cortright said: “Thousands of dedicated people have
    laboriously laid. . .stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able
    to step up the exploration of Mars, Venus, and the rest of the solar
    system. Just when such a program will get a go ahead depends on many
    factors. This coming year will be a crucial one for the decision makers.
       “Of one thing I am absolutely certain: comprehensive exploration of
    the planets is inevitable. Who will be leading this exploration seems
    less certain; but we can if we choose.” (Text)
March 29: Launch of NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 rocket, on mission to perform
    first double-ignition of a hydrogen engine in space, was aborted at ETR
    seconds before liftoff when a power cord failed to disconnect from the
    booster. Failure automatically stopped the Atlas engines from firing
    and countdown was halted at two seconds. No new launch date was set.
           Proj. Off.; AF’,Balt. Sun, 3/30/66)
     (NASA
0 ComSatCorp, on behalf of Intelsat-the     international telecommunications
    satellite consortium-issued requests for proposals (rfp’s) for 210-lb.
    synchronous satellite capable of providing “airplane-to-ground-to-
    airplane” communications with two-way channels. Satellite would
    supplement high-density North Atlantic communications and “permit
    orderly expansion of the aeronautical service on a global basis.”
    (ComSatCorp Release)
                                                                             121
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

March 29: Wilhelm Forster Observatory (West Germany) reported that on
    127th orbit, Soviet spacecraft COSMOS CXIII returned to earth and soft-
    landed at Baikonur, Kazakhstan. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/30/66, A14)
* U.S. Committee on Extension to the Standard Atmosphere (COESA) an-
    nounced plans to publish new volume, U.S. Standard Atmosphere
    Supplements, 1966, which would tabulate and detail properties of earth’s
    atmosphere at all altitudes up to 600 mi.-information necessary to in-
    vestigate atmosphere’s effect on aerospace vehicle operation and design.
    Sponsored by NASA, ESSA, and USAF Cambridge Research Lab., publica-
    tion would be based on data gathered through tracking of artificial earth
    satellites and instrumented rockets and satellites. (NASA Release 66-72)
  Proposed crew transfer tunnel connecting a Gemini spacecraft and a Mol
    vehicle was tested at Arnold Engineering Development Center. (AEDC)
March 30: USAF successfully launched the OVl-IV and OV1-V scientific
    satellites into circular orbits from Vandenberg AFB with Atlas-Agena D
    booster. OV1-IV satellite bore photosynthetic organisms to determine
    effects of zero-g and four types of thermal control coating samples to
    test durability and resistance to heat and radiation. Each of two ther-
    mally insulated sample holders on satellite carried two control surfaces
    and four circular samples, slightly less than an inch in diameter. Pro-
    tected during launch, coatings would be exposed to space environment
    and thermistor measurements of erosion, corrosion, and changes in
     color telemetered during anticipated year in orbit. OV1-V measured
     optical radiation of earth, background, and space. (AFSC, RTD Release
    37.66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
  Attempt to launch NASA’s Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) was
     halted by failure of one of the three engines in the Atlas booster to
     reach full 60,000-lbs. thrust upon firing. Launch was rescheduled for
     April 2, later for April 8. (UPI, Phil. Znq., 3/31/66; UPI, NYT, 4/1/66, 15)
* USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR with Thor-Agena D booster.
     ( U S . Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
0 Addressing the AAS in Hampton, Va., NASA Associate Administrator for

    Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newel1 said: cf. . .as a
    science, space astronomy simply cannot thrive in separation from
    ground-based astronomy. In fact, the phrase ‘space astronomy’ is a dis-
    quieting one. The discipline is astronomy, the objective of which,
    broadly speaking, is to advance our understanding of the universe in
    which we live. The word ‘space’ in space astronomy refers simply to the
    fact that sounding rockets, satellites, and space probes are new tools
    that the astronomer can use in wrestling with the difficult problems of
    astronomical observation. In perspective, the astronomical community
    has before it the task of using these new tools in effective combination
    with ground-based observing so as to best advance the science of
    astronomy.”
        Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said:
     ‘‘So far, all space astronomy has been automated. However, as the
    manned space program matures, plans are being made to incorporate the
    flexibility of manned operation to the program to an increasing ex-
    tent.. . . We recognize that even simple operations by man could
    greatly extend both the lifetime and the versatility of an OAO, and there-
    fore have been looking into the possibilities of using man in such
    maintenance activities. Looking further ahead, we aIso realize that
    eventually astronomers will want larger telescopes in space than are
122               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    possible with the current series of 0 ~ 0 % .  Therefore we have had a
     study conducted on the possibility of building, mounting, and using a
    telescope of approximately 120 inches in space. The problems are far
    from trivial, but they also do not appear insurmountable, given the
    resources necessary for the job.” (Texts)
March 30: ComSatCorp asked FCC for authority to build $5-million earth
    station near Moorefield, W.Va., to supplement ComSatCorp-operated
    facility at Andover, Me. Station would be in operation by late 1967,
    handling all types of commercial communications and supporting two
    Atlantic satellites, EARLY BIRD I, and the proposed Apollo system.
     (ComSatCorp Release)
0 Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown, testifying before Senate
    Armed Services Committee and Subcommittee on DOD of Senate
    Appropriations Committee, said USAF was “working on9, increasing
    procurements directly with prime contractors, but with Government-
    furnished equipment. He added: “There comes a point, however, where
    the trouble that the Government buys itself by furnishing equipment is
                                       .
    more than the money it saves . .,’ (Testimony; Senate, Military
    Procurement Auth. for FY 1967, 907)
0 Dr. J. Allen Hynek’s report on investigation of Ufo sightings in Michigan

    received commentary in the Christian Science Monitor: “Many saucer
    sightings have been merely glimpses of familiar things seen under un-
     familiar circumstances. I n this case, Dr. Hynek says it was marsh gas
    fire. But he also has said there is an impressive and constantly growing
                                                                        .
    list of well-documentedsightings that cannot yet be explained. . . It is
    time for the scientific community to conduct a thorough and objective
    study of the ‘unexplainables.’ ” (CSM, 3/30/66, Al)
March 31: U.S.S.R. launched LUNA x unmanned spacecraft toward the moon
    “to test a system insuring the setting up of an artificial moon satellite
    with the aim of exploring near-lunar outer space and also testing systems
    installed aboard for placing the station in a selenocentric or near lunar
     orbit,” Tass announced. Spacecraft was following a trajectory close to
     the calculated one and onboard equipment was functioning normally.
     (Pravda, 4/1/66, 1, USS-T Trans.; Tass, 3/31/66; Loory, Wash. Post,
    4/1/66, A3)
0 Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler
    Corp. for 2% min.-longest duration firing-at NASA Marshall Space
    Flight Center. Stage would be shi ped to Michoud Assembly Facility for
                                      g
    post-static-test checks and woul be used in checking out the Apollo
    spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training
    astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing. (MSFC Release 66-69)
  B/G J. C. Maxwell (USAF), FAA deputy administrator for supersonic devel-
    opment, told a Washington meeting of Aerospace Industries Associa-
    tion’s Public Relations Advisory Committee that total cost of delivering
    the first American Sst for airline service may exceed four billion dollars.
    He explained: “The SST program has been, and still remains, a high risk
    program. That fact, combined with the sheer magnitude of the develop-
    ment cost, is why the Government is participating in the program to
    develop an aircraft aimed solely at a civil market.” Adding that the cost
    estimate was ccconsiderablymore than the total net worth of the major
    aircraft manufacturers combined,” Maxwell said: “Our philosophy for
    financing the SST program beyond the prototype construction and flight
    test phase is to encourage industry and the financial community to
                                                                          123
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    assume as much responsibility and risk as practicable. We eagerly look
    foward to the day when we can turn the whole program over to private
    enterprise. Conceivably, this could occur when the prototype has flown
    and proven out the design. If all goes well-and the work performed by
    the airframe and engine manufacturers during the past nine months
    gives us cause for optimism-the SST prototype will take to the air in
    Iate 1969 or early in 1970 to begin an intensive period of testing. At
    about this time, production development will get underway with the
    first production model rolling off the line early in 1973 followed by type
    certification and entry into commercial service by 1974.” Although the
    British-French Concorde was expected to be in airline service by 1971,
    Maxwell said this three-year timelag would be offset by the U.S. Sst’s
    advantages: (1)cruising speed of mach 2.7, compared with Concorde’s
    2.2; (2) 250-passenger capacity, compared with Concorde’s anticipated
    140 passengers; and (3) growth potential of titanium construction con-
    trasted with volume-limited aluminum of Concorde. (Text)
March 31: Pratt & Whitney Div.’s entry in Sst engine competition-the
    JTF-l7A-was operated for the first time at P&w’sFlorida Research
    and Development Center, W. Palm Beach, Fla. Twin-spool turbofan
    “was started and operated for the programmed time.” (P&W Release,
    4/1/66)
* FAA had submitted to aircraft manufacturers a new supersonic transport
    (Sst) financing plan, reported William Chapman in the Washington Post.
    Manufacturers, who claimed they could not afford to pay 25% of ex-
    pected $1-billion cost of next building stage, would be able to contribute
    a lighter share of development costs than they had been paying under
    the 7525% cost-sharing plan arranged by President Kennedy. (Chap-
    man, Wash. Post, 3/31/66, H8)
  Australia’s Minister of Supply Denham Henty announced that U.S., U.K.,
    and Australia would cooperate in experiments with U.S. Redstone
    rockets at Woomera Range to study effects of rocket reentry into the
    atmosphere. (Reuters, Wush. Post, 4/1/66, A20; Reuters, NYT,
    4/1/66,24)
  Japanese Transportation Ministry announced a seven-year program to
J


    establish system of navigation satellites to be launched in 1972. A new
    ministry, the Satellite Navigation Research Office, would begin to
    develop electronic equipment, ground stations, and control systems as
    soon as the government’s budget for FY 1966 was approved by the
    current session of the Diet. R&D program would be carried out entirely
    by Japanese scientists. (NYT, 4/1/66, 59M)
* Growing “impatience, mistrust, and hostility of news media and con-
    gressmen toward NASA” was reported by William Hines in the Washing-
    ton Evening Star: “Newsmen have long contended that the initials NASA
    stand for ‘Never A Straight Answer,’ and on at least one occasion a
    high-ranking official was publicly called to account by a reporter for
                                               ...
    consistent telling of inconsistent stories.     If the situation continues
    unaltered, the space administration may soon replace the State Depart-
    ment and the Central Intelligence Agency at the bottom of the capital’s
    credibility list.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/31/66, A14)
0 NAS President Frederick Seitz told Charter Assembly of the Aerospace

    Science and Technology Branch of the Research Society of America,
    BoUing AFB, he believed the scientific community would pursue the
    interests of science far more effectively if it recognized its unique
124               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    opportunity to make the space program scientifically valuable by lending
    support to those components “which do have a significant bearing on
    scientific knowledge.” He believed the knowledge we could gain of the
    solar system through the space program represented “a major contribu-
    tion to our heritage of knowledge, fully as important as the knowledge
    of the earth we have gained in the last 500 years through the exploration
    which began with Henry the Navigator’s systematic explorations of the
    coast of Africa.” (Seitz, Science, 6/24/66)
March 31: Col. Donald Boyer Phillips (USA, Ret.), military aviation pioneer,
    died of pneumonia at age 74 in Alexandria, Va. Colonel Phillips, native
    of Washington, D.C., had designed, built, and flown his first glider in
    1905. When he retired in 1947, he had flown in nearly 90 types of planes.
    (Wash. Post, 4/4/66, B2)
During March: Study of Vertically Incident Cosmic-Ray Trajectories Using
    Sixth Degree Simulations of the Geomagnetic Field-consisting largely of
    computer-generated tables of cosmic-ray trajectories at more than 130
    locations around the world-was issued by AFCRL. Since cosmic ray
    trajectories are directly influenced by the configuration of the magnetic
    field, which varies diurnally, seasonally, and with solar-cycle variations,
    it was possible to derive information on the changing magnetic field by
    observing cosmic-ray events. Also, because calculations of cosmic-ray
    rigidities are equally valid for solar protons, calculation techniques
    developed under this study could be used to evaluate the trajectories o€
    these solar particles as well. (OAR Res. Rev., 3/66)
0 Thirtieth anniversary of Jet Propulsion Laboratory of Cal Tech. In March

    19% Dr. Theodore von Khrmln approved initiation of rocket propulsion
    studies by Frank J. Malina with the assistance of John W. Parsons and
    Edward S. Forman at the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory. (NASA
    Historian)
  Seven French-built Centaure rockets carrying experiments for study of
    polar auroras were successfully launched in February and March by
    ESRO from base at Andoeya, Norway. (M&R, 4/11/66, 7)
                               April 1966

April 1: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, speaking to a group of Li$e
     magazine executives visiting KSC, remarked: “. . . the space program
     has added greater meaning to our lives. I have talked to a great many
     Americans recently about the benefits of the space program, and I have
     found that my fellow Americans get a thrill and a sense of accomplish-
     ment and satisfaction out of this great undertaking of our nation.
         “Our young people have a new frontier to explore. And this comes at
     a time when we thought all the frontiers were gone. They have new
     and exciting places to go out in the universe, new ideas to bring home
     and enrich their lives, new challenges to hone their character.
         “Yesterday our horizon was limited by the globe of earth, and today,
     as a result of this new frontier, our horizons are as limitless as the
     universe itself.” (Text)
e NASA announced transfer of project management of the RL-10-first      hydro-
     gen-fueled rocket engine-from MSFC to LRC and of Headquarters pro-
     gram authority from NASA OMSF to OSSA. RL-10, which had powered
     Saturn 1’s 2nd stage (S-IV) in six successful flights prior to conclusion
     of MSFC’S Saturn I program July 30, 1965, also powered Centaur upper
     stage launch vehicle, managed by LRC. (NASA Release 66-74)
   Soviet Defense Minister Rodion Y. Malinovsky told Communist Party
     Congress meeting in Moscow that Soviet “anti-aircraft defense means
     assure the reliable destruction of any aircraft and many enemy rockets
      . . . calmly and confidently we are guarding the peaceful toil of our
     people especially now that the construction of our blue belt defense has
     been completed. . . .” U S . military experts believed the “blue belt”
     defense referred to by Malinovsky was the Soviet nuclear submarine
     force. (Gwertzman, Wash. Eve.Star, 4/7/66, A3)
* Astronomers in six European countries-Denmark, Sweden, France, the
      Netherlands, Belgium, and West Germany-had agreed to share the
      expense of constructing $7-million observatory on Lasilla, a mountain
      peak several hundred miles north of Santiago, Chile. (Reuters, NYT,
      4/2/66, 27; Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/2/66, A16)
                          LUNA x spacecraft indicated Soviet goals and tech-
0 Launch of U.S.S.R,’s

      niques for reaching moon were similar to those of US., according to
      William Hines in Washington Evening Star, and raised question
      whether U.S.S.R. would attempt manned lunar landing in November
      1967 to mark 50th anniversary of Bolshevik revolution. Lack of evidence
      that Russians had developed a large booster comparable to U S ’ S
      Saturn V suggested they would use earth orbit rendezvous method to
      reach moon, Hines said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/1/66, Al)
 * ComSatCorp’s third annual report revealed that EARLY BIRD I, operating
      since June 28, 1965, as the first commercial communications satellite,

                                                                    125
126               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     had earned $2,138,577 as of Dec. 31,1965. Report omitted any corporzte
     earnings statement, explaining that “with Cornsat’s singular structure-
     and its newness-we are not yet able to present the corporate financial
     statements in a conventional mode.” With FCC approval, “the Corpora-
     tion has adopted the accounting practice of deferring all revenues and
     expenditures until the commencement of full operations.” Financial
     statement showed, however, that $9,677,000 had been spent for “the
     construction of the Early Bird satellites, the cost of the launch in
     April [6,] 1965 and expenditures for satellite system equipment.” By
     the end of 1965, 75 of EARLY BIRD 1’s 240 two-way voice channels had
     been leased-64 by AT&T, nine by Candian Overseas Telecommunication
     Corp., and one each by ITT and RCA. Corporation also earned $8,083,745
     in income from temporary investments, compared with $4,312,714 in
     1964. Report noted that membership of International Telecommunica-
     tions Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) had grown from 20 to 48 countries
     during 1965, and cited plans to launch two improved satellites in late
     summer of 1966 “to provide communications support” for NASA’s
     Apollo program. (Text)
During week of April 1: Pulsed laser beam communications system which
     could penetrate cloud of plasma or charged gases surrounding space-
     craft during reentry and avoid communications blackout was patented
     by General Electric Co. engineers Dr. Kiyo Timiyasu and James R.
     Whitten. Principal use of invention would be in line-of-sight communi-
     cations between earth stations and spacecraft, but two land stations not
     in line of sight also could exchange information by using cloud re-
     flections. (Jones, NYT, 4/2/66, 32)
April 2 124,000-mi.-long cluster of sunspots which could affect weather
         :
     and radio and television signals was detected by West Germany’s
     Bochum Observatory. (AP, Wush. Post, 4/3/66, B7)
  Gatv test program-Project        “Sure-Fire”-was     completed at Arnold
     Engineering Development Center; priority testing began when Gatv
     failure Oct. 25, 1965, caused canceling of Gemini VI mission. (AEDC)
April 3: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station,
     told the press that LUNA x spacecraft had gone into orbit around the
     moon, but that “all may not be well” with it. He suggested that LUNA x
     was tumbling uncontrollably in orbit around moon at distance of 300 or
     400 mi.; this theory evolved after Jodrell Bank detected a series of
     maneuvers beginning at 12:50 p.m. EST-15 min. after Jodrell Bank had
     first picked up LUNA x’s signals. Frequency of the signals had begun to
     decrease, indicating the probe was under the moon’s gravitational pull
     at a distance of about 2,000 mi.; signals then faded out entirely, sug-
     gesting that the retrorockets had been fired and the probe had landed.
     At that point Lovell said: “We think Luna 10 landed at 1:44 P.M. [EST].”
     Minutes later, however, signals again picked up and the situation became
     cc
        extremely obscure.” He concluded: “At last hearing our signals could
     be interpreted as coming from a tumbling spacecraft. We find it difficult
     to believe that it is meant to be tumbling.”
         U.S.S.R. had announced LUNA x’s lunar-orbit mission after March 31
     launch. Sir Bernard‘s theory came a day before Soviet announcement
     of mission results [see April 41. (NYT, 4/4/66, 9; AP, Balt. Sun,
     4/4/66; Wush. Post, 4/4/66, Al)
April 4 U.S.S.R.’s LUNA x unmanned spacecraft had achieved lunar orbit
         :
      (1,000-km. [621-mi.] apolune, 350-km. [217-mi.] perilune, 3-hr. period)
                                                                           127
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    at 1:44 p.m. EST April 3 to become world’s first artificial moon satellite,
     U.S.S.R. announced at 23rd Communist Party Congress meeting in the
     Kremlin. Accomplishment was dramatized by direct broadcast from
     LUNA x of the Communist anthem, “Internationale.”
        Tass released details of LUNA X’S structure and flight. 3,530-lb. space-
     craft consisted of two main parts: moon satellite section and engine
     facilities section. 540-lb. satellite was an airtight package containing
     radio equipment, telemetry system, equipment for studying the moon
     and near-lunar space, heat-regulation and power supply systems, and
     small jet engines to stabilize the flight.
        Approximately 8,000 km. (4,969 mi.) from the lunar surface, space-
     craft was oriented so that jet of the engine was directed against direction
     of its movement. At approximately l:44 p.m. EST retrorockets fired
     automatically, slowing spacecraft to 1.3 km. (.8 mi.) per second and
     putting it in lunar orbit. Twenty minutes after switching off retrorockets,
     earth command was sent to separate instrumented lunar satellite from
     engine facilities section, and first radio communications session was
     held. Equipment was functioning normally and radio communications
     were stable. There was no suggestion that photos of the lunar surface
     were being transmitted to earth, or that LUNA x was “tumbling” [see
     April 31. (Tass, 4/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/4/66, A6; AP, Wash.
     Post, 4/5/66, A12)
Avril 4: House Committee on Science and Astronautics voted to report
     $4,986,864,150 NASA authorization bill-$25,135,580 less than $5,012,
     000,000 NASA had requested for FY 1967. (NASA LAR V/57-58)
  Nike-Apache launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 59-lb. instru-
     mented payload to 108-mi. (174-km.) altitude and impacted 67 mi.
     downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted for ESSA and Graduate Research
     Center of the Southwest, Dallas, the experiment sought to obtain
     ionospheric electron density profile measurements using a plasma
     resonance probe and to obtain data concerning sporadic E phenomenon
     in the valley region between the E- and F-layers of the ionosphere. Data
     were telemetered to ground stations during flight. Experiment was first
     of three to compare techniques for measuring characteristics of upper
     atmosphere and ionosphere. (Wallops Release 66-16; NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 NASA announced a change in sequence of two Apollo/Saturn IB launches

     scheduled for late 1966: AS-202 mission was rescheduled to follow
     AS-203 mission to “provide additional time for checkout of the Apollo
     spacecraft to be flown in . . . AS-202.” AS-203 would test Saturn V 3rd
     stage (S-IVB) and verify that orbital operations features of the liquid
     hydrogen propulsion system were satisfactory. (NASA Release 66-78)
e NASA announced selection of 19 pilots, to join 31-member NASA astronaut
     team in early May: Vance D. Brand, civilian; Lt. John S. Bull (USN);
     Maj. Gerald P. Carr (USMC); Capt. Charles M. Duke, Jr. (USAF); Capt.
     Joe H. Engle (USAF); LCdr. Ronald E. Evans (USN); Maj. Edward G.
     Givens, Jr. (USAF); Fred W. Haise, Jr., civilian; Maj. James B. Irwin
      (USAF); Dr. Don L. Lind, civilian; Capt. Jack R. Lousma (USMC); Lt.
     Thomas K. Mattingly (USN); Lt. Bruce McCandless I1 (USN); LCdr.
     Edgar D. Mitchell (USN) ;Maj. William R. Pogue (USAF) ;Capt. Stuart A.
     Roosa (USAF); John L. Swigert, Jr., civilian; LCdr. Paul J. Weitz (USN);
     and Capt. Alfred M. Worden (USAF). During recruitment, which began
     Sept. 10, 1965, NASA received 351 applications of which 159 met basic
     requirements. (NASA Release 66-67)
128                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

April 4: Defense Electronics, Inc., received a $2,380,000 contract from USAF
      for telemetry equipment for Apollo airborne tracking aircraft. Firm
      would supply C-135 trackers with prediction playback monitors and
      other equipment to provide communications link to Apollo spacecraft
      prior to insertion into lunar trajectory. (Wash. Post, 4/5/66, C7)
    FAA Administrator William F. McKee announced that Dr. Raymond L.
0

      Bisplinghoff would serve as a consultant on FAA research and develop-
      ment efforts-particularly in supersonic transport (Sst) program-
      while continuing to serve as Special Assistant to NASA Administrator.
       (FAA Release 66-30)
    Extent of the impact of Bureau of the Budget’s new directive (A-76),
      stating that “in some instances . . . it is in the national interest for the
                                                                            .
      government to provide directly for products and services it uses . .”
      would be realized this month, reported George C. Wilson in Aviation
       Week. BOB official George C. Mullins told Wilson that the definitive
      standards in A-76 would facilitate a more consistent Federal contracting
      policy: “The high sounding but unspecific language in 60-2 [previous
      directive] was subject to different interpretations by various federal
      agencies.” Mullins added: “We agree that the private enterprise system
      should be preserved. But there is such a thing as a national objective.
      By acknowledging this in the new directive, we feel we are basing our
      policy on a much stronger foundation. Preserving the free enterprise
      system is one good reason” for contracting with private industry, “but
      it is not the only reason.” (Wilson, Av. Wk., 4/4/66, 26)
    UCLA dedicated new center for space sciences, Schlichter Hall, made
e
      possible by $2-million NASA grant. Six-story building, named for Dr.
      Louis Byrne Schlichter, Prof. Emeritus of Geophysics and Director of
      UCLA Institute of Geophysics from 1947 to 1962, would contain 30 large
      laboratories and 50 research and administrative offices.
         Dr. T. L. K. Smull, Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator, said
      in a dedication speech: “NASA thinks that this is a singularly important
      type of activity as many of the problems confronting NASA in the space
      program reach across disciplinary lines and require the combined
      efforts of chemists, physicists, mathematicians, engineers, biologists,
      psychologists and even, on occasion, political scientists, social scientists
      and economists.’’ Other speakers were Dr. Thomas Gold, director of Cor-
      ne11 Univ. Center for Radiophysics and Space Research; Rep. Alphonzo
      Bell (R-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics; UCLA
      Chancellor Franklin D. Murphy; Dr. Schlichter; Prof. Gordon J. F.
      MacDonald; and Nobel Laureate Willard F. Libby, director of UCLA
      Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics. (UCLA Release, 4/3/66;
      Text)
    First direct measurement of minimum amount of energy required to
      initiate simple chemical reaction was announced by Cal Tech, where
      graduate student John Michael White had shown that one third of an
      electron volt of energy was necessary to split a hydrogen molecule and
      link a deuterium atom with one of the hydrogens. AEc-supported study
      had been suggested to White by Dr. Aron Kuppermann, prof. of chemi-
      cal physics, who said measurement would make it possible to learn
       “whether bimolecular chemical reactions can be described by the laws
      of classical mechanics or whether it is necessary to use quantum
      mechanics.” (Cal Tech Release, 4/4/66)
    USAF and NASA signed agreement to establish procedures for joint space
                                                                          129
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    program accident investigation. Ad hoc joint boards, consisting of at
    least three voting members appointed by USAF Director of Aerospace
    Safety and three by NASA Safety Director, would study particular launch
    vehicle accidents. Chairman would be from agency with “primary
    responsibility at time of accident,” determined by circumstances of
    each case. (Text; NASA NMI 1052.74, 4/27/66)
April 4-6: The importance of imagination in shaping the future was em-
    phasized by AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever in a speech
    before Arnold Air Society’s 18th National Conclave, Dallas: “Back in
     the 1930s we had what we thought were pretty fantastic ideas for the
    future. We thought that it might be possible to fly a plane up to the
     sound barrier. There were even people who thought it might be possible
     to break through it somehow-at least for short periods. A few people
     had heard about Dr. Robert Goddard and his work with rockets. They
    knew that he had already launched a rocket several hundred feet into
     the air. Science writers were speculating that we might be able to get
    something out into space by the beginning of the next century.
        “As it turns out, even the most fantastic thinking 30 years ago has
     proved to be very conservative. We have already flown planes like the
     SR-71 at speeds greater than mach 3 for extended periods. The experi-
     mental X-15 has flown at mach 6 and reached altitudes of over 50 miles.
     Our long-range ballistic missiles have ranges of from 5,000 to 9,000
     miles. And our Mercury and Gemini astronauts have sped through space
     for extended periods at speeds better than 17,000 miles per hour. With
     the Apollo program we are not too many years away from landing a
     man on the moon.” (Text)
        Entertainer Bob Hope presented General Schriever the inaugural
     award of Arnold Air Society’s Eugene M. Zuckert Trophy “to recognize
     and stimulate the growth of professionalism in the United States Air
     Force.” General Schriever was cited for his “outstanding dedication to
     the task of insuring the development of vitally needed modern weaponry
     for national defense” and the gathering of “highly qualified technological
     management teams required to perform this task.” (AFSC Release 74.66)
April 5 LUNA x was continuing in circumlunar orbit with 1,017-km. (632-
        :
     mi.) apolune, 350-km. (217-mi.) perilune, 2-hr. 58-min. period, and 71”
     inclination, Tass reported. Eighteen radio communications had been
     held with the satellite ‘%luringwhich a large volume of scientific data
     had been received.” Scientific equipment onboard included: (1)recorder
     of meteoric particles for investigating meteor showers along earth-moon
     route, for seeking dust cloud around the moon, and for registering the
     micrometeorites in circumlunar space; (2) gamma-spectrometer for
     studying the gamma-radiation of the lunar surface; (3) magnetometer
     for refining the value for the strength of the moon’s magnetic field;
      (4)equipment for studying solar plasma in circumlunar space; (5) equip-
     ment for recording the infrared radiation of the lunar surface; and
      (6) instrumentation for studying the radiation conditions in the moon’s
     environs. Variations in the satellite’s orbital parameters would be used
     to investigate the moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, Pravda, 4/6/66,
      1, USS-T Trans.)
  NASA had invited 33 firms to submit proposals on a 12-mo. study of Mars
      and Venus flyby missions in 1975-1982 period using Saturn/ApoUo
     hardware with minimum modifications. Study would emphasize earth
      escape stages based on modifications of the upper stages of Saturn V
130               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     launch vehicle (S-I1 and S-IVB), orbital tanking and assembly opera-
     tions, launch windows, spacecraft, and probes to be launched from
     spacecraft to planet’s surface. (MSFC Release 66-73)
April 5: NASA MSFC awarded cost-plus-incentive-fee contracts totaling more
     than $61 million for “engineering, fabrication, and institutional support
     services in . . . Saturn launch vehicle program” to nine firms: Sperry
     Rand Corp.; Vitro Corp.; Brown Engineering Co.; Spaco, Inc.; Northrop
     Corp.; Hayes International Corp. ; Management Services, Inc. ; Rust
     Engineering Co.; and RCA Service Co. Awards were first one-year
     renewals under options of original contracts awarded in 1965. (MSFC
     Release 66-74)
0 Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown testified before the House

     Armed Services Committee that Ufo reports investigated by USAF under
     Project Blue Book indicated no threat to our national security: “Based
     upon 10,147 reported sightings from 1947 through 1965 . . . the Air
     Force has succeeded in identifying 9,501 of these objects. Virtually all
     of these sightings were derived from subjective human observations and
     interpolations. The most common of these were astronomical sightings.
      ... Other major sources of reported sightings include . . . satellites,
                                                                  ...
     mirages, and spurious radar indications. The remaining 646        are those
     in which the information available does not provide an adequate basis
     for analysis, or for which the information suggests a hypothesis but the
     object or phenomenon explaining it cannot be proved to have been
     there or taken place at that time.” Dr. Brown assured committee that
     USAF would contract a group of scientific experts to conduct an “in
     depth study” of selected Ufo sightings. (Text; AP, Wash. Post,
     4/22/66, A4)
  Success of U.S.S.R.’s LUNA IX and LUNA x missions supported two important
     conclusions, suggested the New Yorlc Times in an editorial: “The Soviet
     Union is now well ahead of the United States in scientific exploration
     of the moon; MOSCOW’S     scientists are straining to beat this country in
                                                     . ..
     achieving man’s first round-trip to the moon.
        “But no matter which nation will be first to conquer the moon, it is
     important to clarify the legal issues arising from this development.
     There should be general international agreement that the moon is the
     property of all mankind and not of any one nation . . . [and] is open for
                                               .”
     research by scientists of all nations. . . (NYT, 4/5/66, 36M)
April 6: U.S,S.R. launched COSMOS CXIV with “scientific equipment designed
     for continuing the outer space research.” Orbital parameters : apogee,
     374 km. (232 mi.); perigee, 210 km. (130 mi.); period, 90.1 min.;
     inclination, 73”.Equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/7/66,
     10, USS-T Trans.)
0 MSFC had purchased 22 additional Saturn IB H-1 rocket engines from North

     American Aviation, Inc., under $7,634,742 modification to previous
     contract. In addition to the 205,000-lb.-thrust engines, which would
     complete engine requirements for Saturn IB/Apollo program, NAA
     would provide three years of support services. (MSFC Release 66-75)
  Astronauts had made more than 1,000 “flights” in the Rendezvous Dock-
     ing Simulator and other facilities at L ~ R to help develop techniques for
                                                 C
     the operation of vehicles in space. Developed by L ~ R C      scientists to
     explore, under controlled laboratory conditions, man’s qbility to com-
     plete a rendezvous in earth or lunar orbit during final 200 ft. of the
     space-docking maneuver, the simulator had been used extensively by
                                                                             131
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                  Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott, who per-
     GEMINI VIII
     formed world’s first space docking March 16. ( L ~ R C Release)
April 6: FAA’s  seventh annual report to the President and Congress described
     “significant cost reductions achieved while meeting increasing demands
     for aeronautical services.” Activities for FY 1965 included: (1) advance-
     ment of supersonic transport (Sst) program toward initial prototype
     construction by end of 1966; (2) issuance of new rules requiring greater
     safety margins during bad weather, higher operational standards for
     small aircraft, and new standards for passenger evacuation in emergen-
     cies; (3) beginning of field tests of a computerized air-traffic-control
     system; (4) commission of first Distance Measuring Equipment-Instru-
     ment Landing System (Dme-11s) combination to facilitate bad weather
     approaches; (5) establishment of General Aviation Jet Training Stand-
     ards Board and issuance of regulation requiring biennial requalification
     of all flight instructors to assure pilot efficiency; and (6) $20-million
     savings from cost-reduction program and other substantial savings from
     increased employee productivity and joint use of equipment and wire
     communications services with DOD. (FAA Release 66-31)
* DOD announced that USA, USN, and USAF would test British-built P.1127
     aircraft-redesignated XVdA V/Stol by US.-to            determine aircraft’s
     ability to meet requirements of each individual service. Evaluations,
     which would be completed by July 31, would be performed at Fort
     Campbell, Eglin AFB, Patuxent Naval Air Station, and aboard an aircraft
     carrier. (DOD Release 270-66)
  Dr. Edmund P. Learned, Harvard Univ. professor of business policy,
     became adviser to FAA Administrator William F. McKee on “economic
     and financial aspects of the supersonic transport (SST) development
     program.” (FAA; FAA Release 66-38)
* ComSatCorp suggested separate meetings during week of April 18 with
     AT&T and Western Union to explore use of multipurpose domestic
     communications satellites and discuss ownership of ground stations.
     Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, stated: “We believe that
     there are no inhibitions on Comsat’s ability to provide domestic satellite
     service, and . . . we view earth stations as an integral and critical part of
     a satellite communication system which must be planned and operated
     in concern with the space segment. Accordingly, we feel that this
     responsibility must be reflected in ownership.” (ComSatCorp Release)
  AFSC achieved more than $1 million in savings or cost avoidance during the
     first year of its Internal Zero Defects Program, AFSC Commander Gen.
     Bernard A. Schriever said in an Andrews AFB ceremony where he pre-
     sented AFSC Zero Defects Achievement Award to the Air Proving
     Ground Center, Eglin AFB. (AFSC Release 82.60)
  Senegalese President Leopold Sedar Senghor, speaking at a press confer-
     ence in Dakar, criticized the wealthy nations for spending money on
     space programs and abandoning the world’s poor. He said that was the
     reason he had never cabled congratulations to heads of state for their
     countries’ space exploits. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 4/7/66)
* London bookmaker William Hill, who had offered 1,000-to-1 odds against
     a manned lunar landing by the end of 1968, cut the odds to 10 to 1
     after LUNA x entered a lunar orbit. (WI, Wush. Daily News, 4/6/66)
April 7 NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 launch vehicle was launched from ETR
        :
     with dummy Surveyor payload. Centaur stage’s failure to achieve
132               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     successful double ignition in space caused 1,730-lb. dummy Surveyor
     payload to remain in earth orbit with the Centaur stage rather than
     enter simulated lunar trajectory as programed. Orbital parameters:
     apogee, 208 mi. (335 km.); perigee, 113 mi. (182 km.); period, 90 min.;
     inclination, 31”. Eighty minutes after launch NASA officials at KSC an-
     nounced that only one of booster’s two hydrogen-fueled RL-10 rocket
     engines had fired the second time. Both engines were to have ignited for
     approximate 107-sec. burn and inserted payload into lunar trajectory.
     Later analysis of data indicated the failure was because of a malfunction
     in Centaur’s attitude control system [see May 31. Purpose of AC-8
     mission was to demonstrate Centaur’s capability to restart its high-energy
     engines in the space environment following coast period in earth
     orbit. Success of this mission was vital to NASA’S first operational mission
     which would attempt to land Surveyor spacecraft on the moon. Centaur
     program was directed by NASA OSSA and managed by LRC. (NASA Releases
     66-58, 66-92; NASA Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 4/8/66, A9; AP, Balt. Sun,
     4/8/66)
April 7: USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from
     WTR. ( U S . Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
  New USA OH-6A helicopter, developed by Hughes Aircraft Co., completed
     a 2,230-mi. flight-longest nonstop helicopter flight in history-from
     Culver City, Calif., to Ormand Beach, Fla., in 15 hrs. 13 min. Flight
     broke record set by USN Sikorsky SA3A helicopter, which flew 2,105 mi.
     nonstop on March 5, 1965. (NYT, 4/11/66, 70; Hughes Aircraft Corp.)
  NASA Apollo Service Module (Sm) propulsion engine test phase was com-
     pleted at Arnold Engineering Development Center. (AEDC)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb was elected to National Geographic
     Society’s board of trustees. (NYT, 4/8/66, 3)
April 8: OAO I Orbiting Astronomical Observatory was launched by NASA
     from ETR with Atlas-Agena D booster into parking orbit and then into
     planned circular orbit. Orbital parameters: 505.4-mi. (813.3-km.)
     apogee; 493.2-mi. (793.7-km.) perigee; 101-min. period; and 35” in-
     clination. Satellite’s solar panels and instrumented booms would be
     deployed April 10.
        First of four spacecraft scheduled for NASA’s program, OAO I-
                                                          Oao
     largest, heaviest, and most electronically complex unmanned spacecraft
     ever developed by US-weighed 3,900 lbs., carried 10 telescopes, and
      contained 44,000 separate parts and 30 mi. of electrical wiring. It
      carried four scientific experiments to provide astronomers with their
     first sustained look at the universe from above the earth’s atmosphere,
      including Univ. of Wisconsin broad-band ultraviolet telescope package
      and detection devices to study the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray
      regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Through its complex ground-
      command spacecraft attitude control system, OAO I would be aimed at
      individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an
      orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed back
      to earth in the form of digital data for analysis by experimenters. Oao
      program was managed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA
      Release 66-60; NYT, 4/9/66, 7; NYT, 4/10/66, 10E)
m NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
      reached 99-mi. (159-km.) altitude and impacted 64 mi. downrange in the
      Atlantic. Objectives of flight were to compare five ionospheric plasma
                                                                           133
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    probes using stable ionosphere as a laboratory for evaluating the probes
     and to check relevant theories of probe operation. (NASA Rpt. sm)
April 8: FAA established a Noise Abatement Staff to direct the agency’s par-
    ticipation in the Government campaign to bring relief to areas disturbed
    by aircraft noise. Objectives of staff, to be directed by Raymond A.
    Shepanek (Capt., USNR) , former FAA aeronautical inspector, included
    development of aircraft noise measurement standards, formulation of
    aircraft noise standards, development of air traffic procedures and air-
     craft operating procedures to minimize noise, and initiation of research
    programs to provide for alleviation of the various features of aircraft
     noise. (FAA Release 66-33)
* Prospect of using a computer to simuIate vast changes in weather and
     climate was discussed by Walter Orr Roberts, director of the National
     Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colo., in an editorial in
     Science. Roberts suggested that with data from World Weather Watch-
     an experiment proposed by the National Academy of Sciences for ob-
     serving the world’s weather continuously in three dimensions--“an
     adequate computer, and a global mathematical model, a vast array of
     experiments on weather and climate-modification can be ‘performed’ by
     numerical computation rather than in nature. The beneficial con-
     sequences can be evaluated and compared to the expected costs. The
     full effect and the potential hazards can be determined without risk to
     life and property. . . .” World Weather Watch system was being studied
     by ESSA and World Meteorological Organization. (Roberts, Science,
     4/8/66, 159)
* U.S. Government’s increased interest in transatlantic cooperation on
     scientific research was attracting attention in Europe, Victor K.
     McElheny reported in Science. “The most dramatic of the suggestions
     made recently is that of sending an ‘artificial comet’ spacecraft toward
     Jupiter or close to the sun, or to use such a spacecraft to investigate the
                                                       .”
     belt of asteroids between Jupiter and Mars. . . McElheny said NASA
     Administrator James E. Webb was planning to visit West Germany and
     other European nations to discuss details of the project and to emphasize
     “that the U.S. is not thinking necessarily in terms of bilateral collabora-
     tion with individual countries, of the sort exemplified by current U.S.
     launching of satellites for Britain, Italy, and France.
         “Where it can, the U.S. prefers to work with multinational European
     organizations, such as the European Atomic Energy Community
                                                                             .”
      (Euratom) or the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) . .
      (McElheny, Science, 4/8/66, 190-191)
April 9: LUNA x had detected electrons with energies higher than cosmic
     radiation, Tass reported: “Data have been obtained which may be inter-
     preted as evidence of the existence in the near-lunar space of ffuxes of
     electrons with energies of tens of thousands of electron volts. These
     ff uxes are 70 to 100 times more intense than the cosmic ray background.
     Possibly, this phenomenon is due to the earth’s magnetic ‘tail.’ Later
     measurements will permit more positive conclusions on the radiation
      conditions near the moon.” In addition, preliminary data analysis
      showed that intensity of the moon’s qagnetic field was “somewhat above
      the level of magnetic fields in free interplanetary space” and that
      meteorite “particle density” near the moon was higher than in “inter-
      planetary space.”
134               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

            reported that US. scientists, including Dr. James A. Van Allen,
       UPI
     State Univ. of Iowa, believed radiation observed by LUNA x was either
     the earth’s comet tail or a similar feature produced by the moon itself.
     Reported level of radiation would be no threat to manned operations
     near the moon, they said. (Tass, 4/9/66; UPI, NYT, 4/10/66, 79; AP,
     Wash. Sun. Star, 4/10/66, A6)
April 9: Problems of preventing space-probe contamination of other planets
     were discussed by James L. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal o the Armed Forces. He
                                                           f
     noted remarks of Boeing engineers C. S. Bartholemew and D. C. Porter
     at the March 28-30 AIAA-AAS meeting in Baltimore that “sterilization and
     spacecraft reliability are ‘competing characteristics.’ If you apply enough
     heat to kill the bacteria, you may also damage the sensitive electronic
     gear. Alternatively, you can use chemicals such as ethylene oxide, but
     it must be applied wet and moisture is similarly an ‘enemy agent’ to
                               .
     electronics equipment. . . Boeing engineers feel that heat-sterilizable
     electronics are ‘within reach,’ but considerably more investigation is
     required.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 4/9/66, 9)
April 10: Main battery system of OAO I Orbiting Astronomical Observatory
     had failed, NASA officials at KSC announced: “Overheating of the OAO.
     primary battery, a problem which became critical late yesterday, has
     resulted in complications leading ;o degradation of the power supply
     from all three batteries aboard the spacecraft, and telemetry signals no
     longer are being received.
        “Efforts to overcome the problem have been unsuccessful and the
     OAO mission appears to have been lost.”
        Officials added, however, that before satellite had failed it had
     demonstrated a key maneuver of the OAO program by successfully lock-
     ing into a series of stars for precise aiming. OAO I had been launched
     from ETR April 8. (AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 71; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     4/11/66, B10; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/11/66)
* The 19 astronauts selected by NASA April 4 would be “too late to take part
     in the first lunar landings . . . [but they] should get into some of the
     follow-on Apollo flights and take some 60-day space trips,” Dr. Charles
     A. Berry, Chief of Medical Programs, MSC, said in a press interview in
     Colorado Springs. (Gibney, Denver Post, 4/10/66)
0 First full-scale checkout version of 365-ft. Saturn V rocket had been

     assembled at KSC to aid installation of electrical and plumbing connec-
     tions on three mobile launching towers. (Marshall Star, 4/6/66, 1)
* Aviatrix Geraldine Mock-who in 1964 became first woman to make a
     solo flight around world-set a new world nonstop distance record for
     women in a 4,550-mi., 31-hr. flight from Honolulu, Hawaii, to Columbus,
     Ohio, in single-engine Cessna 206. Previous distance flight record of
     3,671 mi. had been set by three Russian women in 1938. (NYT,4/12/66,
     25; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A3)
* USNS Kingsport, first ocean link in U.S. research in satellite communica-
     tions, was retired from NASA’s   networks and returned to DOD. In July
     1963 Kingsport had participated in world’s first demonstration of
     communications by satellite in synchronous orbit when a message was
     sent in 45,000-mi. loop from Kingsport anchored in Lagos harbor,
     Nigeria, to SYNCOM 11 comsat and back. Several days later, she was part
     of first direct exchange of radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst,
     N.J., terminal station with land circuits at Lagos. On Aug. 4,Kingsport
     and Lakehurst transmitted and received via SYNCOM 11 first satellite ex-
                                                                         135
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    change of news copy and photo facsimile. Several days later, caught in
    a squall 40 mi. offshore, she became first terminal station to establish
    satellite communications from the open sea. Two months later, she
    participated in first trans-ocean press conference by satellite: stationed
    at Rota, Spain, she connected SYNCOM 1 communications between
                                                 1
    United Nations in New York City and NASA Hq. in Washington, D.C.,
    w t the International Telecommunications Union Conference in
      ih
    Geneva. Kingsport first demonstrated the practicality of communications
    by satellite during manned space missions March 16, 1966, by relaying
    voice reports from GEMINI VIII Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David
    R. Scott via SYNCOM 11 to Hawaii ground station. (NASA Release 66-79)
April 11: NASA Langley Research Center would negotiate $450,000 study
    contract with Martin Co. for 11-mo. study of “costs, crew size, and
     complexity of a flight research program using a manned lifting body
    vehicle.” In conducting the study, the firm would be required to con-
    sider an HL-10 lifting-body concept capable of carrying one, two, four,
    six, or eight crew members. HL-10 was considered representative of
    advanced lifting entry vehicles.
        NASA had specified Titan 11, Titan 111, and Saturn IB as potential
    launch vehicles. For study purposes, Rogers Dry Lake at Edwards AFB
    would be a probable landing site. (NASA Release 66-82; LaRC Release)
a Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president and designer
     of numerous aircraft, was named recipient of the Air Force Academy’s
     1966 Thomas D. White National Defense Award for “outstanding con-
     tribution to the national defense and security of the United States.”
     (UPI,Wush. Post, 4/12/66, A18)
  Development of the world’s brightest laser-a light beam 250 billion times
    brighter than the sun-was announced by Dr, Theodore Maiman,
     president of Korad Corp., a subsidiary of Union Carbide Corp. Laser
     had an intensity of 250 trillion watts per square centimeter when
     focused to a point 1/1,000 of an inch in diameter. (UPI, Wush.. Post,
     4/12/66, A5)
April 12: Cosmonautics Day in U.S.S.R., celebrating fifth anniversary of
     first manned space fight by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations
     of military orientation of U S . space efforts and predictions of Soviet
     space successes. Cosmonaut Gagarin, speaking in the Kremlin, said:
     ccAmericanscientists and cosmonauts have carried out a number of
     interesting experiments. This is to their credit. It is to be deeply
     regretted, however, that American cosmonautics is increasingly falling
     under the influence of the Pentagon, which regards outer space as the
     theater of future military operations.” Gagarin pledged “all his energies
     and knowledge” to help in the lunar mission and said man must make
     himself at home on the moon “to establish stations which will serve as
     points of departure for longer space voyages and also as astronomical
     observatories and scientific laboratories.”
        Cosmonaut Gherman Titov, speaking in a taped interview on Moscow
     television, predicted that “builders and assemblers will one day exit
     into space and put together various parts of space stations, assemble
     spaceships and stations on the moon, and build various structures.”
        In a Pravdu article Marshal Konstantin Vershinin, head of Soviet
     Air Force, predicted a new manned space mission that could take
     several cosmonauts through the Van M e n radiation belts. He noted
136                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                                         ...
     that biomedical data from the COSMOS cx flight would “doubtlessly
     be used in preparing new manned space flights.”
        In an interview published in Prague, Cosmonaut Konstantin Feok-
     tistov predicted that man would land on Mars and Venus between 1970
     and 1980. (Pravda, 4/12/66, 2; Wash. Post, 4/11/66, A8; AP, NYT,
     4/11/66,37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A8; UPI, NYT, 4/14/66,7;
     Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A14; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib.,4/13/66)
April 12: USAF XB-70 No. 2 flew 20 min. at mach 3-longest to date-and
     reached 70,000-ft. maximum altitude in 1-hr. 49-min. flight from
     Edwards AFB. Pilots were North American Aviation, Inc.’s chief test
     pilot Alvin S. White and Col. Joseph Cotton (USAF). (Flight log; AFFTC
       EO)
    U.K.’S Associated Electrical Industries, Ltd., General Electric Co., Ltd.,
0

    and Plessey Co., Ltd., had joined forces to sell ground terminals at $4
    million each to countries that wanted to pick up and relay telephone,
    telegraph, and television signals from communications satellites,
    reported Clyde H. Farnsworth in the New York Times. The British
    companies believed there would be market for about 30 terminals in
    the next two to three years and about 70 to 80 in the next ten years,
    and said that at least seven nations were already interested in pur-
    chasing terminals. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/1/66, 57)
* National Broadcasting Co. (NBC) and ComSatCorp. presented progress
    reports on their separate feasibility studies on domestic communica-
    tions satellite system at ComSatCorp-sponsored    meeting in Washington,
    D.C. Proposed systems, which could provide 24-hr. full-color television
    service and interconnected facilities for radio networks, would each
    cost about $100 million and would consist of four to six three-channel
    synchronous satellites, back-up satellites and boosters, ground-to-
    satellite stations, control stations, and ground receiver terminals.
    NBC’S system would serve only television and radio networks; ComSat-
    Corp’s “common carrier” system could be expanded to accommodate
    all types of communications. Meeting, attended by television network,
    communications, industrial, manufacturing, and government officials,
    was first in a series to be held before final plans were submitted to FCC
    for approval. (NBC Release; ComSatCorp; Wash. Post, 4/13/66, D6;
    Wash. Eve. Star, 4/13/66, D12)
  Ability to induce genetically a hibernation state in man that would lessen
    the body’s needs by cooling could be beneficial for long space voyages,
    suggested Dr. R. R. Chaffee, Univ. of Missouri Space Science Research
    Center, in a speech before Federation of American Societies for
    Experimental Biology meeting in Atlantic City. Dr. Chaffee told of
    genetic experiments in which the ability to hibernate gradually was
    increased over several generations in some families of Syrian hamsters
    and reduced in others, indicating that only a few hereditary genes
    might be involved in the hibernation process. (Carey, Wash. Post,
    4/13/66, A3)
April 13: Gamma-ray spectrum of the lunar surface obtained by LUNA x
    indicated that the moon’s crust was similar to the earth’s, Tass
    announced. The satellite had detected lunar gamma rays from two
    sources: one was “an increased intensity of gamma radiation caused
     chiefly by interaction of cosmic rays with the surface layer of lunar
    material”; the other was “natural radioactivity from the lunar rocks
     associated with uranium, thorium, and potassium.
                                                                          137
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

        “Compared with the analogous radioactivity of earth rocks, the
     observed spectrum comes close to the radioactivity of basic rocks-
     basalts.” (Sullivan, NYT, 4/14/66, 1, 21)
April 13: NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill
     Research Range carried GSFC payload to 184-mi. (296-km.) altitude
     for simultaneous measurements of magnetic and electric fields, low-
     energy electrons, and low-energy protons in a visible aurora. Secondary
     objectives were rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of xenon
     flashing light for trajectory determination. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* GEMINI VIII Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and his family were honored
     with a gala parade on their arrival in Armstrong’s hometown of Wapa-
     koneta, Ohio. Ohio’s Governor James A. Rhodes announced plans for
     the construction of a $200,000 airport near Wapakoneta to be named
     for Armstrong. Sen. Frank J. Lausche (D-Ohio) and Rep. William M.
     McCulloch (R-Ohio) announced a congressional resolution of tribute
     to Armstrong and his fellow GEMINI vm Astronaut David R. Scott.
     (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/14/66; Wush. Post, 4/14/66, D16)
  Pan American World Airways, Inc. (Pan Am), would purchase 25 new
     Boeing 747 jet transports-including twenty-three 490-seat passenger
     models and two all-cargo models which would carry 214,000 lbs.
     freight-for over $525 million, announced Pan Am’s chairman and
     chief executive, Juan T. Trippe. Deliveries of order, reported to be
     largest and most expensive in airline history, would be made between
     September 1969 and May 1970. The 680,000-lb. aircraft would be
     powered by new Pratt & Whitney JT9D-1 fan-jet engine capable of
     delivering 41,000-lbs. thrust and would have 45,000-ft. cruise altitude-
     nearly one mile higher than current transports-and mach .90 cruise
     speed-compared with mach .82 for current models-and                 would
     provide “safety margins superior to any previous commercial airliner”
     with multi-gear landing system which would require only 9,150 ft. of
     takeoff runway. Trippe forecast lower passenger fares and reduced
     cargo tariffs because of 747’s large capacity and efficiency of operation.
      (Pan Am Release; Bedingfield, NYT, 4/14/66, 1; Edwards, Wush. Post,
     4/14/66, K1)
  AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever was presented the American
     Legion’s General WiIliam E. MitchelI Memorial Award-highest honor
     bestowed by the Legion’s Aviator’s Post-at a luncheon ceremony in
      New York‘s Wings Club. Schriever was cited for his “outstanding
      contributions to the aerospace science and military posture of the
      United States.” (AFSC Release 76.66)
April 14: Two space cooperation agreements were confirmed by Spanish
      Foreign Minister Fernando Castiella and Secretary of State Dean Rusk
      in a State Dept. ceremony attended by NASA Deputy Administrator
      Robert C. Seamans, Jr. First agreement provided that NASA and Spain’s
      Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (INTA) would share in the
      operation of NASA space tracking and data acquisition station near
      Madrid which maintains radio contact with unmanned lunar and inter-
      planetary probes and would support manned Apollo mission. Effective
      from May 1,1966, to Jan. 28,1974, and in accordance with government-
      to-government agreement between Spain and U.S. of Jan. 29, 1964,
      contract provided that Spanish engineers and technicians would be
      trained and assigned to tracking, telemetry, communications, and
138               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    support. Some of INTA’S key personnel had already begun special train-
     ing at Deep Space Facilities, Goldstone, Calif.
        Second agreement, part of a continuing Spanish4J.S. program of
     cooperation in space investigation, provided for joint project t o launch
     four sounding rockets in Spain to study winds and temperatures at high
     altitudes. Agreement was in form of a memorandum of understanding
     between INTA and NASA: INTA would establish sounding rocket range, con-
     struct grenade-typepayloads, provide two Nike-boosterrockets, conduct
     launchings, and analyze and publish the data; NASA would lend range
     tracking and telemetry equipment and a launcher, provide two Nike-
     booster rockets, provide prototype payload, and train Spanish personnel
     as needed. Both agencies would bear the cost of discharging their
     respective responsibilities. Results of the experiments would be made
     available to world scientific community. (NASA Release 66-83)
April 14: Two NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were launched from WSMR:
     h s t reached 114-mi. (183-km.) altitude and measured intensity of ultra-
     violet dayglow between 1160 A and 1400 A in the zenith, in the nadir,
     and on the horizon; second reached 120-mi. (192-km.) altitude and
     measured the profile and intensity of the solar Lyman-alpha line.
      (NASA Rpt. SRL)
           ApoIlo AppIications program would be hampered by lack of pay-
  NASA’s
     loads unless Congress granted additional funds in FY 1968 budget,
     NASA Administrator James E. Webb told press conference at Colorado
     Women’s College. NASA’s   efforts to obtain appropriations for post-Apollo
     projects had been hindered by rising costs of the Vietnamese war and
     Congressional discontent with NASA’s     increasing administrative costs.
     Webb said the US. was behind in the space race “except for rendezvous
     and docking, and the Ranger mission. . . . Russia has widened the gap
     during the past two years, launching two Proton payloads of 27,500
     pounds each-which is heavier than we can lift-recovering payloads
                                                                         . .”
     of 10,000 to 15,000 pounds, and launching a three-man spacecraft. .
     Questioned about the House Government Operations Committee’s
     suggestion that NASA abandon the Apollo Applications program and
     participate in USAF’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory program, Webb said
     he did not believe a “complete, common use” of facilities was possible,
     noting that many of the countries in which the US. had tracking
     facilities would not cooperate if installations were used for military
     projects. (Denver Post, 4/15/66)
a First simulated exploration of the moon had shown that two astronauts
     could live and intelligently perform tasks for at least 18 days in cabin
     with 117 cu. ft. of living-workingspace. Test was performed in support
     of Apollo Applications program by two MSFC engineers in Minneapolis
      [see Feb. 20, March 101. (MSFC Release 66-80)
e Recent Soviet space accomplishments indicated that a manned space
     spectacular was imminent, suggested William Hines in the Washington
     Evening Star. He noted LUNA E’S soft-landing on the moon Feb. 3,
     LUNA X’S launch into lunar orbit March 31, and the 22-day flight of
     two dogs in COSMOS cx Feb. 22-March 16. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,
     4/14/66, A12)
  Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown issued memorandum
     approving recommendations of panel appointed to investigate USAF
     relations with “not-for-profit” corporations and ordering that fees paid
     to the corporations be substantidy reduced. In report, issued Feb. 1,
                                                                         139
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                      “. . .
    panel had said that nonprofit corporations            continue to be an
     indispensible factor in developing and acquiring complex aerospace
    systems and in assuring their function through command and control,”
                           .
    but that “guidelines . . point to a fee substantially lower than at
    present.” (Text; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/17/66, A10; Wash. Post,
    4/17/66, A14)
April 14: Inter-American Development Bank awarded Page Communications,
     Inc., $250,000 contract to “determine the most economic locations for
     ground stations in South America which would be linked to the satellite
     system, and the means of connection with local telecommunications
     systems.” Study would be carried out with ComSatCorp cooperation.
      (IDB Release; Tush. Post, 4/16/66, C6)
  In a lecture at Rice Univ., Dr. Henry Faul of the Graduate Research
     Center of the Southwest’s geosciences division insisted on the terres-
     trial origin of tektites in opposition to lunar-origin theory of many
     experts: “The fatal objection to the theory that tektites are of lunar
     origin is the fact that there is no known mechanism of fight that can
     explain how something that hits the moon, generates a lot of heat and
     is melted into a jet stream, is somehow dumped in the widely varying
     patterns and areas where tektites have been found on earth.” (Justice,
     Houston Post, 4/19/66)
April 15: Representatives of Intelsat (International Telecommunications
     Satellite Consortium) toured NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and
     received briefing on MSFC programs and research projects. (MSFC Re-
     lease 66-77)
          Procurement Office reorganized into two main divisions: Policy and
0 NASA’s

     Review, and Contract Management. George J. Vecchietti, Director of
     Procurement, named Paul A. Barron, formerly GSA Assistant General
     Counsel for Regulations and General Law; Assistant Director of
     Procurement for Policy and Review. William P. Risso, formerly Special
     Assistant to Director of Procurement, was named Assistant Director of
     Procurement for Contract Management. Vecchietti also announced
     establishment of Procurement Surveys Div., with Harvey M. Kennedy,
     Jr., Director, and Staff Operations Div., with Harold E. Pryor, Director.
      (NASA Release 66-81)
              had constructed two stations in the United Arab Republic and
0 U.S.S.R.

     Mali to photograph artificial earth satellites, Tass reported. Stations
     had been equipped by U.S.S.R. and were being operated by Soviet,
      U.A.R., and Mali specialists. (Reuters, NYT, 4/16/66, 13)
  Vice President Hubert Humphrey said in address at the Air Force Acad-
      emy, Colorado Springs, Colo. :
         “It was seventy years ago this May that Samuel Pierpont Langley,
      Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, launched his sixteen-foot,
      steam-powered model airplane off the Potomac River and flew a half a
                                               . ..
     mile in the incredible time of 90 seconds.
         “Seventy years-in the larger scheme of history-is not a very
     long time.
         “But though those seventy years are but the average length of a full
      American life, they reach back into an incredibly distant world-a
      world that has receded from us by a quantum of change that no other
      period in the vast sweep of human history can surpass.
         “One measure of that change is flight itself.
         “I flew here this morning from Washington-nonstop-in         3 hours
      and 20 minutes.
140                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

        “Had I made the flight from Washington to Colorado Springs in
     Langley’s plane, it would have required 127 days-and we would have
     had to make 2,987 fuel stops along the way. . . .’, (Text)
April 15: USAF had accepted and funded at cost of $18.5 million more than one
     fourth of the unsolicited proposals it had received from industrial and
     scientific community during first half of FY 1966. The 319 proposals
     accepted promised needed technological advances in operational aero-
     space systems. (AFSC Release 71.66)
  GEMINI VI command pilot Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received an honorary
     Doctor of Aeronautical Engineering degree from Lafayette College,
     Easton, Pa., during convocation commemorating 100 yrs. of science
     and engineering instruction on the campus. (MSC Roundup, 4/29/66, 1 ;
     UPI, Wush. Post, 4/16/66, D4)
a NASA Administrator ,James E. Webb, incoming president of American
     Society for Public Administration (ASPA) , discussed responsibilities of
     administering a “Great Society” at ASPA conference in Washington,
     D.C. Webb said that “. . . with the seething mass of humanity all
     around the world, not many of them very happy today, we have a strong
     requirement for effective administration, precision in the use of public
                                                                         .
     power, for prediction, for planned use of limited resources. . .
                                                                        ...
         “It seems to me that the public administrator in this period        must
     be a bigger, broader person than has been required in the past because
     the forces he must work with are so much larger, and yet so much more
                ..   . Somehow he must command the respect and following
     complex.
     that will convert criticism from destruction of ideas to clarification and
                                ..
     perfection of those ideas. . I believe his performance will be measured
      ... by the scope and sweep of his vision and adjustment to some forces
     that will be beyond his ability to prediot or control; also his ability to
     ride the crest of the wave, that wave of the incoming tide of tomorrow
     that is now bringing in the fruits of a vital and vigorous society.” (Text)
April 16: Preliminary results of flight of U.S.S.R.’s LUNA X, placed in circum-
     lunar orbit April 3 to become moon’s first artificial satellite, were an-
     nounced at Moscow press conference. President of the Soviet Academy
     of Sciences Mstislav Keldysh said that considerably less braking power
     had been required to put a spacecraft in orbit around the moon than
     had been required in a soft landing. This had made it possible to increase
     the payload in LUNA x and to equip it with instruments for important
     studies of the moon and the space surrounding it.
         Academician Aleksandr Vinogradov, geochemist, said that study of
     radioactivity of rocks on the lunar surface had indicated the overall in-
     tensity of gamma radiation on the lurain was comparable to the in-
      tensity of gamma radiation emitted by terrestrial granites [see April 131.
     However, part of it was not due to natural radioactivity but to inter-
      action of cosmic rays and lunar matter. Such radiation was absent in
      terrestrial rocks because of the shielding effect of the earth‘s atmosphere.
     Lunar rocks were comparable in natural radioactivity to basalt rocks on
      earth, indicating that “the processes of the formation of the core of the
     planets of the earth group apparently have the same mechanism.”
         Prof. Naum Grigorov said readings of LUNA x’s magnetometer indi-
      cated presence near the moon of a weak, homogenous, and regular
      magnetic field. Streams of ions of small energies were registered. Analy-
      sis of materials transmitted by LUNA x showed the intensity of particles
                                                                           141
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    in the moon’s radiation belt was 100,000 times less than in the earth’s
    radiation belts.
        Prof. Alexandr Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, said
    existence of an artificial moon satellite was important not only for
    physical research, but also for determining more exactly the mass and
    shape of the moon-information vital for building an exact theory of
    the motion of the moon and for study of the unevenness of the earth‘s
     rotation.
        Replying to questions, Academician Keldysh said LUNA x did not
     carry photocameras but was intended for physical study of near-lunar
     space and the moon itself-its nature, ionosphere, radiations, and fields.
     Satellite would orbit the moon for “a few years.” Duration could not be
     predicted since parameters of the moon’s gravitational field were not
     known. Keldysh said that since assembly of large spacecraft in orbit was
     an important step toward the conquest of outer space, cosmonauts were
     preparing for the solution of this task. Referring to the problem of
     manned flights to the moon, he stressed that the most difficult task to
     be solved was return of the spacecraft into earth’s atmosphere. Keldysh
     said dogs Veterok’s and Ugolyek’s passages through radiation belts in
     COSMOS cx had had no apparently serious effect on them but that pro-
     longed observations were necessary. (Tass, 4/18/66)
April 16: NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W.
     Frutkin addressed the American Academy of Political and Social Science
                                                                       .
     in Philadelphia on international significance of space program: “. . the
     United States has welcomed direct foreign participation in space research
     and exploration. The U S . has contributed its boosters to launch six
     satellites which were conceived, engineered, instrumented and funded
     by cooperating foreign countries. Eight more such satellites are to be
     launched by us under existing agreements and, at this date, other agree-
     ments are in early prospect. We have opened our own satellites to foreign
     experimenters. Some twenty experiments proposed by scientists abroad
     have been selected on their merits for flight on our satellites. These
     foreign experiments are contributed to the program; we contribute space
     in the satellite and its support systems and retrieve the data for the
     experimenter. Even wider cooperation-with twenty different countries
     -is achieved through programs which utilize small, nonorbiting rockets
     to obtain data for which satellites do not commend themselves. In all of
     these projects, we have shared the tasks and costs in literal cooperation
     without exporting a dollar.” (Text)
April 17: New evidence supporting theory that Venus’ environment could
     sustain life was published by Johns Hopkins Univ. astrophysicists
     William Plummer and John Strong in Astrophysical Journal. Past
     measurements of microwave emissions from Venus had indicated very
     high surface temperatures. Plummer and Strong concluded, on the
     basis of recent detailed measurements from high-altitude balloon
     observations by Cal Tech radioastronomers, that possibly “30 percent
     of the observed microwaves in the past had no bearing on surface
     temperatures but rather emanated from electrical discharges within
     the cloudy atmosphere of Venus.” They estimated Venus’ temperature
     ranges from 580°F at equator to 9°F at poles and said there are extensive
     regions-greater than earth’s land area--“where man would find the
     temperature comfortable.” (NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. Post, 4/18/66,
     A7)
142               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

April 17: Ufo was sighted by hundreds of people in Ohio and Pennsylvania,
     including two deputy sheriffs who followed it for 85 mi. USAF later attrib-
     uted sightings to combination of a satellite and the planet Venus. (UPI,
     NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. POSZ,      4/18/66, A7; UPI, NYT, 4/24/66, 95;
     Wash. Eve. Star, 4/23/66, A2)
April 18: ComSatCorp filed with FCC a $31,985,000 fixed-price contract
    with TRW Systems, Inc., for research, development, and production of
    six advanced synchronous satellites for global commercial satellite
    service. Cylindrical, 240-lb. satellites would have 1,200 two-way voice
    channels and five-year operational life and would handle all types of
     communications. (ComSatCorp Release)
  Supersonic transport and rocket flights in the next few decades could
     raise the average surface temperature of the earth by almost half a
     degree by spewing tons of chemical pollutants into the atmosphere,
     said Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, UCLA planetary and space physicist,
    in an interview with the Los Angeles Times. Heavy burning of coal, oil,
    and gas introduced by the industrial revolution in the 19th century
    and the automotive revolution in the 20th had increased carbon dioxide
    in the atmosphere by about 15 per cent, MacDonald estimated. The
     carbon dioxide created a layer of gas that allowed heat from the sun to
    reach the earth but stopped it from escaping when it was re-radiated
    back from the earth. This was the “greenhouse effect,” which raised
    the temperature below the layer and Iowered the temperature above the
    layer. “Four hundred supersonic aircraft flying four flights a day on
    intercontinental routes, would affect surface temperatures as much as
    the whole industrial and automotive revolutions have to date,” Mac.
     Donald said. (Getze, L A . Times, 4/18/66)
0 Striking members of International Union of Electrical Workers (AFL-CIO)
    picketed all gates of Kennedy Space Center, NASA, in wage dispute with
     United Technology Center, builder of solid-fuel boosters for USAP
    Titan I11 launch vehicle. UTC had about 175 workers at KSC, one-third
     of whom were IUEW members. Some 300 of a total force of 366 con.
    struction workers honored the picket lines and failed to show up for
    work on the Saturn V mobile service structure and Vertical Assembly
     Building (Vab). Strike was first at KSC during 1966, but the ninth
     in 27 mos. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/18/66, A l ; AP, NYT, 4/19/66,
     18)
0 A new nuclear particle-the       most massive and most stable yet found-
    had been discovered by physicists at Argonne National Laboratory
     (ANL). Three and a half times as heavy as the proton, the particle was
     ft
        a ‘nucleon resonance’ known simply as N”3245.” The number
     “3245” stood for 3,245 million electron volts, the amount of its
     energy. According to Dr. Alan D. Krisch of Univ. of Michigan, nucleon
     resonances “may be ‘excited’ or highly energetic states of protons and
                ..
     neutrons . and can be produced only in accelerators. They are not
     observed in nature.” Krisch, along with John R. O’Fallon, Keith
     Ruddick, and Steven W. Kormanyos of Univ. of Michigan, and Lazarus
     G. Ratner of ANL, made the discovery using Argonne’s 13.5-billion elec-
     tron volt (Bev) zero gradient synchrotron. They said this “abnormally
     stable” particle has a lifetime of one ten-thousandth of a millionth of a
     millionth of a millionth of a second, which is “longer than that of any
     of its family of nuclear particles.” Krisch suggested N*3245 may have
     “an unusually high spin which prevents it from decaying easily.”
                                                                          143
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Discovery was reported in Physical Review Letters. (Phys. Rev. Letters,
     4/18/66, 709; Amer. Inst. of Physics Release, 4/18/66)
April 18: Capt. Robert F. Freitag (USN, Ret.), Director of Field Center Devel-
     opment, NASA OMSF, speaking in Washington, D.C., before the Commu-
     nity Development Conference of the 16th District of Texas, said that
     the magnitude and importance of the investment in the space program
     dictate that informed citizens from all walks of life participate in a
     national dialogue on decisions involved: “We in NASA do not feel that
                                                                            ..
     the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of NASA alone. .
     The budget for the coming fiscal year permits NASA to hold open the
     option for a program to procure additional flight vehicles beyond those
     now programmed, so as to employ the Apollo hardware, facilities and
     capabilities at least through 1971. If we do not exercise this option in
     the decision for the 1968 budget, we will have to begin a phase-down of
     the manned space flight activities and the ‘mothballing’ of some of our
     facilities. At a small fraction of the initial cost we can continue and we
     can expand our operations in space for the next ten years and more.
     These operations will have tremendous implications for our national
     security and for our position of world leadership, in addition to the
     benefits of scientific advancement and the betterment of man’s life on
     Earth. . . . In the area of national security, our expenditures in space
     probably represent the cheapest insurance policy the nation can buy
     for the future.” (Text)
April 18,19: Press commented on $525-million order from Pan American
     World Airways, Inc. (Pan Am), for 25 Boeing 747 aircraft [see April
     131: Order had cast doubt on market value for Anglo-French Concorde
     Sst, according to Andrew Wilson in Washington Post. BOAC Chairman
     Sir Giles Guthrie had said his corporation would meet with Boeing
     representatives during week of April 18 to discuss purchase of about
     six new jets. 490-seat Boeing 747 would reduce operating costs by as
     much as 37 per cent, and Pan Am order, Wilson said, “makes it
     inevitable that B.O.A.C. will follow suit.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/15/66,
     C-3; Wilson, London Observer; Wash. Post, 4/19/66, C7)
        ?‘The 747 concept promises to be as revolutionary in relation to the
     current generation of jets as the initial 707s were to the piston-powered
     transports they superseded,” Aviation Week editorialized.
        “Biggest technical advancement will come from the new generation
     of high bypass ratio, high temperature, large turbofans typified by the
     Pratt & Whitney Aircraft JT9D. This new gas tcrbine cycle promises
     as much improvement in load-carrying capacity and operating economy
     as the original turbofan gained over the straight turbojet. It is the real
     root of the economic and technical revolution embodied in the 747
     concept.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 4/18/66, 21)
April 19: BOAC grounded four Boeing 707 jets after precautionary inspec-
     tion had revealed hairline cracks around bolt holes in tail assemblies.
     Following BOAC announcement, FAA disclosed that 22 Boeing 707 and
     720 jetliners, all three or more years old, were under repair for tail
     assembly cracks. (NYT, 4/20/66, 1; Ingraham, NYT, 4/21/66, 66M;
     NYT, 4/22/66, 65; Toth, Wash. Post, 4/24/66, M6)-
0 USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR with Atlas-Agena D booster.

     (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
0 House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed its report on H.R.
     1441, the $4.986-billion NASA budget authorization. (NASA LAR V/65-66)
14                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

April 19: International Association of Machinists and Boeing Co. settled
     dispute on seniority issues under Federal mediation, averting strike of
     50,000 Boeing employees, including those working on Saturn V boosters
     at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. (UPI, NYT, 4/20/66, 48; UPI, Wush.
     Post, 4/20/66, A6)
e Eastern Airlines reserved two delivery positions for US. supersonic
     transport (Sst) ; transaction raised total number of reserved delivery
     positions to 96 and number of companies holding reservations to 22.
     (FAA Release 66-36)
April 19-20: American Geophysical Union held 47th annual meeting in
     Washington, D.C. Dr. George P. Woollard, AGU president and director
     of Univ. of Hawaii’s Geophysics Research Center, in opening speech,
     urged intensive study of earth’s interior. As an example of complexities
     of the planet brought to light by detailed knowledge, he noted that
     satellite observations, leading at first to the view of earth as “pear-
     shaped,” had been supplemented by new information on local variations.
     “We will probably wind up,” Woollard said, “with a warty, oblate
     spheroid.” (Sullivan, NYT, 4/20/66, 47M)
        Univ. of Chicago astronomer Edward Anders told AGU that organic
     compounds in certain meteorites were result of “natural chemical
     processes,” not “products of living organisms from afar.” Hydrocarbon
     formation, Anders said, “will happen whenever carbon monoxide,
     hydrogen and meteoritic dust cool on a rapid time scale.” John Wood
     of Smithsonian’s Cambridge Astrophysical Observatory said that some
     meteorites were ‘‘ ‘truly primordial’ matter, formed along with the
     rest of the solar system from a solar nebula.” (Wush. Post, 4/21/66,
     A3)
        Experimenters presented preliminary reports on NASA’s     PIONEER VI
     spacecraft at AGU meeting. Initial data gathered by 140-lb. spacecraft,
     launched into heliocentric orbit Dec. 16, 1965, indicated that: (1)
     low-energy cosmic radiation generated in solar flares traveled in well-
     defined streams coming from varying directions; (2) electron density
     in interplanetary space, measured by Stanford Univ. radio propagation
     detector, was nearly 10 per cu. cm.; (3) solar wind contained not only
     hydrogen and doubly-charged helium ions but also a small number of
     singly-charged helium ions ; and (4) interplanetary magnetic field had
     structures interpreted as filamentary “stringers” associated with solar
     coronal filaments seen during eclipses. (NASA Release 66-87)
April 19-21: Nine NASA astronauts visited MSFC for briefing on Saturn IB
     launch vehicles to be used in initial manned Apollo missions. Briefing-
     including tours, hardware descriptions, design philosophy, structural
     and propulsion tests, and flight data from Feb. 26 AS-201 flight-was
     attended by Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, James A. McDivitt, David R.
     Scott, Russell Schweickart, Edward H. White 11, Frank Borman,
     Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Roger Chaffee, and Walter Cunningham.
      (MSFC Release 66-79)
April 20: COSMOS cxv scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by
     U.S.S.R. “to continue space research,” Tass reported. Satellite was said
     to have an apogee of 294 km. (183 mi.); perigee of 190 km. (118 mi.);
     period, 89.3 min. ; and inclination, 65”. Equipment was functioning
     normally. (Tass, 4/20/66)
  International Union of Electrical Workers acceded to Government request
     to remove pickets at KSC from entrance gates used by building trades
                                                                         145
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     workers. Electricians had struck for higher wages April 18 after expira-
     tion of contract with United Technology Center. (NYT, 4/21/66, 27)
April 20: H. Julian Allen, Director of NASA Ames Research Center, was among
     27 elected to National Academy of Engineering “in recognition of their
     outstanding contributions to engineering theory and practice or to the
     pioneering of new and developing fields of technology.” (NAE Release,
     4/20/66)
0 GSFC turned over all Tiros photographs to the Environmental Science
     Services Administration (ESSA) for archival purposes. (GSFC Historian)
  BOAC announced grounding of two more Boeing 707 jetliners for repair of
     tail assembly cracks; four 707’s had been grounded April 19. (Wash.
     Eve. Star, 4/20/66, A10)
April 21: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR reached
     96-mi. (154-km.) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment designed
     to observe ultraviolet emissions from Venus. Scattered light produced
     by solar illumination of ITT startracker optics prevented acquisition and
     lock-on of target Venus, but good data were obtained on Lyman-alpha.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
   Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Richard B. Russell (D-Ga.)
     announced unanimous vote to increase by $167.9 million DOD’S FY 1967
     budget “to provide ‘long-lead-time’ production items for the Nike-X
     antimissile missile system.” Senator Russell said Committee’s decision
     had been influenced by information reported April 21 in Washington
     Post on Soviet missile-defense buildup and “by the unanimous recom-
     mendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to go ahead, during recent closed-
     door testimony.” Administration budget had already carried $447
     million for missile defense, (Rosenfeld, Wash. Post, 4/21/66, AI;
     Norris, Wash. Post, 4/22/66, A4; Senate Rpt. 1136, 4/25/66)
0 NASA Administrator James E. Webb praised development of the Nerva

     nuclear rocket engine following a tour of AEC’S Las Vegas, Nev., test
     site. He observed the nuclear engine was capable of producing longer-
     duration flights than engine systems in current use. (WI, Houston
     Chron., 4/22/66)
  NASA awarded $50,000, 60-day fixed-price contracts to Douglas Aircraft
     Corp., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering
     Corp. to perform definition and preliminary design studies and evaluate
     plan to make spent Saturn V S-IVB stage hydrogen tank habitable for
     manned space missions of up to 30 days. Contracts would be managed
     by MSFC. (MSFC Release 66-83)
0 Immediate need for an emergency space rescue squad was underlined by
     the curtailed March 16 GEMINI VIII mission and by electrical malfunction
     aboard OAO I successfully orbited April 8, William Hines asserted in the
     Washington Evening Star. “Without such capability,” Hines suggested,
     “large sums of money and vast amounts of scientific-technolo ical
     effort are being dissipated, and it is only a matter of time before bves
     will be placed in jeopardy. . . . Where manned missions are concerned,
                                                                  .. .  In the
     a rescue capability is not merely desirable but imperative.
     next five years somewhere between 25 and 30 missions involving about
     75 astronauts will be flown. Durations will range from three to 45 days,
     and mission objectives will reach as far as the moon’s surface. At the
     most conservative estimate there are probably a dozen chances for
     something to go seriously wrong on a typical mission. To put it another
     way, there are somewhere between 300 and 500 accidents waiting to
146               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     happen in the next five years-any one of them potentially tragic.”
     (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/66, A14)
April 21: U.S.S.R. announced annual Lenin prizes. Winners in science
     included anonymous space experts responsible for LUNA IX and LUNA x
     missions. LUNA IX made the first softlanding on the moon Feb. 3;
     LUNA x became the first manmade satellite of the moon April 3. Prize
     commemorated Lenin’s birthday and was considered highest in the
     Soviet Union. (A€’,   Wash. Post, 4/22/66)
April 22: AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, who directed the
     development of USAF’S strategic missile force, would retire this summer,
     the White House announced. General Schriever, retiring for personal
     reasons, would be replaced Aug. 31 by L/G James Ferguson, USAF
     Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development. (AP, NYT,
     4/23/66, 5; Norris, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, A2)
* USAF OV3-I satellite carrying AFCRL-instrumented 152-lb. payload was
     launched into polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB with Scout booster
      (SLV-1A).  Reported orbital parameters were: apogee, 3,557 mi. (5,724
     km.); perigee, 219 mi. (352 km.); period, 152 min.; inclination, 82”.
     Objectives were measurement of charged particle distribution in earth’s
     magnetic field and acquisition of radiation intensity data for comparison
     with AFCRL satellite measurements in 1960-1963. Previously scheduled
     for April 19, launch had been postponed after detection of malfunction
     in launch vehicle’s ground support system. (OAR Release; U S . Aeron. &
     Space Act., 1966, 150)
e ComSatCorp Chairman of the Board James McCormack said ComSatCorp
     was contacting communications and broadcasting companies to get
     largest possible consensus on costs and technological feasibility of
     domestic multipurpose communications satellite system, and would
     present plans to FCC by Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/66, E?; Bishop,
      WSJ, 4/25/66, 32)
  LUNA x comdeted its 150th orbit of the moon and marked Lenin’s birthdav
  ~-
     by beamfng back to earth the Communist anthem, “Internationale.”
      (UPI, NYT, 4/23/66, 5)
  Graduate Research Center of the Southwest president Dr. Lloyd V.
     Berkner addressed MSC employees. Outlining postlunar landing e2plora-
     tion, Dr. Berkner said: “The very broad strategic objectives for the
     exploration of the solar system are clearly outlined in the National
     Academy of Sciences Summer Study that was done last summer. . . .
      It is urgent and imperative that this study be adopted, or something
      like it, as our major basic strategy beyond the moon. The first job is to
      adopt a national strategy. This is not just a decision of NASA; is a
                                                                        it
      decision of the administration, of the Congress, of the American people.
         “And second it is urgent and imperative that this study be translated
     by joint actions of NASA, National Academy of Sciences and Ameri-
                                the
      can scientists into specific tactical plans for a specific program with
      dollars attached to it. For example, in my opinion, it makes little
      sense to undertake the first Martian landing without some precedent
      exploratory steps. We must first orbit and map the planet and ascertain
      where a landing would be profitable.
         “To do the planetary exploration job effectively, we now need a
      tactical program of specific flights on specific dates with the instru-
  . mentation necessary to plan to accomplish those tasks. I remind you
      that what we are doing today was planned in 1961. And yet, when we
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                         141

    get to our planetary program in the 1970’s,we don’t have corresponding
     specific plans.” He reemphasized the urgency by saying: “If we are to
     achieve in the planetary exploration of the future in an intelligent way,
     in light of the objectives of the Space Act, the time has come to get
     our scientists started now. Your vehicfe program is already ahead of us.”
     Dr. Berkner said that the long-range program should meet certain
     specifications: “(1j step-by-step advancement of experiments in the
    proper order; (2) use o€ the right vehicles to carry out the experiments;
     (3) effective use of Saturn capabilities, from unmanned missions to the
     ultimate manned landing on Mars and perhaps Venus, and (4)proper
    phasing-in of smaller vehicles with the larger ones, and reasonable
    time/cost programming.” (MSC Roundup, 5/27/66, 3)
Aprtl 22-23: JPL Director Dr. William H Pickering received American
                                              ,
     Philosophical Society’s Magellanic Gold Medal at society’s annual
    meeting in Philadelphia “for his achievements in the fields of astronomy
     and navigation.” (NYT, 4/24/66,83)
        AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg told APS that a technological
    society must give the humanities economic freedom in order to assure
     development as a “human” suciety. Discussing role of National
    Foundation on the Arts and Humanities, established in September 1965,
     Seaborg said: “The new support of the arts and humanities by the
    Federal Government should help break down some of the artificial
    barriers we have created between the world of science and technology
                                               .
     and that of the arts and humanities. . though science may have a
     pervading and ascendin in3uence in our lives today, there cannot be
                              f
     any clearcut division etween science and nonscience in interdis-
     ciplinary civilization which a livable future world will require.” (CR,
     5/4/66, 3-4)
April 23: Saturn V 2nd stage test vehcle (S-11-T) was successfully captive-
     fired for 15 sec. at MSFC’s Mississi pi Test Facility in first test of flight-
                                          P
     weight, all systems S-I1 stage. 33- t.-dia., 81-ft.-long stage-largest and
     most powerful liquid-oxygen/liquid-hydrogenstage known-developed
     3.-million-lbs, thrust from five 1-2 engines. Test also marked first
     operational use of MTF, (MSFC Release 66-84)
  Russian space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, in orbit Feb. 22-March 16
     aboard COSMOSCX, appeared on Moscow television with Soviet physician-
     cosmonaut Dr. Boris Yegorov, who told viewers that “the dogs had
     undergone many tests and were found quite normal.” The dogs, who
     has passed through Van Allen radiation belts during each o f 330
     revolutions, would be adopted as pets by workers at Russia’s space
     center, Dr. Yegorov said. (Taw, 4/23/66)
  Materials Research Center at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute-$1.6
     million, NASA-sponsored facility-and adjoining Engineering Science
     Research Building-built with Rensselaer funds and matching NSF
     grant-were dedicated at Troy, N.Y. Princi a l speaker at ceremony,
                                                     P
     which climaxed two-day “Man and Materia s” symposium, w s NASA      a
     Administrator James E. Webb. Rensselaer had received first grant
     under NASA program for establishment of interdisciplinary centers at
     selected universities. (RPI Release, 4/2/66)
a In an articfe in Krasnaya Zuezda, retired Soviet MJG of Aviation B.
                                      .
     Teplinskiy said: “In 1961. . at the m.SJ Defense Department, a
     special command for developing weapons systems for the air forces
                                                                       ..
     was created. Controi of military space plans was assigned it. . It was
148                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




April 23: NASA Mississippi Test Facility conducts its first test firing, a 15-sec. test of the
Saturn V S-I1 stage.


     at that time that Lt. Gen. Bernard Schriever, who then headed the
     Air Force Systems Command and is a well-known fanatic advocate of
     the militarization of outer space, stated: ‘Our military space require-
     ments cannot be fully satisfied by the civilian programs now being
                                     ...
     worked out or planned.’
        “Not all people agreed with this. Prominent American scientist
     Dr. Hugh Dryden declared shortly after his appointment as NASA
     deputy administrator: ‘I have learned-I would like to say I regret to
     have learned-that it is assumed in some circles that if our outer
                     .
     space work . . has no military potential we will not receive correspond-
     ing financial support from any future administrations or congresses.”
     (Krusnaya Zvezda, 4/23/66)
April 24: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in an article written for AP,
     discussed national power in space: “The question that arises is this:
     in terms of national power, is there going to be a real contest for the
     control of this new environment? Is there going to be a shared mastery
     or an effort at domination?
        “The danger is clear in having such a very great power available to
     only one nation, and especially to the Communist nations who have a
     strong, determined drive to dominate the world, to enforce their views
                     ..
     on others..
        “The US. space program gives us a mastery of the space environ-
     ment. It gives us the knowledge which permits us to judge what is in
                                                                           149
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     our own interest. It gives us the assurance that we are going to be at
     the decision table when the big decisions of the future are made. It
     also gives us the image of a ‘can do’ nation, the image of a nation that
     is not going to focus on pure commercialism or fail to respond to a
     great challenge. It gives us also the power to exploit space.” (Text)
April 24: Jet aircraft operating from Washington National Airport. (Wash.
     Sun. Star, 4/24/66, Al)
0 U.S.S.R. began series of carrier rocket tests in two areas of the Pacific

     west and northwest of Midway Island. (AP, NYT, 7/5/66,28)
April 25: Third MOLNIYA I satellite was orbited by U.S.S.R. to assist “develop-
     ment and further improvement of a satellite radio and TV communica-
     tion system (SOVCOMSAT) ,” Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee,
     39,500 km. (24,545 mi.) ; perigee, 499 km. (310 mi.) ; period, 1 hrs.
                                                                         1
     50 min.; inclination, 64.5”. Equipment included broadcasting system
     “as well as instruments of a command-measuring set, an orientation
     system, orbital correction devices, and power supply” for “further
     development of onboard systems, satellite equipment, and onground
     tracking facilities.” (Tass, Pruvdu, 4/26/66, 6, USS-TTrans.)
0 Five-man Observatory Class Spacecraft Review Board had been appointed
     by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space
     Science and Applications. Robert F. Garbarini, NASA Deputy Associate
     Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering),
     would head the board, established to “study all phases of design,
     development, testing and space operations procedures of the orbiting
     observatory spacecraft.” Other Review Board members were: F. John
     Bailey, Chief, Flight Safety Office, MSC;   Jack N. James, Director for
     Lunar and Planetary Programs, JPL; Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy
     Director, ERC; and Francis B. Smith, Assistant Director, LaRc. (NASA
     Release 66-91)
0 Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful

     launch of 240-lb. meteorological sounding rocket from Uchinoura
     launching range in Kyushu, southern Japan. Single-stage rocket
      reached 40.8-mi. (65.7-km.) altitude in 2 min. 4 sec. Data were tele-
      metered to ground station. (Wush. Post, 4/22/66, B2)
0 NASA would ask $1 billion for Apollo Applications programing in FY 1968

      to prevent a lapse in manned space flight by offsetting reduction in
      expenditures and aerospace industry manpower for Project Apollo,
      William Normyle reported in Aviation Week. He continued: “NASA was
      permitted by the Administration to request only $41.9 million for
      Apollo Applications in Fiscal 1967. Some of N S ’ advanced planners
                                                      A As
      argued for $500 million in the Fiscal 1967 budget now under considera-
      tion, but the agency went to the Bureau of the Budget with a request
      for only $270 million, which was reduced to the $41.9 million.”
      (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/25/66, 30)
0 Object described as green and yellow with a long fiery tail-later       deter-
      mined by scientists to be a meteor traveling northwest at 80- to 100-mi.
      altitude-was sighted by thousands of people in eastern US. and
      southeastern Canada. Scientists estimated that meteor, which was
      observed at around 8:15 p.m. EST, might have ranged in size from size
      of a football to several hundred pounds, and had probably disintegrated
      between Albany, N.Y., and Montreal. (Tush. Post, 4/26/66, A l ; NYT,
      4/27/66, 24)
150                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

April 25: Referring to NASA-DOD decision of 1964 to exchange experts in each
     other’s programs, Aviation Week reported the score to date: 184 USAF,
     78 Army, 25 Navy, and six USMC officers assigned to NASA; transferred
     to DOD was one NASA official, Dr. Michael Yarymovich, now technical
     director of USAF’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program. (Av. Wk.,
     4/25/66, 25)
* Federal mediators in San Francisco announced interim agreement in
     wage dispute between International Union of Electrical Workers and
     United Technology Center. Striking electricians would return to work
     by April 28; negotiations for a new contract would continue until
     May 20. AP dispatches from KSC reported union, which had limited
     picketing to one gate April 20, had resumed picketing all five gates,
     charging “bad faith on the part of UTC.” (WI, Wash. Post, 4/26/66, A6;
     A€’,NYT, 4/26/66,14)
  Two controversial theories about the earth’s crust to be tested by the
     Mohole geological project were reviewed in Science. One theory held
     that material flows slowly but constantly up from deep in the earth and
     then spreads out across the ocean floors. Second theory was that the
     earth‘s magnetic field reverses periodically so that successive bands of
     rock would have alternate polarization, depending on the time the
     molten material had frozen and locked in its magnetism. Drills would
     attempt to probe different rock bands to determine if their charges
     were different and when they were formed. First field trials were
     scheduled for early 1968. (Science, 4/25/66)
* Dr. Wallace J. Eckert, Columbia Univ. prof. of celestial mechanics and
     director of IBM’S Watson Laboratory, received National Academy of
     Sciences’ 19th James Craig Watson Medal “for his pioneering con-
     tributions to the scientific application of electronic computers and to
     the theory of the motion of the moon.” (NAS Release, 3/29/66)
April 25-28: American Physical Society met in Washington, D.C. Geo-
     physicist S. K. Runcorn, Univ. of Newcastle-upon-Tyne,U.K., suggested
     that Jupiter’s great red spot may be “the top of a 200-mi.-high column of
     ‘stagnant air’ carried along” by a meteorite crater in the planet’s
     hydrogen surface. This view would contradict a widely held notion that
     the spot is associated with a high mountain. “We don’t believe in
     mountain ranges on Jupiter, at Newcastle,” Runcorn said, explaining
     that Jupiter’s crust would not support a mountain. He noted that the
     large surface feature connected with the stagnant air column might be a
     depression caused by impact of an asteroid or “a moonlet.” Runcorn
     said explanation of red spot as column of gases supported theory of
     Jupiter’s fluid metallic hydrogen core. (APS Release, 4/20/66; S’      imons,
      Wash. Post, 4/27/66, A10; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/66, A3)
        Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, examined management
     role of scientifically trained people and invited their participation in
     the “governmental decision-making process.” Brown, a former physi-
     cist, attributed rising influence of technocrats “to the increasing
     technical content of modern life” and to “the less narrowly technical
     orientation of the technically trained.” He noted transition from part-
     time to full-time scientific advisers in the late 1950’s as “one of the major
     lasting consequences of the Soviet Sputnik achievement.” (Text)
        NASA’s I, launched Sept. 4, 1964, and EXPLORER XXVIII (IMP-c),
                OGO
     launched May 29, 1965, had yielded data essential to evolution of an
     accurate physical description of the universe, according to paper on
                                                                      151
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

low-energy cosmic rays presented at APS meeting by Dr. Donald E.
Hagge of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Hagge noted satellite
measurements and recent “quiet sun year” had given physicists “an
                                .
unprecedented opportunity . . for meaningful cosmic ray research.”
High-apogee satellites permitted measurement of low-energy particles
‘‘not directly observable on the surface of the earth” due to protective
atmosphere and influence of earth’s magnetic field. Minimum of ccsolar
modulation”-suppression of galactic particles by sun’s magnetic field
upon attempted penetration of solar system-meant that ‘particles
observed during 1965 most nearly represent the true situation outside
the solar system.” (GSFC Release, 3/27/66)
    J. A. Simpson of Enrico Fermi Institute, Univ. of Chicago, reported
these satellite experiments had revealed “new features in the cosmic
radiation regarding the energy distribution, the chemical and isotopic
composition of the cosmic rays at hitherto unattainable energies.”
Origin of “ultra-low-energy nuclei,” which reached vicinity of earth
during 1965 period of minimum solar modulation, may be supernovae,
Simpson suggested. (Fermi Institute Release, 4/27/66)
    Simpson and J. J. O’Gallagher, also of Fermi Institute, presented
results of study of solar flare particle propagation based on simul-
taneous observations by MARINER IV space probe and Imp satellites.
Evidence showed that “protons are confined by interplanetary magnetic
fields to narrow channels extending outward from the sun” and
 “particles in these channels are carried around the sun by magnetic
fields which co-rotate with the sun.” (Fermi Institute Release, 4/29/66)
    Paul J. Coleman, Jr., of UCLA,   presented results of “a recently com-
pleted statistical analysis of records of the magnetic field and plasma
velocity, obtained in late 1962 with instruments aboard the spacecraft
MARINER 11,” including Pcexperimentalevidence that [hydromagnetic]
 waves do exist in interplanetary space.” Discussing properties of solar
 wind, Coleman said MARINER 11% measurements had indicated average
 temperature of positive ions in plasma was about 200,000”K. He.noted
 that its high temperature and low density “suggest that the plasma is
 completely ionized. ” (APSRelease, 4/26/66)
     Discussing importance of their NASA-sponsored stellar wind study,
 S. H. Lam of Princeton Univ. and G. Sandri of Aeronautical Research
 Associates of Princeton, Inc., said: “The cosmic radiation that reached
 the Earth, or any satellite that has been sent into space by man, has
 been attenuated, or as the specialists say ‘modulated,’ by the solar wind.
 Therefore, we cannot measure directly the constitution of the cosmic
 radiation as it exists in interstellar space unaffected by the solar wind.
 Yet, to be able to understand the origin of the cosmic radiation, we
 must know its true constitution in interstellar space. A proper under-
 standing of the solar wind will greatly facilitate this difficult task.”
 Lam and Sandri presented electrostatic mode1 for stellar winds at APS
 meeting. (APS Release, 4/29/66)
     Discovery of first celestial body, “Cygnus GR-1,” identifiable as a
  “point source of high energy gamma radiation,” was announced to
 APS by Univ. of Rochester physicists J. G. M. Duthie, Roland W. Cobb,
 and Joseph Stewart. Discovery of source, which coincided with a region
  already identified as an x-ray source known as “Cygnus XR-1,” climaxed
  five years of research sponsored by NASA and NSF. (Univ. of Rochester
  Release, 4/29/66)
152               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

         Describing the Alfven Propulsion Engine (Ape) in a paper on hydro-
     magnetic propulsion and drag in space vehicles, M. A. Ruderman, New
     York Univ., said: “A source of electrical power (nuclear, or solar
     panels) sufficient to power one hundred common light bulbs could
     raise the altitude of a 5-ton satellite about 100 miles in a week of
     operation. By allowing the motor to act as a generator the orbital
     energy of this same satellite can be converted into electrical energy,
     contributing sufficient drag to lower the satellite altitude by almost
     15 miles per day.” (APS Release, 4/26/66)
         Cal Tech physicist H. Victor Neher described latitude survey of
     cosmic rays: “Once we satisfied ourselves that instruments sent by
     balloons up to altitudes of 140,000 feet, near the earth’s magnetic poles,
     gave answers directly comparable to those found by Mariners I1 and
     IV, it became less important to depend on spacecraft for our data. This
     was good news because we have a flexibility and control of balloon
     flights that are not possible with spacecraft.” (APS Release, 4/28/66)
April 25-28: Radiotelescopes trained on radio galaxies might discover the
     quark, which had been proposed as the most elementary particle, Purdue
     Univ. physicists C. S. Shen and T. K. Kuo theorized to APS. Suggested
     two years ago by Dr. Murray Gell-Mann of Cal Tech, the quark was
     described by Shen as “a very, very elegant, beautiful theory. There
     are so many elementary particles. Physicists are all confused as to how
     they are constructed. If they are all constructed from quarks, it is very
     simple.” (Clark, NYT, 4/26/66, 28; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/29/66, A14)
April 26: First test transmissions of long-range radio and television com-
     munications between Moscow and the Far East via third MOLNIYA I
     comsat, launched April 25, were successful. Pictures were of good
     quality. Tass said the satellite would be used to ‘‘further refine the
     system of long-range, two-way television and telephone-telegraph radio
     communications and pilot operations.” (Tass, 4/27/66)
0 COSMOS CXVI scientific satellite was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R.
     CC
        to continue outer space research,” Tass announced. Satellite was said
     to have an apogee of 478 km. (297 mi.); perigee of 294 km. (183 mi.);
     period, 92 min.; and inclination, 48’ 25 min. Equipment was function-
     ing normally. (Tass, Kmsnuyu Zvezdu, 4/28/66, 1, USS-T Trans.)
0 NASA Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Son-

     miani, Pakistan, carried acoustic-grenade payload to 118-mi. (190-km.)
     altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper
     Atmosphere Research Committee (SUPARCO) and British National
      Space Research Committee. Grenades did not eject, but data were
      obtained from trimethyl-aluminum (TU) cloud release and spectrum
     photography. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 ComSatCorp requested FCC permission to construct a t6-million high-

      capacity earth station at St. Croix, Virgin Islands, to “serve the expand-
      ing needs of the Caribbean area, and provide for reliable service
      between the United States and Puerto Rico, South America, Europe
      and Asia.”
          I n a separate request, ComSatCorp petitioned FCC to deny AT&T’S and
      ITT Communications, 1nc.-Virgin Islands’ applications to build and
      operate a cable between U.S. mainland and St. Thomas, Virgin Islands.
       (ComSatCorp Release)
  USAF selected Martin Co. to develop SV-5P manned lifting-body vehicle
      to explore flight characteristics and atmospheric maneuverability of
                                                                         153
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    wingless lifting bodies. Initially, the S,OOO-lb., 24-ft. wingless vehicle
    would be dropped from a B-52 bomber at 40,000- to 50,000-ft. altitude
    at 500 mph for powerless, gliding flight, landing at Edwards AFB at 120
     to 150 mph; in later powered tests, it would accelerate to mach 2
    speeds at 100,000-ft. altitude and then maneuver to landing. Airfoil
     shape of vehicle, which resembled “a delta shaped porpoise with
     vertical fins,” provided lift normally derived from wings. Future
     vehicles, developed as part of AFSC’S Piloted Low Speed Test (Pilot)
     project, would be launched to ferry supplies and crews between earth
     and orbiting space stations. (DOD Release 343-66; Wilford, NYT,
     4/27/66,22)
April 26: NASA convair 990 jet aircraft began ARC-managed, preliminary
     flights in support of NASA’s   Nimbus C weather satellite scheduled for
     launch from WTR May 13. Four GSFC experiments installed in jet would
     test new spacecraft sensors for weather measurement and collect data
     at altitudes over 40,000 ft. for comparison with data obtained by Nimbus
     spacecraft over the same areas. (NASA Release 66-107)
  DDR&E Deputy Director (Strategic & Space Systems) Daniel J. Fink, in an
     address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., said:
     “We in the Department of Defense have always looked upon space less
     as a matter of adventure and more as a matter of necessity; we explore
     its potential not because it is ‘there’ but because we have needs that
     are ‘here.’ It is not that we have identified fundamentally new missions
     since the early days of our space effort. We have, however, begun to
     recognize new applications for space-based systems, particularly in the
     tactical field. The opportunities are tremendous-and sometimes so
     are the problems. We are no longer as enamored with the ‘how’ of
     developing a satellite system. We now take a hard look at the ‘why’ of
     choosing one approach to solving a military need over another-and
     this most assuredly includes competing earth-based systems as well.
      We have come to recognize that our launch vehicle capability coupled
     with better sensors permits us to do more missions from synchronous
      orbit. We also are beginning to sense that there is a high potential for
      combining operational functions in a multiple-purpose satellite where
      common sensor packages and orbital parameters exist.” (DOD Release
      341-66)
  Editorial comment on retirement of AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A.
                                               .
      Schriever: ‘‘Few men had a larger hand . . in developing the scientific
      ‘mix’ of manned aircraft and missiles that is today’s US. Air Force.
         “From the day he was put in charge of our ballistic missile program
      in 1954 until today he has been the key man in Air Force research
      and development.
         “Only last August he was given what is probably the single most
      important scientific assignment in Air Force history-developing the
      military Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL). . .” ( Wush. Daily News,
                                                      .
      4/26/66)
* LaRC would test parachutes for possible landing of instrumented unmanned
      capsules on Mars beginning in summer 1966, in support of NASA’s
      Voyager planetary exploration project. Parachutes would be carried by
      balloons and sounding rockets to 130,000-ft. altitudewhere thin
      earth atmosphere simulates Martian atmosphere-and would then be
      deployed behind test units accelerated to mach 1.2 in level flight [see
      Aug. 301. (NASA   Release 66-90; LaRC Release)
154              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

April 27: Meteorological sounding rocket launched from Chamical, Argen-
     tina, was first in series of launches planned for NASA-Argentine Space
    Commission (CNIE) cooperative program. CNIE had scheduled 13
    launches €or 1966 as part of Inter-American Experimental Meteoro-
    logical Rocket Network (EXAMETNET), in which Argentina, Brazil, and
    US. would cooperate to establish in the Western Hemisphere a north-
    south chain of stations for coordinated sounding rocket launchings to
     obtain experimental data on weather patterns. Brazil launched first
    rocket under EXAMETNET program from Natal, Brazil, Jan. 12. (NASA
     Release 66-103)
  JPL 100-kw. radar was flown successfully on NASA Convair 990 at 3-6-mi.
     (5-10-km.) altitude in preliminary test for rocket flight [see May 91.
     (JPL Release, 6/26/66)
0 Third MOLMYA r communications satellite, launched into elliptical orbit

    by U.S.S.R. April 25, transmitted television broadcast from Vladivostok.
    Transmission of televised May Day celebration from Moscow to
    Vladivostok via satellite had been scheduled for May 1. All equipment
     was functioning normally. (Pruvda, 4/28/66, 4, USS-T Trans.)
  Soviet press reported that Belka and Strelka, dog passengers on U.S.S.R.’s
    SPUTNIK v in orbit more than 24 hrs. Aug. 19-20, 1960, were alive anp
     well. (AP, rush. Post, 4/28/66, B7)
  Army Corps of Engineers had established Extra-Terrestrial Research
     Agency, headed by geologist Alice S. Allen, to coordinate studies of
    lunar surface in anticipation of moon exploration requirements.
     Comprehensive study of such surface properties as soil density, light
     reflectivity, and thermal and electrical conductivity, Corps of Engineers
    believed, would permit deductions about problems of “walking,
     digging, and moving of surface loads . . . providing shelter, water supply
    and necessary construction materials and tools. ” (Henry, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 4/27/66, C3)
o Properly managed, the value of the returns from Government investment
    in research and technology outweighed by “orders of‘ magnitude” the
    investment itself, Dr. Chalmers W. Sherwin, deputy director (research
    and technology), Defense Department Research and Engineering. told a
    meeting in Chicago jointly sponsored by the Patent Law Assn. of Chicago
    and the Chicago Assn. of Commerce and Industry. Sherwin said the
    value of R&D had been confirmed by “Project Hindsight,” a study
     covering such systems as the Mark 46 torpedoes, Minuteman 11, Hound
    Dog, Polaris, Sergeant, and Lance missiles. “We are not sure whether
    good ideas attract ‘good’ (that is, flexible) money, or if innovative
     organizations just ‘happen’ to always have such money. Available tech-
     nology money simply must be spread all over the place in little pockets
     near the need. It is not the ivory towers which need flexible money the
    most, it is rather the organizations heavily involved in real problems-
     particularly in the early stages of development of new systems.” (Text)
0 A surface-based deep-sea search and retrieval system was described by its

     inventor, Willard N. Bascom, president of Ocean Science and Engineer-
     ing, Inc., in an interview with William Hines of Washington Evening
     Star. Bascom, holder of a patent on C c ~ ~ ~ said ~his system could
                                                         ~~     ’y,
     be ready in a year and that “total cost of a ‘SEARCH’ vessel ready for
     operation anywhere in the world would not exceed $Y million.” He cited
     ‘presently unrecoverable losses of spacecraft and experimental weapons
     as an urgent justification for developing a deep-sea retrieval system,”
                                                                             155
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     and said that he had offered “SEARCH” to the Navy. “Similar pro osds
     have been submitted to the Air Force and NASA,” Bascom sa$ His
     system, an outgrowth of the Mohole deep-sea drilling project, would use
     scanning devices and grappling tools suspended from a converted cargo
     ship. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/66, A7)
April 27: FAA had total of 9,566 U S . airports, heliports, and seaplane bases
     on record at end of 1965, 76 more than 1964 tally. Texas, with 846
     landing facilities, led other states. (FAA Release 66-43)
  Dr. Eric A. Walker, president of Pennsylvania State Univ. and chairman
     of the National Science Board, was elected president of the National
     Academy of Engineering. (NAE News)
         Dr. Vamevar Bush, Honorary Chairman of the Corporation, MIT,
     received the National Academy of Engineering’s first Founders’ Medal
     at 2nd annual NAE meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Bush, former pres-
     ident of Carnegie Institution of Washington, director of Office of
     Scientific Research and Development during World War 11, and NACA
     Chairman 1939-41, was cited as “the engineer who mobilized this
     country’s scientific and technical resources for war and created the blue-
     print for the post-war cooperation of science and government.” (NAE
     Release, 4/19/66)
0 About 25,000 acres at KSC had been set aside as a national wildlife refuge,

     the National Geographic Society revealed. Cape Kennedy and nearby
     Cocoa, Fla., were especially rich in bird life; a record total of 204 species
     had been tabulated by the Audubon Society. (NYT, 4/27/66, 52)
April 28: NASA issued a fact sheet on US. international space programs which
     listed criteria applied to determine value and acceptability of cooperative
     arrangements in space activity: (1) cooperative project must have
     scientific validity and mutual interest; (2) cooperative project must be
     conducted openly, with the scientific results being made freely available
     to the world scientific community; (3) each participant must accept
     financial responsibility for its own contribution to the project.
         Since their inception, NASA’s international programs had involved 71
     countries or separate jurisdictions and had included satellite projects,
     individual experiments flown on NASA satellites, sounding rocket in-
     vestigations, and a variety of programs in which foreign ground-based
     observations were coordinated with flight projects.
         US. had concluded bilateral agreements providing for launch of 14
     scientific satellites instrumented and, in all but two cases, engineered
     abroad. Six of these satellites had already been successfully launched
      (one each for France and Italy and two each for Canada and U.K.).
      Other satellites would be contributed by the European Space Research
      Organization (ESRO), U.K., Canada, Italy, and Germany.
         U.S. had also opened its own satellites, manned and unmanned, to
     participation by foreign experimenters. Sixteen such experiments had
     been accepted for flight.
         Some 17 countries had entered into agreements with NASA for one or
     more cooperative sounding rocket projects. Such investigations had been
      initiated by both U.S. and foreign proposals. They had accounted for
      roughly 150 launchings in a five-year period with rockets ranging
      widely in size and type, from boosted Darts and Arcas to Nike combina-
      tions, Aerobees, Shotputs, British Skylarks, and French Centaures.
         Ten cooperating countries made substantial contributions to exper-
      imental communications satellite work by constructing and operating
156               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    overseas ground terminals used for TV and radio demonstrations. Con-
    ventional weather observations in 42 countries helped interpretation of
    cloud-cover photographs from weather satellites.
        A 1962 agreement with U.S.S.R. had resulted in: (1) one-way com-
    munications demonstrations using ECHO 11, (2) some exchange of
    ground-based magnetic field data in anticipation of an agreed exchange
     of satellite data, and (3) exchange of conventional weather data over a
    special communications channel set up between Washington and
    MOSCOW a shared-cost basis pending the availability of satellite data
               on
    from U.S.S.R. (Text)
April 28: European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO) ended three-
    day, seven-nation Inter-ministerial Conference in Paris without reaching
    decisive conclusions. Issues involved were: (1) Western Europe’s
     independent space role competitive with US. and U.S.S.R.; (2) extent
     of collaboration to keep pace with technological advance; and (3) con-
     tinuation of initial ELDO project, three-stage Europa-1 rocket. Cost
     estimate had more than doubled to $420 million, and recent proposal to
     move Europa-1 into space communications would add $60 million.
     Another meeting was scheduled for June. (Mooney, NYT, 4/29/66, 8;
    UPI, Wush. Post, 4/27/66, A15; NYT, 4/28/66, 24)
  Fire in altitude chamber used to simulate environment of Apollo Command
     Module (Cm) at AiResearch Manufacturing Div. Torrance (Calif.)
    Facility severely damaged Apollo Environmental Control System, which
     had undergone 480 hrs. 37 min. of a 500-hr.-duration qualification test.
     Investigating board concluded that probable cause of ignition had been
     failure of electrical heater tape installed as part of the test set-up, and
                                                             .. .
     that some “ground test equipment and materials used          were not suit-
     able for application in the vacuum and 5 psia 100% oxygen environ-
     ments.” Board recommended improvement in selection of ccsome          mate-
     rials used in the Environmental Control System and Apollo Command
     Module” and pointed IO a “potential fire hazard from arcing or direct
     short circuits.” (Senate, Hearing, Apollo Accident, Pt. 1, 2/7/67, 32-4)
* NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried NRL-
     instrumented payload to 109-mi. (175-km.) altitude in experiment to
     photograph solar corona and disc and to measure solar disc variations
     and total solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Performance of rocket and in-
     strumentation was considered excellent. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* U.S. Army parachutists made first manned flight tests of NASA-developed
     parawing at Army’s John F. Kennedy Center for Special Warfare, Fort
     Bragg. Concept of maneuverable, parachute-like, flexible wing had been
     originated by LaRC scientist Francis M. Rogallo and Gertrude S. Rogallo
     in 1948, and on July 18,1963, NASA had awarded $35,000 to the inventors
     in recognition of their contribution to aeronautics. Parawing’s gliding
     and maneuvering capability results from aerodynamic lift developed in
     flight; conventional parachutes are drag devices and do not develop lift.
     Roughly triangular and about 400 sq. ft. in area, arawings used in tests
                                                       T:
     had been built to L ~ R Cspecifications and could e folded, packed, and
     deployed like parachutes. Army Aviation Materiel Laboratories (AVLABS)
     had recommended evaluation of parawings for personnel use, and NASA
     engineers and observers assisted Army with technical consultation.
      (NASA Release 66-106)
0 International Air Transport Assn. (IATA) director Knut Hammarskjold

     announced that most of IATA’S member airlines would accept U.S. State
                                                                           157
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Dept. demands for changes in Warsaw Convention-an international
    treaty which limited liability of airline involved in international-flight
     crash to $8,300 per passenger. U S . had demanded increase in liability
    to $75,000 per passenger and an absolute liability system under which
     carriers would be held liable for damages under all circumstances-even
     in cases of sabotage. (IATA News 12; Long, NYT, 4/28/66, 7; NYT,
     4/29/66, 42)
April 28: Zzvestia described how the Communist Party anthem was trans-
     mitted from LUNA x to earth: “Before the launching, an electronic gener-
     ator was installed in the artificial moon satellite to radiate in a definite
     sequence electric oscillations of the frequencies necessary for reproduc-
                                                 .
     ing selected fragments of the melody. . . The use of semi conductors
     made it possible to substantially reduce the weight and volume of the
     set and considerably increase the range of transmissions. The ‘music’
     signals of the set installed in the Luna 10 could be received even from
     the neighborhood of Venus.
         “The increase in range and the overcoming of cosmic noise were
     achieved by means of special narrow band-pass filters. The cycle of
     functioning of the instrument reproducing ‘Internationale’ consists of
     two parts: generating in a certain sequence signals of various frequencies
     -10 seconds-and        creating intervals before the repetition of the
     melody-45 seconds. The instrument is switched on by a signal from the
     earth.” (Tass, Zzvestia, 4/28/66)
0 New York Times reported hint by Leonid I. Dubrovin, chief of 11th

     U.S.S.R. Antarctic expedition, broadcast by radio from Mirny Antarc-
     tic station, “that the Soviet Union planned to use the Antarctic as a
     testing ground for manned landings on the moon.” Dubrovin had said
     fierce Antarctic conditions would test man’s adaptability and scientists
      could learn much there “that would help man to survive in the desolate
      conditions of the moon.” (NYT, 5/1/66, 15)
April 29: One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space
      tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone,
      Calif. Newest facility in NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN), 210,ft. dish
      antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest
      built for research by spacecraft. Operated by JPL, $14-million antenna
      would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars,
      Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedica-
      tion ceremonies, hosted by JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering,
      included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman
      of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P.
      Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee.
      NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C.
      Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisi-
      tion, also participated. (NASA Release 66-88; MSC Roundup, 4/29/66)
 0 NASA had selected three firms-Computer        Div. of Control Data Corp.,
      Industrial Electronics Div. of General Electric Co., and the Univac Div.
      of Sperry Rand Corp.-for        competitive negotiations leading to an
      estimated $20 million contract to provide a new computing system at
      MSFC. (MSFC Release 66-89)
 0 McDonnell Aircraft Corp. received a $2,071,882 cost-plus-incentive-fee

       contract from AFSC for work on Gemini spacecraft heat shield for Manned
       Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). (DOD Release 356-66)
158                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                  alO-ft.-diameter Deep Space Network antenna, dedicated at Goldstone,
April 29: NASA's
Calif., April 29.

April 30: Test pilots saved one of two U.S. $500 million XB-70 research air-
      craft during test flight from Edwards AFB by short circuiting two
      terminals with a paper clamp. When a jammed door prevented hydraulic
      extension of nose landing gear, Col. Joseph Cotton (USAF), co-pilot with
      North American Aviation, Inc.'s chief test pilot, Alvin S. White, re-
      moved paper clamp from his brief case and touched it to two pin termi-
      nals in a small relay unit, following instructions radioed by NAA ground
      engineers. Gear extended, and although main gear burst into flame as
                                                                            159
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     185-ft., delta-winged aircraft landed, NAA reported damage was light.
     (Wash. Post, 5/3/66, A l ; NYT, 5/4/66, 23)
April 30: President Johnson issued Executive Order 11277 designating Inter-
    national Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) as an
    organization “entitled to enjoy, from and after Au s t 20, 1964, all of
                                                          8“
    the privileges, exemptions, and immunities provide by Section 4(a)” of
     the International Organizations Immunities Act. (Text, Pres. Doc.,
    5/9/66,600)
  LUNA x completed 218th orbit of moon after a total of 120 radio com-
    munications periods, Tass announced. Equipment was functioning
    normally, and radio link was said to be stable. (Tass, 4/30/66)
  GISS marked fifth anniversary with lecture by Dr. Harold C. Urey, prof. of
     chemistry at large, Univ. of California, La Jolla. Reception preceding
    lecture had honored Dr. Urey’s 73rd birthday on April 28. (Goddard
     News, 5/30/66, 8)
During April: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA
     Administrator James E. Webb and AIAA President, sought to define the
     role of a professional and of a professional society in an editorial in
     Astronautics & Aeronautics.
         “. . .in my reading of the history of science and technology, I have
     been impressed by the key role of individuals who related science and
     technology to social needs. I would suggest that they are the profes-
     sionals, and that a true profession deliberately exercises science and
     technology to meet social needs.
         “Unlike most professional and technical societies, AIAA composes a
     wide variety of engineers and physical and life scientists. Yet definite
     social concerns bind us in a single profession-society’s expressed need
     to transport goods and people by atmosphericjlight and to explore space.
     .  . .” (A&A, 4/66, 30-31)
* Three US. airlines-all claiming to be Nation’s oldest-celebrated their
     40th anniversaries :United Airlines, April 6; Western Airlines, April 17;
     and Trans World Airlines (TWA), April 17. (UPI, NYT, 4/3/66)
* Study of buoyant Venus probes that could avoid the high temperaiures
     close to the planet’s surface by staying in static equilibrium at higher and
     cooler altitudes was published in Journal o Spacecraft and Rockets.
                                                      f
     Report, by F. R. Gross of the Goodyear Aerospace Corp., said probes
     would be launched by Saturn IB boosters, have isotensoid shape, and
     trail behind the instrument package. To withstand reentry heating, the
     balloons would be constructed from high-temperature fabrics or films
     now under development. To permit use of conventional instrumentation,
     probes would be designed to reach equilibrium at altitudes where the
     ambient temperature was 160” F. Weight analysis had shown that in the
     minimum temperature atmosphere, worthwhile biological and atmos-
     pheric experiments could be performed. (J/Spacecraft, 4/66, 582-7)
  CAB study revealed that in 153 U.S. air carrier accidents between 1955 and
      1964 caused by or resuIting in fire, 297 of 1,955 fatalities would not have
      occurred had fire been prevented. 1,628 persons died of impact forces,
     and 30 for otherreasons. All fire victims were involved in 13 of the acci-
     dents. Report recommended strengthening of structures to withstand
     impact, improvement of onboard and ground fire-fighting and rescue
      eqyipment, continued improvement of exit facilities, development of
      emergency communication systems, and more detailed passenger brief-
      ings. (CAB, BOSP, 7-6-3)
160               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

During April: Men and women engaged in the national space program should
   reverse defensive and apologetic attitudes toward the commitment to
    space exploration, according to Aerospace Industries Assn. President
    Karl G. Harr, Jr., addressing American Astronautical Society annual
   meeting in San Diego. “If we were the only nation in the world that had
    the capability to proceed into this new dimension, we should do it,”
   Harr said.
        “We should do it as part of a national renaissance on all fronts; for
                     .. .
   a great society         cannot confine its attention to certain challenges
                                                  .
    selected under past conditions, but must . . move comprehensively to
    accept the challenge of the future.
       “. . .As the huge challenge of space generates and consumes and then
    regenerates our material and human resources, so does it widen the
    scope of the environment in which our citizens will exist and make their
    contribution in the years ahead.” (Aerospace, 4/66, 7-9)
* Commentary on numerous reports of Ufo sighting:
       Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental
    Station, said Ufo’s were “purely American phenomena.” What people
    really see “is most likely weather balloons, meteorites, fireballs, re-entry
    of nose cones or other space debris. No trained observer or astronomer
    has ever reported such a sighting.”
        Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “Sir Bernard Lovell, the eminent
    British astronomer who runs the Jodrell Bank space observatory,
                               . ..
    believes that seeing UFOS       is strictly an American phenomenon.
        “Maybe he is right, but IF Americans are seeing UFOS, and IF there
    are visitations from outer space, it may be that the terrestrial visitors
    believe that only America is worth investigating.” (Phil. Eve. Bull.,
    4/26/66)
        Rev. Francis J. Heydon, professor of astronomy at Georgetown Univ.,
    said that people “are seeing things,” but that reports of flying saucers
    would ccdoubtlessincrease. The phenomenon of flying saucers is 100
    percent imagination.”
        Roscoe Drummond, Washington Post: “History is littered with
    examples of the most eminent scientists who were dead certain that
                               .
    things couldn’t be done . . and wrote with great displays of scientific
    evidence to prove that they couldn’t be wrong. We need more objective
     investigation than we have been getting. The scientific unbelievers may
     be right-but they could be totally wrong. They have been before.”
                                              .
        Howard Simons, Washington Post: “. . scientists point out that even
     traveling at the speed of light, which is 186,000 miles per second, who-
     ever it is that is buzzing America in a flying saucer or saucers would
     have to have left the nearest galaxy 50,000 years ago.” (AP, Wash. Eve.
     Star, 4/25/66, A2; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/18/66; Drummond, Wash. Post,
     4/6/66, A25; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/24/66, A25)
                                May 1966

May 1: NASA launched series of four Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding
    rockets within four hours from Natal, Brazil; Point Barrow, Alaska;
    Churchill Research Range; and NASA Wallops Station. GSFC acoustic-
    grenade experiment was designed to obtain temperature, pressure, den-
    sity, and wind data at 22-59-mi. (35-95-km.) altitudes during transition
    from wintertime westerly wind circulation to summertime easterly pat-
    tern. Natal launch was first in cooperative Brazil-US. project under
    agreement signed Nov. 15, 1965, by NASA and Brazilian Space Activities
    Commission (CNAE). (NASA Release 66-101; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched by USAF Cambridge
    Research Lab. from Churchill Research Range, with payload designed to
    measure total and component magnetic field values and primary electron
    and proton fluxes during a magnetic-absorption event. (M&R, 5/16/66,
    101
0 Parachutist Nick Piantanida suffered critical brain damage from oxygen

    cutoff and rapid decompression during emergency descent in a balloon
    gondola near Worthington, Minn. Gondola was electrically severed at
    57,000-ft. aItitude in response to Piantanida’s emergency cry, but
    parachute did not appreciably slow its descent until about 20,000 ft.
    USAF specialist later reported that pressure suit had failed, resulting in
    loss oi oxygen.
       Piantanida, in his third attempt to break world’s free-fall record, had
    planned to jump from 124,000 ft., free-fall to 7,000 ft., and then para-
    chute to earth, proving that trained parachutists could free-fall from
    100,000 ft. without health impairment and without stabilizing devices.
    (UPI, NYT, 5/2/66, 40; I . Post, 5/2/66)
                               F&
0 Moscow’s May Day parade featured no new military weapons for first time

    in three years. Soviet commentators emphasized increased mobility of
    missiles and claimed that antiaircraft rockets had “radioelectronic
    devices [which] home the rockets on their targets, even if they take
    evasive action or use radio jamming devices as a cover.” ( Wush. Post,
    5/2/66, Al, A14)
         31
0 NASA’s veteran astronauts would lose over $6,000 annually from sale of
    their personal stories if 19 new astronauts joined them in contract with
    Time, Inc., and FieId Enterprises Educational Corp., AP reported.
    Under terms of contract, Time, Inc., and Field paid $520,000 annually
    for equal division among ‘participating astronauts,” in return for
    exclusive rights to all unofficial personal stories and photos. (AP,Wmh.
    Post, 5/1/66, N8)

                                                                    161
162               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 1: Australian mobile space tracking station soon would begin seven-
    week, nonstop operation on Thursday Island off Cape York Peninsula,
    according to Australian News and Information Bureau announcement.
    Minister of Supply Denham Henty had said mobile station, part of
            Anna geodetic satellite project for measurement of size and shape
    NASA’s
    of the earth, would transmit data to U.S., via a fixed station near
    Adelaide, for analysis at Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Labora-
    tory. (NYT, 5/1/66, 70)
May 2 Resources of US. space program were minimal “while the Russians
      :
    apparently are increasing theirs,” Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate
    Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told a news conference at MTF.
    re
       Competition in space is not lessening with time, but rather is increas-
    ing. What is needed is a clear definition of where the nation is going in
    space after the moon is explored.” (Russell, Miami Her., 5/3/66)
0 Six-week NASA-sponsored exploration trip to search for plant life in Chile’s
    Atacama Desert-area resembling Martian terrain because of its extreme
    aridity-was begun by Richard W. Davies, JPL Advanced Studies Sec-
    tion, and two other JPL scientists. Explorers, who planned to send back
    1,000 lbs. of sandy soil for analysis, would concentrate on high plateau
    near Calama, 80 mi. inland and 5,000 to 8,000 ft. above sea level.
    Similar trip last year had yielded a microflora in top four inches of sand.
     (JPLRelease)
0 A Soviet victory in the race to achieve first manned lunar landing “would

    be a worldwide propaganda disgrace because we ourselves chose the
    target . . . [and] a crushing political blow at home to the President
    linked with it, which the present White House incumbent has been from
    the inception,” wrote William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets. He
    suggested a possible solution: “. . . extend the US.national goal prior to
    a manned lunar landing by either the US. or the Soviet Union. Then, if
    the Russians were the first to arrive on the Moon, we would be in a
    position to gracefully acknowledge their achievement while pointing out
    that to us the Moon was but a way-station en route to a more distant
    objective. If we accomplished the first landing, we would also have the
    benefits of victory. But we would not be so exposed in the event of a
    defeat. . . .
        “Without establishment of a higher goal and a greater challenge,
    U.S. space capability will dissipate. NASA efforts to prevent this by getting
     a worthwhile Apollo Applications Program under way have not met with
     notable success. This provides a second good reason for lifting our
     national goal. . . .” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/2/66, 46)
During week of May 2: MSC officials had not pinpointed exact cause, but had
     isolated probable cause of faulty thruster which prematurely terminated
     GEMINI VIII mission March 16, Missiles and Rockets reported. Corrective
    action would affect all these components on Gemini 9 and later space-
     craft, Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews emphasized that
     thruster and its associated hardware and electronics were contained in
     adapter module abandoned by crew in orbit prior to reentry. “If we can
     believe telemetry data, we can isolate the cause of the problem to either
     spacecraft wiring or thruster valve solenoids,” Mathews said. Specific
     trouble spot within wiring or valve solenoids would be difficult to
     determine without testing actual equipment. (M&R, 5/9/66, 17)
May 2-4:AIAA met in Washington, D.C. Satellite Educational and Informa-
     tional Television (SEIT)-COnCept of combining television and com-
                                                                           163
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   munications satellites to raise standards of living in less-advanced
   nations-was discussed by Vincent P. Rock, director of Communications
   Central. He emphasized lack of literacy requirement for television
   instruction and noted that it could (1) “transmit skills and knowledge
   required for modernization of productive activity; (2) transmit fantasy
   which helps a person understand the role and techniques of association
   required for participation in a modern society; and (3) transmit infor-
   mation about events and goods required for action in the modern world.”
       Following his speech, Rock told the press that a demonstration SEIT
   system would cost about $30,000,000, excludingground receiving equip-
   ment, and could be ready in three years. Transmissions from satellites
   could either be received on six-foot “dish” antennas and relayed to
   individual receiving sets or relayed directly to home sets. (Sehlstedt,
   Balt. Sun, 5/3/66)
       James D. O’Connell, White House Director of Telecommunications
   Management, warned of frequency shortage for satellite communications
   by 1970 unless new techniques were devised. O’Connell urged aerospace
   engineers who started “this communications explosion” to “consider all
   ideas and conceptsyy    that would squeeze more talk into existing broad-
   cast frequencies. (Clark, NYT, 5/4/66, 23)
       U S . should assume active world leadership in direct satellite-to-home
    radio and television broadcasts which offer tremendous potential for
   mass education and mass propaganda, suggested Columbia Univ. law
   professor Richard N. Gardner in a panel discussion. Warning that
   several nations had already asked international bodies to outlaw general
    broadcasting from space for fear of “unilateral penetration” or unwanted
   propaganda, Gardner urged: (1) the Administration to proceed imme-
    diately in developing direct broadcast satellites; (2) the organization of a
   pilot demonstration project, perhaps in India, with U.N. endorsement;
    (3) the involvement of AID and other international lending agencies in
    educational use of space communications; and (4) the reassurance of
    friendly nations that comsats would not be used for propaganda.
       Murray L. Schwartz, Univ. of Calif. School of Law, told panel that
    satellites were one more example of a technology that might be moving
    too fast for existing social institutions. A “knowledge explosion” heJped
    by space communications would accelerate homogenization of society
    and “one of the great problems is to make sure the homogenization is
    not too great,” he said. (Clark, NYT, 5/5/66, 17; Simons, Wush. Post,
    5/5/66, A l )
Muy 3: House passed NASA authorization bill for FY 1967 (H.R. 14324)
    totaling $4,986,864,150 as follows: $4,248,235,000 for research and
    development; $94,419,000 for construction of facilities; and $644,210,-
    150 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5.012 billion.
       During debate preceding bill’s passage, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.)
    offered amendments, subsequently rejected, to eliminate $41.9-million
    funding for Apollo Applications program and $9.l-million funding for
    construction of lunar sample receiving laboratory at MSC; to reduce
    advanced missions by $5 million; and to cancel $10 million of prior
    authorizations for Facility Planning and Design. Rep. Fulton also
    offered, but later withdrew, an amendment to establish an Inspector
    General’s Office in NASA.
                                   $5.012 billion request for FY 1967, Rep.
        Commenting on NASA’s
    Fulton said: “[It] generally represents a tight program in terms of the
164              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966“

    allocation of resources to the programs that have been regularly ap-
    proved by Congress as parts of the Nation’s effort in aeronautics and
    space.
       “At a level under $4.9 billion, I do not believe NASA can restructure
    its Apollo program moon landing in a form that would not cast the most
    serious doubt as to its ability to meet the objective of the manned lunar
    landing within this decade.
       “At $4.8 billion the moon landing objective could not be met. Below
    this level of the budget, it would become clear that the Nation had
    abandoned the concept of developing a well-rounded total space capa-
                                                          ..   .”
    bility directed toward achieving space preeminence.
       Rep. John Wydler (R.N.Y.), proposing an amendment to earmark $20
    million of the total R&D funds for development work on the problem of
    aircraft noise, suggested: “. . . it is incumbent upon us to bring this
     [space] program closer to the people and show them some way in which
    it can benefit them. We often hear there is going to be a fallout as a
    result of this program-some kind of fallout that will affect the civilian
    population beneficially. Here is an opportunity to give them some fallout
    directly that will be of benefit to them. . . .” Rep. Wydler’s amendment
    was defeated. (CR, 5/3/66, 9189-9223)
May 3: Malfunction in Atlas-Centaurlaunch vehicle’s attitude control system
    was responsible for Centaur stage’s failure to achieve double ignition in
    space during April 7 AC-8 mission from ETR, NASA announced. Pre-
    liminary analysis indicated that one or more small attitude control jets
    on Centaur stage apparently used excessive amounts of hydrogen-
    peroxide gas, causing early depletion of system’s fuel supply. Exact
    cause of excessive use had not yet been determined. Preparations for
    AC-10 mission, which would launch dpmmy Surveyor payload on direct
    ascent to the moon, continued on schedule at ETR. (NASA Release 66-92)
  Gemini 9 spacecraft was mechanically mated to top of Titan I1 booster at
    ETR in preparation for May 17 launch after 48-hr. delay because of tiny
    leak in jet-powered maneuvering unit stored behind spacecraft. NASA
    officials said delay would not change launch date. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull.,
    5/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/3/66, A4)
  NASA launched four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying acoustic
    grenade payloads within four hours from Natal, Brazil; Point Barrow,
    Alaska; Churchill Research Range; and NASA Wallops Station. GSFC
    experiment was designed to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and
    wind data at 22-59-mi. (35-95-km.) altitudes during seasonal wind
    shift from westerly to easterly circulation. First group 0 ” Nike-Cajuns
    had been launched from same sites May 1 as shift to summertime
    easterly pattern began. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Long-range HC-130H cargo aircraft equipped with Fulton Recovery System

     successfully snatched Capt. Gerald T. LyVere (USAF) from Rogers Dry
     Lake at AFFTC in first test of new ground-to-air recovery system for
     rescuing downed fliers and astronauts. At 400-ft. altitude aircrzft
     clamped onto balloon-suspendednylon cable attached to harness dropped
     earlier by parachute, pulled Captain LyVere up behind aircraft, and
     reeled him over rear ramp. In later demonstration, Col. Allison Brooks
     (USAF) and A-3C Ronald Doll (USAF) were recovered simultaneously in
     side-by-side two-man pickup using double harness. Lockheed-built HC-
     130H, which would become operational June 30, could fly missions to
     more than 2,000 mi. from its base, loiter at sea level, and rescue up to
                                                                         165
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS$ 1966

    five persons in multiple pickups from land or sea. For NASA projects, air-
     craft would carry complex UHF spacecraft reentry tracker equipment to
    locate reentering spacecraft. (AFFTC Release)
May 3: Rep. Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.) put in Congressional Record a telegram
    from Charles H. Ruby, president of International Air Line Pilots Associa-
     tion, opposing $75,000 absolute liability award to survivors of victims of
     international air accidents. Proposal, Ruby said, would invite sabotage
     “. . .               ..
           and would offer . criminals the incentive of an automatic payoff
     without requiring them to buy insurance.” (CRY5/5/66, A2474)
0 Air Transport Assn. (ATA) noted major developments in air transportation

     in 1966 annual report, “Facts and Figures”: (1)airlines accounted for
     59% of all inter-city common carrier services compared to 14% in 1950;
     (2) sustained growth rate of 16.2% over past three years outdistanced
     all other major U S . industries; (3) improved efficiency and economy of
     operations enabled airlines to absorb steady advances in wage rates,
     material, and equipment prices ; (4) heavy airline investment in modern-
     ization and improvement permitted reduction in average fares and eased
     inflationary pressures; and (5) more than 85% of record profits were
     reinvested in expansion and improvement program. (ATA Release 39)
0 Thailand and Malaysia joined Intelsat-International      Telecommunications
     Satellite Consortium headed by ComSatCorp-bringing total number of
     member nations to 50. ComSatCorp said it “warmly welcomes this as-
     pect of the development of the consortium and the intention of other
     countries toincrease Intelsatmembershipevenfurther in the near future.”
     Yugoslavia and Romania had also shown interest in Intelsat and were
     considering joining. (ComSatCorp Release; Clark, NYT, 5/3/66, 9)
0 Criticism of Government research and development programs in Richard

     J. Barber’s The Politics o Research was cited in a review by Donald Mintz
                               f
     for the Washington Evening Star: (1) DOD, NASA, and AEC contributions
     -90 per cent of total R&D support-indicated emphasis on defense and
     space at the expense of social and behavioral sciences; (2) 70 per cent of
      F&D funds was directed to development; most of remainder was spent
      on applied, not basic, research; (3) Government agencies had given little
      attention to consequences of their undertakings. (Mintz, Wash. Eve.
     Star, 5/3/66, A10)
0 Former Vice President Richard Nixon told a Republican fund-raising

     dinner in Houston that US.should divert some of its space exploration
      funds to the Vietnam war effort. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A36)
a Minuteman I1 had entered operational service with Strategic Air Com-
      mand, with delivery of first 50-missile squadron at Wing 6, Grand Forks
      AFB. (M/S Daily, 5/3/66)
Muy 4: NASA selected Control Data Corp. and IBM for competitive negotia-
      tions of a $15-million contract to furnish a large-scale digital computer
      complex at URC. (NASA Release 66-102)
 0 Soviet physicist Peter Kapitsa, who had received the 1966 Rutherford

      Prize for Physics May 3 in London, told a press conference that US.-
      U.S.S.R. rivalry was good, stimulated research, and produced variety of
      solutions to different problems. Kapitsa said he thought the Soviet space
      program was ahead of US., but could not prove it. (Wash. Post,
      5/5/66, A20)
 0 NASA had selected ARINC Research Corp. and Im/Federal Electric Corp. for

      competitive negotiations leading to $1,750,000, one-year, cost-plus-
166               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    incentive-fee contract to provide technical support for Saturn launch
    vehicle reliability program at MSFC. (NASA Release 66-104)
May 4: A Space Sciences Division in the Engineering and Development
    Directorate, a consolidated medical directorate, and title changes for
    key management positions became effective at MSC. Medical Research
    and Operations Directorate would be headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry,
    formerly Chief of Center Medical Programs. Medical directorate would
    include Biomedical Research Office, Medical Operations Office, and
    Occupational and Environmental Medicine Office. Addition of medical
    directorate brought the number of Center directorates to five. The four
    Assistant Directors would be known as Directors: Director of Admin-
    istration, Wesley L. Hjornevik; Director of Flight Crew Operations,
    Donald K. Slayton; Director of Engineering and Development, Dr.
    Maxime A. Faget; and Director of Flight Operations, Christopher C.
    Kraft, Jr. (MSCI 1130.1; MSC Roundup, 5/27/66, 1,2)
0 Astronauts returning to earth after long space flights in sterile environment
    might have to take bacteria pills, suggested Dr. T. D. Luckey, Univ. of
    Missouri Medical School, at American Society for Microbiology con-
    vention in Los Angeles. Dr. Luckey suggested that astronauts’ sterile
    air, food, and water eventually could dangerously reduce the amount of
    bacteria in their systems, resulting in bacterial illness when they
    returned to earth. Pills could restore normal degree of immunity to
    terrestrial bacteria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A12)
  Time intervals of less than a billionth of a second were measured for first
    time in a laboratory by Dr. Arnold Shastak, Office of Naval Research.
    Dr. Shastak reported that such intervals might be significant in deter-
    mining the frequency of electromagnetic waves and in research into
    structure and distribution of particles in atomic and molecular systems.
     (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A27)
  Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn. named William Hines of the Washington
    Evening Star recipient of the Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for excel-
    lent writing. Cited for his continuing coverage of NASA’s  MARINER IV Mars
    probe, Hines would receive a trophy and $300 at the Association’s
    annual meeting in New York May 24-26. (AP, NYT, 5/5/66, 6; AP,
     Wush. Post, 5/5/66, B2)
0 JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering received 1965 Spirit of St. Louis

    Medal for “outstanding service to the U S . in directing the research,
    design development, and successful operation of the Ranger unmanned
    lunar reconnaissance spacecraft and the Mariner interplanetary space-
    craft.” Presentation, by ASME and the City of St. Louis, was made at
    National Transportation Symposium in San Francisco. (Av. Wk.,
    5/16/66, 23)
Muy 5 Independent Offices Appropriations Bill H.R. 14921 for FY 1967 was
       :
    reported to the House and scheduled for floor action May 10. Appropria-
     tions Committee recommended $4,245,000,000 for NASA research and
    development, compared to $4,248,235,000 authorized by House; $75,-
     000,000 for construction of facilities, compared to $94,419,000 auth-
    orized by House; and $630,000,000 for administrative operations, com-
    pared to $644,210,150 authorized by House. Total recommendation was
     $4,950,000,000, compared to $4,986,864,150 authorized by House.
     (Text; NASA LAR V/75, 5/5/66)
0 NASA Administrator James E. Webb appointed Dr. John F. Clark as Director
     of GSFC. Dr. Clark, formerly Deputy Associate Administrator for Space
                                                                          167
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Science and Applications (Science), had been Acting Director of GSFC
    since July 1965. (NASA Release 66-105)
May 5: Sen. Milton R. Young (R-N.D.) introduced bill (H.R. 3309) to author-
    ize prototype construction of supersonic transport (Sst) financed by
    Government-guaranteed bonds under Supersonic Transport Authority.
    Proposed procedure would: (1) eliminate necessity of Government’s
    appropriating up to $1.5 billion for project; (2) provide management
    guidelines and sound basis for determining industry’s share in develop-
    ment costs; (3) make use of development-phase assets in production
    phase; and (4) permit contractors and public to participate as stock-
    holders in corporation to produce and sell Sst. (CRY5/5/66, 9396)
  NASA’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as
    originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA
    Apollo Spacecraft Office at MSC, in a speech at NAA’S plant in Downey,
    Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo
    spacecraft and Saturn boosters. “The Apollo program is about on
    schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance
    of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests.
    All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by
    the end of June.
        “I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is
    not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion
    module will be sent up next year.
        “I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done com-
    fortably before the end of the decade.”
        C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and
    Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty
    hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule.
    For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would
    be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for
    combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing elec-
    tricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd
    stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of
    the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An
    airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would
    be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be
    repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts
    with “shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shal-
    low threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other con-
    venient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that
    purpose of stage conversion-to offer astronauts relief from cramped
    quarters and extended weightlessness-did not duplicate function of
    USAF’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co.,
    McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.
    each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin,
    St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; UPI, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
e Technology and automation derived from US. space effort could not raise
    social, educational, moral, or religious values, Dr. Edward C. Welsh,
     Executive Secretary of NASC, told Churchman’s Club in Baltimore, but
     ?e
       science and technology do increase the opportunity to make improve-
    ments. Where there is more leisure, more accumulated knowledge, and
    greater understanding, there is also increased opportunity to improve
     character and raise human values. Certainly, the opportunity which
168               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    such progress gives toward the elimination of war is an impressive
    justification for the entire space program.” (Text)
Muy 5: Small hydrogen-oxygen engine originally developed for Saturn S-IV
    rocket stage was being adapted to serve as heater for expanding helium
    gas used in repressurizing S-IVB propellant tanks in space. Burner, pro-
    viding an 800-lb. payload gain through weight reduction, would make it
    possible to meet pressure requirements by using supercold helium from
    bottles immersed in liquid hydrogen inside fuel tank, and would serve
    as possible source of low-thrust ullage control power during weightless
    flight. (MSFC Release 66-92)
* Small semi-pressure weather balloon designed to drift indefinitely entered
    its fourth orbit of the earth, establishing world’s record for flight dura-
    tion, reported Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Balloon was one
    of a series launched March 30 from Christchurch, New Zealand, as part
    of Southern Hemisphere experiment to examine feasibility of Global
    Horizontal Sounding Technique (Ghost). Ghost-plan to use satellites
    to locate and read out information from approximately 10,000 balloons
    floating around earth at constant altitudes-would express state of
    entire earth’s atmosphere in numbers which would then be processed by
    computer to achieve reliable forecasts for two weeks ahead. Participants
    in Ghost project were National Center of Atmospheric Research, ESSA,
    and New Zealand Weather Service. (Sullivan, N Y T , 5/5/66, 16)
  Bell Aerosystems Co. announced plans to develop ,254011 air-cushion
    vehicle (Acv) capable of carrying 90 passengers or 12 tons of cargo.
    Capable of amphibious operations, hovercraft would be 56 ft. long, 16%
    ft. high, and have cruising speed of at least 60 mph, and could be avail-
    able within one and one half to two years. (Bell Aerosystems Release 30)
  AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received Henry H. Arnold
    Gold Medal for “distinguished service to augment progress and readiness
    in air and space” and,for “distinguished service in defense of our
    country” at American Ordnance Assn. meeting in Washington, D.C. In
    his acceptance speech, General Schriever quoted General Arnold’s 1S38
    prediction: ‘Planes of the future may have telescopic wings, which,
    once in fight, can be foreshortened, telescoped, or pulled in . . . thus
    greatly accelerating the forward progress of the vessel of reduced size
    and decreased air resistance.’ This description . . . anticipated the prin-
                                                                           . .”
    ciple which is employed today on the F-111 sweepwing fighter. .
     (Text)
Muy 6: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXVII carrying scientific instruments for
     continued study of outer space. Orbital parameters: apogee, 308 km.
     (191 mi.); perigee, 207 km. (129 mi.); period, 89.5 min.; inclination,
    65”. Instruments were reportedly functioning normally. (Pruvdu,
    5/7/66, USS-TTrans.)
  NASA research pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency landing on
     Delamar Dry Lake, Nev., when engine of X-15 No. 1aircraft shut down
     prematurely-probably because ammonia fuel pump ruptured-32 sec.
     after aircraft had been dropped from B-52 bomber at 45,000-ft. altitude.
     McKay escaped injury, and X-15 suffered only minor damage. (Edwards
     AFB Memorandum; X-15 Proj. Off.)
  First of uprated 5-2 rocket engines designed to power upper stages of
     Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles had been delivered to MSFC for
     static firing. N U ’ S Rocketdyne Div. had increased engine’s maximum
                                                                            169
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    thrust to 230,000 lbs. by strengthening turbine wheels of turbopumps
    and modifying engine control system. (MSFC Release 66-91)
May 6: Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota Institute of
    Technology, received patent for an astronomical clock to keep track
    of the movements of the sun, moon, stars, and tides; provide a perpetual
    calendar; and show local and world time. Dr. Spilhaus said his clock
    could aid astronomers and navigators. (Jones, NYT, 5/7/66, 35)
0 NASA had selected Computer Sciences Corp. and General Electric Computer

    Div. for competitive negotiations leading to a one-year, $6-million, cost-
    plus-incentive-fee contract to provide support services to MSFC’S Com-
    putation Laboratory. (MSFC Release 66-96)
  Two rocket engines which had key roles in US. space program-RL-10
    and W-1 engines-were being given to Smithsonian Institution by MSFC
    for National Air Museum’s display on the history of rocketry. (MSFC
    Release 66-95)
Muy 6-7: Former Astronaut John H. Glenn attended annual meeting of the
    Transatlantic Council, Boy Scouts of America, in Garmisch, Germany,
    and participated in ceremonies marking German-American Friendship
    Week. While in Europe, Glenn, in his capacity as NASA consultant,
    would speak on U.S. space program to educational, scientific, and tech-
    nical groups in Germany, England, Sweden, Finland, Norway, Denmark,
    Belgium, France, and Switzerland. (NASA Release 66-100)
May 7 President Johnson announced U.S. would seek a treaty through the
       :
    United Nations “laying down rules and procedures for the exploration of
    celestial bodies.” He listed as “essential elements” of the proposed
    treaty: (1) the moon and other celestial bodies should be free for
    exploration and use by all countries; (2) no country should be permitted
    a claim of sovereignty; (3) there should be freedom of scientific investi-
    gation, and all countries should cooperate in scientific activities relating
    to celestial bodies; (4) efforts should be made to avoid harmful con-
    tamination; (5) astronauts of one country should give any necessary
    help to astronauts of another country; (6) no country should be permit-
    ted to station weapons of mass destruction on a celestial body; and (7)
    weapon tests and military maneuvers should be forbidden. (Text; Pres.
    Doc., 5/16/66, 622; NYT, 5/8/66, 66)
  Editorial comment on President Johnson’s proposal:
            . . . In addition to rules governing space exploration a body of law
        CC


    is needed to govern the exploitation of useful resources that may con-
     ceivably be found on other solar bodies. Omission of this topic from
     the first international treaty on space law could produce future dif-
     ficulties. But the President may well have felt that any present attempt
     to reach agreement on this delicate matter might prolong negotiations
                                                              ...
     beyond the time of the first manned Iunar landing.               There is no
     time to lose in getting international agreement to and ratification of this
     essential document.” (NYT, 5/9/66, 36)
            . . . Someday such a treaty may save us from a new sort of far-out
         Ce


     interplanetary imperialism. As revived by Mr. Johnson, however, the
     proposal has to do with a problem that will develop sooner and closer
     to home. After all between now and 1969 or 1970, Americans are going
     to be lofted to the moon’s surface, and so are Russians. This is a pros-
     pect full of very great historic importance. It lends special force to the
                                            ..    . to negotiate an understanding
     President’s call for a renewed effort
170               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    under which the always unpredictable Russians will sign a treaty
   worthy of the name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/66, A6)
       “The first manned landing on the moon seems likely before 1970.
   The implications are immense, regardless of whether the first one is
   American or Russian. President Johnson’s proposal for an international
    compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense.
       “. . .Perhaps a willingness by Moscow to entertain a treaty on space
   may also open the door to discussions about pooling some of the costs,
   as the late President Kennedy proposed.” (Boston Globe, 5/11/66)
            ..
        . Probably the most succinct argument against a comprehensive
       (C


    treaty of this nature is, ‘Who needs it?’ Monopolization of the lunar
    surface by military units and establishment of terror weapons on the
   moon or in orbit appear to be neither immediate dangers nor remote
   possibilities. The bugaboo of an orbiting multimegaton H-bomb seems,
                                                                         .
    on close examination, to be more trouble than it would be worth. . .
       “There is no slightest indication that the Russians propose to lay
    claim to the moon if their cosmonauts get there first, any more than
   we do if we win the race. The precedent followed by both countries in
    Antarctica-nearest thing to the moon on earth-is neither to assert
    nor to recognize territorial claims. This was U.S. and Soviet policy be-
                                                         .
    fore the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959. . .,, (Hines, Wash.
   Eve. Star, 5/12/66, A20)
May 7: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s contention that Nike-X
   antimissile missile system was incapable of defending U.S. against
    Soviet attack and should be kept in R&D stage, received support from
    Society of American Scientists’ executive board. In a statement oppos-
    ing Senate vote providing $168 million toward deployment of Nike-X
    system, the SAS board said: “These expenditures, truly enormous over
    extended periods, would be the hallmark of a frightened, not a great
    society.. . .” (Wash. Post, 5/8/66, P14)
Muy 8: GEMINI VU Astronaut Frank Borman told a British television audience
    in London that the space vehicle, not man, was limiting the length of
    manned space flight. “We are finding that man is very adaptable and
    that if you provide him with the normal comforts he expects on earth,
    he can function as well at zero gravity as he can on earth.” (AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 5/9/66, A2)
 Lockheed Aircraft Corp. chairman Courtland S. Gross described flight
    in proposed U.S. supersonic transport (Sst) in an interview for This
     Week: “It will make the world a lot smaller. Its near two-thousand-mile-
    an-hour speed will carry passengers to London and Paris in two and a
    half hours. With room for 255 to 266 passengers, five abreast, it will
    be a 222-foot walk from the tail to the pilot’s cabin.
       “But the biggest thrill will be cruising at 70,000 to 80,000 feet above
    the earth. At that height you will enjoy the kind of stars and sky seen
    heretofore only by U-2 pilots and astronauts-pinpoint icicles sus-
    pended in the blue-black velvet backdrop of space. Most of the at-
    mosphere is below the supersonic transport’s cruising altitude, so that
    at night, on the horizon, there will be the bright blue band first re-
    ported by the astronauts-light radiating from the other side of the
    earth. When flying the polar routes around the world, passengers will
    enjoy spectacular electrical displays from the ionization of gases in
    the upper atmosphere-great shimmering curtain; of color that flicker
    through the sky.” (This Week, 5/8/66)
                                                                          171
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 9:   NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried
         100-kw. radar to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude in experiment designed
    JPL
    to gather data on behavior of radar echoes as a function of altitude for
    use in developing planetary terrain sounding technique. GsFC-managed
    flight marked first successful functioning of high-powered radar in
    space. Similar radar had been flown successfully on NASA Convair 990
    April 27. (JPL Release, 6/26/66; PL, Lab-Oratory,6/66, 10)
* U.S.S.R.’s LUNA x completed its 284th orbit around moon and transmitted
    Communist anthem, “InternationaleYy’on command from Soviet
    center of deep space communications. Instruments were functioning
    normally. (Pravdu, 5/10/66, 1, USS-T Trans.)
0 House passed bill authorizing appropriations for AEC during FY 1967

    totaling $2,259,958,000: $1,964,128,000 for operating expenses and
    $295,830,000 for plant and capital equipment. Rep. James G. Fulton
    (R-Pa.) urged that the Appropriations Committee consider the possi-
    bility of studying lunar materials in AEC radiation laboratories rather
    than building new NASA Lunar Sample Receiving Laboratory at MSC.
    (NASA LAR V/76)
* Commenting on President Johnson’s proposed U.N. treaty banning
    sovereignty claims on the moon, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) told
    the House: “The President has taken a very progressive and forward
    step . . . in trying to establish a barrier against the use of the moon or
    outer space as a place of contest for the nations of the world. He has
    asked that these areas be internationalized and we follow in space ex-
    ploration that principle which has been established already with re-
    spect to the use of nuclear wea ons.
       “This is a great step forwarc f by the President, and we in the House
    should appreciate it, and commend him for it.” (CR, 5/9/66)
  Text of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ August 1965 proposal to International
    Astronomical Union (IAU) for an international effort to search for
    signals from other worlds was made public in Vienna. Proposal, which
    implied that peculiar objects such as quasars represented the kind of
    beacon a civilization with extraordinary capability might build, recom-
    mended two kinds of searches. First would look for narrow-band sig-
    nals which a “civilization with the meager energy resources of earth”
    could send to another star. Concentration of the energy into narrow
    range of wavelengths would ensure signals’ survival for hundreds of
    light years. Search would be confined to 21-centimeter wavelength in
    the spectrum emitted throughout space by hydrogen.
       Second search would be for signals spanning much of the spectrum
    which a super civilization with the energy resources of a star would
    generate. Such signals would be difficult both to decode and recognize
    as artificial. Proposal, which recommended round-the-clock observa-
    tions for three to five years, would be discussed at IAU General As-
    sembly in Prague Aug. 22-31, 1967. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/10/66, 19)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Robert c. Seamans, Jr., said NASA would request
    $6 billion for FY 1968, including $900 million for Apollo Applications
    and $100 million for Voyager, Aviation Week reported. Seamans’ state-
    ment that “Apollo Applications will fill the post-Apollo gap and that
    there is no need to define another goal now’’ was said to conflict with the
    recent contention of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Admin-
    istrator for Manned Space Flight, that a clear definition of the Nation’s
    post-Apollo goal was necessary. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66,25)
172               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, at Armed Forces
May 9:   AFSC
    Management Assn., in Washington, D.C., predicted a management
    revolution commensurate with the explosive advance of technology and
    the pressing nature of military requirements. “I think that the biggest
    challenge to management in the years ahead will be to find ways to en-
    courage and use the full creative potential of individuals. . . . We must
    create the atmosphere where the unique human capacity for innovation
                                                            . .”
    and judgment can be fully developed and employed. . (Text)
  Communist China conducted rranuclear explosion that contained thermo-
    nuclear material” over its western areas, Hsinhua, Chinese Communist
    press agency, reported. U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., surmised that
    explosion indicated China was on the verge of developing a thermo-
    nuclear or hydrogen bomb. (AP,NYT, 5/10/66, 4; Topping, NYT,
    5/10/66, 1)
0 Industry bids to AFSC for study of new integrated satellite system as follow-
    on to the Midas early warning satellite would be due June 24, Aviation
     Week reported. Proposal request included studies for sensor payload and
    spacecraft. Primary sensors would be optical, covering the infrared,
    ultraviolet, and visible spectra. (Au. Wk., 5/9/66, 23)
  USAF announced it would award contracts to “individuals within the
     scientific community” to conduct “prompt, in depth investigation of
    selected Ufo reports.” Funds for study, which had been recommended
     by Air Force Scientific Advisory Board in March, would be requested
    from FY 1967 and FY 1968 budgets. (DOD Release 388-66)
  Results of survey by DMS, Inc., an aerospace market research firm, indicated
     that nearly twice as many aircraft would be built from 1966 through
     1975 in the non-Communist world as were produced during the previous
     decade as a result of continued increases in airline passenger traffic,
     expansion of “private” flying, and pr&sing need to replace obsolete
     military aircraft. This would amount to about 260,000 aircraft for total
     investment of $100 billion. (DMS Aerospace News)
M u ,10: House passed Independent Offices Appropriation Rill (H.R. 14521)
     for FY 1967 appropriating $4.95 billion for NASA. Amounts were those
     recommended by Appropriations Committee May 5. An amendment pro-
     posed by Rep. H. R. Gross (R-Iowa) to deny funds for Lunar Sample
     Receiving Laboratory at MSC was defeated by a voice vote. (NASA LAR
     V/77)
  First perfect dual countdown rehearsal in Gemini series conducted at KSC
     in preparation for May 17 Gemini IX mission. (AP, NYT, 5/11/66, 16;
     AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/66, A6; Wash. Post, 5/11/66, A7)
  Accelerated programs for launching communications satellites had
     improved prospects of earning profit in 1967, reported ComSatCorp
     president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk at annual shareholders’ meeting in
     Washington, D.C. Predicting a 100-fold increase in ComSatCorp’s
     revenue potential during five-year development plan, Dr. Charyk said:
         .
     “. . we have taken €irm steps for the development of even larger and
     more versatile satellites for deployment on a global basis in 1968. These
     spacecraft will weigh approximately 240 pounds in orbit and will have
     a capacity for 1,200 two-way telephone circuits or four television chan-
     nels.,’ He also noted ComSatCorp had proposed to ESSA that it conduct
     joint feasibility study with IBM to develop satellites to collect, process,
     and disseminate weather data on a global basis. (Vartan, NYT, 5/11/66,
     65; Fouquet, Wash. Post, 5/11/66, E6)
                                                                        173
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 10: Alex P. Aven, owner of an Oklahoma City, Okla., petroleum con-
   sulting firm, was sworn in by NASA Administrator James E. Webb as
   consultant to the Administrator on management. (NASA Release 66-112)
May 10-13: NASA successfully launched 18 Arcas and Hasp meteorological
   sounding rockets to 200,000-ft. altitudes at intervals ranging from four
   minutes to six hours to investigate daily cycle of wind and temperature
   variations in upper atmosphere, compare results of various rocket and
   balloon measuring systems, and study effects of radiation from the sun
    on meteorological instruments. Instrumented payloads descending by
   parachute transmitted atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure
   data, and ten specially instrumented high-altitude weather balloons,
   interspersed among rocket firings, transmitted information as they rose
   to 130,000 ft. Radar tracked both balloon and rocket payloads to deter-
   mine speed and direction of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed
   by NASA Langley Research Center and sponsored by NASA, USA, USN,
   USAF, and ESSA. (NASA Release 66-118; Wallops Release 66-25)
May 10-19: 1966 Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) meeting was held
   in Vienna.
       National Academy of Sciences delegate Dr. Richard W. Porter, sum-
   marizing activities of 1965 U S . space program, said a manned lunar
   landing by 1970 would be a “difficult goal” but U S . had made “sub-
   stantial progress. ,’
       Dr. Porter presented an analysis of data transmitted by NASA MARINER
    IV Mars probe which appeared to support theory that earth sometimes
    has comet-like tail stretching past orbit of Mars. On Feb. 5, 1965, a
    peculiarly timed solar eruption sent series of intense proton clouds into
    space, five of which were detected within 48 hrs. by MARINER IV and two
    other U S . satellites in near-earth orbit. Second and third clouds were
    reported by MARINER IV three to five hours prior to their detection near
    earth, possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous
    length, forcing two clouds to detour through tail in order to penetrate
    earth’s magnetic field. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post,
    5/12/66, A14)
       Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli A. Blagonravov summarized 1965
    U.S.S.R. space program, and said LUNA x, which entered lunar orbit
    April 3, had recorded radiation pattern from lunar surface similar to
    that from basaltic part of earth’s crust. Apparently lunar surface exhib-
    ited no differentiation equivalent to granite on earth, indicating that
    earth and moon were created separately. LUNA x had found level of
    moon’s magnetic field barely above that of interplanetary space; small
    increase was attributed to moon’s passing through earth‘s magnetic tail
    at time of measuremeat. Im lication was that moon is coId throughout,
                                f
    since liquid metal core wou d produce large magnetic field. Report sug-
    gested that new minerals would be found on the moon because of
    unusual chemical reactions caused by its extreme temperature range,
    the impacts of micrometeorites, and rains of high-energy radiation.
     (SulIivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14)
       Soviet delegate A. G. Prishchep, in a joint paper with colleague V. I.
    Vashkov, revealed that U.S.S.R. planetary probes were assembled in
    clean rooms and sterilized with two-fold process involving moist heat to
    prevent dryness and a gas mixture, harmless to the skin, which might
    have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained 50% ethyl-
    ene oxide-extremely poisonous substance which is dangerously
174                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      explosive when combined with oxygen-diluted with 40% methyl
      bromide for safety reasons.
         General Electric scientists H. G. Lorsch and M. 6. Koesterer reported
      that current sterilization cycles varied from treatment at 320” for three
      hours to baking at 200°F for 14 days. They argued that no more than 10
      billion microbes should exist within a spacecraft prior to beginning of
      sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of them was to be
      assured. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/12/66, 79; Beller, M&R, 5/16/66, 17-18)
         Drs. Herbert Friedman and R. W. Kreplin, Naval Research Labora-
      tory, reported that solar radiation level would probably exceed highest
      ever recorded in 100 yrs. during 1969-1970-time of first projected
      manned lunar landing. Basing their prediction on measurements of
      solar x-ray emissions taken by EXPLORER xxx (IQSY Solar Explorer)
      satellite, Friedman and Kreplin explained that x-rays, which could not
      penetrate earth‘s atmosphere, warned of approaching sunspots before
      they could be seen. Solar activities in the form of sunspots and gaseous
      flares occurred in 11-12yr. cycles, but there was also a gross cycle which
      reaches its greatest intensity every 80 to 100 yrs. (Sullivan, NYT,
      5/13/66, 19; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12)
         Dr. Bessel Kok, Research Institute for Advanced Studies, described
      a small instrument which could determine the existence of life when
      landing on another planet. Designed on the assumption that even the
      simplest forms of life use water and such common chemical compounds
      as phosphates and nitrates, device would trace the transfer of nonradio-
      active isotope-Oxygen 18-from these chemicals to water. ( Wush.
      Post, 5/13/66, A12)
         Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to the meeting: (1)
      Italy’s platform for launching San Marco earth satellite at sea was in
      African port of Mombasa and would be towed shortly to site where U S .
      Scout booster would launch satellite into equatorial orbit; (2) Pakistan
      was conducting monthly firings of rockets that injected copper chaff into
      stratosphere to disclose winds in that region over subtropics; (3)
      U.S.S.R. had fired 150 meteorological rockets-almost half from ship-
      board-and U S . was firing about 120 monthly; (4) Romania had used
      orbital data from Washington and Cambridge, Mass., to photograph
      ECHO I and ECHO II comsats in coordination with Soviet expeditionary
      stations in Egypt and Mali; (5) Sweden, Finland, Russia, and East
      Europeans had joined in observing orbital flight changes of ECHO I and
      ECHO 11 attributable to density variations in wisps of air at satellite
      altitude; and (6) East German scientists reported their conclusions on
      upper air structure derived from real-time transmissions from NASA
       EXPLORER XXII satellite. It was estimated that 60 stations in various parts
       of the world were monitoring satellites that sent out “blind” data.
       (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/66, 10E; Sullivan, NYT, 5/16/66, 88)
          Dr. A. I. Lebedensky, Soviet Academy of Sciences, reported that
      LUNA IX photos revealed lunar surface was steadily eroding, at least in
       some places. He suggested that erosion could be caused by solar winds
       or impact of micrometeorites. Lebedensky pointed out two peculiar
       features on LUNA IX’S photos which supported his theory. First was
       series of streaks, resembling mineral veins in earth’s bedrock, on floor
       of crater where LUNA IX had landed. It had previously been assumed that
       moon’s surface was buried deep in debris churned up by meteorite im-
       pacts. Second was presence of rock-like objects on small pedestals
                                                                           175
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    similar to those on earth where soft but rock-strewn surface had been
    eroded. Stones, which ranged in size from one foot to less than one inch
    across and whose pedestals appeared as high as they were wide, “were
    the most unexpected and important result of the flight,” Lebedensky
    said. “Our conclusion is that the stone is harder than the ground around
    it and screens the ground underneath from the erosion effects of solar
    winds and micrometeorites.” Lebedensky admitted the possibility that
    erosion was peculiar to the crater or a particular region of the moon,
    but saw no obvious reason why this should be true. (Sullivan, NYT,
    5/17/66, 28; Toth, Wmh. Post, 5/17/66, A17)
        Radio occultation measurements from MARINER IV’S July 14, 1965,
    Mars flyby indicated that regions on the surface of Mars might vary in
    height by three miles (five kilometers), JPL scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore
    reported. (JPL Release)
        Venus was rotating clockwise only once every 243 days, but during
    that period it seemed to be synchronized with earth, Dr. Richard Gold-
    stein, chief of JPL Communications Systems Research, told the meeting.
    Dr. Goldstein zlso reported that radar probes of winter 1965 when Venus
    was nearest earth indicated prorninences with the ability to depolarize
    microwaves. “They may well be mountain ranges,” Dr. Goldstein said,
     “although large fields of boulders would also depolarize microwaves.
     On earth, of course, such areas usually indicate the presence of nearby
    mountains.” (JPL Release)
        Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli Blagonravov, addressing the annual
     COSPAR press conference, said France and U.S.S.R. had been negotiating
    -within the framework of C S A - n cooperation in space research
                                     O P RO
    which might extend to incorporation of French instruments in Soviet
    satellites “if this should be asked for.” Asked if he could imagine similar
     close cooperation between U S . and U.S.S.R., Blagonravov said there
     was no need for it; if the situation arose, it would be better for them to
     cooperate in processing data obtained from their own satellites. (Reuters,
     Wash. Post, 5/20/66, A5)
May 11: NASA’s    Surveyor spacecraft made first successfuI soft-landing under
     its own power in test at Holloman AFE. 36-sec. descent of spacecraft,
     which had been carried by balloon to 1,000-ft. altitude, was slowed from
     velocity of 55 fps to 5 fps at point of impact by its rocket engine. Test’s
     success was necessary prerequisite to May 30 Surveyor launch from ETR
     for soft-landing on the moon. (AP, NYT, 5/12/66, 39; AP,Wash. Eve.
     Star, 5/12/66, A16)
e U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXVIII carrying scientific instruments for con-
     tinued space research into circulsr orbit at 640-km. (398-mi.) altitude
     with 97.1-min. period and 65” inclination. Instruments were functioning
     normally. (Tass, 5/11/66)
0 NASA was negotiating two $300,000 contracts with SDS Data Systems and

     Perkin-Elmer Corp. for “design, development, and fabrication of two-
     gas atmosphere sensor system” for future manned spacecraft operating
     for 45 days or longer. New system would give an accurate measurement
     of the mixed gases and information on presence of carbon dioxide and
     water vapor. By measuring partial pressure of each. component present,
     system would determine correct ratio required for controlling total
     atmosphere pressure. Manned spacecraft currently used a single-gas
     system operating on oxygen. Longer missions lasting 45 days or more
     might require a two-gas system composed of oxygen and either nitrogen,
176               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     helium, or another inert gas for crew health and safety. Contracts would
     be managed by URC. (NASA Release 66-113)
May 11: USN successfully conducted first guided firing of Phoenix air-to-air
    guided missile over Pacific Missile Range. Missile, developed by Hughes
    Aircraft Co., was fired from USN A-3 aircraft against drone target. All test
     objectives were met. (USN Release)
  NASA selected Dynatronics, Inc., to provide 18 additional pulse code
    modulated (Pcm) telemetry decommut?tor systems for Project Apollo
     communications under $2.3-million fixed-price contract. Systems would
     receive, identify, sort, and prepare “real time” and “onboard stoi ed”
     data. (NASA Release 66-114)
0 NASA would negotiate $800,000 contract with RCA for design s.udy of

     imp oved Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) for national operational
     weather satellite program. Proposed 500-lb., cylindrical satellite would
     be 5 ft. high and 4% ft. in diameter-compared with current 300-lb.
     satellites 2 ft. high, 3% ft. in diameter-and would incorporate camera
     system now carried in two operational spacecraft. Stabilized by flywheel
     and magnetic attitude control system, satellite would always point to
    earth, and its infrared radiometers would scan entire world’s cloud
     cover at night. (NASA Release 66-115)
0 ITT, RCA, and Western Union International requested FCC permission to

     build a $6-million ground station near Woodland, Ga., or at Moorefield,
    W.Va. The three carriers and AT&T also asked FCC to deny ComSatCorp’s
    request to build station at Moorefield. ( V S J , 5/12/66, 1)
May 12: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences recom-
    mended NASA FY 1967 authorization of $5,008,000,000-$58,000,000
    more than House appropriation but $4,000,000 less than NASA request.
    Recommendations by Committee included restoration of 1967 Mariner-
    Venus mission and deletion of amounts added by House for other flight
    projects in lunar and planetary programs; concurrence with NASA request
     of $3.5 million for 260-in. solid fuel rocket motor project; reduction of
    amount requested for Lunar Sample Receiving Laboratory by $1 million;
    and restoration of $14,689,850 to administrative operation, but separa-
    tion of amount approved into two categories: personnel compensation,
    and benefits and other expenses. (NASA LAR V/78-79)
0 Lee R. Scherer, manager of NASA’s      Lunar Orbiter program, in interview
     with Seattle Times reporter Robert L. Twiss, expressed confidence that
     the Boeing-built spacecraft could help resolve many unanswered ques-
     tions about the moon. With funding and NASA approval, Lunar Orbiters
     equipped with devices that could be deployed to the moon could be
     !aunched in 1969, yielding valuable scientific information, Scherer said.
     “We could gain substantial information about other areas of the moon
     than the site chosen for manned landing.” (Twiss, Seattle Times,
     5/12/66)
0 West Germany’s lirst satellite would be launched in 1968 with U S . Scout

     booster to study inner radiation belts and aurora borealis, Science
    Ministry in Bonn announced. Orbit would have 2,898-km. (1,800-mi.)
     apogee and 258-km. (160-mi.) perigee. Nine West German lirms were
     participating in joint NASA-West Germany Science Ministry project.
     (Reuters, Push. Post, 5/13/66, A23; Reuters, NYT, 5/13/66, 12)
0 Results of nationwide Gallup Survey on Ufo sightings: “More than five

    million Americans claim to have seen something they believed to be a
     ‘flying saucer.’ And about ten times as many people-nearly half of the
                                                                         177
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    U S . adult civilian population-believe that these frequently reported
    flying objects, while not necessarily ‘saucers,’ are real and not just a
    figment of the imagination.” (Gallup, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, K7)
May 13: 156-in.-dia., glass-reinforced, plastic-cased, submerged-nozzle solid
    motor reached full thrust of 300,000 lbs. in static firing at Thiokol
    Chemical Corp.’s Wasatch Div. Nozzle had expansion ratio of 34:l and
    directed exhaust into 83-ft.-long diffuser tube to simulate high-altitude
    atmospheric conditions. Motor was one of two units being built by
    Thiokol under contract to AFSC Space Systems Div. to demonstrate
    feasibility of a high-mass-fraction, high-performance, upper-stage 156-
    in. solid motor. (Av. Wk., 5/23/66, 29)
  Apollo Spscecraft Lem Adapter (Sla) was transported by helicopter from
    Tulsa to MSC for serles of vibration and acoustics tests in conjunction
    with other Apollo spacecraft modules and a Saturn IB instrument unit.
    (MSC Roundup, 5/27/66, 1)
  Electrical fire broke out in basement of unoccupied room at JPL and briefly
    interrupted communications with NASA PIONEER VI interplanetary probe.
    Cause of fire had not yet been determined. (A€’,     Wash. Post, 5/14/66,
    A4)
0 World’s first commercial model of nuclear power generator was marketed

    by Martin Co. for $63,000. Designed to produce 25 w of electricity for
    at least five years without refueling, 3,000-lb. device converted heat
    from radioactive strontium-90 into electricity. (Wilford, W I , 5/13/66,
    55)
  AFSC awarded Martin Marietta Corp. $3,115,200 increment to existing
    contract to study Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) compatibility
    requirements for Titan I11 program. Work would be done in Denver,
    Colo. (DOD Release 413-66)
  NASA was negotiating $35,000 contract with RCA for continued research on
    simplified process for manufacturing microelectric printed circuits by
    printing patterns of paste or slurry through screens onto a ceramic
    wafer. Utilizing new transistor developed jointly by NASA and RCA,
    process would enable transistor formerly inserted by hand to be printed
    onto the wafer simultaneously with resistors and capacitors and permit
    several connections to be formed at one time. Contract would be
    managed by IARC. (NASA Release 66-109)
  ‘‘Moonwalker”-device developed by Space General Corp. for astronauts
    to travel on the moon-had been adapted for crippled children. Built
    under HEW grant, 90-lb. machine, which walked on eight mechanical
    legs, could negotiate sand or mud, climb and descend stairs, step up a
    normal street curb, and climb grades of 15” or more. (Wash. Eve. Star,
    5/13/66, Al; Brevard Sentinel, 5/13/66)
May 14: Gemini 10 spacecraft, manufactured by McDonnell Aircraft Corp.,
    was loaded aboard USAF transport plane in St. Louis for flight to KSC in
    preparation for launch in summer 1966. (UPI, Wash. Post, 5/15/66, A2)
  Potential of US. space program was described by Capt. Robert F. Freitag
     (USN, Ret.), NASA Director of Field Center Development, OMSF, in a speech
    before Michigan Assn. of the Professions in Detroit. “Man’s exploration
    of space, the moon and the planets is potentially the greatest inspira-
    tional venture in the history of man, and one in which the entire world
     can share. Thus, the exploration of the space frontier can well provide
     the seed for new floweringsparking a Twentieth Century Renaissance,
     stirring man’s imagination, ennobling his ambitions, and igniting his
178               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    spirit with fresh hope and excitement. As the European Renaissance
    was sparked by the discovery of new continents and seas, so a new Age
    of Discovery in many arenas may well be awakened by man’s venture
                . . .”
    into space.        (Text)
May 14: USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR with Atlas-Agena
    D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Muy 15: NASA NIMBUS 11 (Nimbus C) meteorological satellite was launched
    from WTR with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena B booster into near-polar
    orbit with 730-mi. (1,175-km.) apogee, 678-mi. (1,091-km.) perigee,
    108-min. period, and 80” inclination. Flight plan had called for 600-mi.-
    altitude orbit.
       NIMBUS 11, three-axis earth-stabilized R&D weather satellite, would
    flight-test basic technology essential to meteorological satellites and
    instrumentation necessary to study atmospheric structure. It would also
    extend meteorologicalobservation to region of electromagneticspectrum
    not previously covered. Satellite carried Advanced Vidicon Camera
    System (Avcs) and Automatic Picture Transmission System (Apt), both
    of which operate during daylight portion of each orbit; Medium Resolu-
    tion Infrared Radiometer (Mrir) to store global medium resolution data
    on earth’s heat balance; and High Resolution Infrared Radiometer
     (Hrir) to provide high-resolution nighttime cloud-cover photos and
    cloud-top temperatures. Addition of Hrir data to Apt system was initial
    demonstration of stored and direct readout day-night cloud coverage
    capability. 3,000 weather photos would be taken daily by 912-lb. satellite
    and transmitted to any of 150 Apt stations around the world-eight of
    which had been modified to obtain nighttime cloud cover. Second in
    NASA’S Nimbus series of meteorologicalsatellites, NIMBUS 11 was managed
    by GSFC under overall direction of NASA OSSA. (NASA Proj. Off.; O’Toole,
    NYT, 5/16/66, 10)
* Boosted Arcas sounding rocket was launched from deck of USNS Range
    Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, as test for flight series to obtain
    data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region
    during solar eclipse May 20. No data were obtained because 2nd stage
    failed to ignite, but problem was corrected to ensure successful Rights
    during eclipse. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Gemini IX Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan passed
    their h a 1 major physical examinations at KSC. Mission review board
     confirmed May 17 launch date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/15/66, Al)
* Manufacturers of rocket components, faced with possible work shortage
    because of NASA’s   delay in formulating plans for post-Apollo missions,
    were making “frank pitches to the US. Space Agency-and presumably
     to the Defense Department-for more business,” wrote Alvin B. Webb
    in the Washington Post. Webb noted that “Chrysler is expected to begin
    building the last of its Saturn 1-B boosters by the end of this year. The
    same applies to Douglas production of S4B upper stages for the Saturn 5.
        “Boeing, under the present schedule, probably will begin to run out
     of work on the Saturn first stage in late 1967.” (Webb, Wush. Post,
     5/16/66, D9)
May 16: NIMBUS 11 meteorologicalsatellite was reported “working beautifully”
     by GSFC. Among the thousands of photographs transmitted were those
     of the Gemini IX recovery area. The 912-lb. spacecraft had been
    launched May 15. (UPI, NYT, 5/17/66, 77)
                                                                            179
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 16: Live commercial TV coverage of Gemini IX recovery would be
     provided under an agreement between FCC, ITT, USN, NASA, and Corn-
     SatCorp, Aviation Week reported. ITT would operate a station on the
     U.S.S. Wasp in the Atlantic Ocean recovery force. Signals would be
     transmitted to the US. via EARLY BIRD I comsat. (Av. Wk., 5/16/66,33)
e Soviet space doctors’ examination of dogs Ugolyek and Veterok after their
     22-day flight in COSMOS c x d u r i n g which they had been harnessed and
     force-fed through stomach tubes-indicated          that prolonged stay in
     space produced functional changes in animals which increased upon
     return to earth and then gradually disappeared. X-rays of dogs’ skeletal
     systems showed that calcium had been “washed out.” Muscle mass had
     changed, preventing full resumption of normal motor activity until
     eight or 10 days after return. High pulse rates and dehydration-find-
     ings common to both U.S.S.R. and U S . manned experiments-were
     observed, and on fourth to fifth day after dogs’ return there was “rather
     considerable speedup” of erythrocyte sedimentation reaction and an
     increase in number of Ieucocptes in blood, both apparently in response
     to normal gravity. In summary, doctors said that while functional
     changes did occur during flight, they were not irreversible. Whether or
     not zero gravity could change functional state of organism to extent
     that it could not return to normal was not yet known. (Tass, 5/16/66,
     USS-T Trans.; M&R, 5/23/66, 12)
e Sen. Karl Mundt (R3.D.) informed Senate that Subcommittee on Govern-
     ment Research expected to make specific recommendations to improve
     Federally-financed research and development program, for which almost
     $16 billion was being expended during FY 1966. Sen. Mundt, ranking
     minority member of the subcommittee, said primary task of group was to
     determine and enunciate a more definitive, longer-rangingscience policy.
     He said US. had reached the crossroads, where “it has become pain-
     fully obvious that we cannot continue to support all who demand sup-
     port, but must be selective in the allocation of research funds.” This
      indicated that one of the most pressing questions was how to direct NASA
      efforts, with Apollo program reaching its goal and no follow-onapproved:
             r now ~ on ~
                   is   the threshold of placing a man on the Moon within this
      f                       ~    ~
      decade. After this what? This question concerns the leaders of this fine
      NASA organization as well as its highly trained, scientific and technical
      staff. Where do we turn? Shall the space program continue on its present
      course, or shall it be broadened to better serve the everyday needs of the
                                                          . . .”  (CR, 5/16/66,
      American people? This is a priority crossroads.
      10212)
   NASA awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and RCA $90,000, six-month
      contracts to study characteristics for proposed Orbiting Data Relay
      System (Odrs) which would eliminate gaps in communications and
      provide continuous contact with spacecraft. Studies would probe kind
      of synchronous satellite and ground facilities required to relay data from
      spacecraft in earth orbit to NASA’s   mission control centers at GSFC, JPL,
                        Release 66-119)
      and MSC. (NASA
 e ComSatCorp had negotiated $44J,412 contract-largest          ever negotiated
      by ComSatCorp with a foreign country-with Nippon Electric Co., Ltd.,
      Tokyo, Japan, for multiplex subsystem equipment for earth stations a t
      Oahu, Hawaii, and Brewster Flat, Wash., which would be completed by
      1967. System would modulate signals received from communications
      carriers for transmission over satellite links, demodulate signals received
130               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    from satellite for relay to land distribution systems, and provide con-
    tinuous monitoring for quality of all signals being passed through the
    system. (ComSatCorp Release)
May 1 : Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C.
      6
    Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague
    (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’
    Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including
    nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of
    lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capa-
    bility; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar
    bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes
    within solar system and manned expeditions to planets “whenever that
    becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communi-
    cations from satellites to home receivers “throughout large sections of
    the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied
    satellites. (Text)
0 Discussing “problems of prosperity” confronting airlines in the jet age,

    Robert Hotz said in Aviation Week that growing number of air travelers
    meant larger segment of US. population was concerned with “how much
    of this increasing airline prosperity is being shared with the traveling
                                               . .”
    public in better service and lower fares. .     Noting that CAB chairman
    Charles Murphy had been urging airlines for about one year to ‘‘revamp
    their fare structure” in their own way to avoid Federal intervention,
    Hotz said airlines could either ‘?takea vigorous industry approach” that
    would satisfy customers and retain corporate solvency or “continue
    their traditional piston-powered attitudes and have an angry public goad
    federal legislators and regulators into drastic solutions that could leave
    both the airlines and their customers in a worse muddle than ever.”
    (Hotz, Au. Fk.,    5/16/66, 21)
0 AFSC had completed 110 successful tests of Bak-11 (Barrier Arresting Com-

    ponent)--device to stop aircraft on runway during emergency-at Air
    Force Flight Test Center (AFFTC), Edwards AFB. Device, developed by
    Research, Inc., consisted of an arresting cable which engaged main gear
    struts when actuated by aircraft’s wheels rolling over switches mounted
    on the runway. (AFSC Release 46.66)
Muy 16-27: U S . sponsored communications satellite seminar to provide new
    and developing countries with basic knowledge and practical information
    on economic and technical requirements for earth stations. Seminar,
    conducted under auspices of International Telecommunications Union,
    included lectures, panel discussions, informal exchanges, and equipment
    exhibits by 17 countries. Talks were in English with simultaneous inter-
    pretations in Spanish and French. Representatives of 44 nations
    attended. (State Dept. Release 108)
May 17: Gemini IX mission was scrubbed when Atlas booster failed to place
    Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) in planned 185-mi. (298-km.) cir-
    cular orbit. Launch of Gemini 9 with Command Pilot Thomas Stafford
    and Pilot Eugene Cernan was to have followed 99 min. after Atlas-Agena
    launch; Gemini spacecraft was to rendezvous and dock with Gatv to
    evaluate extravehicdar life support and maneuvering equipment and
    procedures.
       Simultaneous countdown of the Gemini Launch Vehicle/Spacecraft
    and the Atlas-Agena had progressed smoothly and the Atlas launch was
    normal until 121 sec. after liftoff. Then, said the Flight Safety Review
                                                                          181
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Board: “The Atlas No. 2 booster engine swiveled to an extreme hardover
    position about 10 sec. before booster engine cutoff. The other booster
    engine and the sustainer engine, acting under auto pilot control, con-
    tinued to work to counter the asymmetrical thrust.
        “After booster separation, the vehicle continued the flight under SUS-
    tained thrust but at a down angle. It had also rolled to a position where
    ground guidance could not lock on or reacquire. Signals to shut down
    the sustainer engine and inhibit ignition of the Agena engine were sent
    i nd acted upon by the vehicle. Agena separated on schedule and both
    vehicles plunged into the sea.”
        Gemini IX-A mission was scheduled for May 31-and             later re-
    scheduled for June 1-using Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda)
    as target vehicle. (NASA Releases 66-97, 66-124; MSC Roundup, 5/27/66,
    1;Wash. Eve. Star, 5/17/66, A l , A6; Lewis, Wush. Post, 5/18/66, Al,
    A6; NYT, 5/18/66, 1, 26)
Muy 17: In its 17th annual report, the U.N. Commission to Study the Orga-
    nization of Peace said the General Assembly should “declare the title of
    the international community” to the high seas and outer space. Six
    reasons were cited: (1) to avoid conflicts over them between nations;
     (2) to keep their resources from being wasted; (3) to prevent their
    military use; (4) to prevent their contamination; (5) to ensure that
    all nations benefit from their resources; and (6) to provide the U.N.
    with an independent source of income.
        Report continued: “Member nations are not willing to pay assess-
    ments adequate for the task they expect the United Nations to per-
    form. The revenues of the United Nations must therefore be augmented
    by independent sources of income. No one can estimate now what
     the income of the United Nations might be from its granting licenses
    for the exploitation of the resources of the seas and the revenues
    which should accrue to it from outer space communications. It is
     estimated, however, that the amount of money to be realized certainly
     should make an important contribution to the United Nations budget.
                                                 .
    Furthermore, it should help pay for . . technical assistance to the
     developing states.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 5/18/66; Oatis, Wush. Post,
     5/19/66, 65)
* 150-sec. static firing of Saturn S-11-T, an all-systems version of Saturn
     V booster’s 2nd stage, was conducted at NASA Mississippi Test Facility.
     In captive ground test of Nation’s largest, most powerful hydrogen-
     oxygen engine (200,000 lbs. thrust), all major test objectives were met:
     1,100 measurements were taken; gimbaling of 4 of the 5 engines-
     which in flight would provide stability and control to the stage-was
     performed. (MSFC Rclease 66-108)
              LUNA x spacecraft, in lunar orbit since April 3, had completed
0 U.S.S.R.’s

     349 revolutions, covered distance of over 5 million km. (3.1 million mi.) ,
     and transmitted data for 178 communications periods with all instru-
     ments functioning normally. (Tass, 5/17/66)
* U.S.S.R. had developed Polaris-type missiles which could be fired by
     remote control from containers planted under the sea, diplomatic
     sources reported. (UPI, NYT, 5/18/66)
0 Intensive investigation by GSFC and contractors had not yet determined

     causes of OAO I failure April 10. OSSA Review Board of Observatory-
     class Spacecraft would continue analysis of failure as a primary objec-
     tive. (NASA Proj. Off.)
182               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 18: L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth flew X-15 No. 2 for 81 sec. in test to
    measure stability and control of X-15 with ventral fin attached. He
    reached 3,689 mph (mach 5.43) and 99,000-ft. altitude. Flight was 158th
    in NASA/USAF X-15 research program. (mc; X-15 Proj. Off.)
  In letter to Congress transmitting report on the Nation’s oceanographic
    work, President Johnson urged that funds be voted to continue work on
    Project Mohole. House Appropriations Committee had denied (May 5)
    $19.7-million Presidential request for NSF work on Mohole in FY 1967.
    Total cost was estimated as $110 million; about $25 million had already
    been spent. President Johnson wrote: “The Mohole Project will provide
    the answer to many basic questions about the earth’s crust and the
    origin of ocean basins. It will teach us how to drill in the ocean depths-
    the prelude to the future exploitation of resources at the bottom of the
    sea.” (Pres. Doc., 5/23/66, 661; AP, NYT, 5/19/66, 23; Wash. Post,
    5/19/66, A6)
  U.S.S.R.’s third MOLNIYA I comsat, launched April 25, successfully carried
    out “first experiment in observing the earth and taking television
    pictures of our planet” when it transmitted photographs from 30,000-
    to 40,000-km. (18,634- to 24,845-mi.) altitude. Lenses and light filters
    of television camera, focused on earth by means of autonomous focus-
    ing system, were changed to obtain images of earth on Werent scales
    and to observe earth’s surface elements under different illumination.
    (Tass, 5/18/66)
* Summing up the effect of May 17 loss of Gemini IX mission’s Agena
    Target Vehicle, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star:
      “.. . it is obvious that at the very least the American space effort has
    lost three weeks of precious time and possibly $25 million in money-
                                                  ..
    the cost of the lost hardware plus overhead. .
       “One thing should be clear from the experience of Gemini 9.
       “There was nothing of omission or commission that can be charged
    against NASA in the failure of the Agena’s Atlas launching rocket. If
    the hackneyed phrase ‘random failure’ ever was properly used, it was
    in describing yesterday’s trouble.
       “The Atlas, as a standard space launching vehicle, has had 49 suc-
    cesses in 52 attempts over the last three years-a better success record
    than the over-all American space program has enjoyed in any year since
    its inception in 1957.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, AB)
0 Eight photoelectric photometer-telescopes were flown from NASA Wallops

    Sta. on Aerobee 150A sounding rocket to 131-mi. (211-km.) altitude to
    measure stellar ultraviolet radiation which did not penetrate earth’s
    atmosphere and could not be observed from the ground. Readings on
    light in four spectral bands were telemetered to ground stations during
    the 7%-min. flight conducted for Univ. of Wisconsin’s Space Astronomy
    Lab. (NASA Releases 66-30, 66-123; NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Editorial comment on May 17 scrubbing of Gemini IX mission: New York
    Times: “For the third time in the past few months, a space experiment
    involving the Atlas-Agena rocket has run into trouble. Late last year a
    sequence of events similar to yesterday’s led to a postponement of the
    original Gemini rendezvous experiment, while in March of this year,
    Gemini 8 nearly met catastrophe when it was docked with an Agena
    target vehicle. There may well be no connection between these three
    separate incidents; but since the Atlas-Agena has been a highly reliable
    and successful instrument in other aspects of the nation’s space pro-
                                                                         183
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   gram, its emergence as the weak link in the Gemini series poses some-
    thing of a mystery. The setback caused by last year’s failure to orbit
    an Agena target vehicle was made up for by the brilliant improvisation
    that permitted Geminis 6 and 7 to rendezvous Iast December. Warned
    by that earlier experience, space officials were better prepared for this
    latest setback. The substitute target rocket they have on hand may per-
    mit much of the originally planned Gemini 9 experiment to take place
    early next month. But for the moment at least, a shadow has again been
    thrown over this country’s lunar program.” (NYT, 5/18/66)
       Washington Post: “We shall do well to prepare for many more dis-
    appointments before man reaches the moon, including the possibility
    of serious accident. What remains essential in the competition is that
    considerations of human safety not be sacrificed to too feverish a
    schedule.” (Wash. Post, 5/18/66)
       Washington Evening Star: “The simple fact is that the United States
    has been incredibly lucky that no catastrophic accident has yet taken
    place during a manned space flight. The further fact is that the nation
    cannot logically expect this luck to last forever. Progress in space, as
    with nearly all human progress, will come at the cost of men’s lives.
    And the nation should be prepared for the day when our luck runs out;
    prepared to accept tragedy as the inevitable concomitant of so ambitious
    a voyage of discovery.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A18)
May 18: Lockheed test pilot Ed Brown flew American-designed, German-
    built F-1O4G Starfighter to 400 mph in 8 sec. from Lagerfeld Base,
    Munich, Germany. Rocket-assisted takeoff from Zero Length Launch
     (Zell) platform at 30” angle demonstrated aircraft’s capability to carry
    out combat operations from hidden areas without airfields. (New York
    News, 5/19/66; Lockheed Aircraft Gorp.)
* Unidentified USAF satellite was launched from Vandenberg AFB by a Scout
    booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
May 19: Interplanetary spacecraft PIONEER VI, launched by NASA Dec.. 16,
    1965, reached perihelion-75.7 million mi. from sun-at 10 p.m. EDT.
    Among findings reported during probe’s 260 million mi. of travel:
    exact measurement of average numbers of particles in interplanetary
    space; fact that high-energy particles thrown out by solar flares (princi-
    pal radiation hazard to man) traveled in well-defined streams which were
    twisted about one another; and solar wind did not travel in straight
    lines. PIONEER VI had identified new ion (singly ionized helium) in solar
    wind, had found magnetic-field effects on solar wind temperatures, and
    discovered that sun’s magnetic field occurred in filament-like “stringers”
    extending out from its corona. Spacecraft had revealed that regions on
    sun produced many solar flares and high solar wind velocities, as re-
    ported by MARINER IV. During its 154 days in solar orbit, spacecraft had
    transmitted to earth 340 million readings of 3,000 separate scientific
    measurements and sent back 3 million readings of 100 individual en-
    gineering measurements. Specifications called for operating life of six
    months (complete on June 16, 1966), but it could be extended if larger
    antennas were available to hear PIONEER VI as it moved progressively
    away and ahead of the earth on its smaller orbit around the sun. (NASA
    Release 66-122)
  XB-70A-only operational aircraft that approximated size, weight, and
    speed of proposed supersonic transport (Sst)-successfully made SUS-
    tained 2,000-mph (mach 3) flight at 70,000-ft. altitude for 32 min. from
184                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Edwards AFB. Although air friction on exterior surfaces caused heat
    buildup of 620”F, crew inside cockpit enjoyed 75°F environment,
    proving aircraft’s skin and internal systems could withstand this
   temperature range. Flight accomplished major goal in USAF’S XB-70 test
   program and proved that sustained “triple sonic” speed was possible
   for larger aircraft. (AFFTC Release 66-4-7)
Muy 19: Supersonic transport (Sst) would ‘‘grow one foot in length” when
   it reached its normal cruising speed of 1,800 mph-result of metal’s
   expansion and contraction during transition between subsonic and
   supersonic flight-reported AP. “At altitudes for subsonic flight, an
    SST will be exposed to temperatures as low as 65 degrees below zero.




Muy 19: XB-70 research aircraft, shown here in an earlier flight. Later this year NASA
would join USAF in using XB-70 to investigate sonic booms and other high-speed flight
phenomena.


    But in 17 minutes it can reach supersonic altitudes where the tempera-
    ture on the outside of the fuselage will be 450 degrees.’’ (AP, Phil.
    Eve. Bull., 5/19/66)
  Cuba and U.S.S.R. had signed agreement to improve Cuba’s meteorological
    service and hurricane detection system, reported the New York Times.
    Agreement provided for “meteorological laboratory” equipped with
    Soviet radar and instruments which would enable Cuba to receive
   weather data from all over the world and to exchange aerological sound-
   ings with the Soviet Union. (NYT, 5/19/66,8)
                                                                            185
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 19: William Hines charged in Washington Evening Star that publicity
    given to proposed U S . supersonic transport (Sst) was “. . . part of a
     propaganda barrage aimed at the American taxpayer, who in the years
     ahead will be called upon to underwrite deficits clearly predictable in
     building and operating a costly fleet of airplanes capable of spanning the
     Atlantic in two hours.
        “The SST program has been publicized since the program’s inception
     in 1963 with the same combination of gobbledygook and public-relations
     hokum used so successfully in merchandising the moon program.
     Technological challenge, the asserted psychological-spiritual imperative,
     and the added spur of an international ‘race’-all are cited as reasons
     compelling development of a 2,000-mile-an-hoursuper-airliner.
        “Actually the SST, when built and placed in operation, will be no more
     a free-enterprise product than the Saturn-5 moon rocket is. It will be
     built to government specifications, by contractors selected by the govern-
     ment, with development costs largely if not entirely underwritten by
     the government.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/66)
May 20: Test version of Surveyor spacecraft designed for unmanned soft-
     landing on moon made smooth 900-ft. descent from a balloon over
     Holloman AFB in successful final test prior to scheduled May 30 flight.
     Three liquid-fueled engines, operating on information from two radar
     systems aboard spacecraft, slowed it from descent speed of about 50
      mph to about 3.5 mph for landing. Test, second successful Surveyor
     descent without parachutes, had been delayed more than two hours by
     strong winds and optical problems. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/20/66, AI;
     AP, Chic. Trib., 5/21/66)
* Saturn V all-systems 2nd stage (S-11) was successfully fired at MTF for
     355 sec.-its full duration. The big stage developed 1-million-lbs.thrust
     from five hydrogen-and-oxygen-powered5-2 engines. (MSFC Release
     66-116)
   Radio astronomy experiment designed to measure average intensity of
      cosmic radio noise originating outside the solar system was launched
      from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Javelin rocket on 20-min.
      ballistic flight with 570-mi. (918-km.) apogee. Measurements were
      made at frequencies which could not be accurately detected by ground-
      based receivers. Data would aid study of galaxy’s formation. (Wallops
      Release 66-31)
   Five successful sounding rocket launchings were conducted from the deck
      of USNS Range Recoverer during eclipse of sun in Greece, NASA announced.
      Launchings of the Boosted Arcas rockets, part of a cooperative project
      of the Greek National Committee for Space Research and NASA, were
      planned to investigate ionization of the upper amosphere during solar
      eclipse. (NASA Release 66-32; NASA Rpt. SRL)
   USN announced successful completion of flight tests of V/Stol XC-142A
      aircraft aboard U.S.S. Bennington. Tests included 44 short and six
      vertical takeoffs at speeds of up to 35 mph backward and as much as
      400 mph forward at 25,000-ft. altitude. (DOD Release 443-66)
 0 In a press conference, NIMBUS 11 project officials at GSFC said the meteorolog-

      ical satellite was “exceeding all expectations” with the amount and
      quality of data it was returning to earth. Launched into nearly circular
      orbit May 15, satellite could “produce in 12 hrs. as much refined
      weather data as took six months to get out of earlier satellites.” (Wash.
      Eve. Star, 5/20/66, A24)
                   AS                                          6
186




Muy 20: U.S. and Greece launch Boosted Arcas sounding rockets from USNS Range Recov-
erer near Koroni Beach, Greece.
                                                                        187
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 20: Checks of distributions of Martian and lunar crater diameters in-
    dicated that the visible surface of Mars was 2.2-to-3 X 109 years old,
    Alan B. Binder, Univ. of Arizona, reported in Science. This result im-
    plied that in the early history of Mars large-scale subaerial erosion oc-
    curred. Of 69 Martian craters with diameters greater than 10 km., 13%
    had central peaks. This compared favorably with the frequency (11.7%)
    of central peaks among lunar craters and may indicate the peaks re-
    sulted from the impact mechanism rather than post-impact volcanism.
    Well-defined system of lineaments shown in MARINER IV photographs
    may indicate that Mars had lost appreciable angular momentum during
    its history. (Binder, Science, 5/20/66, 1053-5)
  NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR Carried grazing
    incidence telescopes and bandpass filters to estimated 107-mi. (172-km.)
    altitude in GSFC experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs. Another
    GsFc-instrumented Aerobee 150 was launched from WSMR eight hours
    later to 121-mi. (195-km.) altitude to obtain solar spectral data from
    2-60 A. Both rockets and their experiments performed satisfactorily.
    (NASA SRL)
           Rpt.
  NASA Goddard Space Flight Center held an “open house,” including
    movies, live demonstrations, and exhibits. ~GSFCRelease G-7-66)
May 21: Boosted Arcas sounding’rocket, last in series launched during solar
    eclipse from USNS Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, carried
    GSFC experiment to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution
    in ionospheric D region. (NASA    Rpt. SRL)
Muy 22: 15-lb. pigtailed monkey, connected to intricate battery of mini-
    aturized instruments, would be launched into earth orbit in 1967 to
    provide US. scientists with 30-day study of his health, JPL announced.
    Monkey-an astronaut stand-in-would          be part of the Biosatellite
    series projected by NASA. Particularly meaningful to NASA’sspace
    biology program would be urinalysis tests, showing changes in calcium
    and other primate urine constituents, which should indicate how
    astronaut’s metabolism might vary during prolonged space flights.
    ARC was in charge of the program. (JPLRelease)
* US. Army claimed 21 world records for its new light observation heli-
    copter, OH-6A. Nu-supervised flights at Edwards AFB resulted in 12
    speed records, and three each for distance, climbing, and sustained
    altitude. Records had been submitted to F6dkration Aeronautique
    Internationale in Paris for official approval. (Chic. Trib., 5/23/66, 16)
Muy 23: Debate began in Senate on authorization of NASA budget for FY
    1967. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said: “It is important to
    note that the pressures creating the great surges in progress-whether
    it be in science, technology, exploration, or economic and social
    development-come from outside forces and considerations. . . .
       “It is these forcing functions which mainly set the pace of progress
    and development. Space is no exception. Indeed, the great surge in
    space research and exploration is a classic example of this historical
    pattern. It was these forcing functions which set in motion the revolu-
    tion in science and technology which has brought us to the era we
    know as the Space Age. And it is these forcing functions which today
    and tomorrow will determine our future course and our future policies
                 .
    in space. . .
       “The decisions which confront us today are those which will deter-
    mine whether the history of the last half century will repeat itself a
188              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    few years hence, and whether we will once again experience a bitter
    awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more
    advanced space missions of the future. Indeed, in today’s cold war
    arena, the question boils down to whether this Nation can afford such
    a luxury, in terms of our very survival. For it is clear that future
    leadership in this scientific and technological competition-which has
    such great economic, military, and political significance-will not be
    easily held, nor would it be easily regained once lost.” (CR, 5/23/66,
    10681-2)
May 23: Important information on one of several x-ray sources, observable
    only from space, had been obtained by experiments on March 8 sound-
    ing rocket flight from WSMR, NASA announced. Initial results from data
    analyzed revealed that the angular size of the x-ray source in the con-
    stellation Scorpius, Sco X-1, could not exceed 20 arc-seconds. This
    discovery disagreed with widely held view that this source represented
    an ancient nearby (Milky Way) supernova. It strengthened current
    speculation that the sources in Scorpio and many of the other x-ray
    sources are an entirely new class of celestial objects characterized by
    small angular size which are either undetectable or star-like in visible
    light or radio emission. The detail with which the angular size of this
    x-ray source was measured was more than 20 times greater than any
    previous measurement [see June 17-18]. (NASA Release 66-125)
  USAF launched unidentified satellite from WTR with Thor-Agena D booster.
    (US.   Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of William B.
    Rieke, NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and former
    president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc., as Acting Assistant
    Administrator for Administration. Mr. Rieke would assume new duties
    beginning May 30, replacing John B. Young who resigned to become
    an assistant to BOB Director. (NASA Release 66-131; NASA Ann.)
  NASA semiannual procurement report revealed continuing sharp upsurge
    in use of incentive contracts. During six-month period, NASA had
    awarded 41 new incentive contracts and converted two cost-plus-fixed-
    fee contracts to incentive awards. Tar et value of all incentive con-
    tracts as of Dec. 31, 1965, was $2.184 %illion-more than three times
    the total at the end of first half of FY 1965. (Text)
0 A NASA Contract Administration Services Representative’s office-headed

    by Donald R. Mulholland, Deputy Director of NASA’s western Opera-
    tions Office-had been established at headquarters of AFSC’S Air Force
    Contract Management Div. (AFCMD), Los Angeles, Calif. New office,
    which completed network of representatives’ offices in major DOD
    centers, would “provide liaison between AFCMD and NASA elements on
                                             ..
    contract administration services support. .,’ (NASA Hq. Bull., 5/23/66,
    6)
0 International Galabert Astronautical Prize was awarded jointly to MSFC

    Director Dr. Wernher von Braun “for the whole of his work in the
    United States, particularly on the Saturn project,” and to French
    space technicians Jean-Pierre Causse, of the Centre National $Etudes
    Spatiales (CNES), and Roger Chevalier, of the Societe pour ]’Etude et la
    RBalisation d’Engins Balistiques (SEREB) , “as symbols of the French
    space effort.” The $4,000 prize would be presented at October meeting
    of International Astronautical Congress in Paris. (French Embassy;
    Reuters, NYT, 5/24/66, 11)
                                                                         189
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 23: Britain’s W. J. Strang, deputy technical director of the Anglo-
    French Concorde Sst project, dropped all references to the Concorde’s
    being “the world’s first supersonic transport” from the prepared text
    of an address before the Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn. in New York.
    When asked about this omission, Bernard A. Darrieux of France’s Sud
    Aviation Co. replied that French aviation experts who had visited the
    U.S.S.R. and who were informed of Soviet Dlans said there was a
    “strong possibility the U.S.S.R. may be firstly (Norris, Wash. Post,
    5/24/66, A28)
  Astronaut Scott Carpenter decided not to attend Second International
    Congress on Oceanography in Moscow after learning that the US.
    ocean research vessel U.S.S. Silas Bent had been denied permission to
    dock at Leningrad in connection with the conference. Carpenter, who
    had participated in the Sealab I1 experiment in living and working
    underwater, would have attended as an aquanaut and would have been
    the first astronaut to visit Moscow. NAS had designated Silas Bent to
    respond to Soviet invitation for oceanographic ships to visit Soviet
    ports during Congress so delegates couId visit them but Soviet Foreign
    Ministry had refused permission. (AP,    Balt. Sun, 5/24/66)
  NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) descent engine, Phase 11,
    test began at Arnold Engineering Development Center. (AEDC)
May 23-25: Harsh indictment by A. V. Cleaver, chief engineer for rockets
    at Rolls-Royce, of European politicians and civil servants involved in
    the European Launcher Development Organization (ELDO) opened the
    sixth annual European Space Symposium at Brighton, U.K.: “I believe
    the future of ELDO is extremely bleak, unless Europe as a whole and
    the United Kingdom in particular, adopts an entirely fresh approach
    to its problems.. . . Europe could have made a better showing if her
    politicians had been of equal caliber to her technical men, insofar as
    their grasp of 20th century realities was concerned. . . . The lesson
    is this: at any time, the leading nations are those preeminent in technol-
    ogy, usually in the technology of transport.” Cleaver noted that the
    European nations in ELDO had, among them, about 120% of the U S ’ S
    population and more than 50% of the U S . gross national product,
    and should be doing far more than the present one-twentieth of the
    U S . space effort. (Coleman, Av. T k . , 5/30/66, 32)
0 Optimistic assessment of prospects for exploring Mars during the next

     decade and finding some form of life there was presented by scientists
    at the AAs-sponsored symposium on “The Search for Extraterrestrial
    Life” in Anaheim, Calif. Carlos De Moraes, director of planetary
    program studies for Martin Co., visualized a series of space flights
     from 1969 to 1979 and culminating in the landing of two 3,500-lb.
     “space buses.” First flight, in 1969, would be of an 850-lb. spacecraft
     that would provide televised mapping of the Mars surface and take
     measurements of the atmosphere. After a series of intermediary
     flights, the space buses would land in 1979 and release both automated
    biological laboratories and roving vehicles that would explore and
    gather samples at points away from the immediate landing area.
        Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of JPL noted that “any form of life, however
    primitive, found on Mars would be of immense scientific value.” He
     said that no matter how bleak the picture, the possibilities of life on
     Mars should be explored to the fullest because that planet appeared
     to be the likeliest site for life beyond the earth.
190               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

       GE engineers P. G. Thome and Ernest J. Merz described giant
    clamshell under development that would be part of a system launched
    by a Saturn V booster in 1973. The thick disc-shaped object would
    open like a giant mollusk when landed on Mars, releasing devices that
    would start gathering information on atmosphere, weather, soil, and
    life. Information would be telemetered back to earth. Disc could be
    powered by radioisotope-fueled generator that could keep it in operation
    for up to six months. (Texts)
       Speculating about meetings with intelligent beings from or on
    another planet, Harold D. Lasswell, Yale Univ. professor of law and
    political science, asked: “Would earthlings unite or wage interstellar
    war? Would we have to kow-tow to a more advanced civilization, or
    dominate an inferior one? Suppose they had no more, or even less,
    feelings of love and responsibility? Might meeting with an advanced
    society push man further toward creating a culture of frantic fun?”
           Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
    (Ap,
May 24: Senate unanimously passed by voice vote the NASA FY 1967
    authorization bill of $5,008,000,000-$121,135,850 more than the sum
    voted by the House but $4 million less than President Johnson had
    requested. In speech on Senate floor during passage of bill, Sen.
    Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) said that if the US. failed to continue
    development of solid propellants, it would fail in the one thing it
    “should be doing to catch up with the Soviet Union in the field of
    space effort.” Senate bill included only the $3.5 million requested by
    the Administration for one additional firing of a half-length 260-in.
    solid rocket motor. In other debate, Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.) said
    he felt that national priorities were “substantially out of order when
    the Senate, in the course of 5 or 10 minutes, passes a $5 billion authori-
    zation bill to send a man to the moon,” and that he hoped the space
    effort could be put on an international cooperation and not a competitive
    basis. Clark was joined in his remarks against the bill by Sen. J. William
    Fulbright (D-Ark.), who said such action was “typical, today, of any
    bill relating either to outer space or the military . . . in my view,
    it is an outrageous distortion of priorities.” (CR, 5/24/66, 10715-20)
  NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR reached 82-mi. (132-km.) altitude
    in GSFC-Princeton Univ. experiment designed to study ultraviolet
    radiation of the star Zeta Ophiuchus. Burnthrough in rocket’s com-
    bustion chamber at 50.1 sec. caused underperformance, and payload
    did not observe primary target. Most data were lost through long
    exposure of payload film to direct sunlight before recovery. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
0 U.S.S.R.  launched COSMOS CIX carrying scientific instruments for con-
    tinued space research. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,305 km. (810.5
    mi.); perigee, 219 km. (136 mi.); period, 99.8 min.; inclination, 48.5”.
    Instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 5/25/66, 2, uSS-T
    Trans.)
0 First Europa 1booster for European Launcher Development Organization

     (ELDO) was successfully launched from Woomera Range although
    malfunction in an impact indicator at a downrange radar station led to
    early reentry. Booster, composed of British Blue Streak first stage and
    dummy French and German second and third stages, was programed
    for 143-sec. flight. Range safety officer cut flight short by eight seconds
    when radar indicated Europa 1 was heading off course to the left.
                                                                             191
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    There was no malfunction in the rocket itself. Reduction of data later
    showed booster had been on a correct course at 30.3-mi. (48.8-km.)
    altitude. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics officials estimated test was 90%
                                        were achieved.” Europa 1 was spon-
    successful, and that CCobjectives
    sored by U.K., France, Australia, Italy, West Germany, the Nether-
    lands, and Belgium. (UPI, Wash. Post, 5/24/66, A12; NYT, 5/25/66,22;
    Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 32)
May 24: NASA and West Germany’s Ministry for Scientific Research had
    signed cooperative agreement to investigate the physics of comets,
    interplanetary medium, and earth’s magnetosphere. Initial experiments,
    to be launched in fall 1966, would release vaporized metal in upper
    atmosphere, creating artificial ion clouds which would be observed
    from ground. Results would be reviewed to determine desirability of
    conducting similar experiments on larger vehicle at a distance of
    several earth radii. Under agreement, BMwF would provide rocket
    payloads, supplementary cameras, and photometric equipment. NASA
    would furnish one Javelin and one Nike-Tomahawk rocket, launching
    range, support facilities, and equipment for optical observations.
     (NASA Release 66-121)
0 Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received Great Silver Medal of

    Paris from Mayor Albert Chavanac for being “one of the pioneers of
    space, who was able to give a human aspect to the experiment he
    attempted so successfully.” (AP, NYT, 5/25/66, 33)
May 24-25: Representatives of NASA and its major spacecraft and launch
    vehicle contractors attended Saturn Manufacturing Review meeting at
    MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility. Meeting, sponsored annually by
    MSFC, was held to “promote the interchange of space vehicle manu-
    facturing technology.” (MSFC Release 6-115)
May 24-26: Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn. held annual meeting in New
    York.
       AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, in luncheon address,
    cited three factors which could restrain full advancement of technol-
    ogy: “The first of these constraints is the relative silence of our
    opponents. A few years ago the headlines were full of Soviet threats
    of orbital bombs, missiles that could ‘hit a fly in the sky,’ and similar
     weapons. Today, by contrast, the Soviets are not boasting about their
                                  ...
     new weapon developments.          The second constraint is the argument
    made in some quarters that U S . military research and development
     could be ‘provocative’ to our opponents. This argument overlooks the
     fact that our very existence as a free society is ‘provocative’ to our
                                                                      . ..
     opponents, because it contradicts their theory of history.            The
     third constraint is the immediate need for large funds to support our
     forces in Vietnam.. . .,, To overcome these constraints, General
     Schriever said, “we must harness our management experience and
     technological knowledge to serve the national purpose,” in an effort
                                                      . .”
     involving every “segment of our national life. . (Text)
        Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
     Space Flight, discussed implications of 1968 space budget decisions.
     He said U S . today was ‘‘not ahead in this deadly serious competition,”
     and “strong and increasing effort” would be required “to prevent the
     Soviets from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space.” (Text)
        Nike X system had been improved so that it could not only destroy
     hostile satellites but also provide defensive cover for the entire Nation,
192               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   reported Dr. Oswald H. Lange, chief scientist for the Nike X project
   office at Redstone Arsenal, Ala. He described the Nike X system as
   employing two interceptors-the        long-range Zeus and short-range,
   high acceleration Sprint. (NYT, 5/26/66, 4)
      R. I. Mitchell, vice-president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s JetStar
   program, said that Lockheed would produce advanced version of four-
   engine JetStar business aircraft capable of taking off on shorter run-
   ways and carrying more cargo and passengers than previous models.
   New Dash 8 JetStar, powered by Pratt & Whitney JT12A-8 engine,
   would reduce runway requirements from 6,425 ft. to 5,550 ft. and
   would have 1,000 fpm faster rate of climb. (Lockheed Release)
      Two space rescue systems being tested for possible use by USAF were
   discussed by Harold L. Bloom of General Electric CO.% Re-Entry
   Systems Dept.: (1) “Emergency cocoon”-an             inflatable shelter to
   maintain astronaut in a “livable environment” while awaiting rescue-
   would use thin silicone rubber membrane in dacron and Mylar skin to
   provide CQ, and water vapor control; (2) one-man reentry vehicle for
   self-rescue--“Manned Orbital Operations Safety Equipment (MOOSE)”
   -would consist of foldable heat shield bonded to Mylar bag. Astronaut
   would zip himself into MOOSE bag, leave spacecraft, and initiate poly-
   urethane foaming process; foam would insulate and support him
   during reentry oriented with small rocket in an attitude/de-orbit
   package. Form-fitting couch, designed to be traveling at less than
   30 feet per second at the time of impact, would also double as a life raft.
   (Text; Wilford, NYT, 5/8/66, 66)
Muy 25: NASA successfully launched EXPLORER XXXII (AE-B) aeronomy
   satellite from ETR with three-stage Delta booster. The 2nd stage burned
   8 sec. longer than planned-failing to cut off and running to propellant
   depletion-and boosted the satellite into a higher orbit than planned.
   Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,688 mi. (2,717.7 km.), as opposed to
   planned 750 mi.; perigee, 180 mi. (289.8 km.) ; period, 116 min.; inclina-
   tion to equator, 65”. Launch was third time Delta 2nd stage had failed
   to shut down on time and sent 3rd stage and payload to higher altitudes.
      Built by GSFC, and the last of the original satellites outlined by NASA
   when it was established in 1958, the 495-1b., 35-in.- dia. EXPLORER XXXII
   was designed to investigate temperatures, composition, densities, and
   pressure in the upper atmosphere and their diurnal, seasonal, and
   annual variations on a global basis. NASA later announced that adjust-
   ment of onboard programing of spacecraft’s sensors had compensated
   for higher apogee and useful scientific measurements would be taken
   that were not planned originally. All eight experiments onboard were
   functioning “as expected” and spacecraft was spin stabilized at the
   required 30 rpm.
      First aeronomy satellite, EXPLORER XVII, was launched April 3, 1563.
   Results included first direct measurement of neutral helium; first in
   situ measurements of concentrations of neutral atmospheric constit-
   uents at satellite altitudes as a function of time and solar activity; first
   data revealing difference by a factor of two (approx.) in value for atmos-
   pheric density as determined from onboard sensors and from changes in
   satellite’s orbit; first detailed description of diurnal and latitudinal
   behavior of summer ionosphere near altitude of F, maximum over
   eastern US. at time of solar maximum. Results had indicated more
   specialized measurements were needed to reveal basic atmospheric
                                                                           193
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    processes. EXPLORER XXXII incorporated many improvements aimed at
                                     Releases 66-96, 66-139; AP, Wash. Post,
    achieving this objective. (NASA
    5/26/66, E17; WSJ, 5/26/66, 1)
May 25: Fifth anniversary of President John ? .?Kennedy’s call before a joint
    session of Congress to undertake a manned lunar landing in this
    decade.
0 Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago “to achieving

    the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and
    returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the
    Washington Evening Star on the progress made:“Of course, Kennedy
    did not ‘invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation
    to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program
    possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going
    for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American
    astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier.
        “The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program
    were there. What he did-with advice and urging from many advisers
    including the then Vice President Johnson and the late ‘grand old
                                                        .
    man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden-was set a goal. . .
        “The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous
    time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month
    just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous
    setbacks in what had been called ‘the battle for men’s minds.’ On
    April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth-a full 10 months,
    as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat.
    And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs
    adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
  First full-scale Apollo/Saturn V booster-spacecraft combination rolled
    out at NASA Kennedy Space Center exactly five years after President
    Kennedy committed U.S. to manned lunar landing by 1969. Designated
    AS500-F, the 365-ft., 500,000-lb. facilities vehicle was moved from
    Vehicle Assembly Building (Vab) on 3,000-ton7 diesel-powered, steel-
    link-tread crawler transporter to Pad A for use to verify launch facilities,
    train launch crews, and develop test and checkout procedures. (MSFC
    Release 66-114)
0 USAF Flight Safety Review Board announced it had pinpointed cause of

     the Atlas booster failure during the aborted Gemini IX mission May 17:
     gimbaling of the booster engine which forced the Atlas-Agena into a
    hardover trajectory was caused by a short circuit in the electrical
     command system of the engine pitch servo valve. Although several
     other failures could have caused a similar occurrence, the Board said,
     only this one could have caused the exact set of data received from the
     launch vehicle. Malfunction was called a random failure, but to ensure
     that it would not happen again, new tests would be made on the Atlas
     and electrical connections in all new boosters would be x-rayed.
        NASA scheduled the mission, redesignsted Gemini IX-A, for June 1.
     (UPI, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; NYT, 5/26/66; NASA Proj. Off.)
  U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in the Pacific
     to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Another series of
     tests, which had begun April 24, was being continued to improve
     booster rockets necessary to propel manned spacecraft to moon.
      (Tass, 5/25/66, USS-T Trans.)
194              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Muy 25: NASA had selected Boeing Co. for negotiations on $5-million, three-
    year contract to provide “technology for high-power solar arrays” for
    manned and unmanned space missions. Program-part             of research
    effort to increase amount of power for each pound of overall power-
    generating system-would include design and fabrication of nonflight
    experimental model of a 1,25O-sq.-ft. deployable solar panel assembly
    which would have 12.5-kw. output if completely covered with electri-
    cally active solar cells. Completed model would be tested under simulated
    space environment conditions and would serve as test model in solving
    major problems of deploying large-area structures, compact packaging,
    and design of thin solar cells and lightweight material. Contract would
    be managed by JPL. (NASA Release 66-133)
  In a press interview, Capt. Charles Oglesby (USAF) of the North American
    Air Defense Command (NORAD) tracking center in Moorestown, N.J.,
    said scanners were checking on 1,100 items in orbit, including function-
    ing payloads and debris. 95% of items in orbit were from the U.S.
    Of payloads, the US. had 167; U.S.S.R., 43; U.K. and Canada, two
    each; and France, three. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
* USAF awarded Ling-Temco-Vought (LTV) Aerospace Corp. a $353,000
    contract to develop improved techniques and materials for “rapid
    landing sites” for V/Stol aircraft and helicopters. Contract called for
    quick-setting, resinous materials that could be sprayed on ground by
    unskilled persons in remote areas where it would be too costly and
    time-consuming to build conventional landing sites and permanent
    shelter facilities. (AFSC Release 96.66)
* Eastern Airlines president Floyd D. Hall announced company had
    bought options on two French-U.K. Concorde Sst’s for service on
    Pacific routes and to Denver and Seattle. Eastern previously had
    taken options on two U.S. Sst’s. (VSJ, 5/25/66, 14)
Muy 25-27: Twenty astronauts toured MSFC laboratories and test facilities
    and received briefings on Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles.
     (MSFC Release 66-99)
May 26.- MARINER IV spacecraft, which took the world’s first close-up
    pictures of Mars July 14, 1965, was again in contact with earth, report-
    ing on the space environment and its own operating performance after
    18 mos. of flight. NASA said telemetry from MARINER IV, received over a
     197.5-million-mi. radio link with the Deep Space Network‘s Goldstone
    Tracking Station, indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating
    properly. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, MARINER IV had exceeded its design
    life by more than 100% and gave indications it might function until
     1968. (NASA Release 66-135; JPL Release)
  President Johnson issued executive order directing Federal agencies to
     “provide leadership” in prevention, control, and abatement of air
    pollution. (Pres. Doc., 5/30/66, 696)
e A superior glass-covered, super-blue solar cell for space use had been
    developed by scientists at LRC. “Super-blue” referred to cell’s extremely
    high sensitivity to blue light-the higher frequency rays of sunlight
    that reach only the top surface of the solar cell. Since experiments had
    indicated that radiation damage was most severe in cell’s response to
    low-frequency red light, program to develop cells ultraresponsive to
    blue light was begun and the thin, lightweight, super-blue cell evolved.
     (LRC Release 66-25)
                                                                         195
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 26: USAF awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. $12,916,000 contract
    for Agena rocket launch services from April 1966 to September 1967.
    Work would be at Vandenberg AFB. (DOD Release 462-66)
May 27: Dr. Walter A. Radius, career Foreign Service officer who had been
    on detail to NASA from State Dept. since 1963, was appointed special
    assistant to NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis, Breene M.
    Kerr. Dr. Radius would assume new duties beginning June 6. (NASA
    Release 66-129; PIO)
0 NASA selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and Martin Co. for negotia-

    tions of parallel one-year $1-million fixed-price study contracts on
    integration of experiments and experiments support equipment in
    space vehicles and spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications (Aa)
    missions. Companies would define experiment integration work (pay-
    load integration in Apollo lunar module, Saturn launch vehicle instru-
    ment unit, and S-IVB stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles.)
    Contracts would be managed by MSFC. (NASA Release 66-137)
0 Breene M.     Kerr, NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis,
    announced appointment of Dr. Irwin P. Halpern as Director, Policy
    Analysis Staff, Office of the Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis.
    Dr. Halpern, a CIA speciaht on Soviet and Chinese Communist
    political and military affairs and doctrine, would assume new duties
    beginning June 5. (NASA Release 66-130)
0 New F-4J Phantom jet, developed         by McDonnell Aircraft Corp. for
    carrier use by USN and USMC, made its first public flight at Lambert-St.
    Louis Municipal Airport. Aircraft had higher maximum speed, greater
    range, higher combat ceiling, shorter takeoff distance, and greater
    combat capabilities than other Phantom models. (McDonnell Release)
  Memorandum of understanding for cooperative meteorological project
    called “Eole” was signed by NASA and French Centre Nationale d’Etudes
    Spatiales (CNES). To gather data on atmospheric circulation, Eole
    project would use network of constant level balloons-which would
    drift with the wind and act as tracers of air masses-and an earth-
    orbiting satellite-which would record pressure and temperature data
    telemetered from balloons for later transmission to ground stations.
     CNES would be responsible for “development and launching of the
    balloons and their payloads and for the design, fabrication and testing
    of the proposed satellite.’’ NASA would provide Scout rocket, handle
    launching, and train personnel. (NASA Release 66-156)
May 28: Second-stage ground test model of three-stage Saturn V booster
     exploded while being removed from test stand at MTF, injuring five
    persons-none seriously. Stage, which had five hydrogen-oxygen J-2
     engines capable of generating 1 million Ibs. thrust, had been tested
     May 25 in ground firing which had been terminated after 195 sec. when
     hydrogen line leak caused automatic cutoff. At time of explosion,
     technicians were trying to determine cause of hydrogen leak. No
     hydrogen was in tank when explosion occurred; cause of explosion
     had not been determined. (UPI, Wash. Post, 5/28/66, A18; Wilford,
     NYT, 5/30/66, 22)
  Gemini IX-A was officially cleared for launching June 1 on three-day
     mission that would include rendezvous, docking, and extravehicular
     activity. After hearing reports from the astronauts, launching pad
     crews, and the worldwide tracking network, William C. Schneider,
1%               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   mission director, declared Gemini IX-A “ready to go.” (NYT, 5/29/66,
    58; UPI, Wush. Post, 5/28/66, Al)
May 28: NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George
   E. Mueller, speaking at meeting of Texas Radiation Advisory Board
    and Texas Atomic Energy Commission in Freeport, Texas, cited
   reasons that it was vital the U S . be pre-eminent in space: “First,
    consider the nations1 security, or peace-keeping, aspects.
       “Although our space program is a peaceful endeavor, it cannot help
   but have a profound effect on our future military position. Although
    there is no military space force in being in any nation’s arsenal, it
    would be disastrous for the United States to lack the basic understand-
    ing, the basic technology, and the basic engineering which would be
   required if an aggressor should choose to make space a battlefield.. . .
       “In the international arena, our space program-and Manned Space
    Flight in particular-may be considered as a measure of our ability to
    compete with a formidable rival, and as a criterion of our ability to
   maintain technological eminence.
       “The influence of our scientific and technological progress and
   prowess is and has been one of the deciding factors in keeping the
                                              ..
    Cold War peace over the past 20 years. . Should we fall behind in
   the area of space technology, we would jeopardize our national interests,
    on earth as well as in space.” (Text)
Muy 29: The Nation was facing a crisis in space planning, NASA Adminis-
    trator James E. Webb said in a press interview at NASA Hq. The question
   was what to do with the Apollo project after men had landed on the
   moon. The answer would determine whether the U S . remained a
     CC
      major spacefaring nation,” and must be found within a year, he said-
   long before the first lunar landing yas made. Search for the answer
    had been postponed several times because the problem seemed remote
    and budgets were tight. “It is extremely important not to think you
    can postpone the decision again. I think it is imperative to have a
    thoroughgoing national debate on whether we want to go past the
    point of no return.” If the Nation did not mind being second to the
    moon or chose to “dismantle the Apollo machine without recovering
   its great investment,” he would accept that, he said. But he did not
    believe that either the Congress or the public had consciously reached
    these decisions. He feared they just had not thought about them.
    (Clark, NYT, 5/30/66, 1, 22)
 Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev described U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144
    supersonic airliner in Soviet trade-union newspaper Trud. Four-engine
    aluminum aircraft would carry 121 passengers at 1,500 mph (compared
    with US. supersonic transport’s 250 passengers at 2,000 mph) ; speed
    had been deliberately limited to allow construction ‘?of highly durable
    aluminum alloys,” Tupolev said. Tu-144 would be needle-nosed with
    small delta wing far back on fuselage and four jet engines in single
    container under rear section. Aircraft would be operational in “the
    nearest future”-possibly by 1970. (Anderson, NYT, 5/30/66, 36C)
Muy 29-June 4: Mapping the moon for man’s first lunar landing was dis-
    cussed by leading scientists at an 11-nation International Conference
    on Selenodesy at Manchester, England. (Reuters, NYT, 5/30/66, 22)
Muy 30-June I: NASA’s    SURVEYOR I was successfully launched from ETR by
    Atlas-Centaur (AC-10) booster on 63-hr. direct ascent lunar transfer
    trajectory. Spacecraft-carrying survey television system and instru-
                                                                        197
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   mentation to measure lunar surface bearing strength, temperatures,
   and radar reflectivity-was first in series of seven designed to prove out
   design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic
   scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. It would
   softland on the moon June 2.
       After SURVEYOR I separated from Atlas, spacecraft pointed its solar
   panels toward the sun to power its equipment; at five hours GET,
   sensing devices fixed on the star Canopus for cruise attitude stabiliza-
   tion.
       SURVEYOR I spacecraft successfully completed mid-course correction
   of flight path on electronic commands relayed from antenna near JPL.
   Only flaw in launching occurred within one hour GET, when radio
   signals indicated that one of two antennas on spacecraft might have
   failed to deploy. JPL’S Surveyor project manager Robert J. Parks said
   the problem was “not going to preclude a possibility of getting full
   success out of this mission since one antenna is sufficient to receive
   radioed commands unless the spacecraft gets in a position where the
   working antenna is out of range of earth.” The other antenna was
    properly deployed and working perfectly.
       Surveyor program was under direction of OSSA Lunar and Planetary
    Program Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; prime con-
    tractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co.
    Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was under direction of LRC. (NASA Release
    66-127; Wilford, NYT, 5/31/66, 1, 33; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/31/66,
    Al)
May 30: Planned expansion of the global communications satellite network
    of the 50-nation Intelsat was being postponed two years as a result of
    pressure by the FCC on ComSatCorp. ComSatCorp was majority share-
    holder and served as manager for Intelsat. Basic question raised by
    FCC was whether the expansion was too ambitious for the traffic that
    would be available. Threatened with FCC veto or modification of its
    application to construct six 1,500-channel satellites for launch in 1968,
    ComSatCorp notified FCC that deployment of the follow-on 6,000-
    channel multipurpose satellite had been postponed from 1969-70 to
     1972 or later. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 31)
0 U.S.S.R.’s LUNA x spacecraft, which entered selenocentric orbit April 3,

    had stopped sending signals after 219 transmissions, Tass announced.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/2/66, A l )
  The “breakthrough” in the air cargo business was discussed by Robert
    Hotz in Aviation Week: “There is no doubt that air cargo is on the
    move. Airline cargo performance in 1965 surpassed forecasts by
     astonishing margins. Domestic cargo soared 25% last year in contrast
     to the airline predictions of 16%. International cargo rocketed 46%-
     with at least one carrier recording a 65% gain-compared with fore-
     casts of a 25% increase. Many airlines are now watching their projected
     cargo goals for 1970 become a reality in 1966.
        “Stuart Tipton, president of the Air Transport Assn. and always a
     conservative spokesman for the airline industry, cited figures in a
     recent speech that forecast 5.2 billion freight ton miles annually by
     1970 and 15.3 billion by 1975. Mr. Tipton noted that, although these
     levels compared with 1.7 billion freight ton miles flown in 1965, the
     forecasts for a decade hence might well ‘be very conservative.’ ”
      (Hotz, Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 21)
198               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

May 30: Astronauts Thomas P. StaKord and Eugene A. Cernan, the Gemini
    IX-A crew, practiced space rendezvous procedures at KSC in preparation
    for their scheduled June 1 mission. (NYT, 5/31/66, 33)
0 “The First Soft Step,” program discussing Project Surveyor and showing
    fight operations facilities, was broadcast on six Alabama Educational
    Television Network stations. Program, hosted by MIT science reporter
    John Fitch, was first in 13-week “Science Reporter” series which had
    been taped on location at four NASA centers and nine contractor plants.
    Second program, to be telecast June 6, would be titled “Landing on the
    Moon” and would concern NASA’s           Lunar Excursion Module. (MSFC
    Release 66-117)
0 Dr. Donald P. Burcham, JPL Voyager program manager, told Aviation Week

    in an interview that heavy funding for the Voyager Mars program was
    anticipated with FY 1968 funds if the Vietnam war did not create new
    funding problems. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 40)
  Adm. William F. Boone (USN, Ret.), Assistant NASA Administrator for
    Defense Affairs, told Missiles and Rockets that under new agreement
    between DOD and NASA-expected to be signed in about two months-
    LRC would modify a liquid hydrogen J-85 jet engine with 200,000-
    500,000 lbs. thrust for use in air-breathing technology development.
    As its contribution to the joint program, USAF would provide F-106
    aircraft for flight tests of engine. (M&R, 5/30/66, 31)
May 31: Soviet proposal for keeping moon free of weapons was presented to
    U.N. Secretary General U Thant by Ambassador Nikolay T. Fedorenko,
    head of the Soviet delegation to the U.N. Four principles were sug-
    gested as basis for international agreement: “1-The moon and other
    celestial bodies should be free for exploration and use by all states
    without any discrimination. All states enjoy freedom of the scientific
    exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies on an equal basis
    and in accordance with the basic principles of international law.
       “2-The moon and other celestial bodies should be used for peaceful
    purposes only. No military bases and installations including installations
    of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction should be stationed
    on the moon and other celestial bodies.
       “3-The exploration and use of the moon and other celestial bodies
    should be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all mankind.
    They are not subject to appropriation or any territorial claim.
       “P-In the course of the exploration of the moon and other celestial
    bodies, the states proceed from the principles of cooperation and mutual
    assistance and carry on their activities with due account of the respected
    interests of other states for the purpose of maintaining international
    peace and security.” Proposal paralleled treaty suggested by President
    Johnson May 7. (Marder, Wash. Post, 6/1/66, Al)
0 NASA released preliminary report of board investigating explosion of

    Saturn V 2nd stage (S-11-F) ground test version May 28 at MTF. Board
    chairman Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, said that during checkout
    tests after five successful static firings, hydrogen tank pressure sensing
    line had been disconnected. Failure to reconnect line had caused tank
    rupture when pressurized with helium beyond design limits. (Marshall
    Star, 6/1/66, 1)
  NAS issued final report of Space Science Board exobiology study, under-
    taken in summer 1964 at NASA’s     request, including postscript examining
    results of MARINER 111’sJuly 1965 Mars flyby in relation to study’s recom-
                                                                         199
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    mendation that Mars exploration be assigned “highest scientific rior-
    ity.,, Report, Biology and the Exploration o Mars, was releasezwith
                                                   f
    companion anthology, Extraterrestrial Life, which contained 2,000-entry
    bibliography. Advance summary of report had been released Apr. 26,
    1965. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 6-7; NAS-NRC Release, 5/31/66)
May 31: ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack told Washington Society
    of Investment Analysts that ComSatCorp faced two issues of national
    and international significance: (1) “Responsibility for U.S. earth sta-
    tions, as between Cornsat and the other U.S. carriers” and (2) “Designa-
                                                             ..
    tion of the entities which may deal directly with Comsat. .,’He pointed
    out that present international agreements would be renegotiated in
    1969, and that some participants were “dubious about Comsat’s con-
    tinuing ability as the consortium’s manager to spend their money in
    their interests while being subject to the detailed regulation” of the
    FCC. (Text)
  Need for detection instruments to warn Sst pilots of excessive radiation
    during solar flares was described in papers by Sidney Teweles and Ray-
    mond M. McInturff of ESSA and Robert F. Jones of British Meteorological
    Office at Geneva meeting of executive committee of World Meteor-
    oIogica1 Organization. ESSA scientists said descent of plane from cruising
    altitude of about 60,000 ft. to 40,000 ft. might be necessary “three or
    four times a year during the half of the 11-year sunspot cycle when the
    greatest flares occur.’’ (NYT, 6/1/66, 77)
* Gen. William Hugh Blanchard, USAF Vice Chief of Staff, died at 50 after
    suffering heart attack at Pentagon meeting. General Blanchard was
    credited with landing first B-29 in China in March 1944. (NYT, 6/1/66,
    43)
During Muy: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown said in an article
    written for NATO’s Fijteen Nations that one of his principal tasks had
    been to find the most effective way of integrating technical and non-
    technical advice. Of contributions scientists had made to the process of
    defense policy-making, he said: “First, the scientist, operating at the
    frontiers of knowledge, may have anticipated many political and military
    problems posed by scientific advance. Second, military necessity made
    the scientist a leader in applying sophisticated rational and mathematical
    analysis to the solution of some problems-especially resource allocation
    -which have been generated by scientific advance.
        “At the same time it must be acknowledged that advice from scientists
    had been far from infallible, especially where the advice touches upon
    aspects of a larger problem on which the specialist is less expert, and in
    some cases, may not even be fully informed.” (NATO’s Fijteen Nations,
    4-5/66, 18)
  Dr. Von R. Eshleman of Stanford Univ., speaking at International Scien-
    tific Radio Union meeting in Washington, D.C., urged greater interplay
    between ‘‘those concerned with the design and communications of
    spacecraft and those who decide what scientific experiments will be
    aboard.” He cited success of NASA% MARINER IV mission in use of telem-
    etry signals to learn that Martian atmospheric pressure was 1%that
    of earth’s as example of accomplishment through co.operation in bistatic
    radar studies. (Science News, 5/14/66, 366)
  Three Boeing engineers had invented a jet engine inlet which could
    cCchoke77  supersonic transport engine-compressor whine during ap-
    proaches to airports, thereby avoiding airport-area nuisance. Noise-
200               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    choking feature was in addition to inlet’s primary advantage-its ability
    to provide a smooth and even flow of air to a jet engine at mach 2.7, or
    1,900 m h, the planned cruising speed of the US. Sst. (Boeing Release)
During May:!’ostulating that “many members of the House Space Committee
    are determined to become full partners with NASA in the development of
    basic objectives and policy,” Space Science Subcommittee Chairman
    Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) cited recent approach by Subcommittee
    in reallocation of funds during hearings on NASA FY 1967 authorization:
    “The Congress makes resources available for our national space program
    in the name of the American people. Therefore Congress believes that it
    should have a voice in the allocation of these resources. This principle
    was reflected in the actions taken by the Subcommittee.” Karth was
    writing in Astronautics & Aeronautics. (Karth, A&A, 5/66, 26-8)
0 Revolution in military communications “to which we are now fully com-
    mitted and which we are actively pursuing,” was discussed by William
    Beecher in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “At this writing, the Pentagon
    plans a May launch of the first eight of a series of 14 to 22 repeater
    satellites in its Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp) .
    The first eight, riding piggyback on a Titan 111-C test booster, will be
    deposited into random orbits about 21,000 mi. up. Within 60 days
    thereafter, another six repeater satellites together with two gravity-
    gradient experimental satellites will be similarly orbited. If all 14 of the
    communications satellites function perfectly, sufficient coverage will be
    provided to obviate the need for a third shot of eight, Pentagon experts
    Sa?;
         Although meant primarily to perfect the technology of space com-
    munications, after a relatively short test-only period, this Idcsp would
    be made available €or high-priority worldwide military traffic-for in-
    stance, important communications between Washington and Saigon. . . .
        “Then, in 1969 or 1970, the Defense Department hopes to put up a
    fully operational system, called the Advanced Defense Communications
     Satellite Project (Adcsp). As John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense
    Research and Engineering, described it in recent Congressional testi-
    mony, ‘This system will take advantsge of advances in both booster and
     communications technology which will permit the establishment of an
     economical, highly reliable system capable of providing many secure,
    jam-resistant, long-range communications circuits to support vital
     security operations wherever they occur.’ ” (Beecher, A&A, 5/66, 10)
0 New NASA-developed technique for mzking biomedical checks on test pilots

     was being used at Univ. of Kansas Medical Center. Method, which
     replaced bulky sensors with bare wires acting a s their own electrodes,
     permitted doctors to send instrumented patient home after office visit
     and record biomedical data while patient resumed normal activities.
     Wires were applied in three-minute operation. Data obtained in this
     way-rather than while patient was on operating table-were considered
    more meaningful by some physicians. Technique was conceived by
     Dr. James A. Roman, chief of biomedical research at NASA Flight
     Research Center, and introduced to the Univ. of Kansas by Midwest
     Research Institute. MRI was under contract to NASA’s Technology
     Utilization Div. in its program of transferring aerospace technology to
                          Release 66-116)
     the public. (NASA
0 B/G J. C. Maxwell, director of FAA Sst development, discussed supersonic

     air travel in Aerospace:
                                                                         201
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

          . . . The national SST program, though small (from a dollar point of
       CC


    view) when compared to the national space program, nevertheless may
    well have a more immediate impact. The challenge inherent in producing
    an economically attractive supersonic aircraft has already identified and
    created demands for improved manufacturing techniques, simple yet
    reliable eIectronic and communications equipment, advancements in
    extrusion and machine tooling techniques, more efficient (and less
    costly) fuels and lubricants and many other needs.
       “The economic aspects are more easiIy definable.
       cr
          Concerning the potential market for the SST, varying estimates have
    been made based on the expected growth of air transportation over the
    next 20 years and beyond. . . .
       CI
          Conservatively speaking, we now look for a three-fold increase in
    long-haul revenue passenger miles flown by the airlines of the world
    by 1980 and a five-fold increase by 1990. SSTS could carry almost half
                    .
    of this traffic. . .
       “Obviously, the SST program will have a significant impact on the
    U S . balance-of-trade position. Based upon past experience along with
    current encouraging signs, we expect that the export market for a U.S.-
    made SST will be about half of the total production rate. Over a 20-
    year period, this could result in a gold inflow approaching $10 billion.”
     (Aerospace, 5/66)
During May: Space research programs of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. were
    opening the way for solving earth’s future overpopulation problem and
    mankind’s future raw material needs, Soviet Prof. E. Kolman wrote in
    Mirovaya Ekonomika i Mezhdunarodnyye Otnosheniye, a publication of the
    Soviet Academy of Sciences. He referred to estimates that in 400 yrs. the
     earth would have a population of about 900 billion people, equivalent
    to about 10,000 people per square mile. In such a situation, this planet
    would not be able to give all its people even elementary living space,
                                                                       ..
    let alone food. Therefore, he said, ccescapeinto cosmic space . will
    become inevitable.” Professor Kolman mentioned the stimulating
    impact of the space program on progress in science and technology and
     the likelihood of developments useful in more mundane areas of human
    activity. He cited the use of meteorological and communications satel-
    lites as examdes of terrestriallv useful bvmoducts of mace research.
                                                .I*

     (NYT, 5/22/66, 85)
  Four experimental ramjet missiles launched by France’s Office National
     $Etudes et de Recherches A6rospatiales (ONERA) reached speeds of
     nearly 4,600 fps between 40,000- a&d 115,000-ft. altitudes. MisGles were
     part of a 10-flight program code-named STATALTEX, to generate data
     applicable to eventual development of an atmospheric booster that
     could reach mach 5. (M&R, 5/23/66, 9)
                                June 1966

June 1 Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atdaf for Gemini IX-A mission
       :
    was successfully launched by Atlas booster from ETR into planned
     185-mi. (298-km.) circular orbit, but officials were not certain glass-
    fiber shroud protecting docking apparatus had been jettisoned-a
    maneuver essential for docking with Gemini 9 spacecraft. Gemini IX-
    Titan I1 launch was postponed until June 3 when malfunction in
     electronics data-processing equipment blocked guidance signals being
    sent from KSC launch control center to Gemini spacecraft at T-3. NASA
     officials said postponement would not change objectives of the mission
    -extravehicular activity and rendezvous and docking with Atda-but
    would cause some revisions in timing of events. (Wilford, NYT,
    6/2/66, 1)
0 Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) was flown aboard Super Gu py aircraft from

                                                            P
     Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Huntington Beach, Calif., faci ity to company’s
     Sacramento Test Center for static testing. The 33,000-lb. stage, 59 ft.
     long and 21% ft. in diameter, was second Saturn V upper stage to
     arrive at Douglas test site. (MSFC Release 66-126)
0 General Accounting Office released report to Congress charging that

     NASA had wasted $2.5 million on Surveyor program by continuing
     development of 11 types of scientific instruments for SURVEYOR I
     after 1962, when weight problems had forced their deletion from
     planned payload. NASA comments in report’s appendix included letter
     from Deputy Associate Administrator Earl D. Hilburn stating: “Develop-
     ment of these experiments was not halted. . . to assure their availability
     for not only later Surveyor flights but other NASA missions as well.”
     He called continuation “prudent in the light of development lead time
     for scientific instrumentation.” SURVEYOR I had been launched Mav 30
     from ETR on lunar transfer trajectory. (Text; Blair, NYT, 6/1/66,’ 26;
     Av. Wk.,    6/6/66, 25)
0 JPL scientists Richard W. Davies and Roy E. Cameron completed month-

     long expedition in Atacama Desert in’ Northern Chile aAd announced
     in Santiago that analysis of soil samples taken at altitudes up to 20,000
     ft. would test theory that “more microorganisms are found under the
     surface than on it.” If so, Davies said, NASA would “redesign its Mars
     exploration vehicles to look for subsurface life as well as surface life.”
     Atacama region so resembled supposed surface of Mars, they said,
     that JPL team would attempt further studies in area, called by some
     the driest on earth. (AP,  Balt. Sun, 6/2/66)
0 William L. Green, Jr.,     executive assistant in NASA’s    Office of Public
     Affairs and former usu press officer, was appointed NASA Deputy
     Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. (NASA Release 66-140; AF)

     202
                                                                            203
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 1 Three-month NASA-USAF program to measure reactions of structures
        :
    and people to varying types of sonic booms and jet engine noise began
                               which over 100 residents would participate
    at AFFTC. Program-in
    as test subjects-would provide data for analysis and later application
    to supersonic transport development. (AFFTC Release 66-5-6)
  Three college students set record by wearing fully pressurized spacesuits
    continuously for five days in research test conducted for NASA at Aero-
    space Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson AFB. Experi-
    ment-part of 90-day study to test food requirements for future manned
    space fights and emergency food comcepts for lunar exploration-
     broke 24-hr. record set at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks AFB. (AP,
     NYT, 6/2/66, 30)
e Astronaut Frank Borman, a 1950 graduate of West Point, gave Academy
     cadets a souvenir from space-the flag of the cadet company he had
     commanded-carried on his Dec. 4-18, 1965, GEMINI VII mission. (UPI,
     NYT, 6/2/66, 4)
June 2-14: NASA SURVEYOR I became first US. spacecraft to softland on the
     moon when it touched down in the Ocean of Storms and began trans-
     mitting the first of its more than 10,000 clear and detailed television
     pictures to JPL Deep Space Facilities, Goldstone, Calif.
          Landing sequence began 2,000 mi. above moon when, traveling at
     6,000 mph, SURVEYOR I shifted its normal cruising attitude to position
     main retrorocket. Triggered by radar ejected at 52-mi. altitude, main
     retrorocket burned until 37,000-ft. altitude, slowing craft to 400 mph.
     After retrorocket burnout, smaller guidance rockets ignited, slowing
     SURVEYOR I to 3% mph at 14-ft. altitude. Craft then free-fell to lunar
     surface at 8 mph. Landing-so precise that spacecraft’s three footpads
     touched lunar surface within 19 millisec. of each other-confirmed
     that lunar surface could support Apollo Lunar Excursion Module
      (Lem) and proved concept of automatically decelerating a spacecraft
     from 6,000-mph speed to touchdown speed of 3% mph.
          Photos transmitted by SURVEYOR I before its camera was secured
     after sunset of first lunar day (June 14) revealed nearly level lunar
     surface littered with rock fragments [see During June]. “Rubble
     scattered over the surface is probably a fairly general characteristic
     all over the           NASA Surveyor Project Scientist Dr. Leonard Jaffe
      told JPL press conference.
          Pictures taken June 4 during seven two-second firings of nitrogen
      gas from spacecraft’s attitude control jets showed no disturbance of
      the lunar surface. In addition to wide- and narrow-angle lurain photo-
      graphs, SURVEYOR I obtained pictures of the stars Sirius and Canopus
      to determine spacecraft’s exact location.
          Halting communication with SURVEYOR I June 14 to allow spacecraft
      to conserve battery energy throughout lunar night (June 14-29), JPL
      announced: “It is very difficult to predict if Surveyor’s batteries will
      withstand the -260°F cold. If Surveyor survives, the engineers estimate
      it wiIl be several days after sunrise before the batteries thaw O U ~ ” [see
      June 28-29].
           Considerably more complex than Soviet LUNA IX which softlanded
       on the moon-Feb. 3, SURSEYOR      I apparatus remained a closed intact
       system up until touchdown. A tripod-legged arrangement of cameras,
      antennas, and other equipment which used solar celIs to convert sun’s
       energy into electric power for operation on lunar surface, SURVEYOR I
204                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




June 2-14: SURVEYOR I returned this photograph of its footpad resting on the surface of
the moon.


      had a landing system which used radars, a computer, and four rocket
      engines to adjust its own speed, attitude, and fight path. LUNA IX was
      crash-proof, uncontrolled photographic instrument package jettisoned
      by its carrier rocket immediately before impact, which free-fell under
      pull of lunar gravity. It had transmitted only 12 photos.
        The near-flawless performance of SURVEYOR I, an engineering model,
      far exceeded JPL officials’ expectations. rCThis,in my opinion, puts the
      Surveyor program ahead a year,” Robert F. Garbarini, NASA Deputy
      Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications for
      Engineering, told JPL press conference. “We thought it would take
      three or four flights to get the craft operational.” (NASA Proj. O f ;
                                                                           f.
      NASA Release 66-127; JPL Transcript; Spivak, WSJ, 6/3/66, 2; WS’J,
      6/15/66, 1; Shreveport Times, 6/3/66, 12A; Clark, NYT, 6/3/66, 1, 22;
      6/4/66, 12; 6/5/66, 1; 6/6/66, 40M; AP, NYT, 17; Hines, Wash.
      Eve. Star, 6/5/66, C3; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/6/66, A9; Wash. Eve.
      Star, 6/15/66, A6; Berman, Wash. Post, 6/5/66, A14; AP, Wash. Post,
      6/15/66, A10)
                                                                        205
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 2: President Johnson’s statement on SURVEYOR 1’s successful soft-
    landing on the moon: “Overnight the eyes of Surveyor I have become
    the eyes of the world on the Moon. Another exciting chapter in the
    peaceful exploration of the universe is open for men to read and
            ..
    share. .
        “The odds against achieving full success in such a difficult mission
    on the first flight were understandably great. This moment of triumph
    for all who have participated in the Surveyor project has been well
    earned, for back of Surveyor’s perfect performance on this f i s t flight
    are years of hard work, painstaking care, and brilliant engineering.
        “Today our Nation salutes the highly deserving team of scientists,
    engineers, technicians, and managers-in Government, industry, and
    the universities-who have a vision and the skills to pursue it success-
    fully.
        “As the day approaches when men land on the Moon, it is of the
    greatest importance that we agree to exchange openly all information
    that could affect their safety and welfare. It is equally important that
    we preserve these regions for peaceful, scientific activities. I welcome
    the constructive approach of the Soviet statement of May 31 on a
     treaty I have proposed to cover these matters and hope that progress
     can be made rapidly.” (Pres. Doc., 6/6/66, 728)
  NASA SURVEYOR 1’s successful soft-landing on the moon received worldwide
     acclaim.
         Daily Telegraph, London: “There is magic of a kind in the latest
     achievement of American exploration in placing their electronic
                                                            ...
     Surveyor almost directly on its target on the moon.         The techno-
     logical power behind the enterprise of putting a man on the moon is
     mounting with visible acceleration. But the human element remains
     most vital.”
         Le Monde, Paris: “In succeeding with their first attempt at a soft
     landing on the moon only three months after the Soviets, the United
     States has shown that they are on the point of catching up with the
     Soviets in the race to the moon. There is only one experiment left in
     which the United States is behind the Soviet Union: the orbiting
     around the moon of a lunar probe similar to Luna-10. This lag is not
     very great, since the first trial of the Lunar Orbiters is set for next
     month.”
         I1 Tempo, Rome: “We think that the best judgment, even if purely
      a prioristic, of the Surveyor is that given by the Soviet Government,
      which, the day after the departure of the lunar probe, practically
      adhered to President Johnson’s initiative of March 7, tending to a
      recognition of the i-nternationalization of the moon and other extra-
      territorial bodies.”
         Tass: “The success of the Surveyor is an important part of the
      American space program and Soviet scientists think very highly of it.”
      (NYT, 6/5/66, E13)
          Congratulatory cable from Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny
      to President Johnson: “On the occasion of the successful soft-landing
                                                         ..  . our congratula-
      of the Surveyor I spacecraft on the moon, accept
      tions for the American specialists who ensured the success of this
      flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/5/66, 80)
 0 Successful overlapping operation of PEGASUS I,      11, and 111 meteoroid-
      detection satellites-launched Feb. 16, May 25, and July 30, 1965,
206               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    respectively-had      provided full year of data which defined “more
    precise1 than ever before” near-earth meteoroid environment, NASA
    reportel Data-including cumulative count of 1,000 “hits” on target
    plate thickness, identification and location of specific panel hit, attitude
     of spacecraft with respect to earth and sun at impact time, and time of
    penetration-confirmed “protective adequacy” of Apollo manned lunar
     landing spacecraft against meteoroids; provided designers of future
     spacecraft with guidelines on probability of meteoroid penetrations ;
     and improved mapping of South Atlantic anomaly by measuring
     electron radiation density. (NASA Release 66-134)
June 2 V/Adm. H. G. Rickover (USN), in speech at Athens meeting of Royal
       :
     National Foundation, noted benefits to humanity in science and warned
     of dangers inherent in misuse of technology. He urged that technological
     capability be applied selectively to enhance human welfare and conserve
     natural resources, rather than to “submit meekly to whatever is tech-
     nically feasible.” (Text, CR, 6/21/66, 13114-17)
June 3-6: NASA’s GEMINI IX spacecraft, with Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford
     as command pilot and Eugene A. Cernan, pilot, was successfully
     launched from ETR by Titan I1 booster on GEMINI IX-A mission to
     evaluate extravehicular life-support and maneuvering equipment and
     procedures, and to rendezvous and dock with Augmented Target Dock-
     ing Adapter (ATDA), launched from ETR June 1. Initial orbit: 174-mi.
      (280-km.) apogee; 99-mi. (159-km.) perigee; 90-min. period; and 30”
     inclination. At T-3 ground communications system malfunction which
     had postponed June 1launch recurred, but alternate procedures proved
     satisfactory and countdown continued.
         At 49 min. GET Stafford executed first course correction to position
     GEMINI IX for rendezvous, firing thruster rockets to raise perigee to
      134 mi. After two more orbital maneuvers, spacecraft was within 25 ft.
     of target. Stafford, sighting ATDA, confirmed suspicions that its shroud
     had not jettisoned, and docking would be impossible. He radioed ground
      control: “It looks like an angry alligator out there.” NASA later revealed
      that shroud had not jettisoned because technicians, following “insuffi-
      ciently detailed” written instructions, had installed lanyards improperly.
         Complying with modified flight plan, astronauts photographed ATDA,
      executed re-rendezvous maneuver, and executed rendezvous-from-
      above simulating Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) abort from the moon.
      After this maneuver, which depleted fuel supply to 11%-only 6%
     more than minimum reserve-Stafford and Cernan were fatigued and
      recommended 24-hr. postponement of Cernan’s walk in space.
         At 11:02 a.m. EST June 5, Cernan opened hatch of depressurized
      spacecraft, climbed out, and retrieved micrometeoroid impact detector
      attached to side. He moved to full length of 25-ft. tether to take photos.
      After one hour, Cernan returned to Adapter Section to don Astronaut
      Maneuvering Unit (Amu)-a task which required “four or five times
      more work than anticipated.” His faceplate visor began clouding over,
      presumably because environmental control system was not absorbing
      moisture quickly enough. Cernan’s limited visibility and discovery
      that Amu’s radio transmissions were garbled forced Stafford to recall
      him to spacecraft. He had been scheduled to disconnect from GEMINI IX’S
      oxygen supply and maneuver in Amu to 150 ft. from spacecraft.
         Reentry on June 6 was normal. At 1O:OO a.m. EST, in the 46th
      revolution, GEMINI IX impacted 345 mi. east of Cape Kennedy-less
                                                                          207
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




June 3-6: Augmented Target Docking Adapter with unreleased shroud, photographed
by crew of GEMINI IX.

     than two miles from target-in the most accurate landing to date, after
     total mission duration of 72 hrs. 21 min. Splashdown and recovery
     were carried on live television via EARLY BIRD I comsat. Within minutes,
     USN pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, placed flotation collar
     around spacecraft. At 10:45 a.m. EST, spacecraft carrying astronauts
     was hoisted onboard U.S.S. Wasp.
        Accomplishments of GEMINI M-A mission were summarized by. Dr.
     George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
     Flight, at MSC news conference: (1) demonstration of three new
     rendezvous procedures-catching        target in only three revolutions,
     locating it without radar, and approaching it from above rather than
     below; (2) accurately controlled reentry; (3) longest period of extra-
     vehicular activities-over two hours; (4) new information on man’s
     ability to work in space necessary for manned lunar landing and for
     assembling stations in space; and (5) new information on manned
     observation of another spacecraft in orbit. Five experiments were
     successfully performed in accordance with modified flight plan. Con-
     cerning mission’s disappointments, he said: “We will try to do as
     much as we can on each of our Gemini flights. We won’t always succeed
     in meeting all of the objectives. But we learned a great deal about the
     problems that do occur during the course of one of these very difficult
     space missions.” (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-97; Wilford, NYT,
     6/4/66, 1, 10; 6/5/66, 1, 80; 6/6/66, 1, 40; 6/7/66, 1, 34; 6/8/66,
     1,29; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/66, Al, A2;6/5/66, Al, A6; 6/6/66,
208               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Al, A4; 6/7/66, A3; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/4/66, Al, A8; 6/5/66,
     Al, A14; 6/6/66, Al, A3; 6/7/66, Al, A7, A21; 6/8/66, A3; WSJ,
    6/7/66, 2; 6/8/66, 1; Tech. Wk., 6/13/66, 14-15; Av. Wk., 6/13/66,
    31-34)
June 3: USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR with Atlas-
     Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 151)
0 Lockheed Aircraft Corp. signed agreement with Junkers of Munich,

    Germany, to “provide technical consultation, perform design work . . .
     and provide components” for ESRO’s Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite
     (Heos)-first to be designed and developed in Germany-to investigate
     charged particles in space and the effects of magnetic fields on them.
     Overall contract for satellite, which would be launched by NASA into
     elliptical orbit in late 1968, was $5.5 million, with Lockheed’s services
     valued at $500,000. (Lockheed Release)
0 Accumulating geochronologic evidence which “indicates more and more

     convincingly that tektites were formed from terrestrial rocks in large
     meteoritic impacts on the earth” was reported in Science by Henry
     Faul. He said exact process of tektite formation remained a mystery,
     but that age measurements were beginning to show ccwhere” this
     formation occurred and could ultimately invalidate the lunar origin
     hypothesis. (Faul, Science, 6/3/66, 1341-5)
  GEMINI IV Astronaut Edward H. White I1 and GEMINI VII Astronaut Frank
     Borman received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in
     Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/66)
  Edgar G. Bush, senior technician at GSFC since 1959 and designer of first
     micro-electronic circuitry used for flight computers, died of a heart
     ailment. Bush had designed computers for VANGUARD 111, Explorer
     satellites, and Lunar Orbiters. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/66, B5)
June 4: Role of NASA in aeronautical research and development was examined
     in Policy Planning for Aeronautical Research and Development, 279-page
     report released by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), chairman of
     Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Document
     noted “space budget demands have probably hampered what might have
     been expected to be a normal growth of the level of effort in aero-
     nautics within the agency” and questioned adequacy of $124 million
     (about 2%) earmarked for aeronautical R&D out of NASA FY 1967
     appropriation of $5.012 billion. Separate budget for aeronautics was
     suggested as possible solution. (Senate Doc. No. 90, 5/19/66)
  It had not yet been determined whether space fatigue caused any physical
     or psychological problems, but examining effects of this phenomenon
     had become a medical goal, Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Pro-
     grams, MSC, told the press. Space officials believed exhaustion experi-
     enced by GEMINI IX-A Astronauts Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan
     June 3 was caused by lack of sleep during first night of mission and
     execution of complicated and tedious rendezvous. GEMINI VIII Astronaut
     Neil Armstrong said fatigue would be an important consideration in
                                                                    “. . .
     planning a lunar flight which might take as long as 14 days:          we
     will evaluate that particular thing to insure that what we learn from
     these Gemini flights will be applied to that situation and used.” (NYT,
     6/5/66, 80)
  First seven photos transmitted by SURVEYOR I were donated to Clark
     Univ. by JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering as the school broke
     ground for a $5-million library honoring the late rocket pioneer Dr.
                                                                          209
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Robert Hutchings Goddard. (UPI, NYT, 6/6/66, 42; Berman, Vush.
    Post, 6/5/66, A14)
June 5: NASA appointed Dr. Richard L. Lesher as Assistant Administrator
    for Technology Utilization, replacing Breene M. Kerr, who remained
    Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis. Dr. Lesher’s former
    position of Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization
    was filled by Melvin S. Day, former head of Scientific and Technical
    Information Div. (NASA Release 66-143)
June 6: NASA’s   OGO 111 (Ogo-B) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was
    successfully launched from ETR with Atlas-Agena B booster into orbit
    with 75,874-mi. (122,157-km.) apogee; 183-mi. (295-km.) perigee;
    48.6-hr. period; and 31’ inclination. Third of seven spacecraft in
             Ogo program and first to successfully operate three-axis stabi-
    NASA’s
    lized in highly elliptical orbit, OGO 111 weighed 1,135 Ibs.; it carried 21
    experiments-largest number ever carried by U S . scientific space-
    craft-to study solar wind, solar flares, magnetic field disturbances,
    radiation belt particles, aurora events, ionization, and variations in
    atmospheric density. Ogo program was managed by NASA Goddard
    Space Flight Center. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-132; AP, NYT,
    6/8/66, 15; AP, Vash. Post, 6/7/66, A7)
* GEMINI IX-A Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, resting
    aboard U.S.S. V a s p , received tributes from around the world. President
    Johnson, telephoning from his Texas ranch, said: “We are very proud
    of both of you. I have been watching off and on over the weekend and
    saw your return this morning.
        “You have made all of us more aware of what performance under
                                                       .
    pressure is all about and that includes courage. . .”
        Tass science commentator said the Soviet people “give their due”
    to the courage of the astronauts and congratulate them on their safe
    return to earth. He praised the flight as an “achievement of American
    astronautics.”
       Jodrell Bank Experimental Station director Sir Bernard Love11 said
    the success of SURVEYOR I and GEMINI IX-A had made the week one of
    the greatest for American science. “It seems that the Russians will
    have to stage a spectacular development in order to recapture the
    lead which they apparently possessed a week ago.” (Kilpatrick, Vush.
    Post, 6/7/66, A%;Balt. Sun, 6/7/66)
* Sun-powered laser developed by Dr. C. Gilbert Young of American
     Optical Co. under USAF sponsorship had been successfully operated in
     earth’s atmosphere, producing one watt of power in continuous, highly
     intense beam of invisible infrared light. A slender, one-inch-long rod
     of yttrium-aluminum-garnet crystal (Yag), laser was connected to
     telescope which trapped, focused, and delivered sun’s rays-which
     replaced conventional lamp and electrical apparatus needed by other
     lasers for “initial boost”-to      crystal rod. Laser’s beam could carry
     messages between spacecraft and could be used as intense satellite
     beacon. (AZP News 6)
 * FAA’s  “Staff Study-General Aviation Occupant Load Factor” report
     showed that general aviation (nonairline) aircraft in the U S . carried
     39.4 million travelers in 1965, while domestic airlines carried 84.6
     million passengers. Estimates were based on information gathered by
     all of FAA’S flight service station facilities during August 1965. (FAA
     Release 66-54)
210               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 6: U.N. World Meteorological Organization announced award of annual
    prize for outstanding work and international collaboration in meteor-
     ology to Prof. Tor Bergeron of Sweden. Noted for pioneering new
     techniques in air-mass analysis, weather forecasting, and physics of
     precipitation, Professor Bergeron would receive a gold medal and $1,200.
     (NYT, 6/7/66, 12)
0 Mrs. Jane Marshall, editor of aeronautics bibliographies and education

     sourcebooks for National Aerospace Education Council, was named
     1965 winner of National Aeronautic Association’s Frank G. Brewer
     Trophy for cCher  contributions to enlarged aerospace horizons for those
     who teach our nation’s youth.” (Natl. Aeronautic Assn. News)
June 7: Two-stage Wasp (Weightless Analysis Sounding Probe) sounding
     rocket carried 1,500-lb. payload to 148-mi. (238-km.) altitude in ballis-
     tic trajectory from NASA Wallops Station in experiment to study behavior
     of liquid hydrogen under near-zero gravity conditions. Payload, con-
     sisting of scale model of liquid hydrogen fuel tank, impacted 330 mi.
     downrange in Atlantic; no recovery was involved. Experiment under
     weightless conditions, continuing for seven minutes, was recorded by
     television cameras through transparent lucite tank and was telemetered
     back to Wallops. Cameras, mounted on five-foot extension booms,
     photographed the liquid’s sloshing motion when small thrusters were
     activated to show how well baffles positioned the liquid in the tank.
     (NASA Release 66-147)
  MSFC successfully static-tested S-IC stage of the second flight Saturn V
     launch vehicle for 125 sec. and recorded 1,200 measurements of stage’s
     performance. The 33-ft.-dia., 135-ft.-long stage developed 7.5 million
     lbs. thrust from five F-1 engines-four of which were gimbaled during
     test. This was only captive test planned for this flight stage. (MSFC
     Release 66-129)
  Dr. Hans-Joachim von Merkatz, member of West German Bundestag,
     charged in report prepared for delivery before meeting of Assembly of
     the Western European Union that US. was trying to “break up”
     Western Europe’s space program with “tantalizing” offers for joint
     US.-European planetary exploration: “In other words, the exploration
     of Jupiter could divert us from the essential economic benefits to be
     derived from space through the exploration of communications satel-
     lites. The American approach to date has definitely been aimed at
     insuring United States monopoly and leadership in this field as in the
     nuclear field.” Western European Union was composed of U.K., France,
     West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
      (NYT, 6/9/66, 3)
0 The Baltimore Sun commended four companies for their roles in GEMINI

     IX-A flight: Martin Co. for building and testing Titan I1 launch vehicle;
     Westinghouse Corp. for developing sensitive radar equipment; Bendix
     Corp. for engineering, operating, and maintaining NASA’s         tracking
                                                                       ...
     system; and ITT Corp. for giving “millions of television viewers       all
                                                                         . .”
     the advantages of a grandstand seat for the dramatic recovery. .
      (Balt. Sun, 6/7/66)
* Editorial in Washington Evening Star: ‘The United States has just passed
     through its most ambitious and taxing week to date in space. So this is,
     perhaps a fitting time to ask itself just where it is going in space and
     why. James E. Webb, the head of the National Aeronautics and Space
     Administration, has been asking that question for some time now,
                                                                           211
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                             .
    trying to get an answer from the Administration . . and from Con-
           .
    gress. . . The question of whether to pack up or to push on should,
    as Mr. Webb suggests, be the subject of a major national debate.”
     (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/66)
June 7: U.K. Foreign Office issued following statement after press reports of
    Cabinet decision to withdraw from European Launcher Development
    Organization (ELDO) : ‘?Forsome time the Government has had serious
    doubts about whether or not it should continue to participate in the
    ELDO programme. These doubts were centered on financial, technical
    and economical assessments of the initial programme.
        “The Government has concluded after a very careful and detailed
     consideration of all the factors involved, that the latest proposals for
    modifying the initial programme still do not constitute a sufficient
     basis for continuing, and it has so informed its partners.” (British
     Embassy INFORM 195/66, 6/7/66)
June 8: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS cxx carrying scientific instrumentation
     for continued space research. Orbital parameters: apogee, 300 km.
     (186 mi.) ; perigee, 200 km. (124 mi.) ; period, 89.4 min.; inclination,
     51.8’. Equipment was reported to be functioning normally. (Tass,
    6/W66)
* $500-million XB-70 No. 2 experimental bomber and its F-104 chase
     plane collided and burned near Barstow, Calif., destroying both aircraft
     and killing F-104 pilot Joseph A. Walker and XB-70 co-pilot Maj. Carl
     S. Cross (WAF). Walker, NASA test pilot, held world’s records for his
     4,104-rnph and 354,200-ft.-altitude flights in X-15 rocket research air-
     craft. XB-70 pilot A White ejected in seat capsule and parachuted to
                          1
     ground, suffering arm and back injuries. On basis of preliminary USAF
     reports that F-104 apparently hit two vertical stabilizers on XB-70 at
     25,000-ft. altitude during “routine” flight, President Johnson praised
     pilots who gave “their lives to advancing science and technology” and
     added “immeasurably to the progress this nation is making in the effort”
     to advance supersonic flight. USAF later revealed that aircraft were flying
     in formation as close as 10 ft. with T-38, F-4B, and F-5 aircraft “to
     allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric
     engines” for publicity purposes. Disclosure prompted AFSC Commander
     Gen. Bernard Schriever to establish two USAF accident boards and
     Congress to designate House Appropriations Committee to investigate
     the disaster. (Edwards AFB Release; Pres. Doc., 6/13/66, 748; Wash.
     Post, 6/14/66, A3)
* Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) commented on coIIision of XB-70 and
     F-104 aircraft: “This accident must serve as a reminder to the American
     public and to the world that all of the potential hazards of aircraft and
     space fight can never be entirely eliminated from our experimental
     program. The phenomenal success of our manned space flight programs
     Mercury and Gemini and the remaining flights of Gemini and the
     flights of Apollo . . . share the risk that Walker, White, and Cross
     faced each time they flew to test the XB-70.” (CR,     6/8/66)
  Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A5)
     was successfully ground-tested by NASA and AEC at Jackass Flats, Nev.
     Test, in which reactor was operated at design power of 1,100 mw for
      15% min., was first in series to “obtain additional data on reactor
     characteristics under extended operating duration” under joint NASA-
     AEC Rover program. (AEC Release J-151)
212                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 8: President Johnson had sent SURVEYOR I photos to “Chiefs of State of
     more than 100 foreign nations . . . and to the world’s scientific com-
    munity,” Press Secretary Bill Moyers announced. “This effort is made,”
     the President said, “in order that careful study of the photographs will
    be possible around the world. We intend that the knowledge we derive
    from space will be available for the enrichment of our common experi-
     ence and the advancement of peaceful undertakings in the exploration
     of space.” (Pres. Doc., 6/13/66, 748)
  Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.), speaking on floor of Senate, pointed out
     the contributions of small business to Gemini program and SURVEYOR I
     mission and said they were “irrefutable evidence that there is still a
     significant place in our economy for the ambitious and talented. . . in
     new and growing business firms.” (CR, 6/8/66, 12053)
June 9: USAF launched three satellites with a single Atlas-Agena D booster
     from WTR-One unidentified satellite, ERS XVI satellite to test metal-to-
     metal adhesion of space propulsion materials, and USA’S SECOR VI
     geodetic satellite. (US.   Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
  NASA oso 11 Orbiting Solar Observatory, activated by GSFC officials, trans-
     mitted scientific and engineering data from four of its eight experiments.
     Launched from ETR Feb. 3, 1965, os0 11 had exceeded its six-month life
     expectancy by 50% before it was turned off Nov. 3. (GSFC Release
     G-10-66)
* US. had current “edge” over U.S.S.R. in overall space capability but
     this status had been “recently acquired and is not sufficient to form
     even the slightest basis for complacency,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh,
     NASC Executive Secretary, told Armed Forces Communications and
     Electronics Assn. Industrial Luncheon in Washington, D.C. Dr.Welsh
     analyzed the areas of relative accomplishment: “(1)Number o space- f
     craft. The United States has placed dmost 400 spacecraft into earth
     orbit and on escape missions, while the USSR has put slightly less than
     200 on such missions.. . . However. . . Soviets have placed each year
     a greater total weight of payloads. . . . (2) Lunar and Interplanetary.
     The United States has been far less active but considerably more success-
     ful in its interplanetary activities. . . . We have photographed Mars and
     had a productive flyby of Venus while the USSR’s      active interplanetary
     program has been primarily plagued by failure. In addition, we have
     taken some 17,000 photographs of the moon and are taking hundreds
     more by the magnificent Surveyor spacecraft. . . . (3) Manned Flight
     . . .U.S. . . . has a distinct lead over the USSR with about 1500 man
     flight hours in orbit compared with about 500. . . with the longest
     individual flight as well as the longest extra-vehicular activity. Also,
     the U S . has had two controlled rendezvous maneuvers, one docking
     experiment, and considerable manned spacecraft maneuvering experi-
     ence. So far, the USSR has achieved none of these latter goals. (4) Space
     Applications. The United States has navigation, weather, and com-
     munications satellite systems in regular operation, while the USSR is
     still in the developmental stage in such activities. (5) Scientijc Data. . .
     the larger number and greater variety of US. scientific payloads, as well
     as the wider and freer dissemination of the information obtained, may
     well have added more to the world’s store of knowledge. (6) Propulsion
     . . . the USSR has surpassed the United States in the field of propulsion
     so far as the amount of thrust is concerned [but] this thrust advantage
     is much less true today as both countries have in operation and under
                                                                           213
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                                           . .”
    development larger and more advanced propulsion systems..
     (Text)
June 9: Changes in Apollo nomenclature were announced by Julian Scheer,
    NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Mairs, in memorandum from
    Project Designation Committee: (1) Lunar Excursion Module wodd be
    known as “Lunar Module”; (2) Saturn IB booster would be “Uprated
    Saturn I”; and (3) Saturn V stages (S-11, S-IC, and S-IVB) would be
    “first, second, and third stages.” Technical designations for Saturn
    stages, Scheer said, were confusing to the public and would be dropped
    gradually, except in NASA’s internal and technical documentation.
     (Text)
  State Dept. disclosed that on May 26 U.S.S.R. had given U.S. photos
    taken by LUNA IX after it softlanded on the moon Feb. 3. (WI, NYT,
     6/10/66,8)
        engineers Upshur T. Joyner and Walter B. Horne received Society
  L~RC
     of Automotive Engineers’ Arch T. Colwell Merit Award-presented
    annually to authors of papers “of outstanding technical or professional
    merit”-for     “Pneumatic Tire Hydrolapping and Some Effects on
    Vehicle Performance.” (Law Release)
June 10: USAF’S OV3-IV research satellite was launched by NASA from
     Wallops Station by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 2,933 mi.
     (4,720 km.) ; perigee, 398 mi. (640 km.) ;period, 142 min. ; inclination,
    41”. The 173-lb. satellite carried plastic spheres of simulated human
    tissue containing linear energy transfer spectrometers to record effects
     of space radiation and determine how much radiation damage an
    astronaut’s body could undergo in similar manned flight, how long
    man could stay in space at one time, and how often he could safely
     return to space environment. Satellite would also give measurements
     on Van Allen radiation belts and gauge decay of residual radiation in
    man-made Starfish Belt. Equipment, expected to relay data for one year,
     was functioning normally. (Wallops Release 66-35; U S . Aeron. &
    Space Act., 1966, 152)
* Twenty of 21 scientific experiments carried by NASA’s OGO 111, launched
    June 6 from ETR, had been turned on and were operating well. The
     remaining experiment-an ESSA radio propagation measuring device-
     would be turned on June 11. (NASA Release 66-149)
0 Under Secretary of the Air Force Norman Paul told Rep. George H.

     Mahon (D-Tex.), chairman of House Defense Appropriations Sub-
     committee, in closed session that USAF officials were unaware that the
     XB-70 which crashed June 8 was to be used for commercial publicity
     purposes: “The Air Force definitely does not put its stamp on this sort
     of business. . . . Had we been aware, I think it is safe to say it would
     not have happened.” Representative Mahon said Committee would
     “insist that procedures be established which will make impossible a
     recurrence of such misuse of men and military equipment.” (Morris,
     NYT, 6/11/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A8)
* GEMINI IX-A Astronauts Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan were greeted
     by their families on their arrival in Houston after four days of debriefing
     at KSC. (WI, NYT, 6/11/66, 62)
* Lockheed Missiles and Space CO.’Sfirst high-reliability Agena was launched
     from Vandenberg AFB as upper stage on Atlas booster, Aviation Week
     and Space Technology reported. High-reliability Agena had been under
     development for USAF Space Systems Div. for over three years in con-
214               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    junction with Midas infrared early warning system under Program 461.
     (Av. Wk., 6/20/66, 31)
June 11: Astronauts Neil Armstrong and James McDivitt were among over
    700 persons who attended memorial services in Lancaster, Calif., for
    NASA test pilot Joseph A. Walker, killed in June 8 midair collision of
    XB-70 and F-104 Starfighter. (UPI, Wash. Post, 6/13/66, A17)
* “When U.S. spacemen go to the moon, they will surely meet Soviet
    people there,” Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, visiting Sofia for World
    Federation of Democratic Youth congress, told Bulgarian newspaper
    Narodna Armiya. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/12/66, A6)
June 12: General Dynamics Corp. announced that U.S.S. Redstone, one of
    three World War I1 T-2 type tankers being converted by corporation
    into Project Apollo tracking-communications vessel, had undergone
    initial sea trials out of Quincy, Mass. (NYT, 6/12/66)
June 13: House appointed to House-Senate Conference Committee on NASA
    FY 1967 authorization Reps. William E. Miller (R-N.Y.), Olin E.
    Teague (D-Tex.), Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.),
    Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), Joseph W. Martin (R-Mass.), James G.
    Fulton (R-Pa.), and Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (NASA LAR V/95-96)
* Accomplishments between June 1 and 7-SURVEYOR I, GEMINI IX-A,
    OGO 1 1 and Wasp missions-had       given NASA “the niost rewarding week
           1,
    in its short but action-packed history,” wrote William J. Coughlin in
     Technology Week. “Big shots and small, it all added up to an active and
    highly promising seven-day period for NASA. As someone commented,
    this was indeed the week that was.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 6/13/66,54)
* V/Adm. Rufus E. Rose (USN, Ret.) resigned as special assistant on policy
    studies and analyses to NASA Administrator James E. Webb to become
    an assistant to the president of Allied Research Associates, Inc. Admiral
    Rose, who joined NASA in 1964 after 44 years USN service, would be
    involved with “planning, organization, management, and overseas
     operation’’ at Allied. (NASA Release 66-148; Marshall Star, 6/22/66,3)
* France planned to continue work on large space boosters, either alone or
    with other interested European nations, despite British decision to
     withdraw from ELDO’S Europa rocket program, Aviation Week and
     Space Technology reported. French officials, open in their bitterness
    at the British decision, viewed the withdrawal as further proof that
     U.K. made “a poor European partner.” (Av. Wk., 6/13/66, 38)
June 14: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
     carried 50-lb. instrumented payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude.
     Conducted by NASA for Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp., experiment was
     designed to measure electron density in ionospheric D region. (Wallops
     Release 66-36)
 * Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor (USAF), special consultant to President Johnson,
     was appointed president of Institute for Defense Analysis replacing
     Dr. J. P. Ruina, who would return to MIT. IDA also named Dr. Gordon J.
     F. MacDonald, of UCLA’S Dept. of Planetary and Space Sciences, vice
     president for research. Both appointments would take effect in Sep-
     tember. (IDA Release)
          PIONEER VI interplanetary probe launched from ETR Dec. 16, 1965,
   NASA’s
     completed six-month nominal mission at a range of 54.6 million mi.
     with all spacecraft systems performing well. Perihelion had been
     passed May 20, 1966, and aphelion passage would occur Oct. 24.
     Preliminary results of experiments had been reported Apr. 19 at
                                                                           215
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C. (NASA
     Proj. Off.)
June 15: On floor of House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) paid tribute
     to SURVEYOR I and GEMINI IX-A mission successes and said they were
     possible because of “the unity of purpose that exists between the aero-
     space industry and the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
     tion.” (CR, 6/15/66)
0 Propulsion technology’s short-term potential was overestimated and its

     long-term potential underestimated, AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A.
     Schriever told the Second Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference in
     Colorado Springs. “This means that we should push technology without
     trying to tie it to specific system requirements. As a matter of historical
     record, it can be shown that exploratory and advanced development
     programs designed to push technology have provided valuable savings
     in time and money when applied to an engineering development
                                                                   .. .” (Text)
     program that encounters serious and unexpected problems.
0 NASA had selected Control Data Corp. to furnish large-scale computer

     complex for L ~ R C under $20-million, fixed-price contract. Complex
     would utilize computers with wide variety of simulators and increase
     LaRC’s capability and effectiveness in conducting advanced research.
      (NASA Release 66-152)
e Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey proclaimed Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill
     “Multiple Sclerosis Woman of the Year” in ceremony at his Washing-
     ton, D.C., office and presented her with engraved bronze hope chest-
     symbol of Multiple Sclerosis Society. Dr. Gill, an MS patient for over
     20 yrs., was with NASA Manned Flights Experiments Office, OSSA. She
     formerly had been Chief of In-Flight Sciences, OSSA, and on March 1
     had received one of six Federal Women’s Awards of 1966. (Wash.
     Post, 6/16/66, D1)
 0 NASA Western Operations Office (WOO) was disestablished as NASA field

     instalIation. woo functions had been assigned to two component field
      activities-Western Support Office (WSO), which would serve ‘,‘NASA
      Headquarters and installations programs and projects in Southern
      California and Nevada,” and NASA Office-Downey, responsible for
      “overall NASA representation with North American Aviation, Inc., and
      for providing support to field installation projects at the contractor’s
      site.” (NASA Hq. WeekZy Bull., 7/19/66, 3)
 * Boeing Co. revealed new design for its 2707 supersonic transport to be
      submitted to FAA in Sst competition with Lockheed Aircraft Corp.
      Sept. 6. Major structural changes included: shifting aircraft’s four
      engines from under wings to under tail to provide smoother flow of
      air to engine and quiet compressor whine; integrating variable-sweep
      wing with horizontal tail to form single lifting surface during 1,800-
      mph flight; and increasing length (to 298 ft.) and gross takeoff weight
       (to 600,000 Ibs.) to accommodate 300 passengers. (Boeing Release;
      Edwards, Wmh. Post, 6/16/66, C10)
   Hourly bus tours-for a f e e b e g a n at KSC. Announcing the new service,
      KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said: “We want to provide the public
      with as meaningful a tour as can be permitted without interference
      with mission operational requirements. On Sundays, the public will
       continue to have the option of the free drive-through, in private
      vehicles, of the [NASA] center and the Cape Kennedy Air Force Station.”
       (NYT, 5/12/66, 21; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/13/66, El)
216               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 15: GSFC selected Brush Instruments Go. for $900,000 contract to
    provide 22 Unified S-Band (Usb) Systems Monitors for NASA’s Manned
    Space Flight Tracking Network. Systems, composed of high-speed,
    finite sensing and recording devices, would provide Ymmediate reading
    of critical subsystems performance while simultaneously recording
    operating events as they O C C U ~ , ~ ’
                                       pinpoint and record trouble or failure,
    and serve as diagnostic tool for remedial action. (GSFC Release G-11-66)
June 16: USAF Titan 111-C booster launched from ETR inserted seven Initial
    Defense Communications Satellite Program (Idcsp) repeaters and one
    gravity-gradient satellite into random, near-synchronous, equatorial
    orbit, creating nucleus of worldwide military communications system.
    Apogees varied from 15,911 mi. (25,617 km.) to 16,126 mi. (25,963
    km.) ;perigees from 15,811mi. (25,456 km.)to 15,829 mi. (25,484 km.).
    Average period was 22 hrs. 10 min. All seven comsats were reported
    performing nominally. Satellite to explore feasibility of gravity-gradient
    stabilization at very high altitudes had successfully deployed its 52-ft.-
    long booms and was performing as expected.
       Powered flight of Titan 111-C was close to planned parameters.
    Transtage and payload were inserted into parking orbit, where first
    transtage burn made necessary course corrections. Second transtage
    burn-at     110 min. GET-moved stage and load into transfer orbit.
    Third transtage burn-at 06:03 :12 GET-put satellite dispenser frame
    and its eight satellites weighing 800 lbs. total into near-synchronous
    orbit with 15,906-mi. (25,608.6-km.) apogee and 15,801-mi. (25,439.6-
    km.) perigee. At 06:06:52 GET, satellites were ejected one at a time over
    approximate 3-min. period into their preselected orbits. Within six
    minutes, telemetry signals were received and surface-station tracking
    and communications tests begun; within two hours, circuits were
    established through repeaters. Launch was fourth consecutive success
    of Titan 111-C and fmt total success of its transtage.
       Fifteen additional comsats would be launched by late 1966 to ensure
    against failure of one or more satellites. New ground terminal would
    be installed in Vietnam by midsummer to provide additional command
    and control circuits. (UPI, NYT, 6/17/66; 14; UPI, Wash. Post, 6/17/66,
    A4; Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 16)
0 US. gave U.N. proposed treaty on exploration of moon and other celestial

    bodies and asked that U.N. Outer Space Legal Subcommittee meet
    July 12 to discuss it. Draft-based on May 7 statement by President
    Johnson urging treaty to reserve celestial bodies for peaceful purposes-
    declared such bodies open equally to all countries, subject to claim by
    none, and off limits to nuclear weapons, weapon testing, military
    maneuvers, and fortifications. Soviet source said U.S.S.R. had submitted
    similar treaty earlier in day; text of proposal was not made public [see
    June 171. (AP,Wash. Post, 6/17/66, A4)
0 Two Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rockets carrying exploding

    grenade payloads were launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, and Church-
    ill Research Range in a coordinated GSFC experiment to study atmos-
    pheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as
    summer seasonal maximum of noctilucent cloud sighting approached.
    Rockets and instrumentation functioned normally. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Mrs. James A. McDivitt gave birth in Houston to a daughter-first child
     conceived by an American astronaut’s wife after her husband had re-
     turned from space. Astronaut McDivitt was command pilot on the June
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                           2 17




June 16: USAF Titan 111-C launch vehicle in preparation for multiple-satellite payload
mission from Eastern Test Range.

    4-7, 1365, GEMINI IV mission during which Astronaut Edward H. White
    I1 made his 21-min. Eva. (AP, Wash. Eue. Star, 6/17/66, A2)
June 17: Washington, D.C., National Airport marked 25th anniversary
    facing ground congestion problems intensified by initiation of short-
    haul jet service April 24. FAA Administrator William F. McKee told
    13 airlines to restrict flights at National or risk restriction by agency
    edict. Flight statistics released by FAA June 3 had shown 16,109 more
    passengers at National in Msy than April. Dulles International Airport’s
    passenger count had dropped by 14,456. (Golden, Wash. Eve. Star,
    6/20/66, 1 ; Eisen, Wash. Post, 6/26/66, B1, B7)
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
2 18

June 17: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXI for continued space research into
    orbit with 354-km. (220-mi.) apogee, 210-km. (130-mi.) perigee, 72.9”
    inclination, and 98.9-min. period. Instruments were functioning
    normally. (Tass, 6/17/66)
e GSFC announced completion of OGO 111 checkout program. The 1,135-lb.
    spacecraft, orbited June 6, was “operating well” and 21 experiments
    onboard had recorded and transmitted more than 3,000 hrs. of data.
    Cause of continuing problem in receiving signals from range and range-
    rate tracking beacon-      method for precise determination of position
    in orbit-was under study, but use of alternate tracking system pre-
    vented serious effect on OGO 111 scientific mission. (GSFC Release; AP,
    NYT, 6/18/66, 12)
0 At MSC, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented

    NASA Exceptional Service Medals to GEMINIIX-A Astronauts Thomas P.
    Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan and to Richard E. Dineen (Col., WAF)
    who had helped solve problems in the Titan I1 booster that had launched
    the spacecraft. Referring to difficulties that occurred during the June
    3-6 GEMINI Ix-A flight, Seamans said: “We know that if we had been a
    little sharper, if we had worked a little harder, that this would not have
                  .          .
    happened. . . We are. . dissatisfied with ourselves when technical and
    procedural failures keep us from our goals.” He added he had requested
    review of plans for Gemini X, XI, and XI1 missions for “tightening up”
    of procedures. Summarizing Project Gemini’s results to date-“at the
    three quarter mark”-and forecasting its probable total impact on the
    space effort, Seamans said: “I am convinced that this program will be
    completed with far greater return to the nation in scientific information,
    technology, and operational experience than we had originally set out
    to accomplish when we began the program in 1961.” (Wash. Post,
     6/18/66, A2; Waldron, NYT, 6/18/66, 10; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,
    6/20/66, A10)
0 GEMINI IX-A Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan held

     their first post-mission press conference. Cernan said that during his
     space walk he could not keep his feet from floating, was unable to use
     both hands while trying to don backpack containing maneuvering unit,
                                                               .
     and “had to work continually against the pressure suit. . , I was devot-
     ing 50 per cent of my work load just to maintain position.” This extra
     effort saturated the environmental control system and led to fogging of
     his faceplate so that he could not test the maneuvering unit. About the
     same time, he felt his back becoming “extremely hot.” It was later
     revealed some of the insulation had been ripped from his spacesuit.
     After recounting his adventures, Cernan said: “I found no new voodoo
     out there. . ..You’re at home out there. ..I’m convinced we can do just
     about anything we want to do.” (Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; NYT,
     6/18/66. A10)
 0 U.S.S.R. made public its draft treaty for preserving universe for peaceful

     exploration and research in interest of all mankind submitted to U.N.
     June 16. One difference from U S . treaty proposal, also submitted to
     U.N. June 16, concerned settlement of disputes: Soviet plan called for
      consultation and negotiation among parties involved; U.S. proposal
     would refer disputes to International Court of Justice. Platon D.
     Morozov, acting head of Soviet delegation to U.N., asked to have draft
      circulated as document for inclusion on agenda of 21st session of
      General Assembly, to open Sept. 20. (Daniell, NYT, 6/18/66, 10)
                                                                           219
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 17: Gemini XII crew was named. Prime crew: James A. kvell, Jr.,
     command pilot; Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., pilot. Backup crew: L. Gordon
     Cooper, Jr., command pilot; Eugene A. Cernan, pilot. Mission was
     scheduled for late October or early November 1966. (AP, NYT, 6/18/66,
     10; AI’, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/18/66, A2)
   Praising June 16 flight of Titan 111-6booster which injected eight satellites
     into orbit, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told Pentagon
     news conference that program cost included $33 million for satellites,
     $45 million for ground stations, and $10 to $20 million for other system
     elements. Launch costs were excluded since they were covered by Titan
     111-C development funding. Satellites were resistant to jamming or
     interference, but “anyone who puts up an antenna” of the right kind
     could listen in. What they would hear “may or may not be comprehen-
     sible to them” since traffic would be coded. Asked if U.S.S.R. could use
     satellite system, Dr. Brown replied affirmatively. However, DOD Deputy
     Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Thomas F. Rogers
     stated: “We have arranged so that it would be very difficult for them to
     have assured use of it.” (Transcript)
             Cable & Wireless, Ltd., would build three ground stations-at
 0 U.K.’s

     Hong Kong, Bahrein Island, and an undisclosed site-for satellite com-
     munications, reported the Wall Street Journal. Hong Kong station
     would cost $7 million and would be operational by 1968. Seventeen
      firms-including seven U S . companies-had been asked to bid on the
     project. ( WSJ, 6/17/66, 12)
 * President Johnson signed into law Marine Resources and Engineering
      Development Act of 1966, establishing national goals for an expanding
      national oceanographic effort. Legislation, sponsored by Sen. Warren
      G. Magnuson (D-Wash.), provided for Cabinet-level National Council
      of Marine Resources and Engineering Development-and administrative
      and coordinating organization similar to NASC. Chairman would be Vice
      President. Bill also provided for 15-member Marine Science, Engineer-
      ing and Resources Commission to conduct l8-mo. study of US. ocean-
      ographic capabilities and recommend Government organizational plan
      for oceanography. (CR, 6/2/66, 11490-92; Wash. Post, 6/19/66, A17)
 June 17-18: Optical identification of x-ray source Sco X-1 was made at
      Tokyo Observatory. Photoelectric and spectroscopic observations con-
      tinued at Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar Observatories through July; data
      indicated source might be “an uncatalogued old nova.” Optical search
      had been based on information obtained from NASA-American Science
      and Engineering, InC.-MIT experiment flown on Aerobee 150 sounding
      rocket launched March 8 from WSMR. (Astrophys. J., 10/66, 316-21)
 June 18: Discussing the “cost to land men on the moon” in Journal o the   f
       Armed Forces, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said late RASA Deputy Admin-
       istrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, “without much detailed information on
       which to base an assessment,” had estimated $20 billion. Now that
       work on all major contracts was well advanced, NASA had made new
       estimate that validated original figure: total cost would be $22.7 billion
       with possibility of adjustment that would bring it down almost to $20
       billion. (Haggerty, J/Arrned Forces, 6/18/66,8)
  * Development of new solid-fuel improved capability missile (Icm) that
       could “penetrate even the tightest Soviet defense” was being urged by
       USAF, Pentagon sources revealed. Missile would also be able to propel
       several times the payload of present Minuteman and Polaris missiles
220                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     toward targets in U.S.S.R., could be perfected in about five years, and
     would ensure U.S. strike capability even after surprise attack. (Beecher,
     NYT, 6/20/66, 1)
June 19: TIROS VII meteorological satellite had operated successfully in orbit
     three years, traveled more than 445,000,000 mi., and had taken 123,000
     pictures of cloud formations, storms, hurricanes, and typhoons with
     two wide-angle vidicon TV cameras. Orbited from AMR (now ETR) June
     19, 1963, it tracked major hurricanes and provided information aiding
     Ranger, Mariner, and Gemini missions. (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/19/66
   Calculations by computer at Astronomisches Rechen Institut, Heidelberg,
     Germany, and Yale Univ. Observatory had helped astronomers re-
     discover Tempel-Tuttle Comet responsible for Leonid meteor showers
     each November. Comet had been found 100 yrs. ago and not seen again
     until summer 1965. Meteor shower was expected to be spectacular in
     November 1966; it would occur close to time of comet’s return to
     vicinity of earth. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/19/66, 26)
0 Discussing military satellite as “necessity, not adventure,” article in
     Houston Post said DOD had reoriented space research toward “develop-
     ment of a many-purpose military satellite.” DOD Deputy Director of
      Office of Defense Research and Engineering Daniel J. Fink was quoted
     as saying proposed vehicle could: (1) locate military units precisely;
      (2) speed military communications; (3) carry weather observation and
     reporting equipment; (4) furnish early warning against nuclear attack;
     and (5) detect unannounced nuclear tests. (Houston Post, 6/19/66)
   NASA’s (‘new policy of calling a spade a spade-and       a failure a failure-in
     discussing the results of its manned operations in space” was noted by
     William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: “NASA has been sub-
     jected to harsh criticism-some of ij bordering on ridicule-for the past
      disinclination of its officials to admit . . . that things occasionally had
                      .
      gone wrong. . . Seamans’ outspoken evaluation [June 171 of the
      Gemini 9A flight was regarded here as a signal to other NASA officials to
      lay the facts on the line when things do not go exactly according to
      plan.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, AlO)
 0 Stages in development of facilities at KSC for Saturn/Apollo launches were

      described in Aviation Week editorial by Robert Hotz. Now that the
      mission was “moving so close to realization,” he said, bold and far-
      reaching decisions were needed “to insure in the post-Apollo decade
      the full utilization of these Apollo launch facilities and the superb
      technical team that operates them.” Citing “dramatic progress” made
      by US. in first decade of space age, Hotz added: ‘r. . .it is hard to under-
      stand why the highest level of national leadership now shrinks from
      making the decisions today that are necessary to insure this nation’s
      capability for tomorrow.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 6/20/66, 21)
 0 Martin Marietta Corp. was receiving $7,622,000 fixed-price contract from

      AFSC for work on Titan I11 booster. (DOD Release 536-66)
 0 Proposed compromise by ELDO reducing U.K.’s            share of financing was
       reported in Aviation Week. If accepted at July 7-8 ELDO ministerial
       conference in Paris, financial participation was expected to be: U.K.-
      27% of future ELDO costs, a reduction from the 38.79% initially agreed
      upon in 1962-63;West Germany-27%, increased from 22.01%; France,
       25%, increased from 23.93%; Italy, 12%, increased from 9.78%; Nether-
       lands and Belgium would share 9%, increased from Belgium’s 2.85%
       and Netherlands’ 2.64%. (Av. Wk., 6/20/66, 30)
                                                                             221
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 21: NASA awarded Philco Corp. $3.5-million contract for four tri-axis
     magnetometers and supporting equipment to be left on moon by Apollo
     astronauts. One of seven geophysical instruments to be carried in Alsep
     (Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package), 14.5-lb. magnetometer
     would determine presence or absence of lunar magnetic field, measure
     magnetic penetrability of moon, study interplanetary magnetic field
     and its diffusion to moon, and detect electrical currents in solar wind
     above lunar surface. (ARC    Release 66-9)
   USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D rocket from WTR.
     (US.   Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 153)
* ComSatCorp president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, speaking at National Space
     Club luncheon in Vashington, D.C., disclosed plans for a $7- to $9-
     million laboratory to be built by ComSatCorp near Washington, D.C.
     Facility would employ about 200 people and would be completed by
     mid-1468. (Clark, NYT, 6/22/66, 12)
   $3,000 block of magnesium used as vibration test fixture for Lunar Excur-
     sion Module’s propellant-gaging system brought $28.14 in Los Angeles
     junk yard. Two trash collectors had diverted block from Apollo project
     into their disposal truck while emptying trash cans at Giannini Corp.,
     Duarte, Calif. They were booked on suspicion of grand larceny. (UPI,
      Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A6)
0 Development of chemical laser requiring no external energy was advancing

     so rapidly it would “probably be achieved within a year or ~ w o . ”Predic-
     tion was made by Dr. George C. Pimental, professor of chemistry at
     Univ. of California, Berkeley, at AFosR-sponsored seminar on “Science
     Frontiers” at Albuquerque, N. Mex. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/21/66, 12)
June 22: U.S. and U.S.S.R.-which had submitted to U.N. (June 16) similar
     drafts for a treaty banning military use of celestial bodies-agreed to
     meeting of legal experts of Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
     Space in Geneva July 12 to arrange compromise between drafts. U.S.S.R.
     had originally asked that proposals be included in agenda of 21st session
      of U.N. General Assembly, which would open Sept. 20. (Daniell, NYT,
     6/23/66, 1)
 0 Two Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launches, from Point Barrow, Alaska,

      and Churchill Research Range, were coordinated in GSFC experiment to
      obtain atmospheric data as time of summer maximum for noctilucent
      cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation functioned
      satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
 0 Design requirements for second-generation, recoverable-reusable booster
      and spacecraft systems, outlined by NASC staff member Dr. Eugene B.
      Konecci at American Astronautical Society meeting in Wayne, N.J.,
      included: new pFopulsion capability; materials, structures, and sub-
      systems suitable for reuse; and system designed for “full use of the
      human factor capabilities in the control loop, . . . minimum (limited)
      ground support participation, and for easy maintenance and repair.”
       (Text)
 0 President Charles de Gaulle, speaking at Moscow State Univ., suggested

      that France and the U.S.S.R. should work toward a (hew alliance” for
      scientific and other intellectual pursuits. He said that ‘‘culture, science,
      and progress justify national ambitions in our epoch in place of former
      dreams of conquest and domination.” (Grose, NYT, 6/23/66, 1)
    Generator-burner assembly of the LORHO pilot facility was successfully
      run at full power at Arnold Engineering Development Center, marking
222               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     first application of magnetohydrodynamic principles in achieving high-
     velocity flow in a ground environmental test facility. (AEDC)
June 22: ComSatCorp denied ITT World Communications, Inc.’s accusation
     of “unjustly and unreasonably” discriminating against ITT in quoting
     charges to Defense Communications Agency (DCA) 30 satellite cir-
                                                            for
     cuits between Hawaii and Japan, the Philippines and Thailand: “The
                                             ..
     rate quoted to the DCA for each of the. circuits is, in fact, higher than
     the rate quoted to the carriers, as it takes into account the additional
     service costs by Comsat to carry out a responsibility to provide end-to-
                            ..
     end service to DCA. .       ITT Worldcom may have been confused by
     advance knowledge as to the Corporation’s planned tariff for satellite
     channels to be furnished to authorized common carriers, in which the
     $48,000 charge to the carriers would be revised downward to $45,000
     [and] erroneously assumed that this lower charge, which would apply
     only to authorized common carriers, had been quoted by Comsat to the
     DCA.” (ComSatCorp Release)
June 23: NASA’s  PAGEOS I (Pageos A Passive Geodetic Earth-Orbiting Satellite)
     was launched with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster from WTR
     into near-circular polar orbit: 2,645-mi. (4,258-km.) apogee, 2,603-mi.
      (4,191-km.) perigee, 182-min. period, and 87” inclination. PAGEOS I was
     an aluminum-coated Mylar balloon of the ECHO I type. Balloon was
     folded and packaged inside spherical canister ejected into space as launch
     vehicle reached orbital velocity. Canister then separated in half by
     explosive device, and folded satellite automatically inflated to 100-ft.-
     dia. sphere. PAGEOS I carried no instruments. By reflecting sunlight,
     satellite would provide orbiting point source of light to be photographed
     over projected five-year perio’d to determine size and shape of earth to
     a degree never before possible; in orbit, satellite should be as bright as
     star Polaris. Simultaneous observations from 41 portable camera stations
     around world would be used to construct three-dimensional geodetic
     reference system. Resulting satellite triangulation network would make
      it possible to obtain distance between two surface points on earth
     3,000 mi. apart to an accuracy of 32 ft. Project was managed by JARC.
      (NASA Release 66-150; ESSA Release 66-32; NASA Proj. Off.; LaRC Re-
     searcher, 7/1/66, 1, 6; Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A5)
                                         at full power June 8 at Jackass Flats,
 0 NRX-A5 nuclear reactor-operated

      Nev.-was restarted and operated an additional 14% min. at design
     power of 1,100 mw (55,000 lbs. thrust). Tested by Aerojet-General and
      Westinghouse Corp. under joint NASA-AEC program, reactor consumed
      218,000 gal. liquid hydrogen. (AEC Release J-160)
 0 NASA would negotiate six-month study contracts totaling $200,000 with

      General Electric Co. and RCA to determine “feasibility of a satellite
      capable of broadcasting directly to conventional home FM radio and/or
      short wave radios.” Contracts would be managed by NASA OSSA. (NASA
      Release 66-161)
 0 NASA and Vocational Rehabilitation Administration signed agreement “to

      accelerate the application of new technology to the problems of the
      disabled” by making results of aerospace research available for applica-
      tion to rehabilitation “on a continuing basis.” This would involve
      evaluation of NASA technology by VRA scientists; adaptive engineering
      to apply that technology to needs of disabled persons; demonstration of
      resulting devices, systems, and procedures; and commercial introduction
      of new devices and services. (NASA Release 66-160)
                                                                        223
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

June 23: House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably
     H.R. 14832incorporating changes and improvements in organization and
     operation of NSF recommended in Subcommittee on Science, Research,
     and Development report, “The National Science Foundation-Its
     Present and Future.” (House Rpt. 1650)
e FCC ruled that users of satellite communications must operate through
     common carriers instead of dealing directly with ComSatCorp to prevent
     “serious adverse effects upon the well-being of the commercial tele-
     communications industry and the general public it serves.” Ruling,
     which resolved controversy betweeii ComSatCorp and common carriers,
     would protect carriers from reduced tra5c volume resulting from direct
     user-ComSatCorprelations. (FCC; VSJ, 6/24/66, 6)
June 24: NASA awarded Univac $30-million7 five-year contract to provide
     re
       new computing system” for MSFC beginning in 1967. Computer
     Sciences Corp. was selected to provide support services for MSFC Com-
     putation Lab. under $5.5-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract with
     provisions for four one-year extensions. Services would include com-
     puter operation, maintenance, and programing. (NASA Releases 66-164,
     165)
   NASA had awarded $22-million renewal contract to TWA for continued
     support services at KSC. Two contracting methods would be followed:
     cost-plus-award-feefor supply operations and general maintenance; and
     fixed-price for remaining services. (NASA Release 66-166)
* NASA named L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth (USAF) to receive Exceptional
     Service Medal for his “outstanding contributions” to US.aeronautical
     research programs “both as a pilot and as an engineer” on X-15 rocket
     aircraft. Col. Rushworth, who would leave X-15 program in summer
     1966 to attend Armed Forces Staff College, would be presented medal
     at NASA awards ceremony in October. (NASA Release 66-159)
   USAF space launch crews were being familiarized with new low-cost Burner
     I1 upper-stage booster developed by Boeing to inject payloads into orbit
     and then orient the payload accurately. Small, guided, solid-fuel stage,
     scheduled for operation in late 1966, would “economically bridge the
     payload gap between the DOD-NASA Scout launch vehicle and the Delta
     and Agena upper stages.” (Boeing Release)
 * Potential impact of aeronautical technology on social patterns of the
     nation was discussed by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, chairman of
     MIT’S aeronautics and astronautics department, at meeting of Aviation/
     Space Writers’ Assn. in New York City. In only the 10th year of the
                                       “. . .
     space age, he said, the world was        at the beginning of a new surge
     in science and technology stimulated by their interactions with each
     other and with social needs, nourished by the resources and needs of
     space exploration.” (Text; AF‘/SD, 8/66)
.Tune 25: France’s President Charles de Gaulle watched launch of COSMOS
      CXXII unmanned satellite from Baikonur cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, into
     625-km. (388-mi.) altitude circuIar orbit with 65” inclination and 97.1-
     min. period. Tass said all instruments aboard satellite were functioning
      normally. De Gaulle was first Westerner to witness a Soviet launching
     and to visit Baikonur space center. (Tass, 6/25/66; Tanner, NYT,
     6/26/66, 1; Wash. Post, 6/26/66, A20; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/26/66,
      AB)
 * NASA Administrator James E. Webb told National Conference of Lieutenant
      Governors in Cleveland that new satellite weather reporting system
224               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    meant “you say to every other nation the United States is developing
    this power technique of space, not to get power over you, but to develop
    power together with you over the limitations of nature.” (AP, Miami
    News, 6/26/66)
June 25: First full-disc photograph of earth, taken from U.S.S.R.’s third
    MOLNIYA I, had been received from Soviet Novosti Press Agency by
    Donald Zahner of St. Louis, publisher of Review o Popular Astronomy.
                                                        f
    Picture, transmitted May 30 and authenticated by US. Government
    officials and by Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, director of Univ. of Arizona’s
    Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, would appear in July-August issue of
    magazine. Zahner said Soviet officials had probably sent photograph
    out of gratikide for article published by magazine in spring 1966 on
     100th anniversary of Pulkovo Observatory. (Tech. Wk., 7/11/66, 12;
    AP, Balt. Sun, 6/26/66)
June 26: New National Oceanography Assn. (NOA) “to raise the level of
    public awareness of what impact oceans will have on future generations”
    became operative. In first press release, NOA said it would promote
     e?
        opportunities-for national advancement, for profit, for pleasure, and
    for meeting basic human needs-which lie just across the threshold of
    the ocean.” It said U.S. lagged behind U.S.S.R., Japan, and other nations
    in ocean exploration and that a “high priority, fullscale national ocean-
     ography program” was needed to catch up. (NOA Release)
  Siberian-born scientist Mikhail K. Yangel, elected to Communist Party’s
    Central Committee in April and to Supreme Soviet June 12, had been
    tentatively identified as new head of U.S.S.R.’s space program. Several
    other scientists known or believed to be associated with space program
    had been selected to Supreme Soviet for first time; however, since
    Yangel was only one also to occupy seat in Central Committee, this was
    taken as indication he occupied top position. (Shabad, NYT, 6/26/66,
    3)
June 27: U.S.S.R. would continue intensive exploration of space in 1966-70
    period, Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh
    reported to general meeting of Academy. He listed these general
    programs: manned space flights; exploration of physical conditions on
    moon and nearest planets; and development of use of satellites and
     rockets for long-distance communications systems. (Tass, 6/28/66)
* Rep. Hale Boggs (D-La.) told House: “. . . no businessman would invest
     tens of thousands of dollars in a locomotive and then allow it to rust in
     the yard for lack of a $5 part. Neither can we invest tens of billions
     in a space program and leave it to falter for the lack of funds.” Calling
     the present budget “austere,” Bogs warned that in future budgets we
     could not put important elements of our capability into mothballs. “We
     must use it or see it rust.” (CR, 6/27/66, 13707-08)
0 NASA announced conversion of contract with Douglas Aircraft CO. for
     development of Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage from cost-plus-
     fixed-fee to cost-plus-incentive-fee. Under revised contract, company s
     fee would be increased or decreased depending on “attainment of’the
     incentive for cost, schedule and performance.” Estimated cost was
     $700 million, plus fee, (MSFC Release 66-141)
0 Lockheed Aircraft Corp. displayed 273-ft., full-scale mockup of its 1,800-

     mph revised supersonic transport model to be submitted to FAA in Sst
     competition with Boeing Co. Sept. 6. Made primarily of titanium and
     scheduled for first flight by 1970, the 266-passenger Lockheed 2000
                                                                            225
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    would have double-delta wing to provide “outstanding flight handling
    characteristics at all speeds” and to permit cruising at 7,000-ft. altitude,
    and ‘‘weather vision” nose which could move down 15” from super-
    sonic cruise position to give pilot visibility during takeoff, landing, and
    subsonic flight. Boeing design-revealed June 15-had featured variable
    wing swept forward for takeoffs, landings, and subsonic flight and back
    for supersonic cruise. (Lockheed Release)
June 27: June 8 loss of XB-70 experimental aircraft would delay NASA-DOD
     Sst research program for two or three months, Hal Taylor reported in
     Technology Week following interview with Charles Harper, Director,
    NASA Office of Aeronautical Research, OART. (Tech. Wk.7 6/27/66, 18)
  NASA-sponsored space science course-including lectures, demonstrations,
     and experiments-began at (Washington) D.C. Teachers College to
     help local elementary school teachers understand space-age funda-
     mentals and interpret them to their pupils. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/66,
     D9)
0 Physicists at Columbia Univ., under the direction of Dr. Paolo Franzini,

     and at State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook, directed by Dr. Juliet
     Lee-Franzini, published experimental evidence that would disprove
     theory of charge conjunction invariance-theory             that oppositely
     charged particles behave symmetrically. Photographic analysis of decay
     of eta meson, a neutral nuclear particle, into three pions-one positively
     charged, one negatively charged, and one neutral-indicated              that
     positive pion traveled away from decomposed eta meson at a greater
     velocity than negative pion. Results, based on 1,441 photographs, Dr.
     Franzini said, had “far-reaching consequences regarding antiparticles”
     and provided means of identifying “whether a particle or body any-
     where in the universe is positively or negatively charged.” Experiment
     -conducted in Columbia’s Nevis Laboratory, Brookhaven National
     Laboratory, and Stony Brook-was reported in Physical Review Letters.
     (Phys. Rev. Lett., 6/27/66, 1224; AIP Release, 6/26/66)
0 Question of “garbage problem” in space was raised during recent House

     Appropriations Committee hearings on Spacetrack, which maintained
     surveillance on over 1,800 orbiting objects, Drew Pearson reported in
      Washington Post. Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Alexander H.
     Flax replied there was no danger of collision “because of the tremendous
     amount of volume that these 1,800 objects are disposed in. It is like the
     problem of stepping on a flea in Grand Central Station. It could happen,
     but it is highly unlikely.” (Pearson, Wash. Post, 6/27/66)
  AFSC had awarded Bell Aerospace Corp. a one-year study contract to
     develop Dual-purpose Maneuvering Unit (Dmu) that could be worn by
     astronaut or operated by remote radio and TV signals. Dmu would
     combine “best features” of Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)-
     which Astronaut Eugene Cernan was unable to test during GEMINI =-A
     flight-and Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu)-which had been tested
     in laboratory. (AFSC Release 116.66)
0 American Astronautical Society had granted following awards for achieve-

     ments in 1965: W. Raymond Lovelace Award to Dr. Jeanette Ridlon
     Piccard “for past experiments in ballooning and continued contributions
     to space progress”; AAS Space Flight Award (posthumously) to Dr. Hugh
     L. Dryden “for outstanding technical and administrative leadership”;
     Melbourne W. Boynton Award to Dr. Charles A. Berry ‘(for managing
     successfully medical program for astronauts”; AAS Flight Achievement
226               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Award to Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Thomas P. Stafford, Frank
     Borman, and James A. Love11 “for dual outstanding achievements for
     first successful in-plane rendezvous (GEMINI VI) and sustained orbit
     operations (GEMINI ”;Victor A. Prather Award to Richard Johnston
                          VII)
     “for outstanding contributions to design and technology of spacesuits
     for astronauts.” (Av. Wk., 6/27/66, 19)
June 27: Pointing out that “space triumphs” had made “secrecy and the
     hoarding of scientific data less worthwhile,” editorial in the Baltimore
                          .
     Sun concluded: “. . it is not surprising that, despite the relationship
     between military defense and some space activity, Russia and France
     seem about to agree to cooperate in space research-and theunited
     States and Russia likewise.” (Balt. Sun, 6/27/66)
0 Several small solid motors had been test-fired during “last three months”

     at Hercules, Inc.’s Bacchus, Utah, facilities under classified program;
     highest impulse recorded in Free World was reported to have been
     reached. (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 3)
June 28: Analysis of data from aborted March 16 GEMINI VIII mission had
     indicated three of 10 ex eriments were successfully conducted and a
     fourth might later yield c fata, NASA announced. Bioassays of body fluids
     had provided data on flight crew response to spaceflight; frog-egg growth
     experiment had indicated fertilized frog eggs divide normally even under
     conditions of weightlessness; nuclear emulsion experiment had func-
     tioned correctly and had completed 17% of its planned schedule when
     flight was terminated. Fourth experiment was micrometeoroid collection
     device aboard GATV;       exposed surfaces were expected to yield useful
     data if they could be retrieved from GATV during Gemini X mission
     scheduled for no earlier than July 18. Six experiments had had to be
     canceled when GEMINI VIII mission was terminated after electrical short
     circuit in spacecraft caused continuous firing of roll thruster. (NASA
     Release 66-163)
   Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill
     Research Range carried 19-grenade payload in GSFC experiment coordi-
     nated with launch from Point Barrow, Alaska, to study atmospheric
     parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer
     progressed toward time of maximum noctilucent cloud sightings. Rocket
      and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
 e Pratt & Whitney Div. announced it had successfully tested second version
      of engine being built for US. supersonic transport program. Engine
      developed more than 600,000 lbs. thrust at West Palm Beach Facility.
      ( W S , 6/28/66, 9)
 0 U.S.S.R. was encountering difficulties in development of its supersonic

     jet aircraft so that “on the present showing it would seem that the Con-
      corde will not only take to the air before the Tu-144 but will be flying
      commercially earlier, too,” experts at Radio Liberty reported. (DJNS,
      Wash. Eve. Star, 6/28/66)
 June 28-29: NASA’s SURVEYOR I, which had softlanded on moon June 2, did
      not respond to daily 3%-hr. attempt by JPL to reactivate its instruments
      after two-week lunar night. JPL spokesman said: “It may or may not be
      dead. Variations in the moon’s temperature might have caused Sur-
      veyor’s radio frequency to change.” Beginning June 30, JPL’S Deep
      Space Facilities, Goldstone, Calif., would try nightly to contact space-
      craft using preplanned sequence of commands. If response were re-
      ceived, SURVEYOR 1’s television camera would be commanded to take one
                                                                         227
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     picture of spaeecraft’s footpad to verify camera was still operational
     and preparations would be made to resume full program of transmission
     of lunar pictures. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/29/66, A23; UPI, Wash. Post,
     6/29/66, A9; UPI, Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/30/66)
June 29: First nuclear power generator in space marked fifth anniversary.
     Developed by AEC to supplement solar power on USN’S 175-lb. experi-
     mental navigational satellite TRANSIT IV-A, 5-lb. Snap-3 generator had
     traveled 724,000,000 mi. (over 25,000 times around earth). TRANSIT IV-A,
     launched June 29, 1961, from Cape Canaveral, became oldest operating
     US. satellite in May 1964. (AEC Release J-159)
             assed and cleared for President’s signature H.R. 6125, which
  Senatef
     woul convert National Air Museum to National Air and Space Museum
     with NASA representation on advisory board. Bill authorized construction
     of museum building. (CRY6/29/66, 14041-2)
   Senate-House conference committee approved $17.5 billion DOD FY 1967
     authorization bill-$377.3 million less than House version and $310.7
                                          a
     million more than Senate version. Ap roved budget was $553.8 million
     more than DOD request. Bill include $137.9 million increase in R&D
     funds over DOD budget request but House proposal to add $80 million
     to Mol program was cut to $SO-millionincrease. R&D funds also included
     $14.4 million for Condor medium-range guided missile; $11.8 million
     for Amsa (Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft) follow-on bomber; and
     $130.5 million for nuclear guided missile frigate authorized in FY 1965.
      (Av.Wk., 7/4/66, 19; NYT, 6/30/66, 13)
0 S-IB stage for sixth flight Uprated Saturn I booster (S-IBd), powered by

     eight Rocketdyne H-1 engines, was successfully captive-fired at MSFC
     for 145 sec., producing 1.6 million lbs. thrust. (MSFC Release 66-124)
   Hughes Aircraft Corp. received $280-million contract from NATO Air
     Defense Ground Environment Project to build integrated early-warning
     and weapon-control system-consisting of radar, data-handling, and
      communications equipment-extending from Norway to Turkey. ( WSJ,
   ,

     6/30/66, 4; Hughes)
June 30: On the floor of the House, Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) discussed
     Committee changes made in Dept. of Transportation bill, H.R. 13200.
     A “clean bill,” H.R. 15963, was introduced giving proposed Secretary
      of department responsibility for aviation and making Federal Aviation
      Administration (new name for FAA) a division of Dept. of Transporta-
      tion. Civil Aeronautics Board aircraft accident investigation unit would
      also be under Secretary of Transportation. (CR, 6/30/66,14272-5)
 0 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko and French Foreign Minister

      Maurice Couve de Murville signed agreement in Moscow providing
      basic framework for space cooperation during next ten years. Major
      objectives of compact-which       initially scheduled several common
      experiments, including an astronomy test to be conducted from Arch-
      angel, U.S.S.R., and KerguBlen, French islands in the Indian Ocean
      -were missions with Imp-type satellites and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft.
       (SBD, 6/28/66, 344)
 0 NASA selected Northrop Corp. for final negotiations on $5-million contract

      for design, development, fabrication, and testing of “engineering me-
      chanics subsystems for Mariner Mars ’69 spacecraft.” Contract would
      be managed by JPL. (NASA Release 66-170)
   Sens. Carl T. Curtis (R-Neb.) and Jennings Randolph (D-W.Va.) urged
      that appropriations not be sought for construction of National Air and
228               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Space Museum-authorized        by H.R. 6125 passed June 29-until
     the war in Vietnam ended or its expenditures decreased. (CR, 6/30/66,
     14112-14)
June 30: NASA might not in future be able to order aircraft carriers and large
    ships for recovery of astronauts, Chicago Tribune sources reported. USN
    felt vessels could be put to better use to support or relieve forces in
    Vietnam. USAF had proposed to NASA use of new long-range helicopters.
     (Chic. Trib., 7/1/66)
0 NASA tracking station at East Grand Forks, Minn., ceased operation after

    five years of space tracking. Advances in tracking technology and orbit
     determination had made site no longer essential for support of scientific
     satellites; some equipment would be sent to other stations. (NASA Release
     66-117)
0 USN’s Pacific &sile    Range reported 2,608 live missile firings in record
     total of 13,155 operations during FY 1966. (SBD, 7/19/66, 93)
During June: Lurain as seen by SURVEYOR I Science Evaluation Analysis
     Team after preliminary analysis of data was a dark, relatively smooth,
     gently rolling plain “the consistency of a freshly turned field,” studded
     with craters ranging in diameter from one inch to several hundreds of
     feet and littered with fragmental debris ranging in size from few hun-
     dredths of an inch to more than three feet. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker,
     U.S. Geological Survey, said terrestrial scenery most closely resembling
     the lurain as seen by SURVEYOR I would be Sedan crater at AEC’S Nevada
     Test site-large crater covered with small craters and “secondary
     ejecta” resulting from explosion of subsurface nuclear device. Lurain
     appeared to be composed of soil-like substance, or a fine sand, with
     rougher material through it. It appeared to be about three feet deep
     with harder surface beneath. Surface had dynamic bearing strength of
     6-10 psi. Leonard Jaffe, NASA Pr6ject Surveyor scientist, noted that
     results of SURVEYOR I could be summarized by list of previous theories
     on nature of lurain that had been disproved: surface was not composed
     of hard rock; it was not composed of one piece of very porous rock; it
     was not covered by a layer of loose dust either thick or thin; it was a
     finely granulated material with particles that cohered to each other but
     did not seem particularly attracted to spacecraft; it was heavy enough
     for man to walk and work on and for a properly designed spacecraft to
     land on; and it reflected accurate radar signal from surface, not from
     subsurface substance. Jaffe noted there were a few hazards to manned
     spacecraft, mostly from large rocks and possibility of sinkage, but
     emphasized data so far indicated surface was adequate for landing
      Apollo Lem.
        There appeared to be two different types of rocks near SURVEYOR I:
      one with pitted, spongy surface that appeared to be caused by molten
      rock that had cooled and from which gas had escaped; the other harder,
      smoother surfaced, and smaller grained.
        SURVEYOR I photographs were considered superior to U.S.S.R.’s LUNA
      IX results because (1) camera was higher so that horizon was 10 times
     farther away; (2) camera resolution was greater (down to 1/50th of an
      inch); camera worked longer and took more photos under different
     light angles. SURVEYOR 1’s pictures of its own footpad had yielded data
      on surface and subsurface composition. (Clark, NYT, 6/8/66, 1;
     6/17/66, 15; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/66, A4; Sullivan, NYT,
      6/19/66, 14F; SBD, 6/20/66,297)
                                                                            229
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

During June: NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., writing
    in Astronautics & Aeronautics, outlined choices in “potential manned-
    spaceflight missions of the next generation” and argued for taking up
    the preliminary options now. He selected what he called “three natural,
    potential targets” for major extensions of manned space flight. First
    of these he saw as “a spacefaring research and operations center in
    earth orbit,” described as a “large, permanent, manned space facility”
    that would “make possible whole new ranges of experiments, investiga-
    tions, and operations.” Second choice was “the moon itself. . .following
    up the initial exploratory landings with a permanent lunar base.” Third
    objective could be “manned surface exploration of Mars” within con-
    text of “extension of the lunar-landing experience to the near planets.”
    Citing both advantages and difficulties of the latter, he said: “Such an
    effort would represent a greater national commitment of far longer
    duration than our commitment in 1961 to a manned lunar landing, and
    would generate proportionately increased industrial, university, and
    government activities. Significant advances in virtually every field of
    space-related technology would be required. The increase in scientific
    knowledge from direct, firsthand observation and experimentation on
    another planet, however, has not yet been measured against the direct
    cost of its achievement, or against the more subtle cost of longterm
    dedication to a given course of action, with its inherent loss of national
    flexibility in allocation of the limiting resources-technical and scien-
    tific manpower.” ( A M , 6/66, 30-33)
  Measurement of angular size of x-ray source Sco X-1 [see March 8, May
    23, June 17-18] was reported by Herbert Gursky, Riccardo Giacconi,
    Paul Gorenstein, and John R. Waters of American Science and Engineer-
    ing, Inc. (ASE) and MIT’S Minoru Oda, Hale Bradt, Gordon Garmire, and
    B. V. Sreekantan in Astrophysical Journal. Accompanying article by
    ASE’S Oscar P. Manley suggested source was a protostar; Giacconi group
    said source, if observable, would appear in visible light as starlike object.
     (Astrophys. J., 6/66, 1249, 1253)
0 AIP Center for History and Philosophy of Physics received grant from

     Ford Foundation “for a long range planning study to determine the
     future level and direction of the Center’s growing activities in the
     history, philosophy and sociology of twentieth century physics.” (AIP
     Center, Newsletter, 6/66)
* Purposes of Saturn/Apollo Applications program, M/G David M. Jones
     (USAF), NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight,
     said in an interview in Data magazine, were to serve as transition pro-
     gram from Apollo to next space goal and to accomplish “significant
     scientific experiments.”
  . interview Program Director M/G Samuel C.some major setback, in an
        Apollo                                       Phillips (USAF) said
                 in the same issue that “barring                            some
     major failure in a static test on the ground or major failure on a flight,
     it is reasonable to expect that the lunar landing . . , will be accomplished
     before the end of 1969.” (Data, 6/66, 27, 32)
0 Univ. of Toronto Chancellor 0. M. Solandt was named chairman of newly

     created Science Council of Canada; Univ. of Montreal Rector Roger
     Gaudry was named Vice Chairman. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 6-7/66,8)
0 More than 70 tethered balloon ascensions to 1,500-ft. altitude for vehicle

     drop tests had been conducted by AFCRL at Holloman AFB over past three
     years to test Surveyor spacecraft’s retrofire descent and impact capa-
     bilities, OAR Research Review reported. (OAR Res. Rev., 6/66, 17)
230                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

During June: Dr. Dorothy Martin Simon, Avco Corp. vice president and
    director of Corporate Research, received 1966 Achievement Award of
    Society of Women Engineers. She was cited for “significant contribu-
    tions to engineering administration and space engineering, especially in
    the fields of combustion and ablative coatings.’’ (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66,
      46)
    Star RU Camelcpardalis, that four years ago varied its light output
0

      rhythmically every 22 days between visual magnitudes 8.2 and 9.1,
      had become constant in brightness at magnitude of 8.5-too faint to
      be seen with naked eye. Cause of change, reported in Sky and Telescope,
      was unknown. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 7/4/66, 32)
    Ten-month survey was reported by Cal Tech radioastronomy research
e
      fellow Dr. John D. Wyndham. He found that at least a fourth of the
      radio sources reported beyond this galaxy belonged in the quasar cate-
      gory. If a fourth of the thousands of radio sources beyond the Milky
      Way are quasars, the latter must be very abundant, the report said.
      (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/29/66, A26)
    U.S. aerospace exports in 1365 totaled $1,474,000,000-up 21.6 per cent
0

      from 196kAerospace Industries Assn. reported. ( WSJ, 6/27/66, 5)
                                July 1966

July I : NASA successfully launched EXPLORER XXXIII(Imp-D) Anchored Inter-
     planetary Monitoring Platform (Aimp) from ETR using Thrust-Aug-
     mented Delta booster with FW-4s 3rd stage to study interplanetary
     radiation and magnetic fields, Because tracking data indicated at 3:30
     GET spacecraft was in excess-energy orbit, alternate mission plan was
     put into effect at 4:30 GET: retrorocket was fired, injecting EXPLORER
     XXXIII into elliptical earth orbit with 278,990-mi. (449,174-km.) apogee;
     18,975-mi. (30,550-km.) perigee; 13.5-day period; 28.9" inclination.
     Planned parameters: 4,000-mi. (6,4410-km.) apolune; 800-mi. (1,288-
     km.) perilune; 10-hr. period; 175" inclination. NASA later revealed
     booster's 2nd stage had produced 70-80 fps over-velocity which would
     have caused spacecraft to reach moon's vicinity too early to achieve
     lunar capture. Despite EXPLORER XXXIII'S failure to achieve lunar orbit,
     all active experiments were operative and high scientific yield was
     expected.
         Fourth of seven Interplanetary Explorers planned by NASA and first
     to attempt lunar orbit, 206-lb. EXPLORER XXXIII carried six scientific
     experiments and one engineering experiment-a solar cell damage study.
     Primary mission objectives were to study at lunar distances the earth's
     magnetic tail and magnetosphere in interplanetary space twice a month
     by means of lunar anchored spacecraft; and to measure interplanetary
     magnetic fields, solar plasma, and energetic particles in cislunar space.
     Program was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of
     Space Science and Applications (OSSA). (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release
     66-162; UPI, NYT, 7/2/66, 5; Strothman, Wush. Post, 7/2/66, A2)
0 L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth flew X-15 No. 2 to 1,023 mph (mach 1.70)

     and 44,800-ft. altitude to evaluate handling qualities with full external
     fuel tanks. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
0 US. National Academy of Sciences and Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences

     announced initiation of three-year exchange program in which scientists
     of each country would visit the other country from one month to one
     year to lecture, exchange professional views, and conduct research.
     Similar exchanges with science academies in Yugoslavia, Poland, and
     Romania had gone into effect this year, NAS reported, and an earlier
     exchange agreement with Soviet Academy of Sciences remained effec-
     tive. (CAS Release)
  Administrative History o NASA, 1958-63 (SP-4101), by Dr. Robert L.
                             f
     Rosholt and with a foreword bv NASA Administrator James E. Webb, was
     published by NASA. Volum&first in history' series covering major
     programs and other aspects of NASA operations-would be available
     through Superintendent of Documents, GPO. (NASA Release 66-158)

                                                                     231
232               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 1: GEMINI IV Astronaut Edward H. White 11, first US. astronaut to walk
     in space, received the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy from
     Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown at National Geographic
     Society ceremony in Washington, D.C. Established in 1961 by Dr.
     Thomas W. McKnew, chairman of the National Geographic’s Board of
     Trustees, trophy was awarded annually to the USAF officer or unit that
     made the foremost contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace.
        NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the ceremony: “I think
     . . . that no factor has been more important in the advances made in
     aviation and in space than the continued and dedicated driving leader-
     ship of the officers of the Air Force and the personal willingness to take
     the risks involved of these outstanding test pilots and combat pilots
     and those who have done the intervening jobs from transportation to
     helicopter work. We have a great Air Force.” (Text; NYT, 7/12/66)
* Defense Communications Agency (DCA) said it would begin “immediate
     negotiations” with ComSatCorp for contract to provide new military
     message-carrying links to Far East as part of continuing buildup of
     activity in Vietnam. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/66, 2)
July 2: Collection of more than 1,500 tektites-dark, glassy objects suspected
     to be of lunar origin-had been presented to Geology Dept. of Pomona
     College, Claremont, Calif., by Dr. Harvey H. Nininger, a 1917 alumnus.
     Dr. Nininger had gathered most of the tektites in South Vietnam. (AP,
     NYT, 7/3/66, 24)
   France exploded an experimental atomic bomb from tower on Mururoa
     Atoll in the Pacific. Estimated yield was less than one megaton. ( Wash.
     Post, 7/3/66, A l )
July 3: Clotaire Wood, former chief of Vehicle Technology Flight Experi-
     ments in NASA’s OART, became NASA European Representative, Office of
     International Affairs. He replaced Gilbert W. Ousley, who would leave
     Paris office and return to GSFC Aug. 1. (NASA Ann.)
0 John A. Edwards, Director of Gemini Flight Operations, became Deputy

     Director, Gemini Program, in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. He
     replaced LeRoy E. Day, who became Director of Apollo Test. (NASA
     Release 66-176)
July 4: U.S.S.R. was entering second phase of space medicine research,
     seeking the “why” of physiological changes, V. V. Parin, a Soviet
     physician-scientist with a major role in selecting and training cosmo-
     nauts, told Technology Week in a Moscow interview. In phase one “we
     merely made objective observations of animals . . . we were interested
     in just keeping them alive, in generating the atmosphere, maintaining
     thermal control, humidity, pressure, and the rest,” Parin said. “Now
     we want to know the intimate details of animal adaptation” to space,
     because lower animals could be more intensively studied in space flights
      than man. Parin cited four areas in which improved medical technology
     could aid the study of physiology: measuring calcium loss in astronauts;
     analyzing process of water loss in astronauts; measuring muscle tone;
      and devising better telemetry. Parin said he was satisfied with the inter-
      change of space-medical data between U.S.S.R. and U.S. (Beller, Tech.
      Wk., 7/4/66, 12, 13)
 e NASA might have attempted to send Surveyor spacecraft to the moon in
      December 1965 but was effectively discouraged by severely critical
      report on the program published by House Committee on Science and
      Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Avia-
                                                                           233
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     tion Week contended. NASA had wanted to rush Surveyor into launch
     that would have landed during lunar night rather than preferred day-
     light opportunity, to ensure that U.S. achieved first soft-landing before
     U.S.S.R. (Av.Wk., 7/4/66, 15)
July 4: Soviet tests of carrier rockets begun April 24 “to develop new space
     systems” had been completed, Tass announced. Conducted in the
     Pacific in two areas west and northwest of Midway Island, tests were to
     have ended July 31; early completion was not explained. (AP, NYT,
     7/5/66,28)
e NAA’S Rocketdyne Div. reported single J-2 rocket engine had operated
     continuously for 635.9 sec.-more than two minutes longer than burn
     time required for an Apollo lunar launch. Test firing was one of a series
     of 104 during which engine had accumulated a total of 12,120 set.-
     more than three times engine’s specified operating life. (Tech. Wk.,
     7/4/66, 4)
July 5: NASA’s Apollo/Saturn AS-203 mission was successfully launched
     from Complex 37 down ETR to obtain flight information on 2nd stage
      (S-IVB) and instrument unit (Iu), which reflected Saturn V configura-
     tion as nearly as possible. Two-stage Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB)
     launch vehicle boosted unmanned payload composed of S-IVB stage,
     Iu, and nose cone into 117-mi.-altitude circular orbit (88.21-min. period,
     31.94’ inclination). S-IVB engine burned once in earth’s atmosphere
     and was shut down. Engine’s capability to restart after coast, as would
     be necessary during the Apollo mission, was demonstrated. No re-
     ignition was planned on this mission. Photos of liquid hydrogen fuel
     behavior were transmitted to four ground stations by one operable TV
      camera; attempts to repair malfunctioning second camera before launch
     had failed. During fourth orbit, while performing pressure differential
      test of S-IVB stage common bulkhead, internal pressure in the stage
      built up “well in excess of design values,” and the stage fragmented.
         Initial evaluation of flight data indicated that all mission objectives
      were attained. Success of mission--second of three preliminary missions
      preceding first manned Apollo flight-was critical in meeting lunar
      exploration timetable. 58,500-133. S-IVB, heaviest satellite ever orbited
      by the US., was developed by MSFC and launched by KSC under direction
      of NASA Hq. OMSF. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-157; Wilford, NYT,
      7/6/66, 1; UPI, Wash. Post, 7/7/66)
 e Reliable sources said France would build her own ccSaros’y     comsat system
      to avoid U.S. domination in the field, UPI reported. Decision stemmed
      from realization that if France did not act soon, the Anglo-French
      supersonic transport Concorde would have to be flight-controlled by
      U.S. satellite when it entered service within the next decade. (UPI,
       Wash. Post, 7/6/66)
   FAA awarded contracts totaling $1.95 million to Philco Corp. and IBM
      Corp., for first two installations of nationwide semiautomatic air traffic
      control system at FAA’S National Aviation Facilities Experimental
      Center (NAFEC), Atlantic City, N.J. (FAA Release 66-62)
July 6: PROTON irI unmanned scientific space station was launched by
      U.S.S.R. into earth orbit with 630-km. (391-mi.) apogee; 190-km.
       (118-mi.) perigee; 92.5-min. period; and 63.5” inclination. Instruments
      -including     “special scientific apparatus” for continuing complex
      investigations of cosmic rays-were         functioning normally. (Tass,
      Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/8/66, 1, USS-T Trans.)
234                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

          NASA had accepted two miniature TV cameras built by Teledyne
July 6:
     Systems Co. under $350,000 contract for experimental use in space
    research. Designated ccMicroeye,’’camera measured 1% in. by 4% in.,
     weighed less than 1% lbs., and was powered by small rechargeable
    battery. One camera, which included low-power transmitter and could
    telecast distances up to 100 ft., was delivered to NASA Hq. OART to
     evaluate possible applications in biotechnology and human research
     work. Second camera, connected by wire to a monitor screen, was
     delivered to MSFC to evaluate potential use with more powerful trans-
     mitter for monitoring functioning of launch vehicle subsystems.
     Feasibility of mounting camera on spacecraft and focusing on astronauts
     to record optical responses to spacecraft’s rotations would be studied
     by US. Naval Aerospace Medical Institute, Pensacola. (NASA          Release
     66-171; MSFC Release 66-144)
July 6-21: NASA’s   SURVEYOR I, resting on the moon, revived and responded
     to signals from Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station after inactivity
     during two weeks of lunar night and one week of morning sunlight.
     Responding to command, spacecraft angled its solar panel toward sun to
     receive more operating power and began transmitting engineering data.
     Within a few hours after first response, it was declared “a fully opera-
     tional spacecraft”; its battery was recharging; its transmitters, receivers,
     and command system were working; and machinery that moved its solar
     energy collector and high-gain antenna had been exercised. Performance
     amazed JPL officials who doubted spacecraft could survive the -260”
     cold of lunar night.
         Spacecraft continued to perform satisfactorily for two days until
     rapid temperature rise in battery, apparently caused by short circuit,
     threatened to end spacecraft’s life. Temperature was rising at 3” per
     hour, and reached 141°F. Near-fatal temperature subsided by July 10 to
     115°F and SURVEYOR I later transmitted 257 photos-including pictures
     of a shattered glass mirror on metal box containing its battery. BOXwas
     insulated to maintain temperature between 40°C and 125°C; segments
     of mirrored glass helped radiate away heat produced when instruments
     were operating. JPL officials believed shattering was caused by combined
     stresses of heat at lunar noontime and cold during lunar night rather
     than by impact of meteorites or heat from inside compartment.
         Unexpectedly long life of SURVEYOR I ended July 14 after spacecraft
     transmitted 9 out of 10 photos commanded by Johannesburg tracking
     station to search for traces of lunar atmosphere that might scatter light
     from ring of gases erupting from the sun. JPL officially terminated mis-
     sion July 21; spacecraft’s solar panels would be checked during next
     period of advantageous sunlight direction, around Aug. 2, to determine
     if SURVEYOR I were transmitting again. Other checks would be made
     later to assure that spacecraft’s transmissions would not interfere with
      Surveyor B, scheduled for launch in fall 1966. (Miles, Wash. post,
     7/7/66, A4; NYT, 7/9/66, 1; Wash. Post, 7/11/66; Clark, NYT,
      7/7/66, 1;7/13/66, 12; 7/15/66, 11; Av. Wk., 7/25/66,30)
JU~Y7 NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Thumba Equa-
       :
      torial Rocket Launching Station carried proton magnetometer and
      Langmuir probe to 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude in NASA-Indian National
      Commission for Space Research (INCOSPAR)        experiment to determine
      intensity of ionospheric electric current system near magnetic equator.
      Payload had been developed by Physical Research Laboratory in
                                                                         235
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Ahmedabad, India; NASA provided launcher, ground telemetry system,
     and rocket. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
July 7: NASA established new program offices at MSC and MSFC to “handle the
     increasing level of activity involving Apollo Applications.” Offices-
     headed by George M. Low at MSC and Leland Belew at MsFc-would
     manage “activities concerned with projects using OIIOdv hardware for
     purposes in addition to the manned lunar landing.” To provide “pro-
     gram management and direction” for MSFC’S consolidated research and
     technology program and to coordinate activities with NASA Hq., MSFC
     established new Experiments Officeheaded by Dr. William G. Johnson.
      (NASA Release 66-172; MSFC Release 66-151)
   NASA and ComSatCorp had signed agreement €or satellite communications
     services to support Apollo program. ComSatCorp would provide voice/
     data channels and teletype channels in synchronous satellites to be
     positioned over Pacific and Atlantic oceans by NASA. Draft tariff filed by
     ComSatCorp with FCC estimated that cost of services would be $8.95
     million annually. (NASA Release 66-178; ComSatCorp Release)
0 NASA awarded Zia Corp., Las Cruces, N. Mex., a one-year, $5-million,

     cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide maintenance, operation, and
     miscellaneous services at WSMR. (NASA Release 66-173)
   1966 AIAA fellows were selected in recognition of proIonged, significant
     achievements in aerospace technology: Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of
              Goddard Institute for Space Studies; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr.,
     NASA’s
     Director of Flight Operations, MSC;   Prof. Frank E. Marble, Cal Tech’s
     Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA
     Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Francis M. Rogallo,
             Prof. Ascher H. Shapiro, MIT; Dean E. Wooldridge, director of
     L~RC;
     TRW,Inc.; and Robert B. Young, vice president of Aerojet-General
     Corp. Awards would be presented Dec. 2 at AIAA’S annual meeting in
     Boston. (NYT, 7/8/66, 12)
0 Pratt & Whitney Div., United Aircraft Corp., had signed agreement with

     U.K.’s Bristol Siddeley Engines, Ltd., and France’s SNECMA to develop
     jet engine for twin-engine air-bus being designed to transport 250 to 300
     passengers on “medium-range” flights-as from London to Rome-by
     1970 or 1972. (WSJ, 7/7/66, 32)
July 8: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXIII carrying scientific instruments for
      “further investigation of outer space” into earth orbit with 529-km.
      (329-mi.) apogee; 263-km. (163-mi.) perigee; 92.2-min. period; and
     48.8’ inclination. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Zzvestia,
     7/9/66, 4, USS-T Trans.)
0 “Surveyor I-A      Preliminary Report,” covering first five days of successful
      SURVEYOR I lunar mission, had been compiled and published by NASA and
      was available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical
      Information. In foreword, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Admin-
      istrator for Space Science and Applications, emphasized that the publi-
      cation “does not attempt to present detailed measurements and analyses
      of the immense amounts of scientific data that the spacecraft has tele-
      metered to Earth; this task will take months and even years.” (NASA
      Release 66-177)
 0 ESRO launched British Skylark sounding rocket from Salto di Quirra

      Range, to study photochemical processes in comets under meteorological
      research program which began in 1964 and would include 400 sounding
      rocket launches by 1972. (Reuters, Wush. Post, 7/13/66, A21)
236               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Jdy 8 Mars polar caps are white with dry ice, not frozen water in the form of
     :
    frost, wrote Dr. Robert B. Leighton and Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech
    in Science. Their argument was based on MARINER IV’S July 14, 1965,
    flyby which indicated that planet’s atmosphere is very thin and largely
    composed of carbon dioxide which, in frozen form, is dry ice. Theory
    that white on Mars polar caps is ordinary frost was based on observations
    of its reflectivity in the infrared and on manner in which it affected
    orientation of light waves. Authors believed there might be frozen water
    on Mars, but suggested it is all underground in the form of permafrost.
     (Science, 7/8/66, 136-44)
0 International Assn. of Machinists (IAM) struck five major airlines including

    TWA, which provided base support services at KSC. Some work on Project
    Apollo was curtailed, but NASA officials said essential operations were
    continuing. (UPI, NYT, 7/9/66)
  Vice president of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Boris Konstantinov dis-
    cussed mission of Proton spacecraft series in Tass interview: “Research
    already carried out with the help of the Proton stations gives reason to
    expect that the growing weight of such laboratories will allow scientists
    to delve deeper into the processes occurring within the universe.” He
    revealed that PROTON 111, launched July 6, would attempt to experimen-
    tally detect quark^,^^ fundamental particles believed to appear during
    collision of cosmic ray particles with atoms of interstellar environment.
     Spacecraft carried “new, complicated instrumentation which is more
    sensitive than the old equipment.” (Tass, 6/8/66)
  Oklahoma City welcomed home a favorite son, GEMINI IX Astronaut Thomas
    P. Stafford, and conferred honorary state citizenship on his crewmate
     Eugene A. Cernan. Both astronauts were inducted into the National
     Cowboy Hall of Fame, dedicated to the memory of Western frontiers-
    men. (AP, NYT, 7/9/66, 29)          *
  Aeronautical exhibition tracing aviation’s history from supercharger to
     turbojet opened in new Hall of Aeronautical Propulsion at Smithsonian
     Institution, Washington, D.C. (Wash. Post, 7/9/66, B2)
  ITT had protested to U.S. Comptroller General that DOD decision to pur-
     chase communications services directly from ComSatCorp was contrary
     to recent FCC decision requiring all Federal agencies to buy services
     from international carriers. ( WSJ, 7/8/66)
July 8-10: During plenary meeting in Paris, ELDO members agreed to (1)
     expand the present rocket development program from three-stage
     Europa 1 to five-stage ELDO Asp capable of launching 200-kg. (440-lb.)
     comsats by 1971 or 1972; (2) limit ELDO spending to $331 million and
     cut U.K.’s contribution from 39% to 27%; and (3)launch their comsats
     from base in French Guiana. U.K.-which       had threatened to withdraw
     -announced decision to remain in ELDO. (AP, Kansas City Star,
     7/10/66; Tech. Wk., 7/18/66, 20)
July 9: Sun had blinded GEMINI IX Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and
     Eugene A. Cernan for more than two minutes of the critical liftoff
     period June 3, preventing them from reading control gauges or dials,
     KSC officials disclosed. As a result, NASA was considering fitting outside
     of spacecraft windows with tinted coverings on launchings when sun
     might be a serious problem. Coverings would be sprung free of windows
     when spacecraft had achieved orbit. Cernan’s suggestion of sunglases
     would probably be rejected, NASA said, because it would be impossible
     to wear them under helmets. (NYT, 7/10/66, 45)
                                                                            237
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 9: ComSatCorp would conduct communications test in which U.S. and
     European computers would “talk with each other” for a month in fall
     1966 via EARLY BIRD I comsat, reported New York Times. Test could lead
     to daily exchange by satellite of business, scientific, and technical infor-
     mation, and to establishment of U.N. “voice of peace” agency-a world
     bank of medical, technical, and educational knowledge-proposed at
     November 1965 White House conference on international cooperation.
     (Clark, NYT, 7/10/66, 43)
e William A. Hyman, internationally known air and space lawyer and
     author, died in New York City. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/11/66)
July 10: William R. Berry reached 19,000-ft. altitude before landing his hot-
     air balloon “City of San Francisco” near Antioch, CaIif., after 65-min.,
     30-mi. flight from Livermore, Calif. If endorsed by National Aeronautic
     Assn., altitude would break 15,600-ft. world record for hot-air balloons
     set by Don Piccard in 1965. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/11/66, A8)
   L/C Vladimir Komarov, pilot-cosmonaut on U.S.S.R. VOSKHOD I space
     flight Oct. 12-13, 1964, told second Japan-U.S.S.R. youth festival at
     Lake Yamanaka, Yamanashi Prefecture, Japan, that U.S.S.R. soon
     would softland an unmanned spacecraft on moon and return it to earth,
     then make similar flight with dog. Commenting on U.S. rendezvous
     and docking achievements, Komarov said: “The United States experi-
     ment was a very interesting one. But I do not believe that in the series
     of plans to conquer space the Soviet Union is behind the United States.”
      (Tass, 7/14/66; SBD,7/25/66, 122)
July 1 : NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Re-
        1
     search Range reached 126-mi. (202-km.) altitude in NASA-UniV. of
     Michigan experiment to measure ambient neutral and ion composi-
     tion and density as function of altitude and compare data with those
      obtained on February 1965 fights. Rocket and instrumentation per-
      formed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
July 12: NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
     reached 631-mi. (1,015-km.) altitude in Univ. of Pittsburgh-Syracuse
      Univ. experiment to observe ionization levels of exospheric helium.
      Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, with 18-min.
      telemetry signal. Unanticipated high-energy electron particles were
      measured, and data were under study to determine their source. (NASA
      Rpt. SRL)
 e U.S. and U.S.S.R. introduced their draft space law treaties at opening
      session of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space’s Legal Sub-
      committee, meeting in Geneva to discuss peaceful cooperation in explor-
      ing the moon and other celestial bodies. US. Ambassador Arthur J.
      Goldberg told Subcommittee that although drafts were differeni in scope,
      they could be re2onciled if there were good will and common purpose to
      reach agreement. Soviet representative Platon Morozov charged U S .
      should not speak of peace in outer space while continuing its “shameful
      aggressive war on the peaceful people of Vietnam.” (Reuters, NYT,
      7/12/66; Wash. Post, 7/13/66, A23)
   X-15 No. 1was flown to 3,652 mph (mach 5.34) and 130,000-ft. altitude
      by Maj. William . Knight (USAF) to check out electrical loads, nonglare
                         I .
      glass, stick kicker, and shade window. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
 * M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot Milton 0. Thompson,
      was successfully air-launched from B-52 bomber at 45,000-ft. altitude
       and maneuvered into 200-mph landing four minutes later in h s t free
238               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      flight at Edwards AFB. Thompson, Chief Project Pilot for FRC’s Lifting
      Body Program, noted that “With today’s test we have just about com-
                                      . ..
      pleted our whole test program            the next area to be explored is
      whether such a craft could survive reentry into the Earth’s atmosphere.”
      The 2%-ton wingless vehicle was being studied “to establish the
      technological base” for design of future spacecraft and to ferry men and
      equipment between earth and satellites. (FBC Release 14-66; AP, NYT,
      7/13/66, 1; Tech. Wk., 7/18/66, 17)
J u b 12: USAF launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from
      WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 153)
0 NASA had tentatively selected six experiments to be carried on two Mariner

      Mars spacecraft scheduled for launch by Atlas-Centaur boosters between
      early February and mid-April 1S69: two television cameras, infrared
      spectrometer, infrared radiometer, ultraviolet spectrometer, celestial
      mechanics experiment, and S-band occultation experiment. Experi-
      ments were selected to extend knowledge of Martian atmosphere and
      visible features of Martian terrain and to gather additional data to con-
      tinue planning for landing instrumented capsules on the planet. JPL had
      project management responsibility for Mariner Mars 1969 missions.
      (NASA Release 66-174)
0 NASA had selected Garrett Corp., Los Angeles, Calif., for negotiation of

      $15-million contract for final design, development, construction, and
      testing of small research ramjet engines under Hypersonic Research
      Engine Project directed by NASA Hq. OART. Engines-which were to be
      compatible for mounting beneath aft fuselage of X-15 No. 2-would be
      useful for hypersonic transport aircraft, boosters, and for spacecraft
      flying within earth’s atmosphere. (NASA Release 66-182)
   Paramount objective of NASA’s Apollo program was not to land man on the
      moon before U.S.S.R. but to make “US.first in space by the end of this
      decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to all the
      world,” NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told IEEE
      Aerospace Systems Conference in Seattle, Wash. Apollo program was a
      means of acquiring the ability to operate in space on a variety of
                                        “. .
      missions, Dr. Seamans explained: . we are building much more than
      a rocket and a spaceship. We are developing, in government, in in-
      dustry, in our universities, one of the most remarkable teams that has
      ever been assembled. There are more than 400,000 men and women,
      20,000 industrial companies, and more than 150 universities actively
      engaged in the NASA program. More than 90 percent of NASA’s five-billion-
      dollar-a-year budget goes to contractors.” He warned against failing to
      look beyond the near-term goal of manned lunar exploration and said:
      “Programs of the future must be determined within the total context of
      national need and the availability of resources. The Nation’s interest in
      space projects, and the level of support accorded them must in the long
      run be related to tangible benefits that can be derived from the emerging
      technical and operational capabilities.” (Text)
   U.S. had reaped many unexpected benefits from NASA’s manned space-
      flight program, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,
      told Federal Executive Board in Seattle, Wash. Specifically, NASA was
      (1) “making a definite effort to stimulate the development of technology
               ...
      generally       [and had] set up what may well be a unique, formal en-
      deavor to transfer technology which has been developed in the space
                                                                     ...    (2)
      program to more general usage in the industrial community
                                                                           239
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                                          . ..
     striving to promote a rising educational level among the people
     (3) developing industrial skills, management techniques, and a high
     degree of quality control that are of immense benefit to the Nation in
     such mundane things as washing machines, television sets, transistor
                                        .
     radios, and other household items . . (4) helping to assure the country
     of a hard core of engineers and scientists, technicians and managers,
     laboratories and industrial facilities, which have responded to the
     challenge of working on important projects in aeronautics and astronau-
          ..  .” (Text)
     tics.
July 12: Five leading European aerospace companies announced formation
     of consortium to seek European space contracts. Called the European
     Satellite Team, group’s major goal was $l8-million design and construc-
     tion contract for ESRO’S 800-lb. TD-1 and TD-2 research satellites
     scheduled for launch by NASA in 1969 and 1970. Consortium was com-
     posed of Elliott-Automation, U.K.; Compagnie Francaise Thomson-
     Houston, France; Fokker, Netherlands; Allmanna Svenska Elektriska,
     A.B., Sweden; and Fabbrica Italiana Apparecchi Radio, Italy. General
     Electric Co.’s Missile and Space Div. would serve as consultant. (Wil-
     ford, NYT, 7/13/66; Chic. Trib., 7/13/66)
Jzdy 12-13: NASA launched five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA
     Wallops Station between 9:00 p.m. and 5:OO a.m. EDT. Each rocket was
     programed to eject a vapor cloud of reddish or bluish color as its
     altitude increased from 50 to 125mi. Experiments were to measure wind
     velocities and directions at various altitudes; motion of the trails was
     photographed from five camera sites within a 100-mi. radius of Wallops.
     Launches were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to GSFC. (NASA
     Release 66-181; Wallops Release 66-38)
July 13: Vice President Hubert Humphrey told group of young scientists
     visiting Washington, D.C., under National Youth Science Camp pro-
     gram to devote some of their talents to solving problems on earth as well
     as in space. “If we can put a Surveyor on the moon to take pictures, why
     can’t we get some one in from La Guardia Airport to downtown New
                                                            .
     York City before he collects his old age pension . . we must try to
     harness our divergent and separated resources and our energies to solve
     the problems of our earthly environment.” The Vice President forecast
     scientific break-throughs for the year 2000, including the elimination of
     bacterial and viral diseases, the correction of hereditary defects, landing
     of men on Mars, farming of the ocean, manufacture of synthetic pro-
     teins, control of weather on regional basis, and creation of life in the
     laboratory. (Text)
* NASA would negotiate $1.25-million contract with Texas Instruments, Inc.,
     for design, fabrication, and testing of telemetry subsystem for 1969
     Mariner missions to Mars. Motorola, Inc., was selected for design,
     fabrication, and testing of command subsystem for Mariner spacecraft
     under SB2-million contract. Both contracts would be managed by JPL.
      (NASA Release 66-186)
   NASA had assigned MSFC project management of Apollo Telescope Mount
      (Am) for ApoUo Applications (Aa) missions. A combination of accurate,
      high-resolution, solar-oriented telescopes, Atm would be attached to
      spacecraft so that astronauts could manually adjust it to select and
      focus upon a specific area on the sun. (NASA Release 66-185)
   More than 1,500 building tradesmen staged one-day strike at KSC to pro-
                  method of awarding construction contracts. Work on three
      test NASA’s
240               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     key Apollo projects was delayed by walkout, which had been called by
     Brevard (County) Building and Construction Trades Council, but prep-
     arations for July 18 Gemini X mission continued uninterrupted. (UPI,
     NYT, 7/14/66,21)
July 13: Nation’s most modern ship for oceanographic research, USC&GS
     Oceanographer, was commissioned at Washington [D.C.] Navy Yard in
     commemoration of Environmental Science Services Administration’s
     (ESSA) first anniversary. President Johnson, speaking at the ceremony,
     called for international cooperation in oceanographic research and in-
     vited 11 nations, including U.S.S.R., to participate in first round-the-
     world expedition of the new research ship. (Text; ESSA Release 66-41)
July 14: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
     carried 52-lb. variable frequency impedance probe to 121-mi. (195-km.)
     altitude in cooperative West German-US. experiment to measure
     electron density in the ionosphere. NASA furnished two radio propagation
     experiments and sounding rocket; West Germany furnished probe.
     There was no exchange of funds between cooperating a@nCieS-NASA
     and West German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research. Results
     would be made available to world scientific community. (NASA Release
     66-188; Wallops Release 66-40)
0 USAF’S OV1-VIIIT satellite was launched with Atlas D booster from Van-

     denberg AFB into near-circular retrograde orbit: apogee, 627 mi. (1,009
     km.) ; perigee, 619 mi. (996 km.) ; period, 105 min.; inclination, 144”.
     Balloon-shaped satellite-made of soft aluminum wire mesh covered
     with a plastic “skin” which disintegrated after inflation-would act as a
     passive comsat to reflect signals transmitted to it between earth stations,
     determine whether wire would be rigid enough to maintain spherical
     shape, and test theory that C c ~ p e n - m e ~ h ”
                                                   structure would reduce drag
     and solar pressure in space environment. (AFSC Release 140.66)
   COSMOS CXXIV was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. for continued
     space research. Orbital parameters: apogee, 303 km. (188 mi.) ;perigee,
     208 km. (129 mi.); period, 89.4 min.; inclination, 51.8”. Instruments
     were functioning normally. (Tass, 7/14/66)
0 NIMBUS 11 meteorological satellite, launched by NASA May 15, completed

     primary test objective of two months (800 orbits) continuous operation;
     all subsystems were operating according to plan. The 912-lb., lO-ft.-tall
     satellite had traveled more than 20 million mi., taken more than 150,000
     pictures, and received more than 23,000 commands from ground con-
     trollers. NIMBUS 11 was now being readied for extensive infrared photo
     coverage of hurricane breeding areas in Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Proj. Off.;
     NASA Release 66-187; Marshall Star, 7/27/66, 3)
   First anniversary of first close-up photos of Mars taken by NASA’sMARINER IV
     from distance of 134 million mi. Spacecraft was launched Nov. 28, 1964.
      (NYT, 7/26/66,49)
 0 All participants in the Gemini X mission rehearsed their parts in prepara-

     tion for July 18 flight. Astronauts John Young and Michael Collins went
     over flight plan from liftoff to splashdown and conducted review of all
     spacecraft systems. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/66, 11)
 0 New program to disseminate information to industry was initiated by NASA

      and AEC’S Argonne National Laboratory. Purpose was to identify tech-
      nological innovations resulting from Argonne’s research and develop-
      ment projects; prepare brief, business-oriented summaries of innova-
      tions; and distribute them to industry. Summaries-to be known as
                                                                           241
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      AEC-NASA Tech Briefs-would        contain information not customarily re-
      ported in scientific literature such as descriptions of devices, processes,
      and techniques developed to meet specific or engineering needs at
      Argonne and would be combined with similar information currently
      published by NASA. (NASA    Release 66-183)
J d y 14: Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, told World
      Affairs Council in Los Angeles U S . civil space program “affords perhaps
      the most effective global projection of the American personality and the
      American achievement today . . .
          CCThe elements of this favorable projection are the openness with
      which the program is conducted, the direct benefits to others through
      space communications and weather systems, the willingness to share
      both research and results in projects of mutual interest, the energetic
      forward thrust toward technological and managerial pre-eminence, and
     .  . . the evidence of high national purpose.” (Text)
0 If MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun should obtain assignment to

      develop an orbital payload capability between Uprated Saturn 1’s
      35,000-40,000 lbs. and Saturn V’s 250,000-275,000 lbs., “the art of
      rocketry will take a step backward, a promising branch of space tech-
      nology will suffer another reversal, and the American taxpayer will be
      several hundred million dollars poorer,” wrote William Hines in the
      Washington Evening Star. Hines contended that both von Braun’s sug-
      gestions-increasing the thrust of the Uprated Saturn I at cost of $1.5
      billion or reducing the capability of the Saturn V at cost of $3.25 billion
      -would be “fantastically expensive.” He suggested that, “assuming
      that there actually is need for an 80,000-100,000-pound orbital capabil-
      ity, this requirement could be filled more cheaply, and sooner, by
                                                                   .
      pushing development of the solid [propellant] rocket. . .” (Hines,
      Wash. Eve. Star, 7/14/66, A14)
July 15: NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR carried GsFc-instrumented
      payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude in experiment to measure spectral
      irradiance of stars Alpha Lyrae, Lambda Scorpii, Zeta Ophiuchi, and
      Delta Scorpii. Flight marked first successful operation above earth’s
      atmosphere of Star Tracking Rocket Attitude Positioning (Strap) sys-
      tem. The 330-lb. telescope device telemetered almost 80 sec. of ultra-
      violet data and was recovered undamaged about 55 mi. from launch
       site for reuse in fall 1966. Data would give experimenters information
       on star surface temperatures, gravitational field intensity, and relative
       ages. (NASA Rpt. SRL; GSFC Release G-16-66)
 0 50th anniversary of founding of Boeing Co. (EH)

   Possible explanation of astronaut’s inability to see stars on earth’s daylight
       side was presented by physics professors Edward P. Ney and W. F. Hugh
       in Science: a “spacecraft corona”-cloud of particles formed by waste
       materials shed from spacecraft-might produce glow that would hide
       stars dimmer than fourth magnitude. Corona had been discovered by
       former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., who reported during his Feb. 20,
       1962, orbital mission in FRIENDSHIP 7 that he was being accompanied by a
       cloud of “fireflies.” (Science, 7/15/66, 297-9)
 0 Analysis of available evidence concerning possibility of an advanced form
       of life on Mars by Univ. of Maryland astronomy professor Dr. Ernst J.
       Opik appeared in Science. Dr. Opik said the most heavily eroded craters
       visible in photos taken by MARINER IV during the July 14, 1965, flyby
       dated from the earliest period of the planet’s history, implying that
242               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Mars had never had a dense, moist, earth-like atmosphere for any ex-
     tended period and would therefore be a poor prospect for life. Dr. Opik
     argued strongly for at least a primitive form of vegetation, citing in
     particular a region of 1.2 million sq. km. that had darkened rapidly from
     1946 to 1954. He likened this to the change a distant observer would
     have seen on earth as a consequence of the virgin lands development
     program in U.S.S.R. Vegetation was the best explanation for such
     changes; however, if it were not vegetation, “it must be something
     specifically Martian.” The planet, he added, ‘‘may become a source of
     great surprises in the future.” (Science, 7/15/66,255-65)
July 16: Circular insignia of Project Apollo astronauts was displayed for first
     time at KSC. Capital letter “A” was in center with its crossbar formed
     by part of a curving track joining earth (at right) and moon (at left) of
     the “A.” Centered on the crossbar were three twinkling stars-
     symbolic of the three-astronaut crew of each Apollo mission. Earth
     symbol was dominated by North American continent; moon was repre-
     sented in third quarter phase with dark part dominated by a man’s
     profile. Moon, earth, and letter “A” were displayed against dark blue
     background studded with stars-representing outer space. Entire
     design was ringed by a circle with ccApolloy’ top and “NASA” at
                                                         at
     bottom. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/16/66, Al)
July 16-17: Five vapor cloud experiments were launched from NASA Wallops
      Station on Nike-Apache sounding rockets between 8:56 p.m. and 5:08
     a.m. EDT. Vapor trails were ejected at altitude ranges of 30 to 130 mi.
      (48 to 209 km.) to measure wind velocities and directions. Data were
      obtained by photographing motion of trails from five camera sites within
      100-mi. radius of Wallops. Launches were conducted for GCA Corp.
     under contract to GSFC. (Wallops Release 66-41)
July 17: IAM strike at KSC ended when an agreement was reached between
      Local 773 of IAM and TWA, sending 1,100 machinists back to work.
      Labor-management observers cited the local agreement as a “firsty7for
      KSC. (KSC  Historian)
0 Commenting on the tiny US.flag packed into SURVEYOR I which softlanded

      on the moon June 2, Sydney Harris said in the Sun Francisco Examiner
      & Chronicle: “If we begin to export nationalism to the moon, we are
      defeating the very purpose of science and exploration.” (Harris, S.F.
      Examiner & Chron., 7/17/66)
July 18: NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR carried two far-ultraviolet
      image converters to 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in NRL experiment to ob-
      tain stellar spectra and photographs; rocket and instrumentation did not
      perform as expected, and no useful data were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
 0 X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to 3,218 mph

       (mach 4.71) and 96,100-ft. altitude to check out MH inertial system,
      cockpit display, horizontal tail loads, and stick kicker. (X-15 Proj. off.)
   System of two interconnected balloons 815-ft. long designed to test para-
      chute deceleration system of NASA’s     Voyager spacecraft-scheduled to
      land on Mars in 1973-was lofted by USAF from Holloman AFB. Helium
       in small upper balloon inflated main balloon-largest ever launched-
      to 26-million-cu.-ft. capacity as both rose to 130,000-ft. altitude where
      atmosphere was believed to be as thin as that on Mars. 1,800-lb. simu-
      lated Voyager spacecraft payload was jettisoned by radio command
      seven hours after launch, successfully parachuted to earth, and was
      later recovered near Plymlix, Ariz. Main balloon rose to higher altitude
                                                                           243
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     and ruptured as expected. Parachute program was managed by u a c ;
     Voyager program by JPL. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/19/66; Av. Wk., 7/25/66,
     34)
July 18: Probability statistics for astronaut reactions to Apollo lunar mission
     radiation based on NASA-sponsored study at AEC’S Oak Ridge National
     Institute of 2,100 persons exposed to radiation for medical reasons:
     basing estimates on a “better than 50% reaction of those exposed to
     each dose,” it appeared that a 100-Rad dose would produce loss of
     appetite; 150 Rads, nausea and vomiting; and 225 Rads, diarrhea.
     (Tech. Wk., 7/18/66, 4)
  House passed H.R. 14838 revising operation of National Science Founda-
     tion (NSF) (1) give new emphasis to NSF’S basic missions; (2) strengthen
                to
     and increase functions of National Science Board; (3) unify and
     strengthen operational authority of director; and (4) modify and stream-
     line NSF’S organization and structure. (CR, 7/18/66, 15180-4)
* John F. Stearns, former chief of National Referral Center at Library of
     Congress, became Director of N S ’ Science and Technology Informa-
                                        A As
     tion Div., Officeof Technology Utilization. He succeeded Melvin S. Day,
     who had been appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology
     Utilization June 5. (NASA Ann.)
e USAF’S   Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) was “moving quietly but
     quickly toward its first test launch, now scheduled for Oct. 28 from
     Cape Kennedy,” Aviation Week reported. OperationaI Mol would consist
     of modified Gemini spacecraft connected to a ‘‘can-shapedyy      laboratory.
     USAF astronauts, while orbiting in space, would pass through door in
     spacecraft’s heatshield to reach laboratory. October test would show
     whether configuration would endanger astronauts in spacecraft during
     reentry. (Av. Wk., 7/18/66, 25)
  Delays at major U.S. airports totaling 20 million minutes cost aircraft
     operators $63.6 million in 1965, FAA reported in a staff study. One
     third of total delays was caused by air traffic controls, and the remainder
     by airport limitations such as weather conditions, ground congestion,
     and construction. (FAA    Release 66-68)
July 18-21: GEMINI x rendezvous and docking mission-eighth manned flight
     in Gemini series-touched on all aspects of mission objectives for which
      two-man spacecraft was designed. Mission began at ETR’S Complex 14
      with launch by Atlas booster of Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv),
      followed 100 min. later by launch from Complex 19 of Titan I1 booster
      orbiting GEMINI x spacecraft with Astronauts John W. Young as com-
      mand pilot and Michael Collins as pilot. GATV x was placed in near-
      circular orbit with 187-mi. (301-km.) apogee; 180-mi. (290-km.) perigee;
      and 90.5-min. period. The 8,248-1b. GEMINI x was launched into elliptical
      orbit with initial apogee of 167 mi. (268 km.) and 99-mi. (159-km.)
      perigee.
         Maneuvers were executed as planned, with docking of GEMINI x and
      GATV x occurring at 5:58 GET. Only about 380 lbs. maneuvering fuel of
      940 lbs. at liftoff were left, whereas a 680-lb. remainder had been ex-
      pected. An out-of-plane error had necessitated a major correction, with
      excessive fuel consumption. Mated spacecraft, using GATV X’S primary
      propulsion system, attained 476-mi. (766-km.) record altitude for
       manned flight. Burn of GATV x’s secondary propulsion system at 22:38
       GET brought docked configuration into same orbit as GATV vIrr-launched
       March 16 for GEMINI VIII mission-preparatory to later rendezvous.
24                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966


                                                                z
    Standup Eva began at 23:27 GET with Collins photogra hing stellar
    ultraviolet radiation through open hatch. Young ordere termination
    of Eva when both he and Collins experienced severe watering and irrita-
    tion of eyes from an unidentified source. Separation of GEMINI X-GATV x-
    which had remained docked 38 min. 42 sec.-occurred at 44:40 GET.
       Series of maneuvers brought GEMINI x within 50 ft. of GATV VIII.
    Umbilical Eva began at 48:08 GET: Collins removed fairing from GATV
    VIII and retrieved micrometeoroid detection experiment-completing
    b s t productive work ever accomplished on Eva mission. Collins lost Eva
    camera; photographic coverage was limited to pictures taken by Young
    from spacecraft. Eva was terminated after 28 min. to conserve maneuver-
    ing fuel; 50 lbs. had been used, as against 35 lbs. estimated consumption
    for planned 55 min.
       Third hatch opening of mission occurred when astronauts, cramped
    by unstowed equipment, jettisoned 12 items.
       Reentry July 21 after 70 hrs. 47 min. in space and 43 revolutions was
    normal. At 5:07 p.m. EDT, GEMINI x splashed down in Atlantic Ocean
    544 mi. east of Cape Kennedy-less than three miles off target and five
    miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Within minutes, USN
    pararescue team dropped from helicopters had attached flotation collar
    to spacecraft, and Young and Collins were transported by helicopter to
    recovery ship.
       GEMINI x had accomplished (1) two rendezvous, one involving longest
    docking yet achieved, the other a close approach to a passive satellite
    from which an object was retrieved; (2) two Eva exercises; (3) successful
    maneuvering by astronaut from one spacecraft to another and back;
    and (4) use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary
    propulsion for docked s acecraft. (NASA Release 66-179; NASA Proj. Off.;
    Wilford, NYT, 7/19/69 1; Hines, Wa%h. Eve. Star, 7/19/66, Al, A3;
    7/20/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 7/20/66, 1 ; Reistrup, Wash. Post,
    7/22/66, Al, A4; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 26-30)
July 19: House-Senate Conference Committee on NASA authorization
    reached agreement on a $5,000,419,000 FY 1967 bill. Compromise was
    $11.581 million below original NASA request; $13.5 million above House
    version; and $7.5 million below Senate version of bill. The $18 million
    for 1967 Mariner Venus flyby mission that House Science and Astro-
    nautics Committee’s Space Science and Applications Subcommittee had
    sought to cancel was restored. Three main additions to NASA’s        request
    were $13 million for Voyager program; $4 million for 260-in. solid-pro-
    pellant motor development; and $2 million for Snap8 nuclear electric
    generator program. Conference report (H.R. 14324) would be debated in
    House and Senate. (CR, 7/20/66, 15551-4)
  NASA had selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of $35-million, incentive-fee
    contract for “continued systems engineering and operational support”
    of Mission Control Center at MSC. (NASA Release 66-190)
  M2-F2 lifting body vehicle was successfully air-launched from B-52 air-
    craft at 45,000-ft. altitude in second glide flight at Edwards AFB. Purposes
    of flight, piloted by NASA research pilot Milton 0. Thompson, were
    determination of lateral stability control, longitudinal trim, vehicle
    performance, and landing characteristics, and checkout of onboard
    systems. (NASA Proj. Off.)
* NASA &shall Space Flight Center awarded Bendix Corp. and Boeing CO.
    six-month, $350,000 contracts for parallel studies to “develop specifica-
                                                                                       245
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                    x spacecraft, its heatshield forward, aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Guadd-
July 21:   GEMINI
canal.


    tions and drawings” for vehicles being proposed to transport astronauts
    on lunar surface. (MSFC Release 66-157)
July 2 : NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill
      0
    Research Range in engineering test preceding series of five GSFC launches
    t o measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy proton, helium
    nuclei, and heavier nuclei during Polar Cap Absorption event. Rocket
    performance was near predicted; however, nose cone did not retract
    because of override switch heating problem, and data were poor in
     quality. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
2%                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 20: U.S.S.R. launched            cxxv carrying scientific instruments for
                             COSMOS
     continued study of outer space into circular orbit with 250-km. (155-mi.)
     altitude, 89.5-min. period, and 65” inclination. Instruments were func-
     tioning normally. (?‘ass, 7/20/66)
  28-member Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful
     Uses of Outer Space began article-by-article examination of drafts by
     US. and U.S.S.R. for proposed treaty governing exploration of space.
     U S . Ambassador to U.N. Arthur J. Goldberg announced that U S . had
     agreed to extend negotiations beyond proposal for treaty to ban military
     use of moon and other celestial bodies to cover “space itself along
     the lines proposed by the Soviet Union.” Agreed text would be pre-
     sented to U.N. General Assembly in New York in September. (NYT,
      7/22/66, 11)
  NASA announced appointment of Maj. Michael J. Adams (USAF), pilot in
     USAF’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, to X-15 research
     program, replacing Capt. Joe H. Engle (USAF), who had transferred to
     MSC April 4 to become an astronaut. Following extensive training pro-
     gram, Major Adams would become 12th man to fly the rocket-powered
      aircraft. (FRC Release 15-66)
*ARC’S new Hypervelocity Free ‘Flight Facility would be fully operational
      by the end of July, NASA announced. “Light-gas guns” would fire free-
      flying spacecraft models into three wind tunnels. Muzzle velocities up
      to 20,000 mph against an air stream flowing up to 10,000 mph in the
      opposite direction would enable models to achieve test speed of 30,000
    , mph, simulating atmosphere reentry flight from moon or planets.
      (NASA Release 66-189; ARC Release 66-10)
  Flight plan for Lunar Orbiter I, scheduled for launch between Aug. 9 and
      Aug. 13, had been changed to shift trajectory for mission so photo-
      graphic spacecraft would pass over SURVEYOR I twice. Stereographic
      photos, with resolution down to three feet, could thus be obtained.
      First seven areas selected for Lunar Orbiter photography remained
      unchanged and included examples of all major types of lurain to permit
      assessment of suitability for Apollo manned landing missions. (NASA
      Release 66-193)
0 France exploded an atomic bomb, air-dropped over her test site at Mururoa
      Atoll in the Pacific, almost directly under flight path of GEMINI x one
      hour before the spacecraft passed. NASA, advised of the impending test,
      had warned Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins to “keep
      your heads down” and “not to look at the earth while flying over the
      atoll.” ( WSJ, 7/22/66, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 7/20/66, 22)
0 House passed $58.6 billion DOD FY 1967 appropriation bill (H.R. 15941)

      -almost $1 billion more than the Administration had requested and
      largest since World War 11-by 393 to 1 vote. Negative vote was cast
      by Rep. George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), who was registering opposition
      to Vietnam war. (CR, 7/20/66, 15516-51)
0 Achievements in space since first flight in Gemini series March 1965 had

                                                                 .
      been ‘rphenomenal,” stated Washington Post editorial: ‘r. . the people
       of this country can feel pride i the officials o f . . . [NASA] who have
                                        n
      deliberately but confidently advanced the space program without
       catering to pressures for spectacular stunts. The total achievement, in
       and of itself, is spectacular beyond the wildest hopes of a few years
       ago.” (Wash. Post, 7/20/66, A20)
                                                                         241
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 21: US. and U.S.S.R. agreed in discussions at Geneva to treaty article
     on exploration of space barring any state from claiming sovereignty
     over space, including the moon and planets. Article was also approved
     by 28-nation U.N. Legal Subcommittee drawing up treaty from draft
     accords submitted by US. and U.S.S.R. Subcommittee also accepted
     article binding states to conduct space exploration in accordance with
     international law and in the interest of international peace. (Reuters,
     NYT, 7/22/66, 8)
* Maj. William J. Knight (USAF) flew X-15 No. 2 to 3,614 mph (mach 5.12)
     and 192,300-ft. altitude for pilot altitude buildup, star tracker experi-
     ments, and base drag studies. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
* House adopted joint House-Senate conference report (H.R. 14324) on
     1967 NASA authorization by voice vote. Authorization was $5,000,419,-
     000. (CR, 7/21/66, 15887-96)
0 MSFC awarded Emerson Electric Co. a 10-wk., $34,990 study contract to

     determine feasibility of recovering small metallic coupons from wings
     of PEGASUS III meteoroid-detection satellite, orbited by NASA July 30,
     1965. Using sample wing with attached coupons, Emerson wodd analyze
     possible approaches an astronaut could make to satellite and types of
     equipment he would need to perform coupon-retrieving mission. (MSFC
     Release 66-162)
   Application of space age technology to traffic control was near, Chairman
     of the Board of the Ford Motor Co. Henry Ford I1 told the Young Men’s
     Business Club of Greater New Orleans meeting in New York. He said
     plans would soon be presented to the Government for a nationwide
     traffic control system based on earth survey satellites for aerial recon-
     naissance. They would be linked by computers to urban traffic control
                                                                          ..
     centers and ‘*to the stoplight in the corner and even the car radio. .
     As fantastic as it may seem, we believe such a system will be technically
     feasible and economically sound.” Technical capacity for development
     of system had been gained from experience of the Philco Corp., a Ford
     subsidiary, in designing and operating MSC’S Flight Control Center.
     Philco’s communication system was being used on Gemini ’missions.
      (NYT, 7/22/66, 27)
   NSF announced that, under $5.4-million contract awarded Univ. of
     California’s Scripps Institute of Oceanography, scientists would bring
     up core samples from 1,OOO to 3,000 ft. below Atlantic and Pacific
      ocean floors. Two-year drilling program, to begin in 1967, was outgrowth
      of Project Mohole. (Wash. Post, 8/22/66, A7)
* The Will Rogers, 41st and last of Nation’s Polaris ballistic missile sub-
      marines, was christened in Groton, Conn., ceremony by Mrs. Hubert H.
     Humphrey. Launching culminated 8%-yr. construction program of
      nuclear-powered submarines capable of indefinite submergence and
     equipped with 16 2,500-mi.-range missiles with nuclear warheads.
      (Baldwin, NYT, 7/21/66, 5)
July 22: Senate approved by voice vote $5,000,419,000 1967 NASA authoriza-
     tion recommended in joint House-Senate conference report (H.R.
      14324). Bill was then sent to White House for President Johnson’s signa-
      ture. (CR, 7/22/66, 15981-4; Wash. Post, 7/23/66, A6)
* GEMINI x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from
      recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal to KSC to begin 10 days of debriehg
      on July 18-21mission. (Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/23/66, A3)
248                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 22: First move of 41)2-ft.-high, 9-million-lb. mobile service structure by
     crawler-transporter from parking area at KSC to Pad 39-A. (KSC Historian;
     Av. Wk., 8/1/66, 27)
  NASA responded to 47 questions on post-Apollo programs submitted by
     Space Science and S ace Technology panels of President’s Science
     Advisory Committee; Xibliography of advanced study contract reports
     was appended to 107-page document. Information would be used in
     preparation of PSAC report on post-Apollo goals. (Text)
0 Implications of the GEMINI x mission received editorial comment.

         Watertown [N.Y.] Daily Times: “The mind and the body of man
     have demonstrated once again what brilliance and discipline can accom-
     plish. They have also demonstrated once again that fear born out of
     ignorance is overcome by those who will prepare themselves through
     training and perseverance.” ( Watertown Daily Times, 7/22/66)
        Los Angeles Times: GEMINI x flight moved U S . ‘‘a few steps closer to
     the goal of landing a man on the moon before 1970,” and it showed the
     time had come to look “beyond the Apollo moon landing, and to map
     new goals for manned spaceflight.” (L.A. Times, 7/22/66)
        New York Times: “Useful work” accomplished by Michael Collins in
     retrieving micrometeoroid experiment from GATV VIII portended the
     day when “men working in space will put huge structures together,
     joining vehicles and parts that were rocketed separately and even at
     widely separated intervals.” Use of GATV X’S propulsion system to power
     docked GEMIM X-GATV x “opens breathtaking new possibilities in both
     the economics and technology of tomorrow’s space travel.” (NYT,
     7/22/66,28M)
July 23: U.S.S.R. objected to a U S . proposal to allow military equipment
     to be used on the moon or other celestial bodies for peaceful purposes,
     Platon Morozov, deputy acting permanent U.S.S.R. U.N. representative,
     told the Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful
     Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva to draft a treaty governing outer
     space exploration. He said such a provision would create a loophole
     for violations; he was prepared, however, to accept with a few minor
     modifications other provisions of U S . draft article. (Reuters, Wash.
     Post, 7/23/66)
  Locating GATV VIII during Gemini X flight was called “a major feat of
     three-dimensional navigation” in a Hartford Times editorial, which
     said “use of Agena 8’s fuel also brings closer the day when manned
     laboratories permanently parked in orbit around the earth will be in
     use for purposes both experimental and immediately useful.” (Hartford
     Times, 7/23/66)
July 23-27: Three-axis stabilization for NASA’s 111 spacecraft was incapac-
                                                OGO
     itated after 46 days of flawless operation by failure of a magnetic ampli-
     fier which shorted out the attitude control system power inverter. Back-
     up spin stabilization system was activated July 27, and reorientation
     affected only six experiments. Primary scientific objectives were ex-
     pected to be achieved, and spacecraft’s spin axis would be reoriented in
     late December to increase power input. (NASA Proj. Off.)
J u 24: Launch crews began erecting Titan I1 booster on Pad 19 at ETR
       ~
     in preparation for September launch of Gemini XI mission. (AP,
     Houston Post, 7/24/66)
  US. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had
     same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that
                                                                            249
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard,
     contacted at MSC, said it would be of ‘‘enormous value.” Yegorov indicat-
     ed that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration,
     saying: “If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights,
     they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English
     already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
July 24: Harris poll indicated that Americans, in case of national emergency,
     favored first curtailing space and aid-to-citiesprograms and last curtailing
     health-assistance and college-education aid programs. (Parade,7/24/66)
July 25: Boosted Arcas 2 rocket was successfully launched for first time
     from WSMR. Equipped with new Marc 42A1 1st stage, rocket carried 16-
     lb. payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude. (Tech. Wk., 8/1/66, 10)
0 SURVEYOR I bounced two to three inches upward on first impact with

     lurain June 2, JPL announced. According to data returned by 620-lb.
     spacecraft, signals generated by strain gauges indicated the three
     shock-absorber legs had all landed simultaneously on a horizontal
     surface. Eight-inch-diameter circular footpads rebounded clear of sur-
     face before settling on moon. Spacecraft exerted pressure of about
     0.5 psi on lurain after it came to rest. Pressure of footpads at impact
     was about 8 psi. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/25/66, A3; Wash. Eve. Star,
     7/25/66, A12; AP, NYT, 7/25/66, C3; Tech. Wk.,         8/1/66, 9)
                               w.
   GEMINI X Astronauts John          Young and Michael Collins flew from KSC
     to MSC for reunion with families and continued debriefing. News con-
     ference had been set for Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/25/66, A12)
   Editorial on five years of “outstanding service” by NASA Administrator
                                                           ..
     James E. Webb appeared in Technology Week: “. it is time to state
     . . . our belief that Mr. James E. Webb has done an outstanding job as
     NASA Administrator. He has presided over an explosive growth of the
     agency which would have overwhelmed a less capable administrator;
     he has met and solved some exceedingly thorny management problems;
     he has dealt effectively with some of the world’s most temperamental
     scientists; he has successfully steered the space agency’s budget
     through the perils of both Administration and Congressional financing;
     he has given the space program a nationwide base of facilities and
     political strength; and, most important of all, he has forged a team
     which is writing an unparalleled record of technical accomplish-
             . .”  (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 7/25/66, 152)
     ment..
 0 Ludlow King, head of Ludlow King Associates and former executive of

      Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., had been appointed as a consultant
     to NASA. He would study means of making relationship between NASA
     and industry more effective. (NASA Ann.)
           had selected Boeing Co. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. for
 0 MsFC

     parallel feasibility studies of reflector satellite to provide illumination
      over land masses at night, Technology Week reported. Studies, which
      would be worth about $120,000 each for 90-day effort, would be made
      for NASA and DOD. (MSFC PAO; Tech. Wk., 7/25/66, 16)
   General Electric Co. announced ccsuccessfulinitial running” of 600,000-
      1b.-thrust GE4 turbojet engine developed under FAA contract. Engine
      “was started and accelerated to idle speed on July 18, and run up to
      100 per cent speed on July 20, nine days ahead of the contract testing
      date. . . .” GE was competing with Pratt & Whitney Div., United
     Aircraft Corp., for Government contract to build engine for Sst. (GE
      Release)
250                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 25: Tribute was paid in Aviation Week to “some of the men whose
    efforts played a significant role in bringing the Surveyor program
    through its technical and managerial morass” to success: W. Eugene
    Giberson; Robert Garbarini; Benjamin Milwitzky; Rep. Joseph E.
    Karth (D-Minn.); Fred Adler; Leo Stoolman; James D. Cloud; John
    Bozajian; Richard Cheng; Robert Roney; Ralph Colbert; Theodore F.
    Gautschi; Edward Pfund; Marshall Johnson; Richard Gunter; Robert
    J. Parks; Fielding Hedges; Thomas Lund; Donald Zimmet; Richard
    Davis; R. L. Roderick; Richard Iverson; R. E. Sears; and George
    Kerster. (Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 21)
  “Businesslike international negotiations” in Geneva to draft treaty
    ensuring peaceful exploration of space received comment in New York
              “. . .
    Times:         Space law will help confine national rivalries within the
    edges of the atmosphere, beyond which all men must work together in
    the gigantic task of exploration, a task to which there is no conceivable
    end.” ( N Y T , 7/25/66,26)
* General aviation (nonairline) pilots in 1965 flew record 2.6 billion miles
    in 16.7 million hours with 95,442 aircraft, while achieving lowest fatal
    accident rate in history, according to FAA% “Selected General Aviation
    Statistics.” The 8% increase during 1965-largest annual increase
    since 195P-included 382 million more miles and one million more
    hours than in 1964, with “business flying” continuing to be busiest
    segment of general aviation operations. (FAA Release 66-72)
e Boeing Co.’s board of directors approved building 747 jet aircraft capable
    of carrying 350-490 passengers at speeds up to 600 mph. (UPI, Wush.
    Post, 7/26/66, A12)
e About 80 U S . companies were experimenting with crystal fibers to pro-
    duce strong lightweight materials for aerospace use, the Wall Street
    Journal reported. Laboratory tests had shown that tiny crystal fibers
    added to metals and plastics produced rigid, almost unbreakable plastics
    and featherweight metals that remained hard under temperature and
    pressure extremes. (Martin, WSJ, 7/25/66, 1)
  US. domestic airlines flew 25 per cent more revenue passenger miles
     durin first six months of 1966 than during comparable 1965 period,
          %
     actor ing to Air Transport Assn. report. Nearly 30.2 billion revenue
     passenger miles were flown during first half of 1966 by scheduled trunk,
     local service, and helicopter carriers compared with 24.1 billion
     revenue passenger miles during first half of 1965. (Av. Wk., 7/25/66,
     40)
During week of July 25: Patent was granted to Wolfgang G. Offik, senior
     staff engineer for Chrysler Corp., for escape system to rescue workers
     from booster-launch gantry in case of explosion or fire. Equipment
     included series of rescue cabins, each suspended in its own cable at a
     different level in front of gantry. In emergency, workers and astronauts
     still outside spacecraft would enter cabins and drop in them into
     underground shelter, protecting them from flames on gantry and on
     ground. (Jones, NYT, 7/30/66,29)
July 26: US. and U.S.S.R. agreed in principle that countries were inter-
     nationally liable for damage caused to other states by objects they
     launched into outer space. U.S. accepted, with minor changes in word-
     ing, article on liability in Soviet treaty on space law under discussion
     in Geneva by Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful
     Uses of Outer Space. (Wash. Post, 7/26/66, A12)
                                                                        251
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Jdy 26: At Pentagon ceremony, Chief of Naval Operations A h . David L.
    McDonald presented astronaut wings to Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan
     (LCdr., USN) who set a world record for length of “walk in space”
    during June 3-6 GEMlNI IX-A mission. McDonald suggested to NASA
    officials that “you get your own Navy” for astronaut recovery opera-
    tions. USN felt smaller ships not needed in the Vietnam war could be
    used as effectively for this task as the aircraft carrier and dozen ships
    assigned to NASA.
       Speaking later at NASA Hq., Cernan said that what a man needed in
    space to do useful work was a “three-point restraint system”-
    three points of contact with the spacecraft for stabilization. (Norris,
     Wush. Post, 7/27/66, Al, A6)
0 Negotiations were underway between LRC and Martin Marietta Corp. on

    a $150,000 study contract to investigate feasibility of obtaining data
     on Venusian atmosphere using “a balloon or other inflatable buoyant
     device or devices floating in the planet’s clouds.” (NASA Release 66-196)
  MSFC awarded Univ. of Michigan two-month, $29,930 study contract to
     develop 20-channel “infrared sensing technique to survey the earth’s
     natural resource^.^^ Operating on orbiting satellite, system would
     survey possible mineral deposits, analyze soil for growth potential,
     diagnose “health” of crops, and predict bountiful fishing areas. (MSFC
     Release 66-167)
0 Hundreds     of people along Eastern seaboard reported sighting several
     Ufo’s. Robert A. Bennett, FAA watch supervisor at Fulton County
     (Ga.) Airport Tower, sighted three or four objects which slowly changed
     colors from red to green to blue. (UPI, Wush. Post, 7/27/66, A6)
July 27: Eleven scientists formerly associated with the International Geo-
     physical Year (IGY) and International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY) urged
     permanent cooperation in international studies of earth in letter to
     the London Times: “These worldwide cooperative scientific projects
     have shown conclusively that however many and serious are the
     political problems that trouble the human race, it is possible for’all
     the nations of the world to work closely together in great enterprises
     for the common good.” Signers included U S . representatives on IGY
     Committee Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, former chairman of the NAS Space
     Science Board, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Director for
     Space Science and Applications, and U.S.S.R. representatives Dr.
     Vladimir V. Belossov and N. V. Pushkov. (NYT, 7/27/66, 12)
0 WAF pilots Col. Robert L. Stephens and L/Col. Walter F. Daniel received

     official certificates from President Johnson for establishing three
     absolute and six jet-class world records May 1, 1965, in W-12A air-
     craft. Col. Stephens had set new speed record of more than 2,070 mph
     and new altitude record of 80,259 ft. Col. Daniel had set new speed
     records for straight course of over 2,000 mph and on closed course of
     1,688 mph. Records were formerly held by U.S.S.R. (Pres. DOC.,
     8/ 1/66, 1000)
   Sydney (Australia) Univ. physicist Stuart Thomas Butler said that U.S.,
     U.K., and U.S.S.R. were studying the possibility of using a “nuclear
     rocket’’ to prevent the asteroid Icarus from colliding with earth, UPI
     reported. Icarus would pass within four million miles of earth in June
      1968. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, world clearinghouse
     for all astrophysical information, said it had no knowledge the three
     nations were studying the possibility. Two authorities on asteroids,
252               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Dr. Paul Herget, Univ. of Cincinnati, and Dr. Gerald Clemence, Yale
     Univ., said there was not “one chance in a billion” Icarus would strike
     earth. (WI, Chic. T i . 7/28/66)
                         rb,
July 27: Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had devel-
     oped a 7X-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft
     and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been
     delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage.
     (Gibbons, WSJ, 7/27/66, 1)
July 28: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXVI to “continue exploration of outer
     space” into earth orbit with 359-km. (223-mi.) apogee; 212-km.
     (132-mi.) perigee; 51.8” inclination; and 90-min. period. Equipment
     was functioning normally. (Tass, 7/28/66)
   X-15 No. 1 was flown by NASA test pilot John B. McKay to 3,682 mph
     (mach 5.19) and 241,800-ft. altitude. Mission objectives included
     micrometeoroid collection and evaluation of pace transducer, horizon
     scanner, nonglare glass, and stick kicker. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
a NASA in conjunction with the Brazilian Space Commission and Canadian
     Research Council would launch 10 Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with
     80-lb. acoustic grenade payloads from Natal, Brazil; Churchill Research
     Range; Point Barrow, Alaska; and NASA Wallops Station. Four rockets
     would be launched from Churchill and two from each of the other sites.
     Experiments would begin whenever noctilucent clouds appeared over
     Churchill area and would be conducted over 24-hr. period. Project
     would be coordinated by GSFC. (NASA     Release 66-199; Wallops Release
     66-42)
   ComSatCorp announced in financial statement that revenues from operat-
     ing EARLY BIRD I comsat had totaled $2,107,000 for first half of 1966
     while income from temporary cash investments was $4,472,000. Cash
     and temporary cash investments totaled $186,534,000 on June 30.
     (ComSatCorp)
a Expansion of behavioral and social research to keep pace with scientific
     and technical advance was urged by Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, NASC
     staff member, at NDEA Institute for Advanced Study in Industrial Arts
     Education at Univ. of Maryland. “One of the biggest problems con-
     fronting us,” he said, “is that we tend to train our young people for
     today’s world rather than prepare them for the new developments of
     the future. Aerospace systems approach can help to neutralize this
     problem by outlining the parameters and making a model to help
     predict the future requirements. . . . Fear of innovation is based
     generally on lack of knowledge, so we must educate our entire popula-
     tion to our rapidly changing world.” (Text; AFISD, 10/66)
July 29: Saturn V 3rd stage (s-IVB) was static-fired for full flight duration at
     Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento, Calif., test facility, MSFC announced.
     During captive firing-simulating operation of propulsion system dur-
     ing normal 3rd stage flight in a lunar mission-stage burned 150 sec.,
     shut down for 1%-hr. simulated coast period, then reignited and
     operated 290 sec. Stage was powered by Rocketdyne 5-2 hydrogen-
     oxygen engine that would develop 200,000-lbs. thrust in flight. (MSFC
     Release 66-173)
 * First launch of USAF’S Titan 111-B-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg
     AFB placed an unidentified satellite into polar orbit. (SAC TWX; Av. Wk.,
     8/8/66,29)
                                                                           253
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

July 29: NASA pilots Robert Champine and Ron Gerdes were among 15 pilots
     participating in “extensive evaluation” of USA’s    XV-5A V/Stol aircraft
     at Ft. Eustis, Va. Pilots’ observations and evaluations were being com-
     piled and studied by USA “for application on future XV-SA tests” and
     V/Stol aircraft in general. Test program would continue through
     September 1966. (Langley Researcher, 7/29/66, 4)
   DOD announced that USA’s OV-1 Mohawk surveillance aircraft had
     claimed five new world aviation records: (1) time to climb 3,000 meters
      (9,842 ft.)-3 min. 46 sec.; (2) time to climb 6,000 meters (19,685 ft.)
     -9 min. 9 sec.; (3) sustained horizontal flight altitude-32,000 ft.;
      (4) nonstop straight-line distance-2,422 mi. at 255-mph average
     speed; and (5) average speed over 100-km. (63-mi.) closed-circuit
     course at 5,000-ft. altitude-292 mph. Records claimed had been filed
     with Fkdkration Akronautique Internationale under new category for
     land-based turboprop aircraft weighing 13,227 to 17,636 lbs. (DOD
     Release 643-66)
   NASA-sponsored space exhibit opened in Arts and Industries Building of
     the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.; exhibit would begin
     US. tour Sept. 5. (EH)
July 30: Dr. C. V. Raman, 1930 Nobel Prize winner in physics, said in
     convocation address at Indian Institute of Technology in Madras that
     it was “nothing but sheer raving lunacy” to spend millions of dollars
      “to shoot men into space and make them walk there.” Dr. Raman said
     it was “mere pretence’’ to say these exploits were intended to find out
      what was happening on the moon. “It is militarism, very thinly dis-
     guised.” Dr. Raman said he thought spaceflight was the “most sinister
      aspect” of the progress of science in the last 60 yrs. (NYT, 8/1/66,42)
 During July:Te6filo M. Tabanera, president of Argentina’s Comisi6n Nacional
                                             ,
      de Investigaciones Espaciales (CNIE) reviewed accomplishments and
      current plans of space program in the Air University Review. Since
      creation of CNIE in 1960, Argentina had organized meetings to promote
      interest in space research and conducted experiments in aeronomy,
      ionospheric studies, cosmic radiation, and meteorology, launching
      balloons and rockets from Chamical Rocket Range. Current plans
      included: (1) continuation of Centaure sounding rocket launches for
      wind studies, using “luminous-trails” technique; (2) cooperation in
      inter-American experimental meteorological sounding rocket research
      network (EXAMETNET) under agreement with NASA to launch boosted
      Darts and Arcas rockets; and (3) launchings of sounding rockets to
      study cosmic radiation and ionospheric phenomena. (Air Univ. Review,
      7-8/66)
   Quasars, once believed rare, might account for 28 per cent of the radio
      sources in space, Dr. John D. Wyndham, research fellow at Cal Tech,
      reported on the basis of 10-mo. research project. Dr. Wyndham had
      located all 328 sources listed in Third Cambridge Catalog of Radio
      Objects, then identified many of them with visible light sources, in-
      creasing the number of identifications to more than 150. Identification
      of radio noise source with a visible light source was h s t step in deter-
      mining its distance and confirming that it was a quasar, he explained.
       (AP, NYT, 7/6/66, 35)
 0 Six years of exploratory work at JPL and NASA centers on practical prob-

      lems of landing on Mars was summarized by R. P. Thompson of JPL in
      Astronuutics & Aeronautics. He concluded that: (1) design of first
254               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    lander should be simple and conservative, and capable of thorough
    testing so that no single failure mode would cause cccatastrophicfailure
    of mission”; (2) independent backup should be provided for every
    critical event in landing sequence with fcselective’’ redundance to
    achieve high reliability; and (3) capsule should be instrumented to
    allow diagnosis of failures. (A&A, 7/66, 66-73)
During Jdy: David H. Stoddard, M.D., Director of NASA Occupational
    Medical Division, cited in Hospital Topics two “ideal” physiological
    monitors developed in space medicine-biotelemetry, which permitted
    immediate observation of data, although subject was aware he was being
    monitored; and electrocardiocording, which did not allow immediate
    observation but “permits the subject to go where he pleases, do what he
    pleases and to almost forget that he is being monitored.” (Hospital
    Topics, 7/66, 39)
  Czechoslovakian radio correspondent Jan Petranek reported: “Usually
    well-informed Moscow circles have stated that in the next few years
    the Soviet Union will have a spaceship weighing 100 tons at its dis-
    posal.” (Wash. Post, 7/25/66, A2)
  Patent for system with direction finder that would assure ground stations
    continuous and efficient communication with orbiting satellites was
    granted electronics engineers Henry P. Hutchingson, Applied Research
    Lab., Sylvania Electronic Systems, and Dr. Paul R. Arendt, Army
    Electronic Command Labs., Fort Monmouth, N.J. Equipment could
    also correct “Doppler frequency effect” caused by relative movement
    of satellite and station. (Jones, NYT, 7/23/66, 29)
* 60 per cent of the Nation’s commercial airlift capability was immobilized
    by the International Assn. of Machinists walkout, which began July 8.
     (Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 41)
                             August 1966

August 1: In MSC ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C.
    Seamans, Jr., presented GEMINI x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael
    Collins NASA Exceptional Service Medals for “outstanding contribution
    to space flight and engineering,” and the astronauts reviewed their
    July 18-21 mission for the press. Pilot Collins revealed that maneuver-
    ing difficulties during his walk in space had forced him to approach
    GATV VIII three times before successfully retrieving a micrometeoroid
    experiment. He felt the “basic problem” in Eva was that “without
    some sort of handholds or restraining devices, a large percentage of
    the astronaut’s time is going to be devoted to torquing his body around
    until it is in the proper position to do some useful work.” Command
    Pilot Young said mission’s fuel shortage had been caused by large
    out-of-plane error, not human error as previously believed: “We had
    to use a brute force method of rendezvous [with GATV XI. That takes
    quite a lot of fuel.” (Transcript)
0 NASA had signed $339 million supplemental agreement with Chrysler

    Corp.’s Space Div. converting contract for production of Uprated Saturn
    I (Saturn IB) 1st stages (S-IB) from cost-plus-fixed-fee to cost-plus-
    incentive-fee. Under contract managed by MSFC, Chrysler would manu-
    facture, assemble, and test 12 stages and provide support services
    through February 1969. (NASA       Release 66-201)
0 NASA selected Warrier Constructors, Inc., for final negotiations of a

    $3.5-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to complete construction
    and equip a lunar receiving Iaboratory at MSC by end of 1967. A central
     complex where samples of lunar surface material collected by Apollo
     astronauts could be received, examined, and processed, laboratory
     would also be equipped to quarantine spacecraft and crew after flight
    to moon. (NASA Release 66-200)
0 USAF fired Minuteman I1 ICBM equipped with Mark 12 reentry vehicle

     from silo at ETR to target site about 5,000 mi. downrange. Test was 15th
     straight success for Minuteman 1 . (AF News Bureau, NYT, 8/2/66, 2)
                                        1
  In unpublished letter to Science, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, head of North-
     western Univ.’s Dept. of Astronomy and USAF consultant on Ufo’s since
     1948, criticized the “American scientific establishment” for failure to
     investigate persistent Ufo phenomena [see Oct. 211. (Lewis, Wush.
     Post, 8/29/66, A12)
0 Radio Corp. of America was being awarded a $4,450,000 USAF definitive
     contract to supersede previously awarded letter contract for production
     of communication and electronic components for unspecified space
     satellites. Contract would be managed by ASFC’S Space Systems Div.
      (DOD Release 652-66)
  N. A. Zakharov, chief of Soviet Civil Aircraft Research Institute, an-
                                                                    255
256               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    nounced that U.S.S.R. would construct 220-passenger, 560-mph Tu-154
    subsonic airliner to replace the Tu-104, 11-18,and An-10. New Yak-40
    short-haul aircraft, designed to carry 24 passengers up to 375-mi.
    distances at 275 mph, was already under construction and would replace
    the Li-2 and An-2. (Pravda, 8/1/66, 6)
August 1: Team of 33 US. technical experts from Lockheed Aircraft Corp.
    arrived in Noervich, W. Germany, to reorganize maintenance on
    F-104G Starfighter jet aircraft and correct “technical difficulties”
    which had caused crashes of 61 Starfighters and deaths of 36 Luftwaffe
    pilots since 1961. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 8/2/66, C1)
0 In reply to March 2 invitation by‘Fcc to submit comments on whether or

    not private entities should be allowed to establish special-purpose
    communications satellite systems for domestic use, 18 organizations
    filed responses.
        Ford Foundation proposed that consideration be given to formation
    of a nonprofit nationwide television system-operating under Broad-
    casters Nonprofit Satellite Service (BNs)--which would carry an
    extensive schedule of educational programs financed by transmission
    of commercial TV programs. Foundation contended FCC had power to
    authorize such a satellite system and that the act creating ComSatCorp
    had anticipated additional systems to meet unique national needs.
        ComSatCorp filed brief saying there was no legal basis for authorizing
    private organizations to establish special-purpose communications
     satellite systems for domestic use and that it would be in the public
     interest to assign ComSatCorp a monopoly on all such systems. Opinion
     was accompanied by full technical proposal for multi-use, high-capacity,
    four-satellite system for domestic distribution of TV, voice, and data
    signals that would be operational by 1970 at estimated cost of between
    $110 and $126 million.
        AT&T argued it would be against ccexpressed national policy” to
     authorize satellite systems outside the framework of commercial com-
     munications carriers and urged FCC “to conclude in this finding that
     there can be no authorization of private satellite systems.”
        Carnegie Commission on Educational Television said it was encourag-
     ing a study of a comsat system that would be specifically designed for
     noncommercial television. While conceding that national satellites
     might be advantageous in some cases, Carnegie Commission warned
     that such a system presented problems of “educational monopoly and
     centralized control of instructional and other material.” FCC was
     requested to take no definitive action until Carnegie’s forthcoming
     report on educational television was published in late 1966 or early
     1967.
        Briefs of broadcasting industry cited urgency for domestic satellite
     service to cut costs of distributing television and radio programs. This
     cost reduction for the three networks-css, ABC,and NBC-was esti-
     mated at approximately $50 million a year. NBC said a determination as
      to how this satellite service should be obtained could not be made in
      the abstract but “would depend o n . . . a comparison of the respective
      merits of specific proposals.’’
         National Assn. of Manufacturers told FCC that manufacturing com-
      munity should have full freedom of choice either to lease channels from
      ComSatCorp directly or establish private systems. (CR, 8/2/66,
      17131-3; Gould, NYT, 8/2/66, 1, 18; Av. Wk., 8/8/66, 27-8)
                                                                        257
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

August 1 All transatlantic flights out of major European ports of embarkation
         :
    were sold out, and 2,100 tourists were stranded in Europe as a result of
    IAM strike against five major US. airlines which began July 8. (Av. Wk.,
    8/8/66. 42)
Auguit 2 NASA’; Lunar Orbiter A spacecraft was mated to its Atlas-Agena D
         :
    booster in preparation for scheduled Aug. 9 launch from ETR. (Tech.
     Wk., 8/8/66, 3)
  NASA was negotiating with RCA for $13-million cost-plus-award-feerenewal
    of previous contract to operate and maintain three data acquisition
    facilities. Renewal called for engineering and operations services for
             unmanned Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network
    NASA’s
     (STADAN), operation of weather satellite control centers at GSFC, and
    operation and maintenance of tracking stations at Rosman, N. C., and
    Fairbanks, Alaska. (NASA Release 66-202)
  Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961), was elected a
    director of Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., producer of industrial
    gases and chemicals. Dr. Glennan was currently president of Associated
    Universities which operated Brookhaven National Laboratory for AEC
    and National Radio Astronomy Observatory under NSF sponsorship.
    (NYT, 8/3/66, 50)
August 3: X-15 No. 2 was flown to 3,443 mph (mach 4.85) and 249,000-ft.
    altitude by Maj. William J. Knight (WAF) on star-tracking mission.
     (X-15 Proj. Off.)
* Two tape recorders in NASA% NIMBUS 11 meteorological satellite had failed
    but spacecraft continued to transmit daytime and nighttime cloud-cover
    photos. Loss of first recorder, used to store data from Medium Resolu-
    tion Infrared Radiometer (Mrir),would prevent scientists from receiving
    information on earth’s heat balance, water vapor, and temperatures in
    the atmosphere. Failure of second recorder, used in measuring satel-
    lite’s engineering performance, would force NIMBUS 11 to transmit informa-
    tion each time it passed a ground station instead of storing it for more
    convenient playback. Since its launch by NASA May 15, NIMBUS 11 had
    met all mission objectives and transmitted more than 200,000 weather
    photos on a global scale. (NASA Release 66-203)
  First manned Apollo mission might be launched in late 1966, predicted
    Astronaut Virgil Grissom during news conference held by Apollo crew
    and backup crew at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif.,
    facility. Mission was officially scheduled for 1967. (Transcript)
  Senate Committee on Appropriations reported FY 1967 Independent
    Offices Appropriation bill (H.R. 14921),which included $4,991,600,000
    appropriation for NASA: $4,246,600,000 for R&D; $95,000,000 for con-
    struction of facilities; and $650,000,000 for administrative operations.
     (NASA LAR V/126)
* Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful
    launch of Japan’s first television-equipped sounding rocket: 1.4-ton
    rocket carried 22-lb. TV camera to 200-mi. (322-km.) altitude. (UPI,
     Wash. Post, 8/4/66)
0 NASA modified existing cost-plus-fixed-feecontracts with North American

    Aviation, Inc., and IBM Corp. for Apollo program services with new
    agreements totaling $252.6 million: under $145.6 million cost-plus-
    incentive-fee contract extended through December 1968, NAA would
    provide 52 additional J-2 engines for launch vehicles as well as support
    services; IBM would receive $107 million under multiple-incentive con-
258              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    tract, extended through February 1970, for design, development, imple-
    mentation, maintenance, and operation of MSC’S Real Time Computer
    Complex (RTCC). (NASA Release 66-205; MSFC Release 66-176)
August 3: Dr. Leonard Roberts, a specialist on reentry heat shielding at LBRC,
    was named Director of the Mission Analysis Div., NASA Office of Ad-
    vanced Research and Technology, effective Sept. 1. He would succeed
    Clarence A. Syvertson, who would become Assistant Director for Astro-
    nautics at ARC. (NASA Release 66-198)
  US. Court of Custams and Patent Appeals rejected a challenge to the
    validity of a key patent in laser development granted to Dr. Charles H.
    Townes, former provost of MIT, and Dr. Arthur L. Shawlow, Stanford
    Univ., in 1958. Plaintiff R. Gordon Gould, a Columbia Univ. graduate
    student when Dr. Townes was doing research there, argued that he had
    initiated a critical portion of the laser design-the mirror principle-in
    November 1957. The patent for his idea, granted after the Townes-
    Shawlow patent, was held by a subsidiary of Control Data Corp. (NYT,
    8/6/66, 1 ) 0
August 4: Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of
    Outer Space reached accord on nine substantive articles for proposed
    treaty on space law before adjournment after three weeks of negotiation
    in Geneva. Agreement provided that (1) planets should be freely acces-
    sible to all nations; (2) no nation should appropriate any part of them;
    and (3) man’s conduct in space should he reserved to peaceful purposes
    and ruled by conce ts of international law and U.N. Charter. Two key
    provisions propose1 by U S . on reporting of outer space activities and
    on open access to stations, equipment, and spacecraft on planets were
    rejected by Soviet delegate Platon D. Morozov, but US. Ambassador
    Arthur Goldberg told the press he hoped outstanding issues could be
    resolved when Subcommittee reconvened in New York in September.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/66, C4; Wash. Post, 8/5/66, A16)
* X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to 3,682 mph
     (mach 5.34) and 132,700-ft. altitude in his third flight. Primary purpose
    was pilot checkout. (X-15 Proj. Off.; UPI, Chic. Trib., 8/5/66)
  USAF launched OV3-I11 satellite with Scout booster from WTR to measure
     charged particle hazards to space payloads. Orbital parameters: apogee,
    2,781 mi. (4,475 km.) ; perigee, 223 mi. (358 km.) ; period, 136.9 min.;
    inclination, 81”. (US.    Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
0 NASA assigned LRC responsibility for development of space vehicle design

     criteria in the area of chemical propulsion. Howard W. Douglass,
     former director of LRC’s Flox Project Office, was appointed Chief of
     Design Criteria Office and Assistant Chief of Chemical Rocket Div.
           Release 66-40)
     (LRC
  President Johnson appointed BOB Director Charles L. Schultze chairman of
     committee to oversee final review of recommendations made by Nov. 28-
     Dec. 1, 1965, White House Conference on International Cooperation.
     Schultze would be assisted by Conference’s executive director, Raymond
     D. Nasher, and White House special assistants Walt W. Rostow and
     Joseph A. Califano, Jr. (Pres. DOC.,   8/8/66, 1025)
0 American Federation of Government Employees (AFGE) at KSC had

     charged NASA with preferential hiring of retired military officers for
     choice civilian jobs-a      practice which was “demoralizing” career
     officials and damaging the space program. AFGE’S charge was supported
     by House Civil Service Manpower Subcommittee, which had been
                                                                          259
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     investigating the situation for several months. (Young, Wash. Ewe.
     Star, 8/4/66, A2)
August 5: President Johnson signed H.R. 14324 authorizing $5,000,419,000
     NASA appropriation for FY 1967, and then warned that he might have to
     cut back expenditures on space and other programs if prices and wages
     ‘%ise in an inflationary way.” He made no direct mention of current
     steel price hike or demands of International Assn. of Machinists in
     airline strike, but added: “If we are to continue our space effort and
     continue to make the magnificent progress represented by our past
     achievements, we can do so only if business and labor leaders will
     make their contribution by responsible pricing and bargaining deci-
     sions.,’ (Pres. Doc., 8/8/66, 1026)
   MSFC awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $23,438,532 modification
     to an existing contract for “additional work in building and testing the
      Saturn V launch vehicle’s second stage [S-II].” Work would include
     redesign of stage’s umbilical system and additional testing of stage’s
     hardware under simulated flight conditions. (MSFC Release 66-181)
0 German scientists Drs. Otto Hahn, Lise Meitner, and Fritz Strassman

      were named joint recipients of AEC’S 1966 Enrico Fermi Award for
      “their combined and individual efforts in discovering nuclear fission,
      and for their extensive experimental studies which led to this vital
      discovery.” 1966 winners were first foreigners to receive award; Dr.
      Meitner was first woman recipient. (NYT, 8/6/66, 4)
August 6 GEMINI VI Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P.
           :
      Stafford and GEMINI VII Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank
      Borman were named joint winners of the 1966 Harmon International
      Aviator’s Trophy for achieving the first rendezvous in space by two
      separately launched, maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. Award,
      established by late pioneer aviator and balloonist Col. Clifford B.
      Harmon (USAF) “for exceptional feats of pilotry,” would be conferred
      in fall 1966. (NYT, 8/7/66, 4; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/7/66, A18)
 0 Third anniversary of limited test-ban treaty, ratified by 112 nations,

      barring nuclear tests in the atmosphere, under water, and in outer
      space. (Marder, Wash. Post, 8/7/66, 1)
August 6-23: 25th anniversary of first U S . manned rocket-assisted aircraft
      flights made by Homer A. Boushey, then Capt., USA Air Corps, in
      Ercoupe monoplane specially fitted with jet-assisted takeoff (Jato)
      units “to determine if military aircraft could use rockets to get into
      the air faster from short runways with heavy payloads.” During Jato
      test series, conducted by USA Air Corps from March Field, Calif.,
      under direction of the late Dr. Theodore von KBrmin, Boushey made:
      two takeoffs with Ercoupe on rocket power alone; 11 takeoffs combining
      rocket and aircraft power; and four flights in which rockets were fired
       while airplane was at altitude. On Aug. 6, he first flew on rocket power;
       on Aug. 12, he made first rocket-assisted takeoff; and on Aug. 23 he
       made two takeoffs on rocket power alone. Three rockets under each of
       Ercoupe’s wings produced total thrust of 168 lb. for 12 sec. Von
       K&m6n7s group formed company now known as Aerojet-General COT.
       to manufacture Jato units. (Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 12)
                                    solar cell believed at least 50 times more
 August 7: New “~elf-healing’~
       radiation resistant than conventional power supply cells had been
       developed by RCA for GSFC. Unlike previous cells which were made of
       silicon and protected by transparent shields of quartz or sapphire, new
260               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     cells contained small lithium additive which sealed gaps produced by
     bombardment of high-energy radioactive particles and reduced weight
     of shielding by up to 90%. GSFC physicist Milton Schach described the
     new cell as a “major accomplishment” and predicted its use would
    permit flights of over 1,000 days through center of Van Allen radiation
     belts. Applications were also foreseen for communications satellites,
     high-altitude military reconnaissance spacecraft, and missions to
    Jupiter, surrounded by high-energy electron radiation belt. (Wilford,
     NYT, 8/7/66,40)
August 7: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill
    Research Range in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static tube experiment
    to observe the fine atmosphere temperature structure at noctilucent-
    cloud altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily.
     (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Two series of coordinated NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched

    from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow,
    Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in GSFC experiment to gather data-by means
     of exploding grenade technique-on atmospheric wind, temperature,
    pressure, and density as summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sight-
    ings approached. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfac-
    torily, except one rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station did not
    achieve predicted altitude. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 First new comet in 1966 was discovered by Stephen Kilston, recent

    Harvard Univ. graduate, at Lick Observatory, San Jose, Calif., and
     confirmed Aug. 9 by Central Telegram Bureau, Smithsonian Astro-
    physical Observatory. Named for its discoverer, Comet Kilston had a
    magnitude of plus 10.6 and could be seen in the constellation Hercules,
    apparently moving southeast. (AP, NYT, 8/10/66, 5; AP, Wash. Post,
    8/10/66, AS; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, &J10/66,B4)
0 First microscope that could either superimpose or rapidly alternate

    images was being used at Cal Tech to detect changes in position or size
    of metal crystals that might cause structural failure. Microscope was
    assembled by David S. Wood, Thad Vreeland, Jr., and David P. Pope.
     (Sci. Serv., NYT, 8/7/66, 39)
  Proposal for a permanent international program of science cooperation
    made by 11 leaders of the 1957-58 International Geophysical Year
    program and 1964-65 International Year of the Quiet Sun program in
    letter to London Times [see July 271 was praised by the New York
     Times: “The initiative taken by the eleven scientists represents a
    promising new attempt to cut through . . . [political] limits on coopera-
     tion and thus promote more effective research on behalf of all man-
    kind.” (NYT, 8/7/66, 8E)
0 Hughes Aircraft Co. engineer’s smuggling of a small US. flag on NASA’s

    SURVEYOR I spacecraft which softlanded on the moon June 2 was a
    breach of discipline and a violation of international space policy, wrote
    Joshua Lederberg in the Washington Post. “. . . NASA policy requires
     ‘minimum contamination’ so that the moon can remain a useful pre-
    serve for the detection of any life that might be transported by, say,
    meteorites. This calls for ‘clean room’ standards during the assembly
     of spacecraft components.
        “A bootlegged flag which could not have been subjected to such con-
     trol for decontamination is a clear violation of a policy to which this
     country’s honor has been attached and calls for strenuous disciplinary
                                                                         261
                 ASTRONAUTiCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    measures to insure the integrity and credibility of purpose of our future
    exploratory missions.” (Lederberg, Wash. Post, 8/7/66)
August 7: French-Soviet June 30 agreement on space cooperation was arous-
    ing speculation about Soviet participation in French Guiana launch
    site, reported Richard Lewis in Chicago Sun Times. Use of large Soviet
    launch vehicles--which were also missiles-at French Guiana range
    would “open a missile corridor to the soft underbelly of the United
    States early warning system,” and “undoubtedly generate serious
    tension in the Western world and in Europe,’’ Lewis suggested. But
    French restriction that all satellites launched from site use French.
    boosters and crew “would make the Guiana port useless to the Russians
    for space research, since the only space launcher the French have
    developed is the Diamant” whose payload capability was equivalent to
    that of the Scout-smallest booster in U.S. inventory. (Lewis, Chic.
    Sun Times, 8/7/66, 11)
August 8: COSMOS CXXVII was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. to con-
    tinue exploration of outer space. Orbital parameters: apogee, 279 km.
    (173 mi.); perigee, 204 km. (127 mi,); period, 89.2 min.; inclination,
    51.9”. Instruments were functioning normally. (Tass, 8/8/66; Krasnuyu
    Zvezda, 8/10/66, 1, USS-T Trans.)
  Senate began consideration of FY 1967 Independent Offices Appropria-
    tion bill (H.R. 14921), which included $4,991,600,000 NASA appropria-
    tion. Two amendments proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.)
    to reduce NASA’s    appropriation-one by $998,320,000, the other by
    $150,000,000-were defeated. (NASA LAR V/128)
* NASA had selected Bendix Corp., Federal Electric Corp., and Philco Corp.
    for competitive negotiations of a five-year, Qg60-rnillioncontract for
    operation and maintenance services for Deep Space Network. Contract
    would be managed by JPL. (NASA Release 66-210)
  NASA Pasadena Office (Napo), formerly the NASA Resident Office-JpL, was
    established “as a component field activity” of the Office of Space Science
    and Applications (OSSA), NASA Hq. In addition to negotiating, executing,
    and administering NASA contracts with Cal Tech for operation of JPL,
    new Nap0 would provide procurement, contract administration, patent
    and technology utilization, and related services in support of OSSA and
    other NASA organizational elements. (NASA Hq. Bull.)
* Lack of major manned spaceflight goal beyond Apollo Applications (Aa)
    program was causing NASA to delay Saturn booster development for at
    least two years, reported George Alexander in Aviation Week. Major
    Saturn contractors, facing end of current production contracts, won-
    dered which derivatives would be chosen for development and when
    development and production would begin. Although current inventory
    of Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) and Saturn V vehicles was sufficient
    for programs through Aa, future missions might require a “super
    booster” with 280,000-lb. payload capacity or an intermediate vehicle
    with 40,000-lb. payload capacity. (Alexander, Av. Wk., 8/8/66, 59-78)
* Atlas F advanced ballistic reentry system ICBM fired from Vandenberg AFB
    apparently exploded and fell into the Pacific. USAF was investigating
    causes of the failure. (UPI, NYT, 8/9/66)
* FAA was proposing extensive changes in regulations for determining
    crashworthiness of transport aircraft and for meeting passenger evacua-
    tion standards. Proposed changes included: (1) possibility of evacua-
    tion of aircraft in 90 sec.-instead of 120 sec.; (2) increase in number
262                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    and size of emergency exits and more uniform distribution of exits
    throughout passenger cabin; (3) improvement of emergency lighting
    systems; (4) extensive preflight briefing of passengers; (5) increase in
    number of flight attendants per passenger; and (6) changes in design of
    landing gear, fuel lines, and electrical cables for greater safety. (Av. Wk.,
    8/8/66,34)
August 8: New method of averting aircraft crashes on landing or takeoff was
    demonstrated at London’s Royal Aircraft Establishment when a jet
    fighter traveling 80 mph down runway stopped short in three seconds on
    40O-ft.-long7 7-ft.-deep gravel bed. Establishment spokesman estimated
    that pilots of large passenger aircraft could stop in 10 sec. on long strip of
    ordinary gravel. ( W T , 8/9/66, 62)
August 9: NASA should submit to Congress by Dec. 1its recommendations on
    possible major national space objectives, including costs and benefits of
    s ecific missions, concluded 439-page staff report prepared for House
    gience and Astronautics Committee’s NASA Oversight Subcommittee.
    Subcommittee would hold hearings “at an early date” to define future
    space goals. Study-based on testimony of NASA center directors, in-
    dustrial managers, scientists, and other interested parties-recom-
    mended greater interagency coordination in planning and urged NASA
    to “aggressively pursue possible mechanisms for more comprehensive
    program of international cooperation . . .y7 Future space programs
    should be evaluated in relation to national economy and include “in-
    creased emphasis on minimum cost logistics vehicles within the state of
    the art to assure that economical logistics and rescue systems are
    available in the early 1970s and that similar emphasis be placed on new
    generation of spacecraft design capable of ground recovery at lower
    cost.” (Text)
0 USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from

    WTR. (US.     Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
  Computer technique developed by JPL scientist Dr. Robert Nathan and
    applied to 12 photos of the lunar surface transmitted by NASA’s           SUR-
    VEYOR I spacecraft revealed details as small as 1/50 of an inch and, in
    some cases, apparently doubled observable characteristics. Enhance-
    ment process had been used successfully to intensify photos trans-
    mitted by NASA’s      three Ranger spacecraft and MARINER IV Mars probe.
     (NASA Release 66-206; JPL Release)
0 NASA awarded Dow Chemical Co. a $4-million, cost-plus-ked-feeextension

    to previous contract for KSC support services through June 30, 1967.
     (NASA Release 66-212)
August 10: NASA’s    LUNAR ORBITER I (Lunar Orbiter A) unmanned spacecraft
    was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from ETR in first
    U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites
    for Apollo astronauts [see Aug. 14-31].
        Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161-
    km.)altitude parking orbit, reignited after 28-min. coast period, in-
    jecting spacecraft into 90-hr. translunar trajectory, and separated. On
    schedule, LUNAR ORBITER I deployed its four solar panels and two
    antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty
    occurred when spacecraft’s startracker failed to lock on Canopus and
    flight engineers were forced to lock it on the moon-a weaker naviga-
    tional reference point. Assistant Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.,
     of L ~ R Cwas “still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted
                                                                          263
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    it might be more difficult to obtain desired precision and exact positions
    required for optimum photos of lunar surface. At approximately 00:28
    GMT Aug. 11 planned midcourse maneuver was successfully executed,
    and JPL scientists predicted spacecraft would miss original aiming point
    by only 50 mi.
        Primary objectives of NASA’s LUNAR ORBITER I mission, fu-st in series of
    five, were (1)to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit;
    and (2) obtain high-resolution photos of various types of lunar surface
    to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor space-
    craft and improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 3,000-
    mi. strip along moon’s equator, concentrating on nine potential landing
    areas. Spacecraft would also attempt to photograph SURVEYOR I landing
    sites; provide precision trajectory information; and monitor meteoroids
    and radiation intensity in lunar environment. Lunar Orbiter program
     was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s      Office of Space Science
     and Applications. Tracking and communications were the responsibility
     of JPL-operated Deep Space Network. (NASA Release 66-195; Wilford,
     NYT, 8/8/66, 3; 8/11/66, 1, 12; 8/12/66, 51; O’Toole, Wash. Post,
     8/11/66, A l ; 8/12/66, Al; 8/13/66, Al; 8/14/66, Al, A6; AP, Wash.
     Eve. Star, 8/11/66, A3)
August 10: Senate passed FY 1967 Independent Offices Appropriation bill
     (H.R. 14921) 82-2 with NASA appropriation at $4,991,600,000 as reported
     by Committee on Appropriations. (NASA LAR V/130)
0 Rice Univ.     scientists successfully launched 500-ft.-long helium-filled
     balloon from National Center for Atmospheric Research balloon flight
     station, Palestine, Tex., to obtain electronic data on radioactivity within
     the Crab Nebula. When balloon reached 132,000-ft. altitude, 900-lb.
     electronic gamma-ray telescope began recording data. Payload was
     dropped by parachute on electronic signal from ground and recovered
     near Midland, Tex. Study was third in series financed under $166,500
                                                        (HoustonPost, 8/11/66)
     USAF grant and was termed “highly successfd.~~
August 11: NASA test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 1 to 3.,511 mph
     (mach 5.06) and 251,000-ft. altitude to collect micrometeorites. As
     secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check horizon scanner,
     electrical loads, and wing-pod flutter. (X-15 Proj. O f )
                                                             f.
0 MSFC would negotiate with Chrysler Corp. and Douglas Aircraft Co. for

     procurement at $5-10 million of long lead time items for additional
      Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) launch vehicles. Interruption of produc-
      tion capability after completion of presently approved 12 vehicles
      would thus be avoided. Chrysler was building the S-IB 1st stage;
      Douglas was manufacturing S-IVB 2nd stage, (MSFC Release 66-183)
 0 Horace Sheely of the National Survey of Historic Sites, Dept. of the

      Interior, inspected Pakachoag Hill, Auburn, Mass., site of first success-
      ful liquid-fuel rocket flight made by Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Accom-
      panying Sheely were members of the Auburn Rotary and Lions Clubs
      joint committee to preserve the Goddard site. (Joint Comm. Ltr.)
August 12: X-15 No. 2 was flown by Maj. William Knight (USAF) to 3,473 mph
       (mach 4.90) and 231,000-ft. altitude to conduct startracker experiment
      and base drag study and test alternate pitot static system. (X-15 Proj.
      O f ;AP, NYT, 8/14/66, 8)
        f.
 0 Comprehensivereport on June 8 collision of XB-70 and F-104 aircraft near

       Barstow, Calif., compiled by two investigative boards-one to determine
       causes, the other to examine command responsibility-was transmitted
264               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara by Secretary of the Air
    Force Harold Brown. Inadvertent movement by F-104 into position
    “from which recovery was virtually impossible” was cited as “most
    probable cause” of collision; failure of Maj. Carl Cross (USAF) to eject
    from XB-70 before crashing was attributed to an escape system mal-
    function. Among report’s recommendations were: improvement of
    AFFTG’s operational procedures; modification of XB-70’s escape system;
    and establishment of standards for formation flights. In accompanying
    memorandum, Secretary Brown said that Col. Joseph F. Cotton (USAF),
    XB-70 test director; Col. James G. Scott (USAF), Edwards AFB informa-
    tion officer; and John S. McCollom, Director of Research Vehicles for
    Aeronautical Systems Div., had been reprimanded and Col. Albert M.
    Cate (USAF) relieved of duties as Deputy for Systems Tests at AFFTG. (CR,
    8/15/66, 18505-10; WI, NYT, 8/16/66, 15; Maffre, Wash. Post,
    8/16/66, 6 )
August 12: New absorption bands, probably caused in part by reduced gases
    in the Martian atmosphere, had been found in near-infrared spectrum of
    Mars by Fourier spectroscopy, Lewis D. Kaplan, JPL, and Janine and
    Pierre Connes, Observatoire de Meudon and Centre National de la
    Recherche Scientifique, France, reported in Science. The authors
    believed the presence of such constituents might have “important impli-
    cations for the possibility and nature of life on Mars.” (Science, 8/12/66,
    739-40)
e NASA had selected Honeywell, Inc., for negotiation of $5-million contract
    to design, fabricate, and test attitude-control and scan-control sub-
    systems for two Mariner spacecraft to be launched in 1969. (NASA
    Release 66-216)
0 Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling $1.5 billion to Avco Corp.,

    Martin Co., North American Aviation, Inc., Northrop Corp., Fairchild
    Hiller Corp., and LTV, Inc., for work on Sst prototype. (Boeing Release
    s-8928)
e Dr. T. L. K. Smull resumed his duties as Director of the Office of Grants
    and Research Contracts, NASA announced. Since Dec. 1, 1965, he had
    been on leave from that Office, serving as Special Assistant to the
    Administrator on NASA-university relationships. (NASA Ann., 8/12/66)
  M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, with NASA research pilot Milton 0. Thompson
    as pilot, was successfully air-launched from B-52 aircraft at $5,000-ft.
     altitude in third glide flight from Edwards AFB. Purposes of flight were
    determining effect of increasing mach number and minimum damper
     requirements, and testing of longitudinal and lateral stability and
     control. (NASA Proj. Off.)
August 13: Five-man NASA board and House Science and Astronautics Com-
    mittee’s NASA Oversight Subcommittee had begun separate inquiries into
    failures of OGO I, 11, 111, OAO I, and NIMBUS I. Questions under investiga-
     tion included: (1) Is the expenditure on observatory satellites wise?
     (2) Are the projects being carried out on an efficient basis? and (3) Is
     the taxpayer’s interest being protected?
        GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark told AP he believed there had been
     “technical goofs but no management problems” associated with the
     failures. “Scientifically, we have not had a failure in OGO. Something
     less than 100 percent but more than 75 percent of OGO’S experiment
     return has been outstandingly successful. OGO 1 and OGO 2-although
     classified as spacecraft failures-gave us more data than all other
                                                                            265
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    satellites combined up to that time.” (NYT, 8/14/66, 1, 70; AP,
    Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/66, A23)
August 13: Recent Trendex poll taken for Thiokol Chemical Corp. indicated
    that 71.4 per cent of Cincinnati residents were in favor of the Nation’s
    lunar program. (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 8/13/66, 8)
  Research by NASA and Air Transport Assn. indicated that wet-pavement
    skidding by aircraft could be substantially reduced by cutting          to
                                                                     %“s-




    W-in.-deep grooves one to two inches apart in runways. Test runways
    would be equipped with grooves at cost of $70,000 by early 1967 for
    further experimentation. (Hudson, NYT, 8/14/66, 90; UPI, Chic.
    Trib., 8/15/66)
August 13-14: Alternate system kept U S . tracking station at Robledo de
    Chavela, Spain, in operation when 500-600 ft. of cable were burned by
    forest fire raging nearby. Station, which played a critical role in NASA’s
    Lunar Orbiter program, was expected to receive photos of the lunar
    surface in several days. (NASA Release 66-219)
August 14-30: NASA’s   photographic spacecraft LUNAR ORBITER I became first
    US.spacecraft to enter lunar orbit-only 15 mi. off target-after 92-hr.,
    236,319-mi. flight from ETR. Orbital parameters: apolune, 1,152 mi.
    (1,854 km.) ;perilune, 119 mi. (192 km.) ;period, 3 hrs. 37 min.; inclina-
    tion, 12’. JPL reported drop in spacecraft’s apolune Aug. 17 to 1,150 mi.
    (1,851 km.), and rise in perilune to 126 mi. (202.8 km.) ;moon’s gravita-
    tional field was considered cause of orbital variations. After taking
    engineering photos transmitted to JPL Aug. 18-20, spacecraft was in-
    jected into close-in orbit by retrothrust maneuver initiated Aug. 21 for
    medium- and high-resolution photography of lurain. Tracking experts
    said 36-mi. (58-km.) perilune was “within a city block” of where it
    should be.
       Spacecraft’s cameras had exposed 211 dual frames of film to photo-
    graph nine potential Apollo and Surveyor landing sites during mission’s
    photo acquisition phase, announced complete on Aug. 30. Readout was
    expected to be completed by Sept. 15. Medium-resolution camera re-
    turned good images; however, except for an excellent photo of moon’s
    far side, all exposures made with the high-resolution camera were dis-
    appointing. Camera’s malfunction was attributed Aug. 25 to spurious
    signal generated by spacecraft’s film transfer motor at 31-mi. perilune.
    Signal was tripping high-resolution camera shutter and causing film
    smear; LUNAR ORBITER 1’s perilune was lowered to 23 mi. (37 km.) to
    eliminate signal. Unprogramed photograph of earth, commanded Aug.
    23 and received at NASA’s tracking station at Robledo de Chavela, Spain,
    Aug. 25, showed appearance of earth’s terminator-line dividing sun-
    lit and shadowed portion of planet-from distance of about 240,000 mi.
     (386,400 km.). Spacecraft also photographed SURVEYOR I landing site.
     (NASA Proj. Off. ; NASA Releases 66-228, 66-230, 66-233; Wilford, NYT,
    8/15/66,1,23; 8/16/66,15; 8/19/66,1; 8/20/66,8; 8/21/66,1; 8/22/
    66, 8; AP, NYT, 8/24/66, 15; NYT, 8/25/66, A5; 8/26/66, 13; AP,
    NYT, 9/1/66,2; O’Toole, rash. Post, 8/15/66, A l , A13; 8/19/66, A l ;
    8/20/66, A l ; 8/21/66, A l ; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/18/66; Av. Wk.,   8/29/66,
     18)
August 14: Coordinated NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket series was
    launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point
    Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in GSFC experiment to study atmos-
    pheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as
266                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




August 25: First picture of earth from the vicinity of the moon, taken by   NASA’S LUNAR
ORBITER I.




    summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rocket
    and instrumentation performances were satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
August 14: The critical voices raised during Aug. 8-9 Senate debate on the
    NASA portion of the Independent Offices Appropriation bill (H.R. 14921)
    indicated the US. space program was in ‘political trouble,” concluded
    New York Times editorial. ‘?Fundamental questions are being asked
    about whether this country should have gotten involved in the moon
    race in the first place, and invidious comparisons are being drawn about
    the dividends from money spent in space and those that might have
                                                                         267
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    been realized had those same funds been used to meet urgent human
            . ..
    needs.
       “There are important and useful things to be done in a post-Apollo
    space program, but it is doubtful in the extreme that the nation should
    go on indefinitely paying five billion dollars or more annually for such a
                   . .”
                    (NYT, 8/14/66, E10)
    program..
August 14: Capt. Chester M. Lee (USN, Ret.), Operations Planning Chief in
    Mission Operations, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, was appointed
    Assistant Mission Director, Apollo. (NASA Ann., 9/15/66)
* Successful test firing of supersonic Chaparral, USA’s    newest air defense
    guided missile system, was conducted at WSMR. One of two weapon sys-
    tems selected by USA for new air defense battalions, Chaparral met all
    test objectives when it intercepted Firebee target missile in continuing
    series of development firings. (AF News Bureau, NYT, 8/14/66, 16)
0 Hurricane seeding plans for Project Stormfury-joint      USN-ESSA hurricane
    control study program-were announced. Between Aug. 1and Oct. 15,
    17-plane force would be on alert in Puerto Rico to seed storms with
    silver iodide and then monitor temperature, atmospheric pressure, and
    structure of cloud. Project Stormfury was begun in 1961: experiments
    had been performed on hurricanes Esther in 1961 and Beulah in 1963,
    and on tropical cumulus clouds in 1963 and 1965. (DOD Release 654-66)
* Comment in the Washington Sunday Star called US. Sst program a
    “dubious” venture moved by extraordinary pressures: “This is a project
    the taxpayer should view with more than a little interest, if not appre-
    hension, for its cost is coming out of his pocketbook and the price tag is
    escalating. Industry may repay the cost some day, but no one is sure
    just when. The SST, in fact, has become a symbol of national prestige.
    If we do not produce such a plane, American leadership in the aircraft
    industry will sustain a loss of face from which it could not recover.
    Perhaps it is impossibIe to back away from the situation. But the
    American public is at least entitled to know what kind of mare’s nest
    this rivalry has got us into, and the hazards that must be faced.”
     (Wash. Sun, Star, 8/14/66, C1)
August 15: NASA Javelin sounding rocket with new 4th stage ignition system
    was launched from Wallops Station to 434-mi. (698-km.) altitude, In-
    strumented payload measured positive ion composition of ionosphere,
    electron density, and temperature; and mapped distribution of Lyman-
    alpha radiation to determine amount of atomic hydrogen in earth’s
    atmosphere. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
e NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from WSMR reached 100-mi.
     (161-km.) altitude in Dudley Observatory (AIbany, N.Y.) micro-
    meteorite particle collection experiment at a time of 33-year maximum
    for Leonid meteor shower. Rocket and instrumentation performed
    satisfactorily; since radar signals were lost after 265 sec., intensive
    search was necessary for payload recovery. Chief objective was not
    accomplished because of range scheduling, and launch was used for
    control shot. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
e Chrysler COT. had announced it was building 10 more Redstone rockets
    for Sparta-joint US.-U.K.-Australian reentry measurements program
    -Technology Week reported. TRW Systems had prime contract for
    program; LTV Aerospace Corp. was building two-stage solid fuel velocity
    package to propel reentry vehicles back into earth’s atmosphere at
    speeds simulating ICBM reentry. (Tech. Wk., 8/15/66, 12)
268                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

August 15: George A. Lemke, Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, NASA
    Office of Manned Space Flight, died at age 54. A veteran of more than 26
    years in aircraft and space industry, Mr. Lemke had formerly been NASA
    Apollo Project Resident Manager at North American Aviation, Inc.
     (NASA Hq. Bull.)
0 Program Evaluation Review Technique (Pert)-multi-level             scheduling
    program used to spot potential problems before they developed-had
    made it possible during 1966 to meet every “major milestone” in NASA’s
    Saturn-Apollo site activation program for KSC’S Complex 39, Tech-
    nology Week reported. Earlier, only about 2/3 of the target dates were
    being met. Using computer programed with data categorized into three
    levels of detail on individual contractor’s needs, abilities, and timing,
    Pert set up work schedules based on key milestones as periodic progress
    reminders. Frequent computer checks of programed work provided
    officials with definite reading of status of remaining tasks. (Tech. Wk.,
    8/15/66, 40)
  B/G Paul T. Cooper, Vice Commander of AFSC’S Space Systems Div.
     (SSD), would replace M/G Ben I. Funk, retiring Sept. 1, as Commander
    of SSD, AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever announced. (AFSC
    Release 169.66)
August 16: NASA successfully launched 550-lb. Project Scanner instrument
    package from Wallops Station to 380-mi. (612-km.) altitude on 13.5-min.
    suborbital flight: two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy
    emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-
    mapper telescope provided attitude orientation data. Managed by L ~ R C ,
    Project Scanner was advanced research program to obtain data for de-
    signing and developing improved horizon-scanning instrumentation for
    space missions. (Wallops Kelease 66-43)
  WAF launched two unidentified sate1lites”with Atlas-Agena D booster from
    WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & space Act., 1966, 154)
* AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received National Aviation
    Club’s (NAC) 1966 Award of Achievement for his “significant contribu-
    tions to the creation of the Air Force strategic missile force.” The award
    would be presented Aug. 16 in Washington, D.C. (Tech. Vk.,          8/8/66,
    13)
* More than 1,000 sheet metal workers out of 1,300 staged strike at KSC to
    protest NASA’s   permitting nonunion workers to install plumbing and
    sheet metal on Saturn V mobile service tower. Confined to construction
    jobs, strike was not expected to seriously affect major schedules unless
    prolonged. (AP, NYT, 8/17/66, 18)
  North American Aviation, Inc., received a one-year, $48,223 contract
    from MSFC to “investigate the best methods and hardware for performing
    manned Mars and Venus flybys with maximum use of Apollo/Saturn
              ...
    systems        as a stepping stone to manned landing missions.” (MSFC
    Release 66-187)
0 General Dynamics Corp. was being issued a $5,723,878 increment to a

    previously awarded (USAF) contract for work on design and deveIopment
    of an unspecified standard launch vehicle. Contract would be managed
    by AFSC’S Space Systems Div. (DOD Release 701-66)
  Senate Judiciary Committee reported S. 1603, Federal Inventions Act of
     1966. Bill would “establish a uniform national policy concerning
    property rights in inventions resulting from the expenditure of public
     funds for experimental, developmental, or research work,” superseding
    present law governing NASA patent policy. (NASA LAR V/145; Text)
                                                                         269
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

August 16: In Houston Post Edward W. O’Brien cited need for definition of
    future national space effort, pointing out that ‘‘the mighty industry-
    government team that has been mobilized for manned flight is tapering
    off.” Employment, at the pezk, had been 400,000; by the end of 1967,
    total would be 200,000; by 1968, only 100,000. What the U.S. must
    soon determine is “whether this unique assembly of brainpower and
    mechanical skill should be held together, or whether it should be
    applied elsewhere to better public advantage.” (Houston Post, 8/16/66)
  In scheduling manned space flights, NASA Associate Administrator for
    Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the National Space
    Club in Washington, D.C., crew safety was the principal consideration,
    followed by accomplishment of program goals. He pointed out the
    C?
       open-ended“ aspect of Apollo mission scheduling and expressed con-
    fidence that lunar landing would be achieved before the end of the
    decade based on present program posture. During question and answer
    session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA and its contractors had studied
    possible methods of rescuing astronauts in space and would continue
    to do so, the cost, complexities, and uncertainties made it appear to
    date that the money and effort would be better spent in making flights
    safer in the first place. He added: “We don’t exactly have instant rescue
    for people flying around in airliners and this is a large segment of the
    population.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/17/66, 16)
                     PIONEER VII (Pioneer B), second in new Pioneer series,
August 17: NASA’s
    was successfully launched from ETR’S Launch Complex 17A by Thrust-
    Augmented Improved Delta booster into orbit around the sun where it
    would chart magnetic fields emanating from the sun; measure the
    quantity, energy levels, and direction of the solar wind; and differentiate
    between solar and galactic cosmic rays. The 140-lb., drum-shaped
    satellite had perihelion of 1.01 astronomical units (au), or 93.93 million
    mi. (151 million km.); aphelion of 1.125 au, or 104.625 million mi.
    (168.45 million km.) ; period of 402.95 days; inclination of 0.0946O.
    All systems were reported turned on and operating satisfactorily. TWO
    days following launch, PIONEER VII successfully completed maneuver
    which locked its high gain antenna on earth and stabilized its orbital
    path. First of five flights in current Pioneer program-managed by ARC-
    was PIONEER VI, launched Dec. 16, 1965. Overall program objective was
    to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely
    separated points in interplanetary space. (NASA Release 66-211; NASA
    Proj. Off.; AP, rush. Post, 8/18/66, L1; Wilford, NYT, 8/18/66, 15;
    UPI, rush. Post, 8/20/66, A9)
* Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station
    on second development flight of series. The 53-ft.-long rocket developed
    60,000 lbs. thrust and reached 222-mi. (357-km.) altitude before impact-
    ing in Atlantic Ocean some 106 mi. from launch site. Preliminary
    examination of data indicated rocket’s performance was close to
    predicted. Direction of sounding rocket program was under OSSA.
    (NASA Release 66-221; Wallops Release 66-44)
  U.S.S.R. announced that COSMOS CXXII, launched June 25, was collecting
    meteorological data which would be sent to other nations in accordance
    with 1962 agreement with U.S. Satellite carried “instruments for taking
    TV pictures of the clouds, cameras to photograph clouds by infrared
    rays on the day and night sides of the earth, and instruments to measure
    radiation in the earth’s atmosphere.” (Tass, 8/17/66)
270               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

August 17: Dr. Carl Schreiber, Procurement Specialist with NASA Hq. Office
    of Industry Affairs since Aug. 2, 1964, died in Washington, D.C. Dr.
    Schreiber, NACA employee since 1939, had been Assistant Procurement
    and Supply Officer from 1958-64. (NASA Hq. Bull.)
  Soviet Air Marshal V. A. Agaltsov claimed in Tass interview that the
    U.S.S.R. could fire long-range nuclear missiles from aircraft. He said
    this meant Soviet bombers could be beyond limits of enemy’s antiair-
    craft defense zone and accurately fire missiles from distance of several
    hundred miles. (AP,  Wash. Eve. Star, 8/17/66, 18)
9 Martin Co. had been awarded a three-month, $75,000 contract to design

    and develop a flight-qualified, lightweight, hand-held lunar core driller
    for use on Apollo missions, MSC announced. Similar contract, also for
    $75,000, had been awarded Northrop Space Laboratories. (Chic. Trib.,
    8/18/66)
August 17-18: Senate Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Communi-
    cations held hearings concerning Ford Foundation’s Aug. 1 proposal to
    FCC to create a nonprofit domestic satellite system which would carry
    “an extensive schedule” of educational television programs financed by
    transmission of commercial TV programs.
       Ford Foundation president McGeorge Bundy said that although the
    use of profits from a commercial business to finance a noncommercial
    undertaking might be novel to television, creation of a special carrier
    service in the public interest was not without precedent. He cited the
    Government’s granting of special mailing privileges to newspapers and
   magazines. Bundy disclosed the Ford Foundation was planning to
    arrange “a series of meetings in various parts of the country with
   potential users of a noncommercial satellite system.”
       Fred W. Friendly, TV consultant to Bundy, described what he said
   was the underlying irony of modern TV: commercial networks had the
   money to do qualitative public service but lacked sufficient time on the
   air, while educational TV had the time but lacked the money.
       ComSatCorp chairman James McCormack said the heart of the Ford
   proposal called for the “funneling of savings” that might be enjoyed by
   commercial communications carriers into support of a cultural under-
   taking. While acknowledging the value of educational TV, McCormack
   said he felt only Congress could rule whether one segment of a diversified
   society could be compelled to support another segment without benefit
   of specific legislation to that end.
      AT&T vice president Richard Hough, ITT executive Bertram B. Tower,
   and Western Union Telegraph Go. vice president Earl D. Hilburn
   challenged the proposal saying that any such communications system
   should adhere to the common carrier principle of serving all users
   rather than any particular group such as broadcasters. While these
   witnesses supported the objective, they questioned the feasibility of the
   plan on economic and technical grounds. Tower suggested that con-
   sideration be given to permitting special rates for educational TV services
   through existing common carriers. Hilburn said that rate adjustments
   in favor of educational broadcasters might be authorized if some form
   of subsidy were determined to be in the national interest.
       Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.), who had called the hearings, said they
   were a “prelude” to action by FCC and noted that Congress almost
   certainly would want to explore the implications of the Ford proposal
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                    27 1

    as it related to a private corporation. Hearings were completed Aug. 23.
    (ComSatCorp Releases; Gould, NYT, 8/18/66,59; Wash. Post, 8/18/66,
    A12; AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/66, A2)
August 18: U.S.S.R. transmitted to US. for first time information obtained
    from its only known meteorological satellite, COSMOS CXXII, launched
    June 25. Previously, U.S.S.R. had relayed only conventional observa-
    tions from land stations, ships, and balloons. Direct telecommunications
    channel between Moscow and Washington, D.C., had been established
    after March 1963 signing of bilateral agreement for exchange of meteor-
    ological satellite data under June 1962 space cooperation accord. (Bird,
    IVYT, 8/20/66, 1; AP, Wash. Post, 8/21/66, A6)
* USAF launched unidentified satellite with Scout booster from WTR. (U.S.
    Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
* NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 3 to 3,545 mph (mach 5.20)
    and 178,000-ft. altitude in flight test for altitude buildup. As secondary
    mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check out boundary-layer noise,
    horizontal tail loads, and heat transfer panels. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
  U.N. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told Senate Committee on Foreign
    Relations he was “encouraged” about chances for reaching agreement
    with U.S.S.R. on treaty to ensure peaceful uses of outer space but that
      several key issues”-including U.S.S.R.’s position on reporting its
    <C



    activities in space-still posed obstacles after 24 days of negotiations in
    Geneva. Goldberg said that despite this and other problems, he believed
    “the basis for resolving the outstanding issues has already been agreed
    upon.” (AP, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, Al)
* Joint Senate-House Comference Committee on Independent Offices Appro-
    priations reported out H.R. 14921 which included a $4,968,000,000
    NASA FY 1967 appropriation: R&D, $4,245,000,000; construction of
    facilities, $83,000,000; administrative operations, $640,000,000. (NASA
    LAR V/136)
e National Labor Relations Board settled AFL-CIO sheet metal workers strike
    that began at KSC Aug. 16 to protest use of nonunion labor to install
    sheet metal and plumbing on Saturn V mobile service tower. Over 1,000
    of 1,300 construction workers had honored picket lines. (AP, Phil.
    Eve. Bull., 8/ 18/66)
  Helicopter-like atmosphere-entry-and-descent system employing un-
    powered rotor was undergoing wind tunnel testing at ARC as means of
    returning to earth from space. System could land on any solid, level
    surface and return vehicles of wide range of shapes from orbit; most of
    the lift would be supplied by auto-rotor and not by aerodynamic shape
    of vehicle. In orbit, blades for rotor system would be folded and stowed.
    On approaching earth, blades would be released and passage through
    atmosphere would start them turning. (NASA Release 66-217)
e Government of Pakistan announced plans to use comsats to relay telephone
    communications between East and West Pakistan. Two satellite tracking
    stations would be built-one in each province-and would be operative
    by 1968. (Reuters, NYT, 8/18/66,38)
0 Colonization of ocean floor would be more useful to man than colonization

    of the moon, said B. G. Anderson, senior research psychologist for
    General Dynamics Corp.’s Electric Boat Div. at joint AIAA-USN Marine
    Systems Conference in Los Angeles. The food and minerals available to
    man in and under the oceans were more important natural resources-
272               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    and more easily retrieved-than any likely to be found on the moon or
    elsewhere in the solar system. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, H4)
August 19: USAF launched USA’s   SECOR VII geodetic satellite, ERS-xv satellite,
    and an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, using Atlas-Agena D
    booster. (US.    Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
0 NASA selected McDonnell Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of $9-million,

    fixed-price contract to provide an airlock for an experiment in which
    astronauts would enter empty hydrogen tank of a spent Uprated Saturn I
     (Saturn IB) 2nd stage (S-IVB). Airlock would be stacked on space
    vehicle between Saturn and Apollo units using lunar module mounts.
    In orbit, command and service modules would separate and dock with
    airlock unit, and the crew would activate systems to pressurize spent
    hydrogen tank for habitation; hatch in airlock would permit astronauts
    to egress into space without depressurization of tank or spacecraft. First
    mission in MsFC-managed program would be carried out %o earlier
    than 1968.” (NASA Release 66-223; MSFC Release 66-189)
0 Fuel line leading to Saturn V launching pad at KSC ruptured, spilling more

    than 800,000 gallons of liquid oxygen. Spokesman said it was not yet
    known whether line break would delay qualification of pad to receive
    flight version Saturn V during September 1966 for launching early in
     1967. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/20/66, A7)
  About 600 construction workers staged strike at KSC-One day after end of
    three-day sheet metal workers’ strike-in dispute with McGregor-
    Werner Co., which provided administrative services to KSC. (AP, NYT,
    8/20/66, 26)
0 International Assn. of Machinists (IAM) voted 17,727 to 8,235 to ratify

    three-year contract negotiated Aug. 15, ending 43-day strike that had
    halted five major U.S. airlines. (F on F, 8/18-24/66, 317)
August 22: NASA had canceled hardware development and fabrication of
    Apollo experiments pallet whibh was designed to hold modular experi-
    ments and to fit into a section of the Apollo service module. Four firms
    selected in November 1965 for four-month Phase 1A design studies
    had been advised of decision: Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Martin
    Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; and Northrop Space Laboratories.
     (NASA Release 66-224)
0 Twenty-two non-U.S. airlines-14     that had reserved delivery positions for
     Sst and eight that might be potential customers-had been invited to
     conduct independent evaluations of the competing U.S. Sst designs,
    Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 8/22/66,26)
0 Many Ufo’s might be corona discharge-balls       of ionized air-originating
    along high-tension electric power lines, suggested Phillip J. Klass in
    Aviation Week. After comparing corona discharge and reported behavior
     of Ufo’s, Klass found that they were similar in everything but size.
     Discrepancy in size might be from illusionary nature of light, fright of
     the observers, or lack of familiar objects for comparison. Klass empha-
    sized that his theory could not explain all such sightings, but urged
    USAF to continue investigating corona discharge theory. (Klass, Av. Wk.,
    8/22/66, 48-60)
0 The study of future national space objectives by the House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight was
    termed a “timely and thoughtful” document in Technology Week
    editorial by William J. Coughlin. Noting that its major contribution (‘is
    to focus attention on the urgent need for a major decision concerning
                                                                        273
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    the nation’s space program,” Coughlin added: “Not only does Congress
    have a role to play in such decisions, but the Teague subcommittee is
    moving to fill a vacuum in the decision-makingprocess. The Administrg-
    tion has shown itself reluctant to bring forth decisions in this area.
    NASA itself has backed away from defining the next space objective. The
    subcommittee is performing a valuable national service in attempting
    to bring the matter to a head.” (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 50)
August 22: In editorial on current public debate over need for space rescue
    system, Robert Hotz noted in Aviation Week that NASA had “spent con-
    siderable time, money and ingenuity in designing safety into its manned
    spaceflight hardware” and in “developing sound operational procedures”
    that minimize the opportunity for disaster. He added that hearings
    conducted b Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the Manned
                 J
    Spaceflight ubcommittee of the House Committee on Science and
    Astronautics, and a RAND Corp. study commissioned by NASA should pro-
    vide “much useful data on which to base a technically sound and
    economically feasible program that can provide the maximum space
    safety possible without jeopardizing the basic goals of the missions.”
    ( A x Wk., 8/22/66, 11)
0 USAF School of Aerospace Medicine had concluded 15-day test to evaluate

    effects of increased carbon dioxide on four airmen in spacecraft cabin
    simulator. One of a series of such experiments, the latest took the level
    of experience up to the 4% CO, mark, compared with normal ground
    level conditions of 0.033% CO,. Aim was to assess problems astronauts
    might have to face with a partial failure of their life support system.
    (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 4)
August 23: AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg discussed space role of
    nuclear energy in keynote address at Western Electronic Show and
    Convention in Los Angeles. In addition to advantages of nuclear propul-
    sion, Dr. Seaborg said Snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) sys-
    tems offered: (1) independence of sunlight, permitting use in shadow of
    a planet or moon and at great distances from the sun; (2) reduced
    atmospheric drag and propellant weight for maintaining low orbits of
    manned orbiting stations; and (3) larger quantities of electric power.
    He suggested nuclear power systems assembled on the moon could not
    only provide heating, cooling, and electric power, but could extract
    water and minerals and help produce synthetic food. (Text)
0 General Electric Co. announced that GE4 turbojet engine had reached

    full power without augmentor in excess of 40,000 lbs. thrust. GE was
    competing with Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for Sst
    engine contract. (GE Release 66-51)
August 24: U.S.S.R. launched 3,608413. LUNA XI space station toward moon
    for “further testing of systems of an artificial moon sputnik and
    scientific explorations of near lunar space.” Preliminary data indicated
    that spacecraft was traveling close to calculated trajectory and equip-
    ment was functioning normally. (Tass, 8/24/66)
0 Senate unanimously approved House-Senate conference report on FY 1967

    Independent Offices Appropriations (H.R. 14921). Funds for NASA were:
    R&D, .$4,245,000,000; construction of facilities, $83,000,000; and
    administrative operations, $640,000,000. (CR, 8/24/66, 19598-600)
  NASA extended for one year a contract with Documentation, Inc., to oper-
    ate its College Park, Md., Scientific and Technical Information Facility
    -containing world’s largest collection of aerospace literature-during
274               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    FY 1967 at cost of $5,150,000. Monitored by NASA Hq. Scientific and
    Technical Information Div., contractor would also operate Selective
    Dissemination of Information Program, using computer techniques to
    notify NASA scientists and engineers individually of new developments
    of direct interest to their work. (NASA Release 66-227)
August 24: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill
    Research Range reached 98 mi. (157 km.) in NASA-UniV. of New Hamp-
    shire experiment to provide data on neutron intensity at different
    latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric
    electron densities. Rocket performed satisfactorily and instrumentation
    performance was considered excellent. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Two NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched 90 min. apart from
    NASA Wallops Station reached 102-mi. (164-km.) and 105-mi. (169-km.)
    altitudes in GCA Corp.-Univ. of Illinois experiment to measure recom-
    bination coefficients of major E-region constituents and investigate
    importance of metallic ions in lower ionosphere at three solar zenith
    angles. Both rockets performed satisfactorily, and instrumentation on
    first flight-except for ion-mass spectrometer-obtained good data.
    Telemetry deteriorated at lift off on second flight, and transmitter failed
    at about 145 sec. Some data might be extracted through special treat-
    ment of telemetry record. Third flight in series was postponed to allow
    investigation of ion-mass spectrometer difficulty. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* M2-F2 lifting body vehicle was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-
    ft. altitude in fourth glide flight at Edwards AFB with NASA research pilot
    Milton 0. Thompson as pilot. Purpose of flight was determination of
    control damper requirements, lift-drag ratio, elevon response and flap
    effectiveness, and longitudinal stability and control. (NASA Proj. Off.)
* House debated H.R. 935 on establishment of a Dept. of Transportation.
    Rep. Benjamin J. Rosenthal (D-N.Y.) proposed that it include an Office
    of Aircraft Noise Control and Abatement to assume duties of noise
    abatement research groups presently operative in several Government
    agencies, including NASA. (CR, 8/24/66, 19509-33)
August 25: NASA’s   Apollo/Saturn AS-202 mission was successfully launched
    from ETR’S Complex 34 at 1:16 p.m. EDT: 56,000-lb. unmanned Apollo
    spacecraft (011) was boosted into suborbital flight by Uprated Saturn I
    launch vehicle generating 1,600,000 lbs. thrust in second flight test of
    major spacecraft systems; second performance check of command
    module (Cm) heatshielding; and third flight test of Uprated Saturn I.
    Liftoff and powered flight were as programed. After spacecraft separa-
    tion, 21,500-lb.-thrust service module (Sm) propulsion engine burned
    3 min. 35 sec. to boost spacecraft to 706-mi. (1,128.6-km.) altitude.
    Sm’s engines ignited three more times to test rapid restart capabilities,
    with last burn separating Sm. Cm reentered earth’s atmosphere at more
    than 19,900 mph. Maximum temperature of spacecraft’s surface was
    calculated to be about 2,700”F; temperature inside Cm was 70°F. Main
    parachutes deployed at 23,850-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown
    in Pacific Ocean some 500 mi. southeast of Wake Island-200 mi. from
    target-at 2:49 p.m. EDT. Recovery was by aircraft carrier U.S.S.
    Hornet. Apollo heatshield well withstood high heat-load test, and the
    spacecraft was in “stable condition 1.’’
        Officials said that during flight, minor problem developed in unit
    which was to cool drinking water and various electrical components.
    They did not consider problem serious.
                                                                          275
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

        NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.
    Mueller told postflight press conference that “the results of today’s
    flight-once examined-will provide us with the information necessary”
    to make a final decision whether to commit the next Apollo flight to a
    manned mission. (NASA Release 66-213; NASA Proj. Off.;Hines, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 8/26/66, A4; AP, Wash. Post, 8/26/66, A3; Wilford, NYT,
    8/26/66, 1)
August 25: X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,511 mph (mach 5.00) and 257,500-ft.
    by NASA test pilot John B. McKay to conduct series of high-altitude
    scientific experiments: micrometeorites and extraterrestrial dust were
    collected in special container in wing-tip pod; intensity and spectral dis-
    tribution of daytime sky conditions measured; and horizon scanner,
    electrical loads, and wing-pod flutter checked out. (X-15 Proj. O f )
                                                                       f.
  Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of the Space Sciences Sub-
    committee of the House Science and Astronautics committee, said at
    a luncheon of the Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn. in Washington, D.C.,
    that the war in Vietnam and the needs of “the Great Society in general”
    would keep the space budget from expanding soon. He said the budget
    of ‘Znore than $6 billion” that NASA planned to ask Congress for in
    January 1967 (‘is financially not in the cards for the near future.”
    (Text)
* Lawrence Levy, founder and president of Allied Research ASSOC.,        Inc.,
    and former Defense Adviser to U S . Ambassador to NATO, sworn in
                                                                 was
    as a consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on “cooperation
                                                           .
    with western Europe and future space programs. . .,, (NASA        Release
    66-231)
  NASA selected Martin Co. for negotiation of $3-million, incentive-fee
    contract to build 11 experimental spacecraft equipped with parachute
    payloads “to investigate parachute designs and techniques for landing
    instrumented capsules on Mars.” Four would be launched by high-
    altitude balloon systems and seven by Honest John-Nike rockets under
 . LaRc’s Planetary Reentry Parachute Program. (NASA          Release 66-229)
  A phased-out Bomarc missile, serving as target for USAF and USN missiles,
    exploded shortly after it was fired from Vandenberg AFB. (UPI, Wush.
    Post, 8/27/66, A3)
  Gov. Edmund Brown of California told aerospace executives meeting in
    Los Angeles of plans to create state-level Office of Science and Technol-
    ogy to provide liaison between Government and industry in using
    aerospace skills to solve civilian problems. Five state contracts had
    been let for preliminary study of the problems, using the aerospace
    cc
       systems engineering” approach. Brown said state’s studies ‘‘not only
    demonstrated that the systems analysis concept would work” but also
    that “in some cases it was the only concept that would cut through the
    red tape and the customs arising from generations of solving social
    problems in the same old ways.” (Sederberg, L.A. Times, 8/26/66;
    CR, 8/29/66, 20129-30)
* U.S.S.R. began rocket test series in the Pacific Ocean. (Tass, 9/6/66)
August 26: NASA officials revealed at Hq. news briefing that data accumulated
    thus far from LUNAR ORBITER I indicated the moon’s shape departed
    from that of a perfect sphere with a bulge of about W mi. at its north
    pole, a depression of about W mi. around the Northern Hemisphere,
    a W-mi. bulge around the Southern Hemisphere, and a depression of
    about W mi. at the South Pole. Conclusions were based on assumption
276               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    moon’s density was uniform. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/66, A3;
    Av. Wk., 8/29/66, 1%)
August 26: USAF Titan 111-C carrying eight Initial Defense Communications
    Satellite Program (Idcsp) repeaters destroyed itself some 80 sec. after
    launch from ETR’s Launch complex 41. Preliminary observations
    indicated breakup of payload fairing at about 85,000-ft. altitude; trouble-
    detecting system sensed erratic behavior of rocket and triggered device
    that destroyed it. Available data showed “no abnormality in any of the
    vehicle’s other systems.” Detailed study of telemetry and film record
    would be necessary before cause of fairing malfunction could be
    determined. Launch was attempt to duplicate June 16mission of identical
    Titan 111-C that placed seven Idcsps and one gravity-gradient satellite
    into random, near-synchronous equatorial orbits as part of worldwide
    military communications system which would eventually include 23
    comsats. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/26/66, Al; UPI, NYT, 8/27/66, 14;
    AP, Wash. Post, 8/27/66, A3)
  Four sounding rockets-an Aerobee 150A, two Nike-Tomahawks, and a
    Nike-Apache-were launched by NASA from Wallops Station at pre-
    determined intervals between 2:13 p.m. EDT and 3:11 p.m. EDT in
    conjunction with passage of EXPLORER XXXII satellite. Objective of
    series was to correlate measurements of properties, characteristics,
    and conditions of upper atmosphere obtained by rocket-borne experi-
    ments with similar measurements made by EXPLORER XXXII, second
    U.S. Atmosphere Explorer, launched May 25. Project was conducted
    by GSFC under overall direction of OSSA. (Wallops Release 66-45;
    NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 President Johnson spoke at AEC’S      National Reactor Testing Station in
    Arco, Ida. (where world’s first electricity from nuclear power had been
    produced), on his hopes for compromise agreements preventing spread
    of nuclear weapons and ensuring peaceful uses of space. He urged
    recognition “that at the heart of our concern in the years ahead must
    be our relationship with the Soviet Union. . . .
       “1 believe that the Soviets share a genuine desire to enlarge the area
    of agreement. This summer we have been negotiating. . . a treaty that
    would limit future activity on celestial bodies to peaceful purposes.
    This treaty would, for all time, ban weapons of mass destruction, not
    only on celestial bodies, but also in orbit around the earth.. . .”
       He announced that treaty negotiations would resume Sept. 12, and
    continued:
         ..  . Peace will not dramatically appear from a single agreement or
       cc

    a single utterance or a single meeting.
       cc
          It will be advanced by one small, perhaps imperceptible, gain after
    another, in which neither the pride nor the prestige of any large power
    is deemed more important than the fate of the world.” (Text, Pres.
    Doc., 9/5/66, 1160-64)
August 27: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
    Station reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan
    Pitot-static probe experiment to measure atmospheric density, pressure,
    and temperature. Experiment, designed to observe diurnal variations
    in fine structure of region from 9-68 mi. (15-110 km.), was launched
    in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments launched Aug. 26.
    Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA       Rpt. SRL)
                                                                        277
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

August 28: COSMOS CXXYIII was launched by U.S.S.R. into earth orbit with
    364-km. (226-mi.) apogee; 212-km. (132-mi.) perigee; 90-min. period;
    and 65” inclination. Equipment, carried to “continue space investiga-
    tions,” was functioning normally. (Pruvda, 8/28/66, 3)
  NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops
    Station reached 187-mi. (301-km.) altitude in GSFC-univ. of Michigan
    experiment coordinated with Aug. 26 and 27 flights. Simultaneous
    measurement of N2 and electron density and temperature, measure-
    ments of atmospheric ion and neutral composition, and comparative data
    from two mass spectrometers and other experiments were obtained;
    rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Damage to a 900,000-gallon stainless-steel storage tank for Saturn V
    booster’s liquid oxygen fuel would delay booster’s first flight-scheduled
    for first quarter of 1967-by at least 45 days, NASA announced. Damage
    had occurred during Aug. 19 first-stage tanking test when pipeline had
    ruptured spilling 800,000 gallons of liquid oxygen; vacuum thus
    created inside tank had caused depression in tank‘s 2%-in.-thick dome.
    Laboratory tests would determine extent of resulting structural weak-
    ness. (NYT, 8/29/66, 8)
  U.S.S.R.’s official silence on fate of LUNA XI artificial moon satellite
    launched Aug. 24 prompted speculation that spacecraft had switched
    off its beam in orbit, overshot the moon, or crashed. ( r u s h . Post,
    8/28/66, A10; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/28/66, Al)
  Cal Tech scientists Eric E. Becklin and James A. Westphal reported find-
    ings from 19-day telescopic study of comet Ikeya-Seki that began
    Oct. 14, 1965: temperature of comet was “entirely dependent” on the
    sun, varying from 700°F to 1,200”F in direct proportion to distance
    from sun; nucleus and tail were same temperature; and comet was
    composed of “lots of metallic material” rather than ice and dust as
    previously suggested. (Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A9; Bird, NYT, 8/29/66,
    11)
e Commenting on President Johnson’s Aug. 26 appeal for agreement on
    nuclear nonproliferation and peaceful uses of space, New York Times
    editorialized that issues of reporting space activities to U.N., and
    reciprocity and timing of visits to space vehicles and installations
    “would all appear to be soluble in time given a genuine desire for a
    treaty on both sides. . . . But the unanswered question is whether an
    East-West breakthrough on space can in fact come at all while the
    Vietnam impasse continues.” (NYT, 8/28/66, E6)
August 29: Two NASA Boosted Arcas sounding rockets were launched one
    hour apart from WSMR in GSFC experiment to provide simultaneous
    measurements of D-region ions and electrons. Flights marked first
    launches of high-velocity Boosted Arcas rockets from rail launcher.
    Radar coverage was not provided, but rockets appeared to perform as
    predicted. Instrumentation functioned normally; however, parachute
    systems-designed to gather data for Polar Cap Absorption Program-
    were deployed too high and “streamered” entering dense atmosphere.
    (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFC-
    instrumented payload to 128-mi. (206-km.) altitude to obtain dayglow
    measurements. Rocket and instrumentation performed well. (NASA Rpt.
    SRL)
218               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

August 29: Pictures from U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XI spacecraft that apparently
    entered lunar orbit were received and tape recorded by Jodrell Bank
    Experimental Station. Although unable to immediately decipher
    pictures, Station officials said . . they appear to be similar to those
    of Luna 9 and the American Lunar Orbiter transmissions.” U.S.S.R.
    had made no official statement since Aug. 24 launch. (UPI, NYT,
    8/29/66, 11; UFJI, Chic. Trib.,8/30/66; UPI, Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/30/66)
* Plans for manned solar astronomical mission to orbit earth in Apollo
    spacecraft during period of maximum solar activity beginning in 1968
    were announced by NASA. Mission objectives would be to acquire high-
    resolution measurements and observations of structure and behavior
    of sun above earth’s atmosphere and to test man’s capabilities for con-
    ducting astronomical observations in space. MSFC would have project
    and experiment development responsibility. (NASA Release 66-232)
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Space
    Business Daily that NASA had presented several proposed FY 1968
    budgets to BOB, including one for “just over $6 billion” and another
    for $5.5 billion. He said that in the $5.5-billion budget about $500-$600
    million would be for Apollo Applications (Aa); the $6-billion budget
    would include about $1 billion for Aa. Emphasizing that major funds
    for Aa must be included in the FY 1968 budget if the billions of dollars
    spent on Apollo technology were not to be wasted, he indicated that a
    budget of about $5 billion would end plans for an adequate Aa program
    to follow Project Apollo. He noted that under a $5-billion budget,
    there would be a greater percentage cut back in contractor operations
    as opposed to inhouse NASA efforts, but that with a $5.5-billion budget
    the current ratio would remain about the same. Seamans confirmed
    that the fmt manned Apollo lunar landing could come as early as
    1968, but said it is “most likely” to occur in 1969. (SBD, 8/29/66,
    317-8)
* ComSatCorp confirmed it was developing a plan which would have all
    commercial users of a domestic satellite communications system-
    telephone and telegraph companies as well as commercial television
    networks-underwrite      educational TV. Funds would come from a
    portion of anticipated savings to communications users after a domestic
    satellite system was established. Details of plan would be submitted to
    Carnegie Commission on Educational Television-a private group
    making study on needs of educational TV. Carnegie study-to be
    released in late 1966 or early 1967-was expected to be relied on when
    Congress considered renewal of Educational Facilities Act-due          to
    expire in 1967-which concerned educational TV. (WSJ, 8/30/66, 10;
    AP, rash. Post, 8/30/66, D8)
  AT&T would sell its Andover, Me., ground station to ComSatCorp for
    $4,981,000, pending FCC approval. Station, which transmitted and
    received signals from EARLY BIRD I for transatlantic telephone, tele-
    vision, and data communications, had been leased by ComSatCorp since
    January 1965. (ComSatCorp Release)
* Death of Nick Piantanida, 33-yr.-old parachutist in a coma since oxygen
    supply failed at 57,000-ft. altitude during May 1 attempt to break
    world’s freefall record. (NYT, 8/30/66, 41; Wash. Post, 8/31/66, A6)
* Aerial Coast Patrol of US. Coast Guard established 50 years ago.
August 30: X-15 No. 2 was flown to 3,614 mph (mach 5) and 102,200-ft.
    altitude by Maj. William J. Knight (USAF) to conduct heat tests. Pilot
                                                                         279
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    conducted base-drag studies and checked out stability and control,
    ablative materials, and wing tip accelerometer. It was 170th flight of the
    X-15 and 7th during August. (FRC Release 16-66; X-15 Proj. Off.)
August 30: Tass announced that LUNA XI had become second U.S.S.R. satel-
    lite to circle moon when it entered lunar orbit Aug. 27 with 1,200-km.
     (745-mi.) apolune; 160-km. (99-mi.) perilune; 2 hr. 58-min. period; and
    270” inclination. In first official statement since Aug. 24 launch, agency
    reported that midcourse maneuver had been successfully executed
    Aug. 26 and that onboard equipment was functioning normally. LUNA x
    began orbiting moon April 3-first spacecraft to do so-but did not
    transmit photos to earth. (Tass, Pruvda, 8/30/66, 1; AP, rush. Post,
    8/25/66, A3)
8 First of series of high-altitude experiments to investigate parachute
    designs and techniques that might be incorporated into Voyager
    spacecraft scheduled for unmanned soft landing on Mars in 1973 was
    conducted by NASA from Walker AFB. The 15-ft.-diameter, 1,600-lb.
    disc-shaped flight unit containing packaged test parachute, instruments
    to record loads and parachute deployment, and ring of 12 small rockets
    for acceleration was carried by balloon to 120,000- to 125,000-ft.
    altitude then released on ground command. Acceleration rockets
    apparently ignited as planned, propelling unit upward at about 850
    mph into arching trajectory. Parachute deployed; system descended
    in planned recovery area at WSMR. Test was apparent success; extensive
    performance analyses were being made. Balloon system had been tested
    July 18. Parachute project was managed by LaRC and coordinated with
    JPL, which managed Voyager program. (NASA Release 66-225; AP,
    Balt. Sun, 8/31/66)
8 House passed H.R. 15963, bill to establish Cabinet-level Dept. of Trans-

    portation. Amendments proposed by Reps. Benjamin J. Rosenthal
     (D-N.Y.) and John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) that would have established an
    Office of Aircraft Noise Control and Abatement in the Department
    were defeated. (CR, 8/30/66, 20342-84)
8 New York Times editorial: “The Soviet-American race to the moon is

    heating up. Even as the United States-built satellite, Lunar Orbiter,
    finished photographing the moon, Moscow’s huge Luna 1 also went1
    into lunar orbit. The indicated success of the second unmanned flight
    of the Apollo moonship-another step toward putting the first Ameri-
    cans on the moon-undoubtedly will speed initial tests of a Soviet
    lunar vehicle.” (NYT, 8/30/66)
August 31: U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XI that entered orbit around the moon Aug. 27
    was described as containing “an entire orchestra of rocket engines.”
    Vladimir Orlov, writing in Pruvdu, said the spacecraft contained in
    addition to its main power system a braking engine installation and
      four directing engines with comparatively small thrust.’’ (AP, NYT,
     CC



    9/1/66, 2)
8 Columbia Univ. professor of business administration Dr. Leonard R.

    Sayles was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator on organization
    policy and managerial practices and procedures. (NASA Release 66-235)
8 Photographic proof that two clouds of ‘‘cosmic rubble’” were orbiting the

    earth in the same path as the moon was announced by Lockheed
    Missiles & Space Co. engineer J. Wesley Simpson. The ccrubble7’      might
    have come from all over the universe and could offer clues to the
    earth’s origin, solar winds, and the possibility of life in outer space.
280                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




August 30: Hurricane Faith (white mass at left) as photographed from 700-mi. altitude
by NASA’S               satellite.
            NIMBUS 11


    Although photographic images were too faint to be reproduced on
    paper, they were visible on negatives and when projected on a smooth
    white surface. (UPI, NYT, 9/1/66, 24)
During August: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, head of MIT’S Dept. of Aero-
    nautics and Astronautics and Special Consultant to NASA Administrator,
    wrote in Air Force and Space Digest that there appeared to be wide-
    spread lack of public understanding that aeronautical and space
    developments might have a profound effect on transformation of society:
                                                                            ..
       It is not so much the possession of the new technologies . that
    <c

    counts. Of more importance are the quickened spirits, the sharpened
    intellects, and the developed resources that can permeate the whole
    fabric of a society.” (AF/SD, 8/66, 86-7)
* In letter to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee
    on NASA Oversight, Dr. H. H. Hess, chairman of NAS Space Science
    Board, said that the national space program had become too big to
    make it practical to focus on any single future goal: “To pick one and
    virtually abandon the remainder would give a far smaller return than
                                                                           281
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    a balanced program aimed at several major objectives, even though the
    advantage of strong focus is being given up.” Three possible major
    goals suggested by Hess were: (1) unmanned exploration of the planets,
    primarily Mars and Venus, “with a subsidiary effort” on Jupiter;
     (2) continued manned lunar effort; and (3) earth-orbiting astronomy
    platform with optical, X-ray, gamma-ray, and radio telescopes “with
    ultimately manned maintenance.” (Av. Wk., 8/22/66, 95)
During August: First space disaster was among predictions for 1967 in new
    edition of Old Moore’s Almanack, a volume published in U.K. for 270
    years. (UPI, NYT, 8/22/66, 37)
* Role of Venus in NASA’s future space sciences program was reviewed in
     report by OSSA to House Science and Astronautics Committee. Report
    suggested that NASA might increase interest in Venus with combinations
     of Mars-Venus flights and single missions to Venus using Mariner,
     Voyager, and advanced Automated Biological Laboratory spacecraft to
                                                  ..
     investigate “the possibility of life forms. . From almost every aspect
     ...  Venus is an important, puzzling, and paradoxical planet, meriting
     continued examination by space flight missions.” (Text; Tech. Wk.,
     9/12/66, 18-9)
0 U S . Sst program had been assigned “Dx” priority-highest       manufactur-
     ing priority usually reserved for key defense and space programs-by
     President Johnson in April without public announcement, the press
     reported. The New York Times questioned secrecy and priority implied
     by President’s decision: “It was an error to keep the decision secret.”
      (Clark, NYT, 8/7/66, 1; WSJ, 8/9/66, 1; NYT, 8/8/66, C26)
   Summarizing two years of negotiations between France and U.S.S.R. on
     cooperative satellite communications program in Astronautics & Aero-
     nautics, Andrew 6. Haley said questions of (1) access of French scien-
     tists and technicians to Soviet launch sites, and (2) size of orbit for
     French satellite to be launched with Soviet vehicle were still unsettled.
      (Haley, A&A, 8/66, 15-6)
* Sharing of research with U S . industry under NASA’s technology utiliza-
      tion program was commended in Petroleum Today article by Clay Hor-
      nick. December 1965 Conference on Selected Technology for the
      Petroleum Industry at Lewis Research Center, Hornick said, had
      encouraged utilization of space research discoveries in fields of com-
      bustion, lubrication, and nuclear resonance. (Hornick, Petroleum Today,
      Summer 1966, 16-19)
 0 US. Army’s aviation role would increase, not diminish, as result of

      recent USA-USAF Chiefs of Staff agreement on tactical airlift capabilities,
                                                                              .
      USA Director of Aviation B/G Robert R. Williams told Data. “. . I
      assure you that the Army will continue to exploit the inherent capabili-
      ties of aircraft to support the conduct of prompt and sustained combat
      operations on land. Just as we will continue to receive aviation support
      from the other services, so will we continue to provide organic aviation
      responsive to the direct control and planning of the Army commander.
      Further, we will develop and acquire aircraft and aircraft command and
                                                                ..
       control systems which are uniquely capable of fulfilling . the require-
       ments of immediate availability for sustained operation in a field
       environment. . . .,’ (Data, 8/66, 9-10)
 * Comment on LUNAR ORBITER I mission:
         New York Times: “Unfortunately, the decision made a half decade ago
       was to give priority to the Apollo program for landing a man on the
282              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

          .. .
    moon       Lunar Orbiter’s achievements remind us that there is no
    pressing necessity for putting manned lunar flight first. If President
    Johnson should decide to slow down the Apollo project by cutting its
    budget appreciably, scientific investigation of the moon with instru-
    ment satellites could continue and be richly productive.
       “In a few years pictures of the earth’s orb as seen from distant space
    will become commonplace. Tomorrow’s schoolchildren will find it hard
    to believe there was a time when no human eyes had seen the full
    crescent arc of earth’s globe from the perspective of the moon or
    beyond.”
       Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “Looking rather like a crumbly piece
    of Roquefort, there it was-Earth, as seen from the Moon by a camera
    aboard Lunar Orbiter 1. The picture was a black-and-white, but no
    matter. Since the Moon has no appreciable atmosphere, Earth will
    never take on the bright orange and yellow hues of a harvest moon.
    And since there are no forests, no lakes, no oceans, no snowcovered
    fields on the Moon, Earth will never be framed, for lunar lovers, in the
    sylvan or aquatic settings that lend so much enchantment and mystery
    to earthly views of the Moon.”
       Sam Shenton, leader and secretary of the International Flat Earth
    Society, claimed that the circular body shown in LUNAR ORBITER 1’s
    photos Aug. 25 was not really earth, but “one of the non-luminous
    bodies between us and the moon.” He admitted that photos of the earth
    had been “a great shock” to the 24-member society. (NYT, 8/19/66,
    29; 8/27/66; Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/27/66; Reuters, Wash. Post, 8/29/66,
     A31
During August-September: USAF Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell discussed
    military future of manned aircraft in NATO’s Fifteen Nations. Aero-
    nautical technology in fields of propulsion and composite materials-
    and less radical improvements in performance, navigation aids, fire
     control systems, and conventional ordnance-indicated that “by 1975
     we will have increased by major increments the speed, range, altitude,
     payload and over-all versatility of manned aircraft for military roles.”
     Noting that X-15 could fly faster and higher than V-2 ballistic missile,
     General McConnell said he believed “that well in advance of the esti-
     mates that most people would make, Air Force pilots will be flying
     genuine aerospace craft that can take off under their own power,
     operate in space and return to a controlled landing.” (NATO’s Fqteen
     Nations, 8-9/66)
During Summer: First four sessions of Legal Subcommittee of the U.N.
     Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were summarized in an
     article by NASA Deputy General Counsel Paul G. Dembling and Daniel M.
     Arons, Attorney-Adviser, NASA Office of General Counsel, in Journal of
     Air Law and Commerce. (J/Air Law and Commerce, Summer/66,329-86)
                                September 1966

     September 1: Lewis Research Center awarded Aerojet-General Corp. a $10-
          million contract for fabrication and static test firing of 260-in.-dia.
          solid propellant rocket motor. An advanced version of two motors of
          the same diameter previously tested by Aerojet, new motor would use
          propellant with higher burning rate and was expected to develop 5.25
          million lbs. peak thrust when test-fired for 80 sec. in June 1967.
          Earlier versions had produced 3.6 miIlion lbs. thrust during 114-sec.
          tests. (NASA Release 66-236; LRC Release 66-52)
        Explosion of Saturn V booster’s 2nd stage (S-11-F) at MTF May 28 was
          caused by inadequate test procedures and faulty hydrogen line fitting,
          NASA investigative board, chaired by KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus,
          concluded. Board reported that first shift workmen had failed to attach
          pressure-sensing line to stage’s hydrogen tank or to inform second
          shift workmen of disconnect, with result that test conductor’s gauge
          registered zero reading when stage was actually under pressurization
          with gaseous helium. Tank ruptured at 23 psig-far below 38-psig
          design pressure-because of poor hydrogen line fitting. Board recom-
          mended “tighter control” over MTF test procedures. (MSFC Release
          66-196)
        NASA Nike-Tomahawk launched from Churchill Research Range reached
     .     150-mi. (242-km.) altitude in first of a series of four NASA-UniV. of
          California, Berkeley, experiments to obtain proton and electron
          measurements over energy range of 1-300 kev. Rocket and instru-
          mentation performed satisfactorily [see Sept. 6, 161. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
      * NASA appointed Paul A. Barron Deputy Director of Procurement and
           Gordon H. Tyler, formerly GSFC procurement officer, to succeed Barron
           as Assistant Director of Procurement for Policy and Review. (NASA
           Release 66-234)
        Gen. James Ferguson, Deputy Chief of Staff/R&D, Hq. USAF, assumed
           command of AFSC, replacing Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, who retired
           Aug. 31. (AFSC Release 184.66)
      0 USAF would make electronic portraits of satellite shapes to develop catalog

           of radar images of possible space vehicle shapes, AFSC announced.
           Measurements on some 24 satellite models would be taken by AFSC
           Electronic Systems Div. at Holloman AFB in 2,000 hrs. of tests extending
           through December. (AFSC Release 156.66)
      0 L/C Harry W. Peterson (USAF, Ret.), former chief of Contract Division,

           Contract Administration Services, Hq. USAF Defense Supply Agency,
           was appointed Director, Contract Administration Division of NASA
           Procurement Office. (NASA Ann., 10/7/66)
      September 2 Tape recorder for Advanced Vidicon Camera System on
                    :
                    NIMBUS 11 meteorological satellite had failed, but camera could
           NASA’s
           still transmit cloud-cover photos when within range of North American
                                                                         283
-4
284                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966-

     receiving stations. Launched from WTR, NIMBUS II had successfully
     passed its final test objective of two months of continuous operation
     July 15. Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) camera system and
     High Resolution Infrared Radiation (Hrir) system were still operating.
     (NASA Release 66-243)
September 2: Data from onboard cameras and other recovered instruments had
     confirmed success of NASA’s high-altitude experiment to investigate
                                   first
     parachute designs and techniques that might be used to land instru-
     mented capsules on Mars. Launched aboard a balloon Aug. 30 from
     Walker AFB, experiment had “provided a solid data base with which we
     can compare and correlate the results of later flight tests involving
     parachutes and flight units of different sizes and shapes,” Project
     Manager John C. McFall reported. (NASA Release 66-241)
0 Eight Government agencies, headed by FAA, formed Inter-Agency Bird

     Hazard Committee to exchange and consolidate data in an effort to
     develop methods for reducing danger of collisions between birds and
     aircraft: Dept. of the Interior; USN; HEW; CAB; NASA; USA; and USAF.
     Since 1961, FAA had spent more than $500,000 for research on bird
     habitats, migration, and preventive and corrective methods to reduce
     collisions-which had averaged 300 per year. (FAA Release 66-84)
0 NASA Langley Research Center had invited four aircraft manufacturers-

     Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Douglas Aircraft Co., and General
     Dynamics Corp.-to submit by Sept. 30 proposals for a research pro-
     gram to reduce noise generated by commercial jet transports. (NASA
     Release 66-242)
  New Eastman Kodak film processing system for fast reaction, high-
     quality aerial reconnaissance photography that simultaneously devel-
     oped a negative and a high-resolution positive transparency in 30 sec.,
     had been demonstrated by USAF at Wright-Patterson AFB. (AFSC Release
     142.66)
0 H.S. Becker, former North American Aviation, Inc., executive, had been

     appointed Deputy Director of MSFC’S Advanced Systems Office. (MSFC
     Release 66-199)
  North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $1,550,000 initial incre-
     ment to a $5,671,000 USAF contract for development work on vertical
     takeoff and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Contract would be managed by
     AFSC’S Systems Engineering Group. (DOD Release 760-66)
0 M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by NASA research pilot Milton 0.

     Thompson, was launched from B-52 bomber at 45,000-ft. altitude in
     fifth glide flight at Edwards AFB. Purposes of flight were evaluation of a
     360’ overhead approach using visual cues only and determination of
     control damper-off handling qualities. (NASA Proj. Off.)
September 2-3: Three NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched
     from Churchill Research Range in GSFC experiment to measure in-
     tensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and
     heavier nuclei present during a Polar Cap Absorption event. Rockets
     and instrumentation-except for solid-state detectors on first flight-
     performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
September 3: Reports by Volunteer Flight Officers Network-new tracking
     system in which 22,000 commercial pilots on 51 airlines searched the
     skies for reentering space hardware-had proved valuable to Smithso-
     nian Institution’s Astrophysical Observatory and USAF in improving
     computer methods and clearing records. Network was founded by
                                                                          285
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     amateur astronomer Herbert E. Roth, director of Denver Moonwatch
     team. (Clark, NYT, 9/4/66, 68)
September 4: U.S.S.R.’s 12-ton PROTON 111 unmanned spacecraft-launched
     into earth orbit July 6 to study cosmic rays and atomic particles-was
     still functioning normally and transmitting data to earth regularly,
     Trud reported. (AP, NYT, 9/6/66, 74)
   Invention of reusable turbo-rocket engine, which could launch space-
      craft for 1/10 current U.S. costs, was announced by ROUS Royce at
     British Assn. for the Advancement of Science meeting in Nottingham,
     U.K. Engine had been designed in titanium, but compressor blades
      could be made of hifil-new fiber-reinforced plastic five times as stiff as
      titanium, more reliable, lighter, and less expensive. Partly air-breathing
      turbo-rocket-cross between jet engine and rocket-would be fueled
      on kerosene and liquid oxygen. Battery of 48 turborockets-each
      weighing 1,000 lbs. and capable of generating 22,000 lbs. thrust-could
      boost Apollo spacecraft to 25,000-ft. altitude in fraction of a second and
      then be landed by remote control. Reported cost of launch would be
      $2.8 million compared to $28 million with US. booster. (Houston
       Chron., 9/5/66)
    Soviet cosmonauts had not been troubled by perspiration, breathing
      difficulties, or high heartbeat rates as was Astronaut Richard F. Gordon,
      Jr., during GEMINI XI mission, Soviet physician-cosmonaut Dr. Boris
      Yegorov said at press conference in Geneva. Probable reason was that
      cosmonauts worked in “completely normal” atmospheric conditions
      and breathed ordinary air, while astronauts used artificial air mixture
      containing more oxygen than normal, he said. Yegorov, one of three
      crew members in Oct. 12, 1964, VOSKHOD I mission, was attending
       congress on space biology. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/66, A3)
 September 5: Administration officials had no indication that U.S.S.R. was
       man-rating a new booster for manned lunar landing program, Technology
       Week reported. They also doubted reports that U.S.S.R. would attempt
       landing mission in October 1967--fiftieth anniversary of Bolshevik
       Revolution-but       anticipated another Soviet manned earth-orbital
       flight in 1966. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66,3)
 0 Gen. Bernard Schriever, who retired as AFSC Commander Aug. 31, was

       saluted by Technology Week: “The nation owes an immense debt to
       Gen. Schriever, for he and a handful of other far-sighted men almost
       literally dragged this country into the missile era at a time when there
       were few who believed that the intercontinental missile was a feasible
       weapon.
          “Moreover, once the decision had been made it was to Gen. Schriever
       that the task fell of putting together the organization to tackle such a
       formidable assignment.
           “The success story that followed is well-known in the industry and
                   .
        the nation.. .,, (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 50)
  0 Future of consortium agreements between U.K. and European nations

        was still uncertain despite success of European Launcher Development
        Organization (ELDO) and progress of Concorde supersonic transport
        program, L. L. Doty reported in Aviation Week. “. . . dissensions over
        the distribution of work loads, allocation of procurement, financial
        sharing and miscalculations of projected costs are threatening present
        consortiums, and possibly discouraging formation of others.”
           In addition, nationalism “which is accelerating the drive for inde-
286                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                          ..
     pendence in aerospace activities . tend[s] to draw governments away
                                      .
     from the consortium principle. . .” (Doty, Av. Wk.,      9/5/66, 29)
September 5: Dr. Clifford A. Spohn (Col., USAF, Ret.) had been appointed
     director of operations at ESSAYS National Satellite Center, succeeding
     Arthur W. Johnson, who had been appointed deputy director of the
     facility. (ESSA Release 66-8)
  Prevailing theory that nuclear particles are symmetrical throughout
     nature, challenged two months ago by Dr. Paolo Franzini, Columbia
     Univ., and his wife Dr. Juliet Lee-Franzini, State Univ. of New York
     [see June 271, was reinforced by results of experiment conducted in
     Geneva by European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) scientists
     and reported at Rochester Conference at Univ. of California, Berkeley.
     Validation of Franzini discovery, which had stirred wide interest in
     scientific circles, would force physicists to derive new or more sophisti-
     cated explanations for basic nature of matter. CERN experiment, based
     on analysis of 10,665 photographs of eta-meson decay into three pions,
     found no significant difference in energy levels of positive and negative
     pions. Franzini had observed greater energy in positive pion than nega-
     tive. Franzini and CERN groups planned further experiments, and similar
     test would be conducted by Columbia Univ. physicist Leon Lederman.
     (NYT, 9/6/66, 30)
0 “Nobody has yet found any space goals that will stir the Europeans the
     way manned space flight and the race toward a lunar landing have
     generated tremendous technical impetus in the US. and U.S.S.R.,”
     Robert Hotz reported in Aviation Week. “If new fomulae can he found
     to fit changing European requirements, the prospects for applying the
     spearhead technology of the aerospace industry will never be brighter.
     For the United States, this will require a more realistic government
     policy in permitting more first-line technology to be exported to our
     allies. For Europe, it will require a more realistic appraisal of how its
      technical resources can be applied to compete successfully in the
      world market.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 9/5/66,21)
September 6: President Johnson signed FY 1967 Independent Offices Appro-
      priation Bill (H.R. 14921), which included $4,968,000,000 NASA
      appropriation-below $5 billion for first time since FY 1963. (NASA
            v/14)
      LAR
    Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Co., General Electric Co., and Pratt &
9

      Whitney Div., United Aircraft Corp., submitted final designs for 1,800-
      mph Sst to FAA. Evaluation team of Government and airline experts
      was expected to submit engine and airframe choices to FAA Administra-
      tor William F. McKee by Nov. 1. Final selection would be announced
      by President Johnson in late 1966. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/7/66, D7;
      Clark, NYT, 9/7/66, 26)
    Rebutting Aug. 14 Washington Sunday Star editorial which called the
e
      US. Sst program “a dubious venture moved by extraordinary pres-
      sures,” Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) told Senate that program
      was “moving forward on a logical basis” to make Sst available for com-
      mercial use in 1974 at total cost of about $4.5 billion-25% of which
      would be paid by manufacturers. Senator Magnuson said that planners
      were “well aware” of potential hazards of excess radiation, internal
      heat, lack of maneuverability, and structural stress suggested by Star
      and assured the Senate that aircraft had been designed “to preclude
                                                                          287
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                               .
     catastrophic conditions. . .’, (CR, 9/6/66, 20909-10; Tech. Wk.,
     9/5/66, 17)
September 6: Two NASA Nike-Tomahawks launched about six hours apart
     from Churchill Research Range reached 145mi. (238-km.) and 150-mi.
     (243-km.) altitudes. They were second and third in series of four
     NASA-UniV. of California, Berkeley, experiments to obtain proton and
     electron measurements. Both rockets and instrumentation performed
     satisfactorily; first rocket’s nose cone did not eject until after apogee,
     but good data were received [see Sept. 1, 161. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Soviet rocket tests begun Aug. 25 in the Pacific had been completed six
     weeks ahead of schedule, Tass announced. (Tass, 9/6/66; WI, NYT,
     9/7/66)
* NASA awarded facilities grants totaling $3.2 million to Univ. of Wisconsin
     and Univ. of Washington to provide “urgently needed” quarters and
     specialized facilities for space-related research and training. (NASA
     Release 66-244)
* NASA awarded George Washington Univ. a three-year, $750,000 grant
      “to undertake a multidisciplinary program of policy studies in science,
      technology, and public administration.” Program was expected to
      contribute to analysis of various policy questions related to develop-
     ment of the space program and utilization of knowledge derived from
     it. (NASA Release 66-240)
* A 1967 world conference on space to be held in Geneva, Paris, or Vienna
      was proposed by Soviet professor Anatoli Blagonravov to Legal Sub-
      committee of U.N. committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting
      in New York. US. had favored 1968 meeting in New York. (NYT,
      9/7/66)
 * Proposal to produce first worldwide live telecast in June 1967 was out-
      lined at Geneva meeting of European Broadcasting Union. AX, CBS, and
      NBC news executives expressed interest in proposal but would not com-
      mit themselves until details of program, under supervision of British
      Broadcasting Corp., were resolved. Live television transmission around
      the world would be possible after ComSatCorp’s planned launching of
      two communications satellites in fall 1966-one over the Atlantic, the
      other over the Pacific. (Adams, NYT, 9/7/66)
 * 1966’s second new comet-first with a tail-had been discovered by Dr.
      Roberto Barbon, Italian astronomer visiting Mt. Wilson and Mt.
      Palomar Observatories, and confirmed by Smithsonian Astrophysical
       Observatory. Named for its discoverer, ninth magnitude object was in
       constellation Cetus. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 9/6/66, 46)
 September 7: Thunder and lightning brought down NASA meteorological
      balloon near Austin, Tex. The 10-million-cu.-ft. balloon, launched
       from Minneapolis Aug. 24 by Litton Systems, had failed to deflate
       automatically after its payload had been detached and was slowly drift-
       ing toward the Gulf of Mexico. USAF had been prepared to shoot it down
       because it “was a menace to jet aircraft.” (WI, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/7/66)
 9 New mineral named ctdjerfi~herite”-a         copper-iron sulfide-had been
       found in meteorites. Since it does not exist naturally on earth and could
       be formed only at high temperatures, it was speculated that djerfisherite
       might have originated in the sun’s outermost layer. Report of finding
       was released through American Assn. for the Advancement of Science
       by Dr. Louis H. Fuchs. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Stat, 9/7/66, D2)
288               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

September 8: NASA test pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency
     landing of X-15 No. 1 at Smith’s Ranch, Nev., after malfunction
     developed in aircraft’s fuel system. There was no damage to aircraft
     and no injury to pilot. Primary purpose of flight was photometer
     measurements of sharpness of earth’s horizon for use in Apollo pro-
     gram. (X-15 Proj. Off.; UPI, Wush. Post, 9/9/66, BlO)
  Rep. Ogden Reid (R-N.Y.) introduced H.R. 17604 to amend National
     Aeronautics and Space Act to provide a NASA R&D program for aircraft
     noise abatement. Program would: attempt to develop workable measur-
     ing system for correlating intensity and quality of aircraft noise with
     effects on persons on the ground; develop quieter aircraft through
     research and development; compile knowledge on methods and devices
     for aircraft noise abatement; coordinate research relating to aircraft
     noise abatement; and determine cause and develop solutions for other
     “related nuisances.” (NASA LAR V/146)
0 Dr. Winston E. Kock, first director of ERC, had resigned to return to
     Bendix Corp., effective Oct. 1. James C. Elms, NASA Deputy Associate
     Administrator for Manned Space Flight, would replace him. (NASA
     Release 66-247)
0 US. should divert funds from NASA’s      Apollo program and from Federal
     highway projects to improve urban housing and transportation systems,
     Sen. Eugene J. McCarthy (D-Minn.) suggested to International Con-
     ference of Social Work in Washington, D.C. (Honsa, Wush. Post,
     9/9/66, A14)
  Development of a “magnetic hammer” at MSFC had saved the Government
     some $2,130,000 in 1965 and netted its inventors $2,500 each-largest
     joint invention award ever made at MSFC. A portable device which
     created an intense magnetic field to move metal uniformly without
     marring the surface, hammer had been used to replace mechanical
     stretching of Saturn V bulkhead gore segments and restore previously
     rejected segments. Inventors were Robert J. Schwinghamer, MSFC, and
     Leslie D. Foster, formerly of MSFC and currently with Comprehensive
     Designers, Inc. (MSFC Release 66-206)
  FCC’S Oct. 1deadline for filing comments on whether or not private entities
     should be allowed to establish special-purpose communications satellite
     systems for domestic use was extended to Nov. 3. Initially FCC had
     requested that comments and proposals be submitted by Aug. 1. Com-
     plexity of proposals submitted by ComSatCorp and the Ford Foundation
      on that date and resulting questions and discussion had necessitated
      two extensions of the deadline. (Adams, NYT, 9/9/66, 77)
   In response to allegations that F-111 aircraft was unacceptable as an all-
      purpose military aircraft, DOD told Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.)
     that: (1) production of F-111A for USAF was on schedule with first
      deliveries planned in 1967; (2) performance of the aircraft would be
      close to 1962 evaluations; (3) aircraft would be superior to any other
      tactical weapons system in the world in C c ~ r i t i ~ a l ) 7 of range,
                                                              factors
      payload, speed, and versatility; (4) cost variations were “typical of
      large scale development programs”; and (5) goal of one basic aircraft
      for two services was being met. (CR, 9/8/66, 21207)
September 9: Validity of satellite measurements of micrometeoroid fluxes
      in which piezoelectric microphones had been used as detectors was
      challenged in Science by Carl Nilsson, Australian scientist working
      at GSFC. Although these measurements had given rise to theory that
                                                                         289
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     earth was surrounded by dust cloud, analysis of 100 hrs. of data from
     NASA’s 11 satellite revealed: (1) there had been no detectable signals
            OGO
     from sensors that could have been caused by micrometeoroid impact;
     and (2) the microphone systems had been emitting noise. Nilsson con-
     cluded that in past satellite measurements, microphone noises had not
     been caused by micrometeoroid impact but by reaction of microphone
     crystals to temperature changes. (Nilsson, Science, 10/9/66, 1242-6)
September 9: House of Commons’ Committee of Public Accounts said devel-
     opment costs for Anglo-French supersonic airliner Concorde would
     total $1.4 billion-compared to original $476 million estimated cost-
     before its completion in 1973, according to the New York Times. The
     “massive increase” in cost was attributed to changes in design, increases
     in wages, and “underestimation in the earlier estimates.” (NYT,
     9/9/66, 76)
September 10-16: NASA Administrator James E. Webb made unpublicized
     trip to West Germany to discuss three new space agreements; co-
     operative projects would involve a German-built advanced solar
     exploration spacecraft to be launched by NASA, a joint aeronomy satellite
     to study solar radiation, and participation in Apollo Telescope Mount
     for observation of sun’s structure from above earth’s atmosphere.
      (Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 18)
September 10: Chemical reactions in gases produced by a “Q-switched”
     ruby laser suggested a new method for studying very high temperature
     reactions, reported Westinghouse Research Laboratories scientists L.
     M. Epstein and K. H. Sun in a letter t o Nature. Studies establishing
     dependence of yield on intensity and configuration of focal spot were
     recommended to prove usefulness of method as an absolute dosimeter
     for laser shots. (Epstein and Sun, Nature, 9/10/66, 1173-4)
September 11: Andrew 6. Haley, early advocate of outer space rule of law
     and author of the “metalaw” concept to govern the conduct of terrestrial
     beings in outer space, died in Washington, D.C. At the time of his
     death, Haley was general counsel to International Astronautical Federa-
     tion (IAF), counsel and fellow of AIAA, IAF observer to U.N., and aca-
     demician of International Institute of Space Law. He authored the
     book Space Law and Government in 1964. (Wash. Post, 9/12/66, B7;
     Wash. Eve. Star, 9/12/66, B5)
0 USAF had launched reconnaissance satellite over U.S.S.R.          that could
     photograph Soviet military bases and return film packages on command
     from ground control, Dick Lyons reported in Wushington Post. Key com-
     ponents were high-powered camera that could photograph objects
     several feet in diameter from 100-mi.altitude; cluster of film packages-
     cassettes-that could be dropped from satellite at random and picked
     up by recovery aircraft; and an Agena vehicle which could be maneu-
     vered from ground. A new version of Samos spacecraft, satellite could
     remain in orbit for weeks or months-until its supply of film packages
     was exhausted-and might also be able to transmit TV pictures to U S .
     ground stations. (Lyons, Wush. Post, 9/12/66)
September 12: Balloonist Tracy Barnes landed at Rio Grande, N.J., complet-
     ing first hot-air balloon flight across the continental US. Barnes left
     San Diego April 10. (Wush. Post, 9/12/66, D11)
  Shift of management of NASA’s       Apollo Telescope Mount mission from
     GSFC to MSFC was evidence of NASA’s  effort “toward inhouse development
290               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     of major space projects7’ to “offset threatened loss of personnel” at
           manned space flight centers as Apollo program passed its personnel
      NASA
     peak, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 80)
September 12: U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs.
     thrust-enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed
     sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. recon-
     naissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post,
     9/11/66, Al)
September 12-15: Three-day GEMINI XI mission-ninth manned flight in
              Gemini series-began with launch of Gemini Agena Target
     NASA’s
     Vehicle (GATV) by Atlas booster from ETR’S Complex 14, followed 97
     min. later by launch of GEMINI XI by Titan I1 booster from Complex 19.
     Astronauts were Charles Conrad, Jr., command pilot, and Richard F.
     Gordon, Jr., pilot. GATV entered near-circular, 185-mi.-altitude orbit;
     GEMINI XI entered elliptical orbit with 175-mi. (280-km.) apogee; 100-mi.
     (161-km.) perigee; 90-min. period; and 33” inclination. GEMINI XI
     docked with GATV 94 min. after liftoff to become first manned spacecraft
     to achieve first-revolution rendezvous and docking-mission’s primary
     objective. Other accomplishments included extravehicular activity
      (Eva), maneuvering of docked GEMINI XI-GATV configuration to record
     851-mi. altitude, station-keeping using tether to link two spacecraft,
     computer-controlled reentry, and completion of several experiments.
        After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent
     sleep period attached to GATV. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on
     schedule at 23:58 GET, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie
     camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s
     100-ft. tether to GEMINI XI’S docking bar, had to rest astride GATV.
     When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by
     Conrad at 24:02 GET to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and
     return to cabin.
        At 40:58 GET, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft
     used GATV’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi.
     apogee-record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions,
     second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-
     mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 GET Gordon opened hatch to begin
     2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments
     were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: GEMINI XI undocked
     from GATV and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to
     hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that
      two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using
      maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow
      rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centri-
      fugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance.
     After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed
      successful re-rendezvous-added to flight plan because of GEMINI XI’S
                                               -  -
      favorable fuel supply.
         Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight
      was first h U.3. space program to be guided automatically by computer
      which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of GEMINI XI
      in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy-within two miles of target-
      and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live
      television via EARLY BIRD I comsat. USN pararescue team, dropped from
      helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were
                                                                            291
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     flown by helicopter to recovery ship. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release
     66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, ‘A14;
     9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Tush. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66,
     Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66,1,
     28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24)
September 12-16: Joint Royal Aeronautical Society (mes) Centenary Con-
     gress and Fifth Congress of the International Council of the Aeronautical
     Sciences (ICAS) held in London.
         Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary mes president, said
                                   “.
     in a centenary address that . . making the right selection in research
     programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole
                                     .”
     of aeronautical evolution. . . Risks involved in the total investment
     necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to “the obvious
     answer”-international cooperation: “If it is important to see that
     aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable
     it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out
     an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances
     of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66,
      126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
September 13: U.N. Ambassador Arthur Goldberg, attempting to clear ob-
     stacles to early completion of space law treaty, announced two US.
      compromises to Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful
      Uses of Outer Space meeting in New York: (1) US. would not require
      that space stations and vehicles be “open at all times” for inspection,
      but would allow that visits be made on “a basis of reciprocity” with
      “reasonable advance notice” to host government; (2) US. would not
      demand submission of comprehensive reports on space exploration to
      U.N. members and scientific community, but would have reports sub-
      mitted “to the extent feasible and practicable.” U.S.S.R. demand that
      nations granting tracking facilities to any space power provide same
      facilities on identical terms to other space powers was modified by
      Soviet delegate Platon D. Morozov to include provision that expenses
      incurred in rendering tracking aid would be reimbursed. (Teltsch, NYT,
      9/14/66, 32)
 0 Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Science and Astro-
      nautics Committee, praised NASA’s     GEMINI XI mission on the floor of the
      House: cr. . . the Gemini 1 crew successfully accomplished the first
                                     1
      rendezvous and docking in space within one revolution, by far the
      quickest of any rendezvous attempted to date. It is significant to note
                                             . ..
      at this point in the mission that the        flight is following the planned
                                                                            . . .”
      schedule of events closer than any other Gemini flight to date.
       (CR, 9/13/66, 21495)
 0 U.S.S.R. pilot Aleksey Anosov had established new world’s distance record

      for helicopter with 1,509-km. (938-mi.) flight in MI-1 helicopter from
      Sumi in the Ukraine to the Orenburg region in the Urals. Previous
      record of 900 mi. (1,lzCes km.)had been set by Capt. Chester R. RadclBe,
      Jr. (USAF), July 5, 1962. (Tush. Post, 9/14/66, B2)
 September 13-14: First Logistics Management Symposium attended by some
       400 industrialists and government officials met at MSFC to discuss logis-
       tics support of activities in the free world and in space. In the keynote
       address, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr.
       George E. Mueller stressed that effective logistics management was
       essential to the success of NASA’s  Apollo program. “For the first time in
292              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    a NASA manned space flight program, the greater part of logistics is not
                                                       .
    being provided by the Department of Defense. . .
         “However, the need for increasing the emphasis on logistics manage-
                              ...
     ment for Apollo is great.
         “The Apollo Saturn space vehicle involves 20,000 contractors and
    subcontractors and has more than 900,000 individual parts. The Saturn
     V first stage holds 56 tank cars of propellants. The second and third
     stages of Saturn V transported by water during the Apollo program will
     spend a total of 700 days at sea. Apollo program transportation by all
     modes will require coordination with nine Government agencies. The
     launch windows for the Apollo lunar mission are relatively small,
     malfunctions on the pad must be kept to a minimum while corrective
     maintenance must be extremely fast and reliable. All of these elements
     make the Apollo logistics program both complicated and costly. . . .”
      (MSFC Release 66-202; Text)
September 13-15: Series of five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets was
     launched from Churchill Research Range in GCA Corp. experiment to
     compare, by means of Langmuir probe and trimethyl-aluminum (TMA)
     cloud techniques, electron density profile with wind profile. A NASA
     aircraft obtained supporting photographs of vapor clouds. All rockets
     and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; TMA did not eject during
     second flight in series, but useful data were obtained from Langmuir
     probe. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
September 1 :X-15 No. 3 was flown to 3,580 mph (mach 5.11) and 254,200-ft.
             4
     altitude by NASA pilot William H. Dana for altitude buildup, micro-
     meteoroid collection, measurements of total solar flux and broadband
     light distribution by JPL spectroradiometer, and radiometer measure-
     ments of ultraviolet exhaust plume characteristics. (X-15 Proj. Off.; FRC
      Release; JPL Release 408)
8 LUNA XI, U.S.S.R.’s second lunar orbiting satellite, launched Aug. 24,
      was continuing to orbit moon and had completed 1,410 revolutions,
      Tass announced. All equipment was functioning normally. (Tass,
      9/ 14/66)
8 U.S.S.R. astronomers had scanned the Milky Way in six-centimeter wave-

      length for first time, using Pulkovo Observatory’s huge radiotelescope
      and parabolic antenna. Observations did not confirm current theory
       that radio emanations were primarily linked with radio glow of “hot
      gas” (ionized hydrogen) in our galaxy, but showed that “even in these
      wave-lengths a considerable role is played by the emanation of fast
       electrons moving in magnetic fields at speeds close to that of light.”
       Simultaneously, Pulkovo astronomers conducted detailed study of 80
       other clouds of ionized hydrogen to “help determine more exactly the
      physical conditions which exist in the most interesting parts of the
       Milky Way and their relationship with the continuous radio emanation
       of our galaxy as a whole.” (Tass, 9/14/66)
September 15: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB
       with Thor-Burner 11 booster. (Tech. Wk., 9/26/66, 15; U.S. Aeron. &
       Space Act., 1966, 156)
 8 Recent developments in space technology were discussed by President
       Johnson and President of Republic of the Philippines Ferdinand E.
       Marcos in White House discussions. President Marcos expressed desire
       to encourage greater training of Philippine scientists and engineers in
       the peaceful application of space technology, and President Johnson
                                                                            293
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     offered appropriate fellowships for study in US. institutions. (Pres.
     Doc., 9/19/66, 1296)
September 16: U.S. and U.S.S.R. reached impasse over question of access
     to tracking facilities that would be part of U.N. treaty on space explora-
     tion. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg blamed U.S.S.R. for halting
     agreement on treaty, voicing US. contention that tracking facilities
     must be negotiated by bilateral agreements and not guaranteed by
     treaty. Compulsory access to tracking facilities, Goldberg said, would
     constitute sovereignty violation. Soviet Ambassador Platon D. Morozov
     defended proposal as means to correct a discriminatory situation in
     which U.S. had certain advantages because of its alliances with other
     nations. (Teltsch, NYT, 9/17/66; Sanger, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, A4)
* NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
     reached 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. NASA-univ. of Maryland experiment
     was designed to (1) evaluate pulse and thermal equalization probes as
     research tools, (2) investigate electron energy distribution in normal
     daytime ionosphere, and (3) investigate use of wing-slope techniques
     with Langmuir probes. Rocket and instrumentation performed satis-
     factorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* NASA Nike-Tomahawk launched from Churchill Research Range reached
     151-mi. (243-km.) altitude in Iast of four NASA-UniV. of California,
     Berkeley, experiments [see Sept. 1,6]. Rocket and instrumentation per-
     formed satisfactorily, and measurements of flux, energy spectrum,
     pitch angle distribution, and time variations of mirroring and precipitat-
     ing charged particles were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from
     WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
   GEMINI XI Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr.,
     arrived at KSC from recovery ship U.S.S. Guam to undergo physical
     examination and to begin debriefing. (Wilford, NYT, 9/17/66, 11)
* A 40-ft. strip of 16-mm. film “of excellent quality” shot by Astronauts
     Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., during Sept. 12-15
      GEMINI XI mission was released at MSC. One sequence showed Gordon
      straddling Agena to tie tether from GATV to GEMINI XI. Movie revealed
      Conrad had described scene accurately when he had radioed to earth:
      cCHeys riding it like a cowboy.”
         In Washington, D.C., White House announced Gordon would be
      promoted from USN lieutenant commander to full commander. (AP,
      Wash. Post, 9/17/66, F1; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/66, A5; UPI, NYT,
      9/18/66, 1, 82)
 * M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot Bruce Peterson, was
      air-launched from B-52 aircraft at $5,000-ft. altitude in sixth glide flight
      at Edwards AFB. Purpose of flight was checkout of new pilot. (NASA
      Proj. Off.)
 * President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Werner A.
      Baum, Vice President for Scientific Affairs of New York Univ., as
      Deputy Administrator of ESSA to succeed V/Adm. H. Arnold Karo who
      would retire Jan. 1, 1967. (Pres. Doc., 9/19/66, 1305)
 * LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein discussed LRC studies on use of liquid
      methane as an aircraft fuel at the 5th Congress of the International
      Council of the Aeronautical Sciences (ICAS) meeting in London. Since
      liquid methane had higher heating value, greater cooling capacity, and
      lower price per pound than present jet fuels, its use in commercial
294               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     supersonic transport might increase Sst payload by 30 per cent and
     similarly reduce direct operating cost. Dr. Silverstein pointed out, how-
     ever, that much more would have to be learned about both flight and
     ground equipment before liquid methane could be seriously considered
     as an aircraft fuel. (LRC Release 66-56)
September 16: New York Times editorial: ‘‘Space historians will have to invent
     new superlatives to describe the contributions of Gemini 11 and astro-
     nauts Conrad and Gordon to man’s entry into the cosmos. From the
     link-up with the Agena in the very first orbit to the incredibly accurate
     automatic return to earth, the three-day flight demonstrated a new level
     of capability far surpassing that shown in any previous flight by any
     nation.” (NYT, 9/16/66, 34M)
e Soviet newspaper Trud said that although Sept. 12-15 GEMINIXI mission
     had set new altitude record, it otherwise only repeated “already achieved
     results.” Trud added that some of these results were “worse” than
     before, citing the lesser length of time spent in Eva by Astronaut Richard
     F. Gordon, Jr. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/66, A2)
0 Air Force Assn. honored four officers for exceptional achievement at its

     second annual fall meeting in Washington, D.C.: Col. Robert A. Berman,
     Wright-Patterson AFB, Logistics Executive Management Award; Col.
     Spencer S. Hunn, Hanscom Field, Mass., AFSC Distinguished Award for
     Management; Col. Gregory C. Frese, Jr., Washington, D.C., AFSC
     Meritorious Award for Support Management; and L/Col. Martin H.
     Brewer, Vandenberg AFB, AFSC Meritorious Award for Program Manage-
     ment. (J/Armed Forces, 9/10/66, 25)
September 17: U.S.S.R. launched five- to six-ton spacecraft, possibly from
     Cosmos series, which exploded into 51 pieces detectable by radar. GSFC
     Satellite Situation Report would later reveal that nine pieces of debris
     remained in orbit on Oct. 15, the rest having reentered beginning Sept.
     20. Launch was first unannounced U.S.S.R. space flight since Jan. 4,
      1963. Evert Clark said in the New York Times that launch marked first
      U.S.S.R. 49” inclination launch from Tyura Tam and that Kapustin
     Yar had been used for all previous 49” launches. (GSFC SSR, 10/15/66,
     22-5; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/1/66, 3)
   NASA reported that smudgy spacecraft windows and exposure problems had
      compromised quality of most of movie film taken by Astronauts Charles
      Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 GEMINI xi
      mission. Still pictures were all “of good quality” and showed earth’s
      curvature more clearly than on any other manmade photographs. (AP,
      Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A8)
September 18: Records set by GEMINI XI mission that had made “space history”
      were detailed in Chicago American editorial: “The greatest speed ever
      attained by man-18,129 mph-as well as the slowest yet flown by any-
                   ...    15,402 mph; the greatest altitude ever reached, 850
      one in orbit
      miles; the first ‘direct ascent’ rendezvous with an orbiting satellite; the
      first multiple docking in space . . .; the first rendezvous using on-board
      equipment, with no help from the ground.” (Chic. Am., 9/18/66)
 0 Optimism about man’s ability to perform useful work in space was

      expressed by Dr. Charles Berry, MSC Director of Flight Research and
      Operations, in telephone interview with Washington Post writer J. V.
      Reistrup. Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., had demonstrated problems
      involved when he had left GEMINI XI spacecraft Sept. 13 to perform
      seemingly simple tasks and had exerted enough energy to raise his
                                                                         295
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     heart rate to peak 180 beats a minute. Berry said there was a “tremen-
     dous amount of effort involved in getting into position for performing
     basic tasks”; once “positioning” was solved, jobs could be done. The
     problem was to set up each activity to require minimum effort. (Reistrup,
     Wash. Post, 9/18/66, A4)
September 18: USAF Aerospace Medical Div. chief scientist Dr. Hubertus
     Strughold stated in telephone interview with Washington Sunday Star’s
     William Hines that NASA had not given adequate attention to keeping
     astronaut’s vision unimpaired during Eva. He said that in normal earth
     gravity, man could orient himself by means of sight sense (eyes);
     balance sense (otoliths of inner ear); and pressure sense (Meissner
     corpuscles concentrated primarily in palms of hands and soles of feet).
     In space there was no gravity, so otoliths and Meissner corpuscles could
     not function. When vision was also lost or impaired, orientation was
     impossible. Strughold pointed out that vision impairment had been a
     factor in curtailment of three of four Eva missions to date. He said
     advances in training and in spacesuit design were urgently needed. USAF
     had been “working on the problem” but had not been asked by NASA for
     advice or assistance. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A7)
September 19: NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR reached 102-mi. (165-
     km.) altitude in GSFC-PrinCetOn Univ. Observatory experiment to study
     ultraviolet radiation from the star Epsilon Canis Majoris. Although
     spectrograph recording was limited by rocket’s low altitude, good spectral
     resolution was obtained and wavelength limit was extended shortward
     to lines never before observed. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Proposal by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to
     establish nonmilitary global navigation system had been rejected by
      interdepartmental committee after two-year study. Leonard Jaffe, Direc-
      tor of NASA’s    Communication and Navigation Programs Div., and
      chairman of the committee, said in interview with Aviation Week that
      further research and development were required. “Low-keyed” study
      effort planned by NASA would include award of more feasibility study
      contracts to industry and test of navigation equipment on Applications
      Technology Satellite (Ats) mission, during which voice transmissions
      would be made to aircraft. Report of committee, which included
      representatives from NASA, FAA, DOD, and Dept. of Interior, would be
      submitted to Congress in several weeks. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 38; Tech.
       Wk., 9/19/66, 3)
 e Employment in the aerospace industry would reach 1,349,000in December
      1966-an increase of 1 per cent over December 1965-Aerospace
                                1
      Industries Assn. estimated in a semiannual survey. Estimate was based
      on reports from 267 plants and facilities of 59 companies which repre-
      sented nearly 80 per cent of entire industry. (AIA Release 66-55)
 e Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF, Ret.), former AFSC commander, became
       chairman of Aerojet-General Corp.’s newly established advanced plan-
      ning advisory board. He would serve as senior consultant. (Wash.
       Eve. Star, 9/20/66, A16)
 * The generalaviation (nonairline) fleet would “be 80 per cent larger and
       90 per cent busier” in 1975 than in 1964, FAA estimated in a staff study
       and forecast. Study, which would be used to plan aviation facilities and
       services during next decade, predicted that 160,000 general-aviation
       aircraft would fly 30 million hrs. in 1975, compared to 88,742 aircraft
       and 15.7 million hrs. in 1964. (FAA Release 66-87)
296                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

September 19: In telegram to companies which had submitted Sst airframe and
     engine designs Sept. 6-Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., General
     Electric Go., and Pratt & Whitney Div., United Aircraft COTp.-FAA
     said it would no longer approve “the public release of any information
     on the supersonic transport program which could be construed as being
     intended to influence anyone’s judgment,” relative to evaluation of Sst
     designs, until “conditions permit.” Selection of contractors was expected
     in late 1966. (Clark, NYT, 9/24/66, 50)
  FAA Administrator William F. McKee told the Economic Club of Detroit
     that by bringing closer together the industrialized and developing
     nations, supersonic aircraft would make possible “a better way of life
     for all. . . . The social meaning of this greater ability to communicate is
     difficult to imagine.” Calling air travel one of the Nation’s fastest-
     growing businesses, General McKee said that rate of increase had
     averaged 14 per cent over recent years and had jumped to 25 per cent
     for the first half of 1966. (NYT, 9/20/66, 76)
  Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams, and William W. Williams,
     Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers, had been named recipients of Wright
     Brothers Medal by Society of Automotive Engineers for group report
     on development of soft-field and rough-field landing gear. (Av. Wk.,
     9/19/66, 25)
                           2,204-1b. SURVEYOR 11 (Surveyor 3) was successfully
September 20-22: NASA’s
     launched from ETR’S Complex 36 at 8:32 a.m. EDT. After excellent injec-
     tion by Atlas-Centaur (AC-7) launch vehicle on trajectory toward moon’s
     Sinus Medii, spacecraft successfully accomplished all required sequences
     up to midcourse maneuver. Initiated at 1:OO a.m. EDT Sept. 21, the 9.8-
     sec. thrust phase was unsuccessful because one of three vernier engines
     failed to ignite, which caused spacecraft to tumble at about 1 rps.
     Thirty-nine additional attempts were made to start all three engines.
     In all cases, the same two engines ignited; the third did not.
        JPL engineers, uncertain of cause of malfunction, speculated it might
     be result of stuck valve or insufficient power to operate engine’s trigger-
     ing mechanism. They said unless it was corrected, SURVEYOR 11 could
     not softland since all three vernier engines were needed to stabilize
     spacecraft during decelerating descent to lunar surface.
        On Sept. 22, when it became apparent the mission could not be
     completed, engineering experiments were performed to obtain as much
     data as possible on spacecraft performance. All communication with
     spacecraft was lost 30 sec. after main retro ignition at 5:34 a.m. EDT.
     Probable cause was mechanical failure within telecommunications sub-
     system due to centrifugal forces generated by high tumbling rate.
     SURVEYOR 11 impacted in area of moon southeast of crater Copernicus
     about 11:18 p.m. EDT.
        Spacecraft was second in series of seven flights to prove out design,
     develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic scientific
     and engineering data in support of Project Apollo; it contained survey
     television system and instrumentation to measure lunar surface bearing
     strength, temperatures, and radar reflectivity. SURVEYOR I, identically
     equipped, was launched May 30, successfully softlanded on moon June
     2 in region of Oceanus Procellarum, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to
     earth. Surveyor program was under direction of OSSA’S Lunar and
     Planetary Div. ; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur
     booster was managed by LRC; prime contractor for spacecraft develop-
                                                                         297
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     ment and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (NASA Release 66-248; NASA
     Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/21/66, A l ; Wilford, NYT, 9/22/66, 2;
     NYT. 9/23/66. 25)
September.20: During White House meeting with President Johnson, NASA
     Administrator James E. Webb discussed current status of national
     space program and showed President two previously unreleased color
     photographs-one of southern Texas, the other of Baja California-
     taken from 180-mi. altitude during Sept. 12-15 GEMINI XI mission. Fol-
     lowing meeting, Webb announced that Astronauts Richard F. Gordon,
     Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong would leave Oct. 7 for three-week tour of 10
     Latin American nations : Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia,
     Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. (Wash. Eve. Star,
     9/21/66, A4)
  Project Eros (Earth Resources Observation Satellite)-program to gather
     facts about earth’s natural resources from earth-orbiting satellites with
     remote sensing observation instruments-was announced by Secretary
     of the Interior Stewart L. Udall: “Facts on distribution of needed
     minerals, our water supplies and the extent of water pollution, agricul-
     tural crops and forests and human habitations, can be used for regional
     and continental long-range planning.” Udall named Dr. William T.
     Pecora, Director of U.S. Geological Survey, to head program. (Beckman,
     Chic. Trib., 9/21/66; CR, 9/27/66, 23171-2)
* Simulated Aerobee 150 was launched from WSMR to 2-mi. (3.2-km.) altitude
     in GSFC flight test of proposed new Aerobee booster. Instrumentation
     performed satisfactorily, and booster performance was excellent. (NASA
     Rpt. SRL)
* USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from WTR.
      (US.  Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
  Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of the House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics, told the National Space Club in Washington,
      D.C., that the national space program provided the best possible work-
     shop for gathering of vital science and technology necessary for other
     important goals on earth: “In other words, from space research and
     development have come new methods of thinking, new techniques of
     management, new marriages of scientific disciplines, and a new illumina-
     tion on possible interrelationships of human problems to scientific
     knowledge.” During question and answer period, Rep. Miller said there
      would be a “very definite mission” for the 260-in.-dia. solid propellant
      motor in the U.S. space program, although that mission could not
      presently be strictly defined. He said the Nation would have to develop
      space rescue capability and one apparently promising way to do this
      was through the use of solids. Solids, he pointed out, were storable
     and could be readied and launched on short notice. (Text; MIS Daily,
      9/21/66, 22)
  M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (USAF), was
      air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45.000-ft. altitude in seventh dide
      flight at Edwards AFB; purpose of flight was checkout of new $lot.
      (NASA Proi. Off.)
September 21: Iuan T. Trippe, chairman and chief executive officer of Pan
      American World Airways, in remarks made when he received National
      Defense Transportation Assn. Award in Dallas, urged development of
      both Boeing and Lockheed supersonic transport prototypes: “Only
      further competition between these two manufacturers, during the three
298               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     years required to buiId and flight-test the prototypes, can insure that
     the American supersonic transport ultimately selected will have the
     maximum attainable performance.” (Text; Av. Wk.,        9/26/66, 21)
September 21: NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $$.Z-rnillion, fixed-price con-
     tract to provide six computer complexes to support Apollo command-
     module and lunar-module simulators at MSC and KSC by March 1967.
     (NASA   Release 66-254)
0 Dr. Robert H. Cannon, Jr., professor of aeronautics and astronautics at

     Stanford Univ., succeeded Dr. Robert G. Loewy as USAF’S chief scientist.
     Appointment was for one year. (DOD Release 791-66; M I S Daily,
     9/20/66,21)
September 22: Dr. Otis E. Lancaster, professor of engineering education at
     Pennsylvania State Univ., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Admin-
     istrator. He would advise on the subjects of NASA-university relation-
     ships, methods for strengthening engineering education programs, and
     ways to provide stronger engineering/administrative ties. (NASA Release
     66-256)
  In proclamation designating Oct. 12 Columbus Day, President Johnson
     said Columbus’ conquest of the Atlantic, “the ‘outer space’ of the
     fifteenth century,’’ was as meaningful to Americans of the space age
     “as it was to our forefathers who pushed across the vast expanses of
     this continent.” All our frontiers were not conquered, for “new shores
     of promise await those who, like Columbus, push on undaunted by the
     failures of the past or fear of the uncharted future.” (Pres. Doc.,
     9/26/66, 1340)
0 I n address to U.N. General Assembly in New York, US. Ambassador

     Arthur J. Goldberg said U S . would provide “tracking coverage from
     United States territory” for Soviet rocket launchings if a “mutually
     beneficial agreement” could be made. Stressing that tracking facilities
     were a matter for “bilateral negotiation and agreement,” he said the
     treaty to govern activities in outer space was “too urgent and too
     important to be delayed. . . . It is all the more urgent because of man’s
     rapid strides toward landing on the moon.” Impasse had been reached
     in discussions in Geneva because U.S.S.R. had insisted pact guarantee
     that states granting tracking facilities to any country provide same
     facilities to other countries. (Text; NYT, 9/23/66, 12)
0 M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot Bruce Peterson, was

     air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in eighth glide
     flight from Edwards AFB. Purposes of flight were pilot checkout and
     tests of longitudinal and lateral stability and control with dampers on
                                                Proj. Off.)
     and off at slightly higher speeds. (NASA
September 23: NASA Lewis Research Center had awarded General Dynamics’
     Convair Div. a $15,565,331, fixed-price contract to fabricate and assem-
     ble five additional Centaur stages for future space missions. (NASA
     Release 66-253)
0 S-IC-3 booster for first Saturn V flight was shipped from NASA’s    Michoud
     Assembly Facility aboard Poseidon to MSFC for static-testing scheduled
     for late October. (NASA Release 66-218)
0 Practical dividends from investment in space program were cited by MSFC

     Director Dr. Wernher von Braun in an address at Midwest Space
     Exposition, Jackson, Mich. In addition to ‘‘tangible returns” from
     advances in navigation, meteorological, and communications satellites,
     he noted uses of space technology for surveying earth’s resources and
                                                                        299
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     suggested ultimate benefits, as yet unpredictable, would “dwarf, those
     he had named. (Text)
September 24: Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA
     Wallops Station ejected multicolored barium clouds over eastern U.S.
     at 310-mi. (499-km.) and 570-mi. (917-km.) altitudes, Cooperative
     NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research (BMWF) experiment meas-
     ured electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photograph-
     ing and tracking ionized clouds; secondary objective was observation
     of interaction between cloud and solar wind. Launch was followed by
     reported sightings of “brilliant” Ufo’s. ( N A ~ A
                                                     Release 66-245; Wallops
     Releases 66-46, 66-48; AP, Wash. Post, 9/25/66, A23; AP, Wash.
     Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A3; NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Boeing Co., General Electric Co., and Pratt &

     Whitney Div., United Aircraft Corp., charged that FAA was attempting
     a form of censorship by restricting advertisements and release of
     information on proposed Sst designs. FAA replied that the temporary
     restriction had been imposed Sept. 19 to keep the public from getting
     only fragments of overall Sst story and to relieve burden of ccclearing’y
     new advertisements for publication while designs were being evaluated
     by the Government. (Clark, N Y T , 9/24/66, 50)
0 10-nation ESRO’S new rocket-launching base opened at Sekkujokki, Sweden

     -inside the Arctic Circle. ESRO would launch some 400 British Skylark
     and French Centaure rockets from $7.6-million base during next eight
     years to study aurora borealis. (Reuters, NYT, 9/25/66, 42)
0 Evidence for volcanic origin of lunar craters was presented in a letter to

     Nature by Univ. of Western Australia geologist 6. J. H. McCall. Eleventh
     frame of photographs by NASA’s   MARINER IV spacecraft revealed scalloping
     in walls of Martian craters comparable to scalloping in terrestrial cal-
     deras-such as Krakatau, Indonesia, Aso, Japan, and Crater Lake, Ore.
     McCall had also detected scalloping in lunar craters, which he believed
     cc
        closely resemble terrestrial volcano-tectonic craters.” Taking “pro-
     nounced scalloping . . . to be a valid indication of volcano-tectonic
     subsidence,” McCall questioned whether lunar craters could be ex-
     plained by hypervelocity impact. (McCall, Nature, 9/24/66, 1384-5)
0 US. offer at U.N. Sept. 22 to provide U.S.S.R. with tracking facilities on

     US. territory for Soviet space program received editorial comment in
     New York Times: “If all the Russians are after is improved tracking
                                                           .
                                                   .
     facilities for their own space program, the . . offer . . should be most
     agreeable to Moscow. Conclusion of a Soviet-American treaty for this
     purpose would very likely help smooth the way for similar bilateral
     agreements between the Soviet Union and other non-Communist coun-
     tries. . . . Ambassador Goldberg’s suggestion points the way to satisfying
     legitimate Soviet needs without forced infringement on the national
     sovereignty of others.” ( N Y T , 9/24/66, 22)
September 24-25: Society of Experimental Test Pilots’ conference in Beverly
     Hills, Calif. Astronaut John W. Young said space crews needed “another
     set of arms” before they could do useful work in orbit; he suggested
     rigid arm-like clamps built into or attachable to spacesuit. Discussing
     early fears . . . that zero g (weightlessness) might prove a physical
     problem, Young commented: “There is simply not that difference
     between zero-G and one-G [earth’s gravity]. Men will die of old age
     before they are bothered by zero-G.” Referring to present landing mode,
     Young said Gemini data had helped substantiate belief that land landings
300                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




September 24: Javelin rocket launched from Wallops Station releases barium cloud
visible over much of eastern United States.
                                                                         301
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     were feasible and that “development of a land-landing capability must
     be vigorously pursued.”
        NASA test pilot Milton 0. Thompson was awarded SEW’S 1966 Iven
     C. Kincheloe Award, presented annually to the outstanding experimental
     test pilot of the year, “in recognition of outstanding professional
     accomplishment in the flight testing” of M2-F2 wingless lifting-body
                      Release 66-252; FRC Release 18-66; Wash. Eve. Star,
     vehicle. (NASA
     9/24/66, A2)
September 25: Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA WaIlQps
     Station ejected mixture of barium and copper oxide at about 125-mi.
     (201-km.) altitude during ascent and at 160-mi. (258-km.) altitude
     during both ascent and descent. Three distinct clouds, visible for hun-
     dreds of miles, were photographed and tracked in second NASA-German
     Ministry of Scientific Research cooperative launch to measure electric
     fields and wind motions in upper atmosphere [see Sept. 241. (NASA
     Release 66-248; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-49; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  Indications were increasing that President Johnson would accede to pres-
     sure from White House fiscal advisers to cut $1 billion from Project
     Apollo budget as part of effort to reduce proposed N 1967 Government
     spending by $4 billion, Leslie Carpenter reported in the Washington
     Sunday Star. It was contended that reduction would postpone manned
     lunar landing by only two years, putting it between 1970-72rather than
     1968-70.NASA Administrator James E. Webb, opposing the move, argued
     it would raise the overall cost and permit the U.S.S.R. to beat the U.S.
     to the moon. (Carpenter, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A21)
  Data transmitted from NASA’s       PIONEER VII spacecraft (launched from ETR
     Aug. 17) to Johannesburg DSN station indicated spacecraft had pene-
     trated earth’s magnetic tail at 3.25 million mi. from earth, NASA Ames
     Research Center announced. Spacecraft measurements of solar wind
     flux suggested PIONEER vi1 had emerged from and repenetrated tail
     several times. PIONEER VI (launched Dec. 16, 1965) had observed that
     solar wind does not flow from the sun in straight lines but blows mag-
     netic tail from side to side; this “flapping” was reason spacecraft entered
     taiI several times. (ARC  PAO, 9/26/66)
September 26: Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., pilot of Sept. 12-15 GEMINI
     XI mission, said at MSC mission summary news conference that 80 per
     cent of his energy during Eva was spent trying to hold still and in keep-
     ing his arms and hands in front of him while connecting spacecraft to
                        “. .   . a little simple task that I had done many times
     Agena with tether:
     in training to the tune of about 30 seconds lasted about 30 minutes.”
     Gordon recommended development of restraint system to keep astro-
     nauts in position to use both hands while outside spacecraft. He said
     stiff spacesuit worn on mission hampered his movements; his arms and
     legs tended to float upward because of spacesuit’s configuration. (MSC
     Roundup, 9/30/66, 1-2; Waldron, NYT, 9/27/66, 14; AP, Wash. Eve.
     Star, 9/27/66, A4)
0 Japan’s first attempt to orbit satellite failed when Lambda 4s-1 rocket went

     off course after ignition of 4th stage. The 8.&-ton, 55-ft. booster was
     launched from Uchinoura Range, Kyushu Island, and carried 57.2-1b.
     instrument package designed to radio back scientific information on
     the ionosphere. Scientists from the Univ. of Tokyo had scheduled
     second launch attempt-using 39-ton Mu rocket-for December. (NYT,
     9/27/66, 16; Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 13)
302               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

September 26: U.S.S.R. began carrier rocket tests in the Pacific, to last until
     Oct. 25. Tass said center of area with 74-km. (46-mi.) radius had coor-
     dinates of 37’14’ north latitude and 172’49‘ east latitude. Ships and
     aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and
     midnight local time. (Tass, Prauda, 9/25/66, 2)
* NASA and NAS-NRC jointly announced that a “limited number” of appoint-
     ments as scientist-astronauts was being made available. To qualify, a
     scientist must be a U.S. citizen on or before March 15, 1967, be no
     taller than six feet, be born after Aug. 1, 1930, and have a doctorate in
     the natural sciences, medicine, or engineering. Applicants would also
     be required to meet physical qualifications for pilot crew members.
     After the Academy had done initial screening, NASA would make final
     selection. Deadline for applications was midnight, Jan. 8, 1967. Appli-
     cants would be informed of their status by March 15, 1967. (NASA
     Release 66-255; NAS-NRC Release)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb expressed appreciation to USAF, on its
     19th anniversary, in a letter to Air Force Awn. President Jess Larson:
     “The technology developed by the Air Force for its needs in the period
     before 1958 has served as the foundation for the manned and unmanned
                                              .
     missions which NASA is carrying out. . .
             .
         “An. .important aspect of the growing aerospace strength of the
     United States is the close cooperation between the Air Force and NASA
                                         .”
     in planning for future projects. . . (Text; AF/SD, 11/66, 85)
* Comparing earth to a “manned spaceship hurtling through the infinity of
     space,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address at San
     Fernando State College that exploration of space would bring home the
     fact that “earth is a mere speck in the universe.” He said it would seem
     increasingly absurd we had not better organized our living together on
     this planet: “Our experience in space can be a powerful stimulus to all
     of us, wherever we live, to move towards a world of law, a world without
     war. And may we find also in the space effort that ‘moral equivalent
     of war’ for which philosophers have been searching over many centuries.
     Like war, it stretches our human capabilities to the utmost. It demands
     all that we possess of ingenuity, determination, persistence, and intel-
     ligenceand, on the part of our gallant astronauts, the highest degree
     of courage and resourcefulness in the face of danger. Space activities
     - e v e n competition in space-can be a substitute for aggression, a
     bridge for mutual understanding and the identification of common
     interests with other nations, and a major tool of arms control and dis-
     armament.” (Text)
* Columbia Univ. oceanographic research ship Vema was fixing position
     off the coast of Iceland by means of three USN Transit navigational satel-
     lites. This marked first civilian use of space navigation systems for
     oceanographic research. Primary function of satellites, launched in
     July 1964, was to help guide USN ships and Polaris submarines. (Wilford,
     NYT, 9/26/66, 41)
* Pan American World Airways’ fan-jet Falcon claimed new speed record
     for business aircraft when it flew from St. John’s, Newfoundland, to
     Lisbon, Portugal, covering 2,388 mi. in 4 hrs. 38 min. 28 sec. North
     American Aviation’s Sabreliner had set previous record of 4 hrs. 45
     min. 59.4 sec. on Oct. 26, 1963. Both flights had been piloted by George
     Eremea of Petit Jean Air Service. (NYT, 9/29/66, 86)
                                                                           303
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

September 26: U.S.S.R.’s “period of inactivity in manned space flight” re-
     ceived editorial comment in Kansas City Star: ccAboutall the West can
     do is wait until something happens. Meanwhile, the US. program moves
     ahead with significant achievements. But whiIe guessing can be fun,
     a word of caution: Let’s not make the mistake of counting the Russians
     out of the space race.” (Kansas City Star, 9/26/66)
September 27: U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XI-which entered lunar orbit Aug. 27-was
     studying gamma rays and x-rays emitted from lunar surface “to deter-
     mine its chemical composition more exactly,” Tass reported. (Tass,
     9/27/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/27/66, Al)
e Space negotiations played important role in visit of West German Chan-
     cellor Ludwig Erhard to U S . Following discussions with President
     Johnson, joint statement was released from White House: “The Pres-
     ident and the Chancellor discussed possibilities for increased coopera-
     tion in technology and science and in particular in the field of space
     research. The Chancellor expressed his satisfaction that effective steps
     toward increased cooperation in space research have been initiated
     since his last meeting with the President in December 1965. The
     President and the Chancellor welcomed the decision to expand the
     present cooperative satellite program reached as a result of the recent
     discussions in Bonn between NASA Administrator Webb and Minister
     of Science Stoltenberg.
         “The President and the Chancellor agreed that scientific cooperation
     should be pressed forward for the mutual benefit of both countries and
     the advancement of human knowledge, preserving opportunities for
     additional nations to participate and contribute.”
         President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard, accompanied by NASA
     Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S.
     McNamara, later flew from Washington, D.C., to Cape Kennedy for
     tour of KSC. During speech in Vehicle Assembly Building, President
     Johnson said he was discussing “with the Chancellor, as well as other
     leaders, my hope that our scientists can join in joint endeavors to reap
     the full benefits of space research.” He said he had authorized Admin-
     istrator Webb “to discuss whether solar physicists from Europe may
     wish to be associated with the American solar physicists” in program
     for Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) to be flown “on an Apollo flight in
     order to study the sun at the height of the solar cycle.”
         Appealing to the U.S.S.R. for early conclusion of a treaty on outer
     space exploration, Johnson said: “1 earnestly hope that the Soviet
     Union-whose space achievements have been very great-will feel as
     we feel in America: that the rapid evolution of space technology makes
      . ..a treaty between us governing the use of space a most urgent matter
      . .. as we explore the vastness of space, and as we dream of new horizons,
     we work, too, for the manmade controls that will keep these efforts at
      the service of man and at the service of peace.” He noted that the U S .
      sought and would continue to seek cooperation in space with U.S.S.R.:
      “We have an agreement to exchange certain kinds of space data. . . .
      We will soon publish jointly American and Soviet material on space
      biology and medicine.” The President also mentioned that the US.
      was “on schedule in our plan and our determination to put men on the
      moon before 1970.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1365-6, 1370; Wash. Eve.
      Star, 9/28/66, C1)
304                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




September 27: West Germany’s Chancellor Ludwig Erhard and President Johnson are
briefed by          officials at Kennedy Space Center.
             NASA



September 27: President Johnson, in 10th anniversary edition of Russian-
     language America Illustrated, published by USIA for distribution in
     U.S.S.R., appealed to Soviet people for new era of friendship and
     understanding between the two countries. Johnson said “constructive
     steps” toward that goal would be “progress in the field of disarmament
     and in greater cooperative efforts . . . in space exploration, medical
     research, and communications.” He added: “We’ve got to get into the
     habit of peaceful cooperation. The test ban treaty was a significant
     step. There have been others since 1963. We have agreed not to put
     bombs in orbit, we are working together on . . . desalination, weather
     information, exchanges of scientists, artists, and yes, magazines.”
     (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1360-3)
  In awards ceremony at NASA Hq., Administrator James E. Webb presented
     Charles Conrad, Jr., command pilot of Sept. 12-15 GEMINI XI mission,
     gold ribbon attachment to NASA’s   Exceptional Service Medal awarded
     to him after August 1965 GEMINI v spaceflight; pilot Richard F. Gordon,
     Jr., received Exceptional Service Medal.
        Webb announced that during Sept. 10-16 visit to West Germany for
     preliminary negotiations of space agreement, he had been authorized to
     offer room on manned and unmanned spacecraft for valid scientific
     experiments submitted by West Germans. Offer applied also to scientists
     of other nations. (AP, NYT, 9/28/66, 21; Tush. Post, 9/28/66, A$;
     Tech. Wk.,  10/3/66, 18)
  NASA, to “allow a better time and motion evaluation of the workloads and
     stresses” experienced by an astronaut during extravehicular activity,
                                                                           305
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     had canceled plans to test USAF Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)
     on Gemini XI1 mission. NASA and DOD would study plans to reschedule
     experiment on later manned spaceflight. (NASA Release 66-258)
September 27: Prominent details of the moon’s far side photographed by
     ZOND 111 in July 1965 had been named by Soviet astronomers for great
     scientists, Tass reported. Among them were the Korolev thalassoid and
     the craters of Confucius, Spinoza, Mendel, Zhukovskiy, and Galois.
     Information relayed by ZOND 111 would be included in second part of
     Atlas o the Other Side of the Moon, currently under preparation. First
             f
     part was published in October 1960. Prof. Yuri Lipski, in charge of
     preparing the atlas, said one of the photos taken by LUNAR ORBITER I
     that had been “kindly supplied by American researchers,” had revealed
     approximate        overlap of details in photo taken by ZOND 111 while
     remainder of photo coincided in part with photos taken by LUNA III.
     (Tass, 9/27/66)
0 Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, chief adviser on geology for Interior Dept.’s

     Geological Survey, proposed 10-yr. lunar exploration program following
     first Apollo astronaut landings late in this decade that “would have
     nothing to do with exploiting natural resources of the moon.” He
     explained: “We are using our mineral resources at a fantastic rate.
     What we really need to sustain our economic needs in the years ahead
     is a . . . theory about how the earth was formed. A good way to develop
     this theory would be by comparison with another celestial body-and
     the moon is just such a body.” Cost would be some $1.5 billion a year.
     Proposal was made during interview with William Hines, Washington
     Evening Star. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/27/66, A9)
September 28: USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB
     using Titan 111-B-Agena D launch vehicle. (UPI, Wush. Daily News,
     9/29/66, 24; U S . Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
0 700-seat auditorium would be built at National Academy of Sciences and

     a special award established as a memorial to Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late
     NASA Deputy Administrator. Financing would be by Hugh L. Dryden
      Memorial Fund, established by Dr. Dryden’s personal friends and
     scientific associates shortly after his death in December 1965. Announce-
      ment was made jointly by Mrs. Dryden, NASA Administrator James E.
      Webb, and NAS President Dr. Frederick Seitz.
         Commenting on proposed memorial, Webb said: “To a very large
      degree NASA and NASA’s     program owe their existence and success to
                      .
      Hugh Dryden. . . His wise leadership as Deputy Administrator of NASA
      and as NASA’s scientist, played a leading role in creating effective
                      first
      working relationships between Government, industry, and the univer-
      sities of the Nation to meet the tremendous new scientific and engineer-
      ing tasks of the space age.”
         Dr. Seitz said: “It is particularly appropriate that funds raised in the
      name of Hugh Dryden, who served the Academy for ten years as its
      Home Secretary, be used to provide the Academy with an auditorium
      in which scientific and engineering questions of national importance
      could be discussed and considered. Dryden’s remarkable personal gifts
      as fundamental scientist, engineer, and public administrator were
      responsible, in great measure, for this nation’s preeminence in aviation
      and its successes in space. To all his activities, he brought ethical and
      professional standards that were deeply admired by all who knew him.”
       (NAS-NRC Release; NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt., 1; Wash. Post, 9/28/66, B4)
306               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

September 28: L ~ R Cawarded 7-mo. study contracts, valued at $390,000
     each, to Northrop Corp. and Fairchild-Hiller Corp. to design V/Stol
     aircraft for research on handling qualities and operation during in-
     strument approach in the terminal area. Aircraft would be used by
     NASA and USAF to gather flight research information necessary to improve
     operation of V/Stol jet aircraft in hovering and transition speed range.
     (NASA Release 66-259)
0 US. invited NATO allies to use its military comsat system temporarily and

     to collaborate in joint development of new system specifically for the
     alliance. US. would make time available on its seven-satellite military
     network launched by USAF Titan I11 rocket June 17. To adapt system to
     NATO’s needs, it was proposed that new ground station be built in Naples
     to operate with one under construction in the Netherlands and another
     operating in West Germany. In early 1968, satellite would be launched
     from U S . site into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. (35,903-km.)
     altitude for alliance’s exclusive use. It could be built by consortium
     of member countries. Eventually, comsat system was envisaged whose
     relays would permit use of ground stations small enough to be carried
     on a truck which could be used by military units on the move. Cost of
     plan was said to be some $50 million. Proposal would be on agenda of
     next meeting of NATO’s foreign ministers, set tentatively for Dec. 15-16.
     (Mooney, NYT, 9/29/66, 1; Nossiter, Wash. Post, 9/29/66, A22)
   M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (USAF), was
     air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in ninth glide
     fight at Edwards AFB. Purposes of flight were to complete pilot check-
     out and to extend the M2-FZ’s flight envelope. (NASA Proj. Off.)
   Soviet physicians, according to Tass, had reported that highlanders or
     people who had lived for a long time in mountain areas made the best
     astronaut candidates since they “spend the energy of their organism
     much more ec~nomically.~~ used less oxygen when doing physical
                                   They
     work; had approximately 30 per cent greater resistance to oxygen short-
     age; and possessed “heightened resistance to infrared, ultraviolet, and
     cosmic radiations.” (Tass, 9/29/66)
September 29: Crew for second manned Apollo mission, scheduled for 1967
     as open-ended earth orbital flight up to 14 days, was announced by NASA:
      Walter M. Schirra, Jr., command pilot; Donn F. Eisele, senior pilot;
      and Walter Cunningham, pilot. Backup crew: Frank Borman, command
     pilot; Thomas P. Stafford, senior pilot; and Michael Collins, pilot. It
      would be first space mission for Eisele and Cunningham. (NASA Release
      66-260)
 0 NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded three new study contracts
      totaling $400,000 to investigate launch vehicle needs and best methods
      for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips :North American
      Aviation, Inc., received $100,000 to study feasibility of modifying
      Saturn V 2nd stage (S-11) for use as an orbital injection stage; Douglas
      Aircraft Co., $100,000 for feasibility of using Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB)
      as part of a planetary vehicle; and TRW Systems, Inc., $200,000 for
      alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing
      missions. (MSFC Release 66-223)
 0 Soviet scientists, in report distributed by Tass, said it was now possible

      to protect spacecraft from radiation with an electromagnetic field in
      place of heavy metal shielding that had begun to limit possibilities of
      space travel. “The proposed electrostatic protection is much lighter,
                                                                           307
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     with its weight consisting only of the electrodes, insulators, and sources
     of power.” Tass also quoted Soviet scientists as saying that danger of
     man’s becoming overheated in space during prolonged work in an air-
     tight suit would disappear if the suit were ventilated from within.
     Experiments had shown that man wearing an unventilated spacesuit
     might develop first symptoms of overheating on fourth day; on fifth
     day, body temperature might rise and heart rate increase, resulting in
     considerably decreased ability to work. (Tass, 9/29/66; AP, Wash. Post,
     9/29/66, Al)
September 29: Boeing Co. unveiled a $2-million, full-scale mockup of 1,800-
     mph Sst-featuring variable-sweep wings, 350-passengercapacity, and a
                             in Government-sponsored competition for Sst
     movable nose-built
     production contract. Specifications were suhmitted to FAA Sept. 6, for
     evaluation. (Boeing Photos; Clark, NYT, 9/30/66, 45; Wash. Eve. Star,
     9/30/66, B9)
* AIA.4-sponsoredtour of European aerospace companies began in Paris with
     briefing arranged by Eurospace, the Council of European Industrial
     Groups. AIAA President Raymond L. Bisplinghoff led the combined tour,
     which then broke into three groups for visits to facilities in France,
     U.K., Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, and Italy.
        In a welcoming address in Paris, Eurospace President Jean Delorme
     said his group would (1) urge establishment of a “European Space
     Authority” modeled after ESRO, (2) encourage greater national invest-
     ment in cooperative R&D progress, and (3) point out discrepancy
     between Europe’s high economic potential and low investment in aero-
     space R&D. (Newbauer and Hersey, A&A, 1/67, 46-56)
September 30: NASA’s   Blossom Point, Md., tracking station, prototype station
     for Project Vanguard, was closed “because of technical progress in
     space communications.” Blossom Point Station, which had tracked
     every unmanned earth-orbiting NASA satellite since EXPLORER I was
     launched Jan. 31, 1958, would become part of STADAN Network Test
     and Training Facility at GSFC. Facility, to be operational by Jan. 1, 1967,
     would test equipment, modes, and procedures and train personnel for
     STADAN stations. (NASA   Release 66-117)
* Three earth-orbiting objects not identified “with any launching or country
     of origin” were reported by GSFC Satellite Situation Report. Two had
     inclination of 85” and the third, 35”. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/66; Clark, NYT,
     11/1/66, 19)
September 30-October 2: Series of Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding
     rocket were launched from NASA Wallops Station and Natal, Brazil,
     in GSFC experiment to obtain temperature, wind, pressure, and density
     data at intervals throughout 24-hr. periods near fall equinox. Using
     exploding grenade technique, experiment investigated thermally
     driven diurnal tide theory of upper atmosphere. Wind motion was
     studied by photographically tracking smoke puffs from upper grenade
     using Apache rocket motor. Rockets and instrumentation performed
     satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
During September: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, in an interview with
     Technology Week, predicted that U.S. would land men on the moon in
     1969-probably before U.S.S.R. He said the Johnson Administration
     had definite plans for “very active post-Apollo s~hedule,’~ refused
                                                                    but
     to “put a time schedule on what comes next.” Post-Apollo activities
     would include exploring the moon, increasing our knowledge of the
308               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    planets, expanding earth-orbiting capability, both manned and unman-
    ned, and developing maneuverable, reusable spacecraft. The Vice
    President foresaw no possibility of merging USAF’S Manned Orbiting
    Laboratory (Mol) program with any of NASA’s manned projects. (Tech.
     JYk., 9/5/66, 12, 13)
During September: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were exchanging daily six to eight
    weather satellite photographs with nephanalyses. First U.S. transmittal
    began Sept. 6 with pictures from ESSA I meteorologicalsatellite, launched
    Feb. 3. On Sept. 11, U.S.S.R. began sending pictures from COSMOS
    CXXII, launched June 25. Regions photographed-primarily           Atlantic
    Ocean and Western Europe-had been matched so operations of satellite
    systems could be compared. Joint effort to improve transmission quality
    had been proposed since transmission seemed to degrade photographs :
    U.S. scientists found Soviet photos “poor” in quality; Soviet scientists
    described U.S. photos as “usable.”
       Receipt of photos from COSMOS CXXII had enabled U.S. to analyze
    satellite’s instrumentation: COSMOS CXXII carried pair of 48’ TV cameras
    canted 16.5” to each side of orbital plane to provide coverage of about
    690 mi. of earth. Cameras overlapped field of coverage by 1”; frames
    transmitted so far had 10 per cent overlap. (Av. Wk.,      9/26/66, 26-7;
    Schmeck, NYT, 9/27/66, 15)
  Scientific and technological knowledge must be directed to the “making
    and keeping of peace,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of
    Science and Technology and science adviser to the President, told
    General Electric Forum.
       ccSciencewill not be the sole contributor toward this end. . . . Its
    role must be to relieve those pressures that have traditionally been the
    causes of political, social, and economic instability-pressures which
    have always led to an upheaval of social order. By helping to alleviate
    poverty, ignorance and disease, and by improving food supplies and
    living conditions, science can help to remove the causes of war. . . .”
     (GE Forum, 7-9/66, 8)
0 Honors and elections reported by Aviation Week: (1) George Galipeau,

    president of Van Dusen Aircraft Supplies, was elected president of
    National Pilots Assn. (NPA); (2) Paul Poberezny, president of Experi-
    mental Aircraft Assn., was named 1966 NPA Pilot of the Year; and (3)
    H. M. Horner, United Aircraft Corp.’s chairman and chief executive
    officer, was named recipient of National Aviation Club’s Award for
    Achievement for his “life-long devotion to the advancement of air
    power and space power for world commerce and Free World Defense.”
          m.,    9/12/66, 23)
     (Av.
0 Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of House Science and Astro-

    nautics Committee’s Space Sciences Subcommittee, recommended in
    Astronautics & Aeronautics that manned and unmanned earth-orbital
    missions be given major emphasis in the next few years. He suggested
    lower priority be assigned manned planetary exploration and establish-
    ment of manned lunar bases, but that unmanned Voyager Mars and
    Venus missions be given more extensive support. (A&A, 9/66, 12-14)
  NASA released its 1,OOOth Tech Brief, one which described development of
    improved titanium alloy of possible value in field of medicine.
       Potential industrial uses of inorganic fibers developed as reinforce-
    ments in materials for spacecraft were discussed in Non-Glassy Inorganic
    Fibers and Composites, issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization.
                                                                      309
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      Techniques used to monitor astronauts’ blood pressure could be
    adapted to prolong the lives of persons with certain types of heart
    disease, concluded Westinghouse Research Laboratories engineers
    William J. Jones and Wyatt C. Simpson in monograph entitled NASA
    Contributions to Cardiovascular Monitoring. Study was conducted for
    NASA’s Office of Technology Utilization. (NASA Releases 66-238, 66-246,
    66-250)
During September: USAF had begun evaluation studies of Adam (Air Deflection
    and Modulation)II-a revolutionary typeof aircraft with engines located
    inside the wings-at Wright-Patterson AFB. A full-span, powered model
    of the propulsive-wing V/Stol aircraft would be designed, built, and
    tested by LTV Aerospace Corp. under a ls-mo., $439,000 contract jointly
    funded by USAF and USA. Wind-tunnel tests would be made at LaRC. Air-
    craft could be used in both military tactical and commercial passenger
    versions. (AFSC Release 154.66)
                             October 1966

October 1: Eighth anniversary of NASA, established by the National Aero-
    nautics and Space Act of 1958.
  Rufus E. Miles, Jr., director of mid-career programs at Princeton Univ.’s
    Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International AfTairs and former
    HEW Assistant Secretary for Administration, was sworn in as a NASA
    consultant on management operations. (NASA Release 66-277)
October 2: ESSA 111 (Tos-A), third meteorological satellite in Tiros Opera-
    tional Satellite (Tos) series and first to include Advanced Vidicon
     Camera System (Avcs), was successfully launched for ESSA by NASA
    from WTR using three-stage Thor-Delta booster on mission to provide
    daily global cloud-cover photos. Satellite achieved nearly polar, sun-
    synchronous orbit with 922-mi. (1,486-km.) apogee; 858-mi. (1,381-
    km.) perigee; 114.5-min. period; and 101” inclination. It was expected
    to transmit first photos to Gilmore Creek, Alaska, receiving station Oct.
    3. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 325-1b. ESSA 111
    carried two Avcs systems to provide cloud coverage and an infrared
    sensor (Ir) to measure earth’s heat balance. Launch was first for Thor-
    Delta booster from WTR.
       ESSA financed, managed, and operated the Tos system; GSFC was
    responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft
    in orbit. First two satellites in system-ESSA I and ESSA 11-were
    launched Feb. 3 and Feb. 28, respectively. (NASA Proj. O f ;AP, NYT,
                                                              f.
     10/3/66, 11; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/3/66, A12)
  NASA ended series begun Sept. 30 of ten Nike-Cajun sounding rockets
    carrying acoustic grenades launched at six-hour intervals from Natal,
    Brazil, and NASA Wallops Station to gather meteorological information
    on atmosphere between 20-mi. and 60-mi. altitude. Grenades were
    ejected and detonated at programed altitudes to study diurnal variations
    in winds, temperatures, densities, and pressures. Launchings completed
    international series of experiments for meteorological research in the
    upper atmosphere carried out under Nov. 15, 1965, agreement between
    Brazilian Space Commission (CNAE)      and NASA. (NASA   Release 66-265;
    Wallops Release 66-52)
  Zenith Radio Gorp. demonstrated experimental systems for displaying
    television pictures which substituted laser beam for conventional
    cathode-ray tube. Small nozzle placed on one wall projected television
    image on opposite wall in same fashion as movie projector. Clarity of
    images produced by laser beam was only slightly below that of con-
    ventional TV sets. (Kotulak, Chic. Trib., 10/3/66)
9 NAS Council approved statement urging scientists to “help maintain ICSU’S

     [International Council of Scientific Unions’] nonpolitical traditions by
    avoiding controversial nonscientific activities while participating in
    union-sponsored meetings.” (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 10/66, 11)

    310
                                                                         311
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 2 President of the Republic of the Philippines Ferdinand Marcos was
         :
    seeking to postpone Asian summit conference on Vietnam from Oct. 18
    to Oct. 24 to allow time for comsat, scheduled for launch over Pacific
    Oct. 19 by NASA for ComSatCorp, to become operative. Comsat would
    assure worldwide mass media coverage of event. (Reuters, Wash. Post,
     10/3/66)
* “The answer to the housing problem lies on the way to the moon,” tech-
     nologist and Southern Illinois Univ. research professor Buckminster
     Fuller told Wolf Von Eckardt of the Washington Post. Much of the
     complex apparatus used in development of closed ecological systems for
    long manned space flights could be used in terrestrial housing, Fuller
     said. He envisioned enclosing the necessary machinery in a “little
                 .
     black box. . . We are investing $7 billion in it. It weighs 500 pounds.
     We can probably mass-produce it for $2 a pound.
        “That means we can give all the things they need foremost in a house
     -water, heat, cooling and waste regeneration-for $1000. And we can
     give it to them without tying them down to real estate with its waste-
     fully expensive water pipes and sewers . . . with high-pressure sprays
     and chemical regeneration, a man can quench his thirst and clean him-
     self for a long time with just a glass of water.
             .                                          .
        “[It] . . also solved the pollution problem. . .” (Von Eckardt,
      Wash. Post, 10/2/66, G11)
October 3: USC&GS ship Oceanographer, $9.2-million “floating laboratory,”
     left Jacksonville, Fla., on 11-week, 14,000-mi. expedition to conduct
     marine scientific studies off eastern coast of South America and partici-
     pate in observations of total eclipse of the sun Nov. 12. Expedition was
     being conducted by ESSA. (ESSA Release 66-57)
e Absence of statement by President Johnson and West German Chancellor
     Erhard after their September meeting in Washington, D.C., on sug-
     gested US.-Western Europe program of unmanned exploration of
     Jupiter indicated that the proposal had been “killed for the foreseeable
     future,” Technology Week speculated. (Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 3)
0 Anticipating launching of Pacific satellite in late 1966, ComSatCorp filed

     tariff with FCC for Pacific services. Monthly rates ComSatCorp would
     charge authorized common carriers would be $2,700 between US. main-
     land and Hawaii; $4,900 from U S . mainland to Japan; and $3,800 from
     Hawaii to Japan. Tariff for service to NASA for Project Apollo would be
     equivalent to level of charges applied to other commercial satellite
      channels. ComSatCorp also said it planned reduced rates for Atlantic
      services, to apply when second satellite became operational. (ComSat-
      Corp Release)
* M/G John D. Stevenson (USAF, Ret.), former commander of Joint Task
     Force Eight of the Defense Atomic Support Agency, was appointed
      Special Assistant to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
      Flight Dr. George E. Mueller to assist with general management of
     manned space flight activities. (NASA Ann.)
e Tonnage of US. bombs dropped on Vietnam in 1966 would surpass that
      dropped by US. in the entire Pacific during World War I1 or during
      three years of the Korean War, Ted Sell reported in the World J o u d
      Tribune. U.S. planned to drop 638,000 tons of bombs in 1966 compared
      to 502,781 tons dropped by USAF in the Pacific between 1941 and 1945.
      (Sell, WJT, 10/3/66, 4)
312               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 3-8: MsFc-sponsoredspace sciences exhibit tracing history of rocketry
    into the future of space exploration, with models of rockets, rocket
    engines, and spacecraft, was featured at Alabama State Fair in Birming-
    ham. (MSFC Release 66-224)
October 4: Ninth anniversary of orbiting of SPUTNIK I by U.S.S.R.
* U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XI spacecraft, which entered lunar orbit Aug. 27, stopped
    transmitting at 2:30 GMT Oct. 1when its batteries were exhausted, Tass
    reported. Spacecraft had completed 277 orbits around moon and had
    sent 137 transmissions of scientific information and trajectory data to
    monitoring stations on earth. Results would be published later. (Tass,
     10/4/66; Tass, Pravda, 10/5/66, 1, USS-T Trans.)
  NASA announced plans to launch two ion engines into polar orbit in late
     1968 satellite mission to advance development of ion engines as propul-
    sion units for future long-duration space missions. Second part of LRC’S
     Space Electric Rocket Test (Sert) program, mission would evaluate
    inflight performance of electron-bombardment ion engines for six
    months or more and analyze effects of thrusters and their electric fields
     on other satellite components. LRC conducted first successful operation
     of ion engine in space July 20, 1964, in 50-min. Sert I ballistic flight
    from NASA Wallops Station. (NASA      Release 66-262)
e Dr. Ren6 Dubos, microbiologist and pathologist at Rockefeller Univ., was
     selected to receive Pacific Science Center’s 1966 Arches of Science
     Award for his “outstanding contribution to the public understanding of
     the meaning of science to contemporary man.” (Wash. Eve. Star,
     10/5/66, A8)
* France exploded last nuclear device in its test series at Mururoa Atoll in
     the South Pacific. There was no official estimate on size of the explosion.
     Test series began July 2. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 10/5/66, A21; AP,
     Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/66, A9)
October 4-7: NASA-Lewis inspection held at LRC to commemorate 25th year
     of operation as aeronautical and space propulsion research laboratory;
     Lewis-managed launch vehicles and the GEMINI VII spacecraft were on
     display for congressional, Government, university, and industrial
     leaders touring facility. (LRC Release 66-60)
October 5 Revised Soviet draft for space law treaty circulated to U.N.
          :
     members contained three apparent concessions to U.S. position: (1)
     equal access to all nations’ tracking facilities would be arranged by
     bilateral negotiations; (2) all parties would inform U.N. Secretary
     General, the public, and international scientific community of nature
     and results of their activities in space “to the greatest extent feasible
     and practicable”; and (3) space stations and vehicles of any party on the
    moon and/or other celestial bodies would be open to visitors “on a
     basis of reciprocity” with “reasonable advance notice.” (Teltsch, NYT,
     10/6/66, 6; Wash. Post, 10/6/66, A20)
  USAF launched USA’sSECOB VIII geodetic satellite and unidentified satellite
     with Atlas-Agena D booster from WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act.,
     1966,156)
  M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (USAF),was
     air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in 10th glide
     flight at Edwards AFB; purpose was to explore lateral and longitudinal
     stability and control characteristics with dampers on and off. (NASA
     Proj. Off.)
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                     313

October 5 NASA Astronaut Michael Collins presented U.S. flag carried on
           :
    July 18-21 GEMINI x mission to St. Albans School in Washington, D.C.,
     as ‘‘a token of my appreciation for getting me started on this road.”
     Collins and three other alumni were honored by St. Albans at a banquet
     and reception. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, B1)
October 6 In his first X-15 flight test, Maj. Michael J. Adams (USAF) flew
          :
     X-15 No. 1 to 2,045 mph (mach 3.0) and 75,400-ft. altitude before
     making successful emergency landing at Cuddeback Dry Lake, Calif.,
     when fuel tank unported S0 sec. after launch. There was no aircraft
                                   I
     damage or pilot injury. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
* Press briefing was held at LaRc on results of NASA’sLUNAR ORBITER I
     mission, launched Aug. 10 from ETR to orbit the moon and photograph
     possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts.
        The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed
     a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and
     hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progres-
     sively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or “blocks,”
     proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of
     the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where SURVEYOR I was
     resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare-
     flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters-it had 20 per cent fewer
     craters than any of the other sites.
        U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr.
     Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic
     activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near
     SURVEYOR I and a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled
     with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: “The moon is not a cold, dead,
     lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr.
     Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in
     two general directions-northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest
     -and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred
     along these lines.
        LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the
     satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not
     bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center
     of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight
     wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the ‘‘bulge” theory.
        Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any “hits”
     during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting
      satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks.
        Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter
      E-second of five satellites in series-would be launched between Nov.
      6 and 1 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by LUNAR
               1
      ORBITER I. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3;
      O’Toole, Tush. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
 * NASA Javelin sounding rocket Launched from NASA Wdlops Station reached
      404-mi. (650-km.) altitude in GsFC-Canadian Defence Research Board
      Telecommunications Establishment experiment to measure ion and
      electron density and temperature. Although rocket did not perform as
      expected, all instrumentation functioned normally and “excellentyy
      data were received. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
 * Apollo Command Module (Cm) hardware could be recovered and refur-
      bished for use on extended earth-orbital missions and long stays on the
314               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    lunar surface, North American Aviation, Inc., Vice President Dr. John
    McCarthy suggested at AIAA-AAS Forum discussing “After Apollo-
    What Next?” in Washington, D.C. “Such refurbished hardware could
    be available within 18 months at no interference to the lunar landing
    program and would permit the gathering of vital data and experience
    for the more difficult task of exploring the planets,” Dr. McCarthy said.
    He recommended an integrated space program which would include
    developing one advanced earth reentry module, single basic laboratory
    module, and modular launch vehicle system; he emphasized the need
    to determine the Nation’s 10-yr. space objectives “as soon as possible.”
     (Text)
October 6: U.S.S.R. might use data from published accounts of NASA’s
    Gemini space flights to “reap the benefits of our efforts” and “leapfrog”
    the U.S. into the next phase of the moon race, Astronaut Michael
    Collins told the Yale Club of Washington, D.C. As examples of data that
    would assist Soviet scientists, Collins noted that Gemini fights had
    demonstrated the feasibility of rendezvous and docking missions in
    space, as well as man’s capability to withstand long-duration space
    flights. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A7)
0 Because “procedural difficulties” had delayed approval for construction

     of new high-capacity ComSatCorp earth station at Moorefield, W. Va.,
    ComSatCorp asked FCC to authorize construction of second large
     antenna at Andover, Me., “to meet pressing demands for greater
     satellite communications capacity.” ComSatCorp stressed that even if
     the Andover application were approved, it would shortly update the
     Moorefield application and “continue to seek approval of it,” because a
     second East Coast station site would be required for flexibility, diversity,
     and survivability. (ComSatCorp Release)
  Clark Univ.’s Robert Hutchings Goddard Library announced plans to bury
     a time capsule containing 100 “early Space Age” artifacts, including
     tape recording of former Astronaut John Glenn’s communications with
     ground control during his Feb. 20, 1962, MA-6 flight in FRIENDSHIP 7.
     Capsule would be set to be opened in 500 yrs. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star,
     10/6/66, A4)
0 Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams,

     and William W. Williams received Society of Automotive Engineers’
      (SAE) Wright Brothers Medal for their group report on development of
     soft-field and rough-field landing gear. Presentation was made at SAE’S
     National Aeronautic and Space Engineering Meeting in Los Angeles.
      (Lockheed Southern Star, 9/15/66, 1)
October 6-7: Conference on status of spectroscopic observations of Martian
     atmosphere was held at NASA’s    request by NAS Space Science Board in
     Washington. Fktimate of atmospheric pressure would determine space-
      craft design for Mars landing. If pressure were no lower than 15 milli-
      bars,z arachute landing would be possible, but full retrothrust system
     woul be necessary at 5 millibars. Recommendations of the conference
     would be made available “in the near future.” (NAS-NRC-NAE News
     Report, 10/66, 4)
October 7: NASA’s    Eighth Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in
      Washington, D.C.
         NASA Administrator James E. Webb accepted from Mr. and Mrs. C.
      Thomas Clagett, Jr., for placement at KSC a replica of the bronze
      Kennedy bust sculpted by Felix de Weldon for the John F. Kennedy
                                                                         315
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Memorial Library; and from the American Society of C v l Engineers,
                                                             ii
    the 1966 Outstanding Civil Engineering Achievement Award for KSC’S
    Launch Complex 39. Mr. Webb presented NASA’s       Distinguished Public
    Service Medal to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, chairman, Graduate Research
    Center of the Southwest’s Board of Trustees, who emphasized the need
    for careful and immediate post-Apollo planning in his keynote address :
    “We now have a powerful machinery for the command of space-
    trained specialists, mighty rockets, a technological dexterity that is un-
    surpassed. But to keep this capability, we must have new strategic ob-
    jectives. And that there are many worthwhile and compelling objectives
                            ..   .
    there can be no doubt.
        “I would assert that it is now imperative that more advanced space
    strategies be adopted-and quickly-if our space program is to remain
    efficient and effective. And I would suggest that whatever this further
    strategy, it employ and advance our full capability in science, men,
                              .
    mechanisms, and skill. . .”
        Recipients of Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. Hugh L. Dryden,
    former Deputy Administrator (posthumously); Dr. T. Keith Glennan,
    first NASA Administrator; and Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF, Ret.),
    former AFSC Commander. Recipients of Exceptional Scientific Achieve-
    ment Medal: Richard F. Arenstorf, MSFC; Helmut J. Horn, MSFC; Norman
    F. Ness, GSFC; and George F. Pezdirtz, L ~ R C . Outstanding Leadership
    Medal: John F. Clark, GSFC; Edgar M. Cortright, Hq.; Robert L. Krieger,
    Wallops; George J. Vecchietti, Hq.; Harold B. Finger, Hq.; Harry H.
     Gorman, MSFC; Edmund F. O’Connor, MSFC; Eberhard F. M. Rees,
    MSFC; and Herman K. Weidner, MSFC. Exceptional Service Medal: M.
    Helen Davies, ARC; Herbert A. Wilson, LaRc; Robert A. Rushworth,
    WAF; Roll D. Ginter, Hq.; David S. Gabriel, LRC; Edmund R. Jonash,
    LRC; J. Cary Nettles, LRC; Wilfred E. Scull, GSFC; Harry Press, GSFC;
     Leland F. Belew, MSFC; Lee B. James, MSFC; William G. Johnson, MSFC;
     and Peter A. Minderman, KSC. Group Achievement Award: JPL; LRC;
     L ~ R C (2); and Hq. Space Nuclear Propulsion Office. Public Service
     Award: Grant L. Hansen, General Dynamics Corp. (Program; Text
     AF/SD, 1/67/54-5)
October 7: NASA announced selection of Bendix Field Engineering Co. to pro-
     vide maintenance and operations support of the Deep Space Network
     under a three-year, $37-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to be
     managed by JPL. (NASA Release 66-268)
* Willson H. Hunter, Assistant to the Director of LRC, had been appointed
     NASA’s Senior Scientific Representative to Australia, replacing Ray w.
     Hooker, who had been named Special Assistant for Industrial Affairs at
     WRC. (NASA Release 66-267; LRC Release 66-64)
0 General Dynamics Corp. received eight-month, $275,000 MSFC contract to

     investigate concepts of large space structures having possible post-
     Apollo use. Three structures which could fly as Apollo Applications (Aa)
     payloads on Saturn launch vehicles would be selected, evaluated, and
     validated for immediate useful application in space. (MSFC Release
     66-245)
* USAF awarded Univ. of Colorado a 15-m0., $300,000 research contract to
     “conduct independent investigations into unidentified flflq object (Ufo)
     reports.” Study would be headed by Dr. Edward U. Condon, a professor
     of physics at the university. (DOD Release 847-66)
0 Arthur G. Wimer, Jr., assistant deputy chief of staff for science and tech-
316               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     nology in the Air Research and Development Command, was named
     chief scientist for AFSC, replacing Dr. Bernhard H. Goethert who had
     resigned to become director of Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute.
      (AFSC Release 206.66)
October 8: NASA’s SURVEYOR I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon’s
      Ocean of Storms June 2, responded to signals from Johannesburg track-
     ing station almost three months after it had been turned off following
     successful completion of its mission. Batteries had been recharged
     during latter part of moon’s 14-day period of sunlight. JPL scientists said
     an attempt might be made to obtain additional photos of the lunar sur-
     face from the spacecraft before sun set about noon EDT Oct. 9. (Wash.
     Sun. Star, 10/9/66, A4)
   Executive Committee of International Council of Scientific Unions
     meeting in Monaco approved statement underlining importance of
      agreement that scientific meetings “shall not be disturbed by political
      statements or by any activities of a political nature.” (NAS-NRC-NAE
      News Report, 10/66, 11)
0 Small-scale lunar roughness resulted from impact of small meteorites, not
      from internal volcanic effects, according to J. A. Bastin, Queen Mary
      College, London, in a letter to Nutru-e. He advanced arguments that
      (1) roughness lacks horizontal directionality associated with vulcanism,
      and (2) from known distribution of meteorites by size, taken with
      estimates of age of lunar surface, “it can be shown that the surface
      should be virtually covered by craters of millimetre and centimetre
          ..   .,, (Bastin, Nature, 10/8/66, 171-3)
      size.
October 9: Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., USN), speaking at national
      convention of Naval Reserve Officers Assn. in Denver, described his
      astronaut-aquanaut occupation as a liaison between space and undersea
      exploration. He said there were plans to train astronauts under water to
      better withstand the tiring work of maneuvering outside spacecraft-a
      major problem of recent space flights. Models of spacecraft would be
      used; astronauts would wear spacesuits and would work without swim
      fins. Carpenter, who had volunteered in May 1964 for USN’s Project
      Sea Lab, said aquanauts could work in water until they became tired
      or hungry. (Denver Post, 10/9/66)
October 10: NASA Administrator James E. Webb told press conference in
      New York that U.S.S.R. had “a better chance now than two years ago9’
      to land a man on the moon before the US. Basing his view on the Soviet
      lead in payload-orbiting capability, Webb said: “They have been launch-
      ing and recovering 10,000-pound spacecraft for four years. You cannot
      work in space without large booster^.^' He suggested that the 10-mo.
      period of Soviet inactivity in manned space flight would end “very
       soon.” (Loory, NYT, 10/11/66)
0 Gemini Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong were
       received in Bogota by Colombian President Carlos Lleras Restrepo during
      their three-week tour of Latin America. (UPI, Wush. Post, 10/11/66, B2)
 * L ~ R C awarded Douglas Aircraft Co. a one-year, $145,204 contract for
       management services and facilities related to Design Criteria Program
       for space vehicle structures. Program-with total contract estimated at
       $500,000-was established by NASA to acquaint contractors and program
       managers with recommended design-problem solutions that had evolved
       from experience in space technology and alert them to possible pitfalls.
       (NASA Release 66-264)
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                       3 17

October 10: Johnson Administration could not increase NASA’s FY 1968budget
    because of Vietnam war, but it could make a policy decision on a post-
    Apollo program, wrote Robert Hotz, in Aviation Week.
        “What it will take to get this effort going is some political courage to
    restate the necessity of proceeding beyond Apollo, a decision to chart a
    specific course from the available alternatives and some modest Fiscal
    1968 funding to retain the technical resources that will be required for
    the future-particularly engineering and scientific manpower. This
    combination of activity has already been deferred one year beyond its
    critical moment by the Johnson Administration. Delay for another fiscal
    year could impose a braking effect from which eventual acceleration
    would be much more costly and much less effective.” (Hotz, Av. Wk.,
    10/10/66, 21)
0 Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of                  Inventions and
                                                         NASA’s
    Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to be-
    come a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College. (NASA
    Ann.)
October 10-15: XVIIth International Astronautical Federation Congress was
    held in Madrid. Opening ceremony, attended by Prince Juan Carlos,
    son of pretender to Spanish throne; Princess Sophia, his wife; and
    Queen Mother Fredericka of Greece, included speeches by IAF President
    Dr. William H. Pickering; International Academy of Astronautics
    President Dr. Charles Draper; International Institute of Space Law
    President Dr. I. PBpin; Spanish Astronautical Assn. President Pedro
    Huarte-Mendicoa y Larraga; and Spanish Air Minister Gen. Josk Lacalle
    Larraga. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1)
        Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported
    first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-
    gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research
     Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After
     collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-
    grzdient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently
     reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis
     gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory.
     (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2)
        Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc.,
     Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and
     Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch
     vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and
     engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could
     propel a 7,000-Ib. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt
     and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same
     target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3)
        Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer
     Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise
     in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1)
        Richard Johnston, Chief of MSC Crew Systems Div., said that to work
     effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more stream-
     lined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device
     such as “stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used
     in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He
     said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions
     nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep
318                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investiga-
      tion of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice
      Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, over-
      heated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks.
      (Wilford, NYT,10/12/66, 24)
          Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
      Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s       Gemini pro-
      gram and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and
      Operations at MSC, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini
      missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had
      revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoi-
      etic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be
      adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Re-
      sults of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclu-
      sive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative
      immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being ex-
      amined as possible causes. (Tech.     Wk., 10/17/66, 16)
          Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and 6. D. Glod reported
      cr
        significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical prepara-
      tions” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines
      adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R.
      used drugs in manned spaceflight both for “therapeutic purposes or to
      increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.”
      Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants;
      cardiovascular preparations ; and antiradiation medications. (Tech.
       Wc., 10/24/66, 13)
          Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov
      said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most im-
      portant problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had devel-
      oped a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver
      into working position, which included raising one hand over the head
      and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body re-
      action and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Au. Wk., 10/17/66,30-31)
          Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div.,
      encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of
      GEMINI v-Titan I1 booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of
      an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a
      cc
         near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage”
      to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn 1’s 2nd stage (S-IVB).
       (Av. Wk., 10/24/66, 32)
          H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that
      moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal
      g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation
      and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown.
       (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13-14)
          Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight
      activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966,
      in COSMOS CX. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body
      weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they
      emerged from capsule, but film sequence taken four months later
      showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neuro-
                                                              Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
      logical regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech.
                                                                          319
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

         Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of
           (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
    IAF.
October 11: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR reached
     89-mi. (144km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering,
     Inc., experiment to make a high-resolution survey of celestial x-ray
     sources. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA
     Rpt. SRL)
0 NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, speaking before Metro-

     politan Washington Board of Trade’s Science Industry Committee, re-
     plied to criticism that the national space program is highly expensive
     and wasteful: “The national space program is the largest concerted
     effort undertaken by any nation to advance the frontiers of human
     knowledge. As such, it is a seedbed of invention, a spur to our produc-
     tivity, a source of insurance for our national security, a stimulus to
     learning, and a world-wide ambassador for peace. Because of it, our
     chances of improving medical research and finding a cure for cancer or
     heart disease are greater, not less. Because of it, our chances of improv-
     ing our educational system and solving a vast range of social problems
     are greater, not less.
         “The issue is really not that of substituting space progress for prog-
     ress in some other worthy field, because the space program contributes
     importantly to advances in practically all other lines of endeavor, and
     it stimulates the national economy at the same time. . . .” (Text)
   Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. engineer Dede Sonnichsen claimed six
     new world records when he flew an AX-4 hot air balloon to 21,000-ft.
     altitude from Tracy, Calif., and landed it 15 mi. away. Of 10 hot air
     balloon classifications, Sonnichsen’s claims were to altitude records in
     AX-4, 5, 6,7, and 8 categories and to establishment of record for 15-mi.
     distance. (L.A. Times, 10/12/66)
   International cooperation on patents procedures and mechanized infor-
     mation retrieval was urged at Washington, D. C., meeting of National
     Association of Manufacturers’ Patents Committee. U.S. Commissioner
     of Patents Edward J. Brenner said that “most of the search or examining
     work in anywhere from 15% to 80% of the applications . . . could be
     eliminated” if patent offices exchanged information. (Beller, Tech. Wk.,
      11/7/66, 20)
October 12: M2-F2 wingless lifting body was launched from B-52 aircraft and
      flown by Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry (USAF) in 45,000-ft. glide to powerless
     landing at Edwards AFB; maximum speed was nearly 400 mph. This was
      11th test mission for 6,000-lb. research vehicle developed for NASA to
      study possible design for future spacecraft that could maneuver in at-
     mosphere after reentry from orbit. (NASA Proj. Off.; L. A . Times, 10/
      13/66)
   Dr. Lee Arnold, chairman of New York Univ.’s Dept. of Aeronautics and
      Astronautics and director of Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics,
      was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on
      technology utilization. (NASA Release 66-271)
   USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from
      WTR. (US.   Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 157)
 0 Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, head of Soviet delegation to IAF Congress, told news

       conference in Madrid that U.S.S.R. had to investigate and solve a “num-
      ber of difficult problems” before it could attempt a manned lunar m i s -
       sion. Asked if he believed US. and U.S.S.R. would ever join together
320                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




October 12: MZ-FZ lifting body mated to B-52 launch aircraft at          Flight Research
                                                                  NASA
Center, in preparation for flight tests.


    for a space mission, Sedov said it would be economicallyand scientifically
    feasible, but “we don’t have any plans for joint launchings. The situa-
    tion is not technical but political and I think the international situation
    in these days cann’ot change this.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/13/66,12)
October 12: IAF conferees toured the NASA-INTA Robledo de Chavela Space
    Tracking Station outside Madrid. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/14/66, 1)
* NAS Committee on Public Engineering Policy (COPEP) held first meeting
    in New York City; chairman was Dr. Chauncey Starr, president of
    Atomics International Division of North American Aviation, Inc., and
    as of January 1, 1967, UCLA Dean of Engineering. (NAS-NRC-NAE News
    Report, 10/66, 1,3)
0 UCLA announced plans to build its own satellite to study earth’s magnetic

    field and interplanetary space. Feasibility studies financed by $55,000
    NASA grant were being conducted by Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco
    Corp. (UPI, NYT, 10/15/66,33)
October 13: U. S. and Brazil would cooperate in sounding rocket program to
    study total solar eclipse in South America Nov. 12. Nineteen sounding
    rockets would be launched to altitudes as high as 175 mi. (280 km.)
    from Rio Grande launch site located near path of total eclipse. Program
    was based on July 1965 agreement between NASA and Brazilian Space
                           .
     Commission (CNAE) (Wallops Release 66-51)
* Washington Post commented on report of satellite collision made by Dr.
     Hilliard Paige at IAF Congress in Madrid: “Belated disclosure that two
     Air Force space vehicles collided in space in April, 1965, ought to re-
                                                                            321
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    mind the country that part of its space program is being carried on be-
    hind a cloak of secrecy as absolute as that which conceals space opera-
    tions in the Soviet Union. The open policy of NASA, which has done so
    much to keep the whole nation interested in and excited about space
                                                                       .
    progress, is in sharp contrast to the policy of the Air Force. . .” [Ed.
    note: Satellites were USN, not USAF.] (Wash. Post, 10/13/66, A22)
October 13: Western Union International, Inc., announced receipt of DOD
     order for 10 Pacific satellite communications channels, permitting com-
    pany to file with FCC for rate reductions on all its cable and satellite
    service in the Pacific area. Order and rate reductions were dependent
     on FCC’S approving Western Union’s previously announced request to
     lease and operate up to 65 satellite channels in the Pacific area. (DJNS,
     Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/66, A13)
October 13-14: Use of satellite navigation and communications system to
    guide merchant ships was urged by General Electric Co. engineer Roy
     E. Anderson at Institute of Navigation meeting at U.S. Merchant Marine
     Academy, Kings Point, N.Y. Ships could be equipped for $2,000 to auto-
     matically obtain position fixes anywhere in the world, Anderson esti-
     mated. He believed operational system could be designed and built
     within two years. (NYT, 10/17/66, 60)
October 14: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXIX into earth orbit with 307-km.
      (191-mi.) apogee; 202-km. (126-mi.) perigee; 89.4-min. period; and 65”
     inclination. Equipment “for continuing explorations of outer space”
     was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/14/66)
* Control of ESSA 111 meteorological satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 3 from
     WTR, was turned over to ESSA. (NASA Proj. Off.)
  NASA awarded IBM Corp.’s Federal Systems Div. a $51-million, sole-source
      contract to provide Saturn instrument unit launch support services at
      KSC through June 30, 1470. (NASA Release 66-275)
0 Sixteenth-century manuscript “On Rockets” by Conrad Haas (circa 1550)

     received at IAF Congress in Madrid. Concepts of rocket construction in-
      cluded multistage rockets and a design of a house-like upper stage.
      (Text)
  MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth accepted the 1566 Daniel and Florence
      Guggenheim International Astronautics Award at the IAF Congress in
      Madrid. Dr. Gilruth said in his acceptance speech: “The spaceflight
      achievements of Mercury and Gemini, now entered in the history of
      man’s exploration of the universe, took origin in the ideas, aspirations,
      and technical contributions of many persons in many countries. Astro-
      nautics has an international birthright, just as its future has great mean-
      ing for all of mankind.” (A&A, 1/67, 66)
   Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko, member of Soviet delegation to IAF Congress, told
      press conference in Madrid that U.S.S.R. was “doing very serious
      preparatory work” for another manned mission that would be “a serious
      new step in space exploration.” He disclosed no details but indicated
      mission might include extravehicular activity. Asked why there had
      been no Soviet manned spaceflight since March 18, 1965, VOSKHOD 11
      mission, Gazenko explained it reflected Soviet desire to make a major
      advance with each flight rather than repeat proved techniques. (Wilford,
      NYT, 10/15/66, 11)
October 15: President Johnson signed into law H.R. 15963 creating Cabinet-
      level Department of Transportation. (Pres. Doc., 10/24/66, 1498)
322               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 15: Close of IAF Congress was dramatized when Spain launched
     her first sounding rocket-Carabela         &from Arencillo base, near
     Huelva. British-built rocket, which cost approximately $1,700, carried
     12-lb. instrumented payload to 81-km. (50-mi.) aItitude and then im-
     pacted LEO mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Two NASA officials-William
     Hausman, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, and
     Clotaire Wood, NASA European Representative-observed the launch,
     first of six in a long-range program to study meteorology. (Wilford,
     NYT, 10/16/66, 78)
  Communist sources speculated that U.S.S.R. would launch “a large
     satellite carrying several men . . . just before the Nov. 7 anniversary of
     the Bolshevik Revolution,” and another, the world’s largest satellite
     and carrying eight men, by the end of 1966, AP reported. (AP, NYT,
     10/16/66,28)
October 16: Third year in space began for two experimental Vela nuclear
    detection satellites launched by DOD Oct. 16, 1963, into near-circular
     orbit at 52,174-mi. (84,000-km.) altitude. Satellites had demonstrated
    successful R&D program and had provided effective capability to detect
    nuclear explosions in space. DOD had overall responsibility for Vela
    program; ARPA had overall direction with support of AEC. (AFSC Release
    205.66)
October 17: NASA had begun study of how to keep two or more small monkeys
    in earth orbit for up to one year to assess long-term effects of weight-
    lessness on primates and evaluate problems related to humans under-
    taking extensive work in space. Industrial firms had been asked to sub-
    mit by Oct. 27 “preliminary design study” for Orbiting Primate Space-
    craft capable of being carried into earth orbit during Apollo program.
    LaRC would manage study. (NASA Release 66-273)
0 France’s Dragon sounding rocket was successfully launched from Nor-

    wegian range on Andoeya Island by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales
     (CNES). (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66, 13)
  At dedication of Sherman Fairchild Technology Center, Germantown, Md.,
    plans to use Nimbus B meteorological satellite-scheduled for launch
    late in 1966-in elephant-tracking experiment were revealed in speech
    prepared for delivery by MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and
    read in his absence by MSFC PAO Director, Bart J. Slattery, Jr. Satellite
    would home in on 25-lb. portable transponder strapped to back of an
    elephant. Experiment would test use of satellites to monitor wildlife,
    learn more about animal migration, and develop means of protecting
    species threatened with extinction. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/18/66, A14;
     Wash. Post, 10/18/66; Balt. Sun, 10/18/66)
* Mew studies of Martian atmosphere had rekindled hope of finding life on
    Mars, Dr. Lewis D. Kaplan of JPL reported at Western meeting of
    American Chemical Society in San Francisco. French scientists Drs.
    Pierre and Janine Connes of the Observatory of Haut-Provence, using
     improved spectroscopic equipment designed by Dr. Connes, had found
    concentration of hydrogen compounds around Mars 1,000 times greater
    than in earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Kaplan, who analyzed observations ob-
    tained, said the hydrogen compounds-considered necessary to life-
    probably included methane derivatives and perhaps methane itself.
    Methane appears on earth as gaseous hydrocarbon product of decom-
    posed organic matter and is known to be produced by anaerobic bac-
     teria not requiring the oxygen essential to most life on earth. Dr.
                                                                       323
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Kaplan’s work was sponsored by NASA and by France’s Centre National
    #Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the Meudon Observatory. (AP, NYT,
    10/18/66, 9)
October 17: Boeing Co. announced it had awarded $10 million in sub-
    contracts during planning phase (Phase 11-C) of Government-sponsored
    Sst design competition. Phase 11-C was being conducted under 18-1110.
    Government-industry cost-sharing contract which would end Dec. 31.
    Boeing and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had submitted final airframe de-
    signs to FAA Sept. 6. (Boeing Release)
0 Plan for 500-mph, 80-passenger Vtol air-bus service, developed by MIT’S

    Flight Transportation Laboratory to ease transportation congestion on
    the East Coast in the 1970’s, was announced by the Commerce Dept.
     (UPI, NYT, 10/18/66, 76)
During week of October 17: House Committee on Government Operations, in
    report based on August hearings by Subcommittee on Military Opera-
    tions, urged a ten- to twenty-fold expansion of DOD’S initial comsat sys-
     tem by increasing number and improving performance of both satellites
     and ground terminals. “Neither the Communications Satellite Corpora-
     tion nor the other commercial carriers need fear they will lose the
     Defense Department as a good customer” as a result of this expansion,
    the report said. (Av. Wk., 10/24/66, 29)
          Advanced Manned Missions program office issued Rfps on $300,000,
0 NASA’s

     nine-month analysis of economic potential of orbiting manned natural
     resources laboratory. It was specified that firms interested “must
     possess strong economic expertise at the national and international
    levels and must not be involved in the production of space or experi-
     mental hardware.” Replies were due at NASA Hq. Nov. 21. (Av. Wk.,
     10/24/66,28)
0 MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry

    received AIAA’S 1566 John Jeffries Award “for outstanding contributions
    to the advancement of aeronautics through medical research.” Presenta-
     tion was made at AIAA Military Aircraft Systems Meeting in Dallas.
     (MSC Roundup, 10/28/66, 1)
October 18: NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in interview with Look,
     rejected report that U.S.S.R. had lost men in space: “Every bit of in-
     formation we have shows that they have been as carefui with the lives
     of cosmonauts as we have been with astronauts. As far as I know, they
     have not lost a single man in flight. They have lost them on the ground,
     they have lost them in airplanes, just like we have.” (Look, 10/18/66)
  Research and development in essential space programs would not be
     seriously affected by demands of the Vietnam conflict, USAF Under
     Secretary Norman S. Paul told a National Space Club meeting in
     Washington, D.C. Asked during question and answer period for rough
     estimate of military manned spaceflight expenditures in the 1970s, Paul
     said that currently DOD was spending $1.3 billion of its $?-billion R&D
     budget on space and that it was “a safe guess this amount will go up.”
     Asked if there might be NASA programs competitive with USAF’S Mol,
     Paul said there was “not the slightest possibility.” (Text; MIS DuiZy,
     10/19/66, 20)
  DOD announced USAF would buy 99 improved F4E Phantom jet aircraft
     equipped for first time with internally mounted 20-mm. Gatling gun
     capable of firing 6,000 rounds a minute. Aircraft would give US.
     superiority over Soviet-made MiG-21s used by North Vietnam. (AP,
     NYT, 10/20/66, 27)
324               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 18: Dr. Jan H. Oort, head of Leiden Observatory, the Netherlands,
    and former head of International Astronomical Union, received 1966
    Vetlesen Award in earth sciences. Administered by Columbia Univ.
    for the G. Unger Vetlesen Foundation, the prize was awarded for ‘‘out-
    standing achievement in the sciences resulting in a clearer understand-
    ing of earth.”
        NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications
    Dr. Homer E. Newel1 noted in speech at award dinner that “through the
    space approach . . . the domain of the geosciences” had been strength-
     ened and extended: “The theories, instruments,, and skills needed and
     developed to study the earth can now be applied to investigating the
    moon and planets at first hand. Comparative studies of the planets and
     their atmospheres, ionospheres, and magnetospheres, promise increased
     understanding of our own planet, earth.” (Text; Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/
     66, 36)
October 19: NASA Administrator James E. Webb and the late NASA Deputy
     Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden were awarded the 1966 Robert J.
     Collier Trophy for “representing all of the Gemini program teams which
     significantly advance human experience in space flight,’’ at special
     ceremony in Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum.
     Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn.
       for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America,
     with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air
     or s ace vehicles.”
         V
         c
         e
         !    President Hubert H. Humphrey, presenting the trophy, said:
     “I can think of no more fitting choice for this distinguished award than
     Project Gemini and all those who made it such a success.’’ He noted that
     Gemini manned s acecraft had spent 875 hrs. in space; Gemini was first
                      B
     spacecraft to ren ezvous and first to dock with another spacecraft; and
     four Gemini astronauts had walked in space for total 5 hrs. 52 min.
         Administrator Webb, accepting trophy, said: “Gemini has broadened
     our vision, validated our concepts, proved out our technology, and has
     provided a much sounder structure of knowledge as to the importance of
     not accepting a position of second best in space.” Attributing Gemini
     program’s success to “the application of our scheduling principles,”
     Webb noted crmilestones’’:beginning of unmanned flights in 1963; first
     manned flight in 1964; rendezvous, docking, and first extravehicular
     activity in 1965; first use of Agena for orbit change and first closed-loop
     guidance in 1966; completion of program in 1967. “We missed the
     first two milestones. From then on, with the exception of docking, we
     have accomplished each milestone ahead of or on schedule and we do
     expect to complete the Gemini program ahead of schedule next month.”
      (Text; NASA Ann.; NAA News, 10/16/66; Wash. Post, 10/20/66, B7)
e Wilhelm Forster Observatory, West Berlin, reported U.S.S.R. had launch-
     ed a satellite at 7:20 a.m. EDT from space center in Baikonur. Spokesman
     said it had not been determined whether spacecraft was manned. NASC
      Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said report appeared to be in
     error and had apparently stemmed from misinterpretation of Soviet
     transmissions associated with tracking of previously launched Cosmos
      spacecraft. He added that if the U.S.S.R. did attempt launching, nothing
     got into orbit. U.S.S.R. made no comment. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/20/66)
   U.S. did not have women astronauts because “we have not yet been able to
      find an applicant sufficiently qualified in both scientific and engineering
                                                                           325
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    background, who also possesses the required test pilot experience,” said
    NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.
    Mueller at dedication of Cedar Crest College’s science center in Allen-
    town, Pa. He said NASA has always had the same requirements for both
    men and women; “there had never been any discrimination with regard
    to sex or on any other basis.” (Text)
October 19: MSFC awarded Martin Co. a one-year, $100,000 contract for design
    feasibility study of 2,000-w nuclear power system consisting of four
    Snap-29 radioisotope generators-each delivering 500 w-for possible
     use on long duration post-Apollo missions. Study would be performed at
    Martin’s Baltimore plant. (MSFC Release 66-251)
  Study of Ufo’s had been “relegated to the bottom of the barrel” by USAF,
     Dr. James C. McDonald, Univ. of Arizona professor, charged at Wash-
    ington, D.C., American Meteorological Society meeting. Attacking
    USAF’S Project Bluebook as “extremely superficial and of a low level of
     technical competence,” he urged that Ufo responsibility be taken away
     from USAF and put “into scientific hands.” The hypothesis that Ufo’s
    might be “extraterrestrial probes” could not be ruled out, he said.
     (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/66, C14)
October 20: U.S.S.R.’s launch of two satellites was observed by leaders of
     eight Communist nations visiting U.S.S.R. for summit talks on Vietnam
     and Communist China.
        COSMOS CXXX, for continued space research, entered earth orbit with
     340-km. (211-mi.) apogee; 211-km. (131-mi.) perigee; 89.9-min. period;
     and 65” inclination. Equipment was functioning normally.
                                                            ..
        Fourth MOLNIYA I comsat, for “further testing o f .     long range two-
     way television and telephonic-telegraphic radio communication,” had
     orbital parameters of apogee, 39,700 km. (24,658 mi.) ; perigee, 485 km.
     (301 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 53 min.; and inclination, 64.9”. Equipment,
     including broadcasting system, orientation system, orbital correction
     devices, and power supply, was functioning normally. (Tass, 10/20/66)
  Sounding rocket launched by Spain from Arencillo base fell to earth
     within a hundred yards of launching site. Officials blamed failure in
     guidance system. Launch was part of series begun Oct. 15 to collect
     meteorological data from region at 30- to 60-mi. (48-to 97-km.) altitude.
      (Chic. Trib., 10/21/66)
  No video information was on tape recorded by SURVEYOR I on Oct. 9 and
     transmitted to Deep Space Tracking Station, Johannesburg, South
     Africa, Oct. 10, JPL reported. Scientists said they had not been too hope-
     ful, and had been surprised that spacecraft had responded at all on Oct.
     8. SURVEYOR I, which had landed on moon’s Ocean of Storms June 2,
     entered its fifth lunar night shortly after Oct. 8 telemetry was returned.
      It had completed its second lunar day operations on July 13. (Wash.
      Eve. Star, 10/20/66; Tech. Wk., 10/17/66, 10)
   Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science
      and Astronautics, told Clear Lake (Tex.) Chamber of Commerce that he
      foresaw no curtailment of space program because of Vietnam war. If
      there were curtailment, “it will be aimed at all Government programs.”
      (Amerine, Houston Chron., 10/21/66)
   Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and
      Applications, visited MSFC to review technological and scientific progress
      on work being conducted by MSFC for OSSA projects, including Apollo
      Telescope Mount, x-ray astronomy experiment, and several other
326               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     astronomy experiments. Accompanying Dr. Newel1 were his deputies,
     Edgar M. Cortright and Dr. John E. Naugle, and directors of OSSA
       rogram offices. (MSFC    Release 66-256)
      B
Octo er 21: U.N. World Meteorological Organization-in report on plan for
     World Weather Watch to be injtiated between 1968 and 1970-warned
     it would be “foolhardy” for man to attempt to modify weather on large
     scale with current limited knowledge of atmospheric forces. Plan called
     for use of satellites; a relatively dense network of land and ocean weather
     stations, manned and unmanned; drifting sea buoys; balloons; and
     other instruments to probe the world’s atmosphere. High-speed tele-
     communications systems would centralize findings for analysis and relay
     latest detailed information to meteorologists everywhere. This would
     enable them to forecast the weather “both with improved accuracy and
     for a longer time ahead.” (NYT, 10/22/66,, 12)
0 I n a letter to Science, Dr. J. Allen Hynek of Northwestern Univ. said “we

     suffer, perhaps, from temporal provincialism” in dismissing the Ufo
     phenomenon with a shrug. He said that when he was scientific consultant
     to USAF’s Project Blue Book-Ufo registry at Wright-Patterson AFB-
     some of the most coherent reports had come from scientifically trained
     people. “Hard data” cases had contained frequent allusions to recurrent
     kinematic, geometric, and luminescent characteristics. “I have begun
     to feel that there is a tendency in 20th century science to forget that
     there will be a 21st century science, and indeed a 30th century science,
     from which vantage points our knowledge of the universe may appear
     quite different.” He had urged USAF “to ask physical and social scientists
     of stature to make a . . . scholarly study’’ of Ufo’s. Hynek‘s letter was
     written before Oct. 17 announcement of $300,000 USAF contract to
     Univ. of Colorado for Ufo investigation [see Aug. 1 . (Science, 10/21/66,
                                                            1
     329; A&A, 12/66, 4)
* Radar signature analysis (Rsa) for “spatial detective work” was discussed
     in Time. Using Rsa, scientists could reconstruct characteristics of
     foreign satellite from radar pulse pattern reflected to tracking station:
     by measuring amplitude of reflected pulses, satellite’s size could be
     calculated; by analyzing variations in pulse amplitude, satellite’s shape
     could be determined; by determining periodicity with which pulse
     pattern repeated itself, speed of tumbling, rolling, or spinning around
     spacecraft’s axes could be inferred. Computerized Rsa was being devel-
     oped so that in event of war, warhead radar signatures could be spotted
     quickly enough to order interception and destruction by defending
     missiles. (Time, 10/21/66)
  USAF OAR had proved capability of new dust separation device which could
     provide longer engine life for gas-turbine-powered engines, especially
     helicopters being used in Vietnam. Device was designed to prevent
     erosion of compressor section in engine and glass formation on engine’s
     hot surfaces by removing dust particles and other foreign objects from
     air before they could be sucked into engine. Tests had demonstrated
     a.r.erage 92 per cent efficiency. (OAR Release)
October 22: LUNA XII was launched by U.S.S.R. on trajectory toward the
     moon “to study the systems of the artificial satellite and near lunar
     space,” Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally, and
     spacecraft was traveling close to planned trajectory. (Tass, 10/23/66)
* NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR reached 93-mi. (149-km.) altitude
     in third mc-managed Project Luster experiment to collect meteoric
                                                                          327
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     debris during peak of Orionid meteor shower. Luster micrometeoroid
    sampling instrument deployed successfully during flight; debris was
    vacuum sealed at recovery. Rocket and instrumentation performed
    satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. s a )
October 22: U.S.S.R. was seeking experienced scientists between ages 40
    and 50 as cosmonauts, AP reported Soviet scientist Pyotr Yegorov as
    saying. Yegorov claimed there were no medical reasons men in this age
    group could not participate in space flights. (AP, Phil. Sun. Bull.,
     10/23/66)
October 23: France had requested that Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and
    Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., photograph sodium vapor trail of Centaure sound-
                                Gemini XI1 mission scheduled for launch Nov.
    ing rocket during NASA’s
    9. Sounding rocket-to study winds up to 400 mph at high altitudes-
    would be launched from Hammaguir Range on signal from Gemini
    Mission Control at MSC. Experiment would be first by foreign government
    to be part of a US. manned space flight. (Wash. Post, 10/23/66, A10;
    AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/23/66, A7)
0 JPL had awarded $200,000 contract to Avco Corp.’s Space Div. for task

    work in JPL’S new $1.5 million Sterilization Assembly Development
    Laboratory (SADL) . Starting in mid-1967, SADL would be sterilization
     testing headquarters €or Voyager spacecraft, scheduled €or Mars landing
    in the 1970s. (JPL Release)
October 24: NASA Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated
    NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968at IEEE conference
    in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not
     been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly
    with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain;
     or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was
     still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee J., 10/25/66)
0 Miniature data recording system that could be strapped to pilot’s leg to

     record physiological information during aircraft flights in which missiles
     were fired was being developed at Naval Missile Center, Point Mugu,
     Calif. NMC electronic engineer and inventor of device Clifford Phipps
     said: “In testing the whole weapons system, it is important to know how
     the man reacts, too.” (PMR Release 1411-66)
  Fred W. Friendly, former president of CBS News and current television
     adviser to Ford Foundation, said at National Assn. of Educational
     Broadcasters convention in Kansas City that the nonprofit comsat pro-
     posed by the Foundation to FCC Aug. 1would provide a “second service
     appealing to excellence.” He said educational broadcasting was now
     inefficient because it lacked “the interconnections to bring events to
     people as they hap en.” (AP,NYT, 10/20/66, 78)
                        l
0 ComSatCorp propose to FCC a reduced, flat rate for transatlantic TV trans-

     missions, effective with commercial operation of new Atlantic comsat
     in late 1966. Proposed rate for one-way, black-and-whitetransmission:
     $1,000 for first 10min. and $30 each additional minute per half channel.
     Current rates varied from $1,800 for first 10 min. and $32 each addi-
     tional minute during nonpeak hours, to $3,000 for first 10 min. and
     $48 each additional minute during peak hours. (ComSatCorp Release)
0 Roll D. Ginter, NASA Centaur Program Manager, became Director of OART’S

     newly established Space Flight Programs Div. He would be responsible
     for mission planning, management, and coordination of technology
     space flight projects and experiments within OART. (NASA Release 66-276)
328               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 24: Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was appointed chairman of
    the board of Royal Crown Cola International, Ltd. (AP, Wash. Post,
     10/25/66, C8)
0 Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Deputy Director of White House’s Office of

    Science and Technology, warned in speech at seminar on Research in
    the Service of Man in Oklahoma City that unless scientists “educated”
    the President and “other intelligent, concerned laymen” about the
    applicability of their work, their fields of research would suffer. Science,
    he said, could no longer hope to exist “through some mystique, without
     constraints or scrutiny in terms of material goals, and isolated from
     the competition for allocation of resources which are finite.” (Sullivan,
     NYT, 10/25/66, 78M)
0 USAF was awarding Thiokol Chemical Corp. $1,075,507 contract for design,
     fabrication, and testing of thrust vector control system €or 156-in.
     solid rocket motor. (DOD Release 897-66)
0 Proposed further reduction in NASA FY 1967 appropriation because of
     Vietnam war would amount to ‘(national disaster,” Ira C. Eaker wrote
     in Sun Antonio Express: “Such desertion of our present space program
     would give the Soviets an advantage they are now striving mightily to
     achieve. The U.S.S.R. is now spending about twice what the US. is
     spending for space research.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 10/24/66)
October 25: Propellant tank rupture occurred on Apollo spacecraft 017
     service module during proof pressure test at 240 psi conducted by NAA
     at Downey, Calif.; inflight operating pressure would be 180 psi. No test
     personnel were injured. NASA had established board of inquiry to
     investigate. (NASA Release 66-285; NAA S&ID Skywriter, 10/28/66, 4;
     AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/66, D18)
0 U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported that U.S.S.R.’s LUNA

     XII spacecraft had apparently entered orbit around moon and was trans-
     mitting telemetry but no photographic signals. U.S.S.R. had made no
     official statement since Oct. 22 launch. (UPI, NYT, 10/26/66, 10; Wash.
     Post, 10/26/66, A16)
0 NASA Aerobee 150 and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 35 min.

     apart from WSMR reached 116-mi. (186-km.) and 74-mi. (119-km.)
     altitudes in GSFC-ESSA Institute for Telecommunication Sciences and
     Aeronomy experiment. Aerobee rocket and instrumentation, designed
      to measure micrometeoroid and cosmic dust impacts and electron den-
     sities, performed satisfactorily. Although Nike-Cajun did not reach
     predicted altitude and two of seven experiments to obtain data on ion-
      ospheric D-region did not function properly, satisfactory results were
      obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
   MSFC had awarded Univ. of Wisconsin a $679,101 contract to develop
      sensors for galactic x-ray mapping experiment to be flown on an Up-
      rated Saturn I (Saturn IB) launch vehicle in 1968. Sensors would
      explore x-ray sources other than sun and Crab Nebula. (MSFC Release
      66-258)
 0 Potential for application of biomedical knowledge acquired in space

      research was discussed by Dr. Richard L. Lesher, NASA Assistant Admin-
      istrator for Technology Utilization, at the Conference on Biomedical
      Knowledge, Oklahoma City. He described two experimental efforts
      conducted by NASA’s   technology utilization program : (1) an agreement
      with Vocational Rehabilitation Administration to make available infor-
      mation from aerospace research to solve ‘problems of restoring the
                                                                               329
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     disabled to productive life,” and (2) interdisciplinary biomedical applica-
     tion teams at research centers under NASA contract to define medical
     problems and identify aerospace technology applicable to their solution.
     (Text)
October 25: British Research Council had offered to pay one half the $11.2-
    million cost of constructing a 150-in. telescope in Australia, largest in
     Southern Hemisphere. Similar offer from Univ. of California was
     pending before Australian Government. (NYT, 10/26/66, 1)
October 25-28: 75th anniversary convocation, “Scientific Progress and
     Human Values,” was held at Cal Tech. Dr. Lee A. DuBridge in welcom-
                                                                           .. .
     ing address noted meeting represented “a time for self appraisal.          We
    at Cal Tech are seriously seeking to take a hard look at ourselves, at the
     world of science and technology of which we are part, and at the world
     of human beings who may either benefit or possibly suffer from what
     we do.”
        NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.
     Mueller said that “through the creative use of the capabilities that we
     are building up, space may . . . be used as one of many approaches to
    alleviate” problems of “famine, disease, over-population, and the need
    for more and better education” facing developing nations.
        Dreams of eventual space travel were “pure fantasy,” according to
     Cal Tech astronautics professor Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein. He urged,
     however, that a greater portion of national expenditures be devoted to
     achieving interstellar communications-a task that ‘‘may ultimately
     become the greatest scientific adventure.”
        Dr. Robert P. Sharp, professor of geology at Cal Tech, noted that
    although “earth scientists” were playing important role in national
    space program, it was also important that they “look downward into
                            .
     our own planet. . . Our understanding of these distant bodies will
     depend to a good degree upon how well we understand our own plain
     earth.”
        Likelihood that revolutionary improvement in communication on
     earth would transform society was suggested by John R. Pierce, research
     director of Bell Telephone Labs. Communications Sciences Div. Satel-
     lites would greatly expand potential of backward countries and would
     help build a sense of national identity in underdeveloped areas.
        “Technology is moving faster than our ability to assimilate it,”
     scientist and industrialist Dr. Simon Ram0 postulated. Dr. Ram0 urged
     development of new class of men called ~ C ~ ~ c i o - t e c h n ~ lwhoi could 7
                                                                         og ~ts~
     “effectively link scientific developments with social betterment.”
        Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, professor of theoretical physics at Cal Tech,
     said society must give new direction to technology, diverting it from
     applications that yield higher productive efficiency into areas that
     yielded greater human satisfaction. A symbol of this sort of change
     would occur when man no longer wanted to channel resources into
     “building bigger, noisier aircraft” or when society decided to divert a
     new highway around a virgin forest rather than build through it.
     (Texts; Bart, NYT, 10/26/66, 23; Duscha, Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A9;
     NYT, 10/30/66, 52)
October 26: NASA’s Atlas-Centaur 9 (AC-9) launch vehicle successfully
     carried out first full-thrust restart in space of liquid hydrogen engine
     during two-burn indirect ascent mission launched from ETR. Flight-
     eighth and last planned Centaur development test flight-almost exactly
330                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      followed prelaunch plans: AC-9 Centaur stage burned for 328 sec. and
      again for 107 sec., first to drive itself into temporary 100-mi. (161-km.)
      altitude parking orbit and then to inject mass model of Surveyor space-
      craft on simulated lunar transfer trajectory. Preliminary tracking data
      indicated dummy spacecraft was aimed accurately and on course.
      Centaur project had been managed by LBC. (NASA Release 66-274; NASA
      Proj. Off.; LRC Release 66-69; AP, Vush. Post, 10/27/66, A7; Av. Vk.,
      10/31/66,39)
October 26: U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XII was probably less than 100 mi. from moon,
    reported director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Sir
    Bernard Lovell. He said: ‘Zast night the signals from the probe were
    steady and indicated that, contrary to LUNA x and XI, it was ejected into
    orbit without rotation. That means that potentially it was a more success-
    ful exercise.” (AP,    Balt. Sun, 10/27/66)
  Four-stage USAF Trailblazer was launched from NASA Wallops Station in
    second of a series of six Air Force Avionics Laboratory launches to
    study communications blackout during space vehicle reentry. (Tech.
     Vk.,  11/7/66, 10)
  Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Tass as saying that he was in
    favor of strict international law governing cooperation in space. Through
    agreement, all stations, equipment, and spacecraft sent to moon or the
    planets could be available for use by representatives of other states, he
    noted. “However, all this would be justified only if the moon and the
    other celestial bodies are used by all treaty participants for peaceful
    purposes.” (Tass, 10/26/66)
0 NASA awarded North American Aviation, he., a $37-million, cost-plus-

    award-fee contract supplement for launch preparation and checkout of
    ten Saturn V 2nd stages (S-11). (NASA Release 66-281)
0 W - F 2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry (USAF),

    made 12th glide flight at Edwards AFB after air-launch from B-52 air-
    craft at 45,000-ft. altitude. Purposes of flight were to obtain data on
    stability and control at 7” and 11”angles of attack and on upper flap
    effectiveness. (NASA Proj. Off.)
October 26-29: Second International Congress on Air Technology met at
    Hot Springs, Ark.
        Need to develop a V/Stol aircraft as an “air bus” for faster short-haul
    transportation of cargo and passengers within large urban areas was
    rapidly increasing with growth in population, asserted Jack D. Brewer,
    program manager for V/Stol research, NASA Hq. By 1985, according to
    prediction, more than 130 million persons-half the U S . population-
    would be living in super metropolitan areas at San Francisco-Los
    Angeles, Buffalo-Chicago,and Boston-New York-Washington, D.C. (NASA
    Release 66-282)
        Cooperation as well as competition would be necessary to meet chal-
     lenges of future air transportation, John C. Brizendine, Douglas Air-
     craft Co., Inc., Aircraft Division vice president for engineering, told
    the Congress. He said progress in solving problems such as noise,
     limiting effects of weather, congestion of airports and airways, and rapid
     transportation needs between airports and cities, should be accelerated.
         .. if society is to realize the progress and benefits technology can
     offer, we as leaders of large segments of society also must display in-
     creasing unity of purpose in striving to overcome the major environ-
     mental problems common to all of us.” (CR, 1/23/67, 5729-31)
                                                                        331
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 27: NASA launched ComSatCorp’s INTELSAT 11-A comsat from ETR by
    three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical
     transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit
    parameters: apogee, 23,382 mi. (37,646 km.) ; perigee, 186 mi. (299.9
    km.); period, 1 hr. 9 min.; inclination, 26.4’. At ninth apogee-on
                       1
     Oct. 30-ComSatCorp fired the apogee motor. Apparently the apogee
    motor nozzle was blown off shortly after the motor ignited, and INTELSAT
    11-A entered orbit with 23,330-mi. (37,545-km.) apogee; 2,072-mi. (3,334-
    km.) perigee; 12 hr. 16 min. period; and 17” inclination rather than
    planned 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit over Pacific. ComSat-
     Corp announced that 192-lb. satellite, nicknamed “LANI BIRD,” could
    receive and transmit televisidn and other forms of communications,
     but that “significance of this potential remains to be assessed.”
        First satellite in ComSatCorp’s two-satellite Intelsat I1 system to
    provide transatlantic and transpacific comsat coverage, INTELSAT 11-A
    had been scheduled to extend commercial service to the Pacific; assist
     in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide
     capability for live transpacific TV by handling TV, data transmission,
     or up to 240 voice channels between “first class” ground stations.
     Intelsat 11-B was planned for launch in early 1967. INTELSAT I (“EARLY
     BIRD”) had been orbited April 6, 1965. (ComSatCorp Releases; NASA
     Proj. Off.)
0 No photographic signals had been detected by Western monitors from

     U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XII, which had apparently entered lunar orbit Oct. 25.
     It was speculated that spacecraft had been shut down temporarily to
     conserve battery power. U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since
     Oct. 22 launch. (UPI, NYT, 10/28/66, 21)
0 ComSatCorp asked FCC for authority to construct a $6,500,000 high-

     capacity earth station in Peach Tree Valley, Calif., to communicate
     with, and perform tracking, telemetry, and command duties for, orbiting
     satellites. ComSatCorp would withdraw Oct. 6 application for a second
     antenna at Andover, Me., station pending FCC action on California
     application. (ComSatCorp Release)
0 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., accepting the

     New York Board of Trade’s 20th annual Business Speaks Award on
     behalf of NASA, noted “the most important lesson” learned in manage-
                                  .
     ment of the space effort: “. . when pressing forward and coordinating
                                                              .
     the efforts of a large group of teams and individuals . . it is of para-
     mount importance to provide objectives for each and to assure that
     these objectives are tailored to the mind and capability of the group
     attacking them. If the task is ever going to be accomplished, it must
     seem achievable . . . to the man undertaking it. And . . . each segment
     of the overall task must be accurately tracked and timed to be properly
     completed and fitted into the appropriate sequence even as the work
     goes on.’’ (Text)
0 Communist China exploded on target over its own territory a nuclear
     weapon carried by a guided missile. Test was fourth in series of nuclear
     explosions: first, Oct. 16, 1964; second, May 14, 1965; third, May 9,
     1966. (NYT, 10/28/66, 1, 18)
October 28: USAF’S OV3-I1 research satellite was launched from Vandenberg
     AFB by Scout rocket into orbit with 991-mi. (1,595-km.) apogee; 198-mi.
      (319-km.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 82’ inclination. Launch was
     planned so satellite would be in orbit during Nov. 12 South American
332               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    solar eclipse to provide data on charged particle variations in extreme
    upper atmosphere before, during, and after eclipse. Satellite, designed
    to remain active in space at least one year, would also extend knowledge
    of electron and ion density structure found in outer radiation belt by
             DISCOVERER XVII. (Vandenberg AFB PIO; UPI, Phil. Sun. Bull.,
    NASA’s
     10/30/66)
October 28: First manned Apollo spacecraft (AS-204) would be orbited in
    first quarter of 1967, NASA announced. Mission would verify spacecraft
    systems performance and crew operations. NASA had hoped for December
    launching, but modification of environmental control system (Ecs)
    would necessitate further ground testing of spacecraft. Prime crew
     would be Virgil I. Grissom, command pilot; Edward H. White 11, senior
    pilot; and Roger Chaffee, pilot. Backup crew would be James McDivitt,
     command pilot; David Scott, senior pilot; and Russell Schweikart, pilot.
     (NASA  Release 66-284)
0 NASA awarded Boeing Co. a $4.5-million contract modification for design

     and procurement of Saturn V 1st stages. Hardware included propellant
     ducts and valves and pressurization switches and gauges. (NASA      Release
     66-283)
0 General Electric Co. successfully tested prototype GE4 turbojet engine at

     52,600 lbs. thrust-believed to be record for air-breathing engines of
     all types. GE4 was developed in FAA competition with Pratt & Whitney
     Div., United Aircraft Corp., for Sst engine contract. (GE Release 66-51)
  NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech at Mills College,
     Oakland, Calif., that the “complex interdevelopment of technological
     power and of the social organization necessary to control, direct, and
     exploit it . . . is a central element of the space age. . . . The success of
     our space program is helping to p o v e to ourselves and to the world
     that we have the will and the capacity to establish far-reaching, difficult
     goals and bring them surely to fruition. This kind of proof is a major
     basis for national prestige and international cooperation.” (Text)
* U.S. Army Corps of Engineers awarded $1,071,205 contract for construc-
     tion of foundations at ERC to Coleman Bros. Corp., Boston. (MSC Round-
     up, 10/28/66, %; DOD Release 879-66)
  Recent “booming” in Chicago area precipitated editorial comment in
     Chicago Daily News: “We grant that the supersonic age is upon us.
     But it is also an age of human beings with human rights. One of these
     is the right not to be buffeted around by sonic booms, and it is evidently
     going to take eternal vigilance to keep that right from being obliterated
     in the name of some totally unsupportable need.” (Chic. Daily News,
     10/28/66)
  Plan to shift headquarters of USN’S manned spacecraft recovery fleet (Task
     Force 140) from Norfolk to Houston was under study by DOD, fleet
     commander R/Adm. Conrad Abhau told AP. Abhau said he and his
     staff had been absent from Norfolk on recovery operations 4+0per cent
     of the time during the past 12 mos. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/29/66, E16)
  FCC had granted ITT World Communications, Inc., permission to provide
     facilities on U.S.S. Wasp for televising recovery of Gemini 12 space-
     craft; three-day mission was scheduled for Nov. 9 launch. TV signals
     would be transmitted by EARLY BIRD I for relay. (Wash. Eve. Star,
     10/29/66, A16)
October 29: LUNAR ORBITER I impacted on moon’s hidden side at 9:30 a.m.
     EDT on command from earth. The spacecraft was deliberately crashed
                                                                           333
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     to obviate possible interference with mission of second Lunar Orbiter
     (Lunar Orbiter B) scheduled for launch Nov. 6. First U S . spacecraft
     to orbit and photograph moon, LUNAR ORBITER I, launched Aug. 10,
     became first satellite to be deliberately destroyed in space by NASA. (NASA
     Release 66-287; O’Toole, Push. Post, 10/30/66, A10)
October 29: LUNA XII had photographed lurain with “a special phototelevision
     device,” Tass announced in first official statement relating to spacecraft
     since Oct. 22 launch. Satellite had entered lunar orbit Oct. 25 with
     1,740-km. (1,081-mi.) apolune; 100-km. (62-mi.) perilune; and 3 hr. 25
     min. period. First photos transmitted-shown on Moscow television less
     than an hour after announcement-showed              clearly distinguishable
     details of craters and mountain ranges.
         LUNA XII was ninth photographic mission to moon. Five had been
     from US.: RANGERS VII, VIII, and IX, SURVEYOR I, and LUNAR ORBITER I;
     four from U.S.S.R.: LUNA 111, ZOND 111, LUNA IX, and LUNA XII. (Tass,
     10/29/66; AP, N Y T , 10/30/66, 43)
   Dr. Serge A. Korff, director of New York Univ.’s cosmic research program,
     told a youth science seminar at the Explorer’s Club in New York that he
     believed many Ufo sightings had been of giant balloons sent aloft by
     NYU to test the upper atmosphere: “[They] are 300 to 400 feet across
     and because they are partly inflated, assume strange shapes as they
     ascend. At high altitudes they often reflect sunlight and become visible
      to viewers below in areas where the sun has set or before it has risen.”
      (NYT, 10/30/66, 45)
   “Whole towns” on the moon, complete with dome-like buildings linked
      by tunnels and parks under transparent hoods, might be constructed
      in 20th century, Soviet architect Nikolay Kolomiyets suggested in
      Krusnuyu Zvezdu. Kolomiyets said the moon town should provide a
      safe shelter for its inhabitants and be attractive as well. Best construc-
      tion material would probably be lunar rocks. “It can be expected that
      after treatment with alkalis, lunar rocks can be used to build walls and
      roofs by pouring, just as they are made on earth by pouring concrete.”
       (Tass, 10/29/66)
October 30: U.S.S.R. Antaeus cargo aircraft lifted 88 tons, 103 kg., in flight
      from Podmoskovnoye airport (Moscow) piloted by I. Y. Davidov,
      Krusnuyu Zvezdu announced. Previous cargo record had been 53 metric
      tons, 479 kg., lifted Dec. 16, 1958, by US. MATS C-133 Cargomaster
      piloted by Col. John M. Thompson (WAF). (Tass, 10/30/66)
   Sst would be limited to speed over land of 660 mph to avoid sonic booms,
      Evert Clark reported in New York Times. (Clark, NYT, 10/31/66, 1)
October 31: NASA launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket from Wallops Station
      to test performaace of spacecraft heat shield design. First two stages
      lifted 135-lb. payload to 75,000-ft. altitude. As payload began to fall
      back to earth, last two stages were fired to drive it downward at about
      6,800 mph. Information was obtained by tracking and photography and
      from the payload itself, which was recovered after parachute descent
       into Atlantic. (Wallops PAO; UPI, NYT, 11/1/66)
 * Japan successfully launched four-stage Mu-1 rocket from Uchinoura
       Space Center, Kyushu Island, to test 1st-stage fuel combustion and
       booster propulsion. The 70-ft.-long7 solid-fueled launch vehicle was
       launched at 69” inclination and impacted in Pacific after 3-min. 20-sec.
       flight. Scientists called test ‘‘a success.” Mu was scheduled to orbit
       Japan’s first satellite by 1968. (AP, NYT, 11/1/66)
334               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

October 31: Sst design proposal evaluations were submitted to FAA by 235-
    member Government team and 30 domestic and foreign airlines; FAA
    Administrator William F. McKee would study evaluations and make
    recommendation; President Johnson would make final decision by Jan.
     1, 1967. (Wash. Post, 11/1/66, B7)
* A revolution in 1970’s of air transport industry that would ccchangeits
    scope and character even more than the switch from piston-engine
    equipment to jets did in the 1960s,” was predicted by Robert Hotz in
    Aviation Week. Transformation would be stimulated by the “sharp spur
    of advanced technology arriving in the midst of changing economic and
    social problems.” Hotz observed that “no other major business in the
    industrial history of the world has had to cope with such a series of
    technical revolutions in such a short time span as the airlines.” (Hotz,
    Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 21)
  U.S.S.R. planned to build two additional satellite tracking stations in
    Cuba and had sited one near Santiago, Aviation Week reported. (Av.
     Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
  USAF had awarded Boeing Co. $142.3-million firm fixed-price incentive
    contract to develop and produce A G M - ~ ~Short Range Attack Missile
                                                     A
     (Sram) to be carried by FB-111 bombers and adaptable to late model
    B-52 bombers. (DOD Release 925-66)
  Franco-Soviet cooperative space agreement was being viewed with skepti-
    cism by French scientists who foresaw effort would break down for
    same lack of Soviet candor that had stymied useful information exchange
    between US. and U.S.S.R., Aviation Week reported. In addition, French
    Communists were protesting to Kremlin that high Soviet sanction of
    President De Gaulle’s space program was weakening Communistpolitical
    stature in France. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 23)
  Cost-sharing dispute between DOD and NASA over use of ETR was reported
    by Aviation Week. DOD wanted NASA to pay share of continuing costs-
    possibly as much as $100 million annually-instead of only expenses
    for launches. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 25)
  Discussing the manned spaceflight program in press interview at Texas
    Technical College, physicist and atomic scientist Dr. Edward Teller said:
      ... to get to the moon first is not important, but who stays there and
     tr

    exploits the knowledge to be gained from the moon is more important.”
    Teller, attending symposium on arid and semi-arid land, said US. should
    settle a colony of scientists on moon to determine feasibility of using it
    as a base for reaching Mars. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/1/66, 8)
0 NASA was planning total of 1 lunar landing missions, reported Technology
                                  1
     Week, citing procurement request issued by MSC. Number of missions
    was included as guideline for firms asked to submit bids on development
     of crew recovery quarantine equipment. (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66, 3)
  FAA predicted flying activity at the 303 airports with FAA control towers
    would break all records in 1966: an estimated 45.1 million landings and
     takeoffs were foreseen-a 19 per cent increase over 1965. (FAA     Release
    66-95)
During October: NASA published Vacuum Technology and Space Simulation
     (SP-105), a comprehensive manual available to public through the
     Superintendent of Documents, GPO. (NASA        Release 66-279)
  FAA cautioned airline executives during briefing in Washington, D.C., not
     to let desire for a “fly-off competition’’ keep them from making as clear-
     cut a first choice as possible for the supersonic transport. If they did
                                                                          335
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    not, they might get aircraft they did not want or Congressional critics
    might use indecisiveness to stdl or kill program. Possibility that proto-
    types of both the Boeing and Lockheed airframe designs would be built
    was virtually ruled out. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 25)
During October: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown summarized
    USAF’S position on its future in space in an interview with Armed Forces
    Management: “It is not a matter of desiring to conduct military cam-
    paigns in space but rather to preclude any aggressor from using space as
                                                                   . ..
    an area of operations for launching attacks against the US.
        “We should not be doing things just to be doing them. Rather, they
    must have direct relation to establishing military needs.
        “Space is not a mission but a place to perform a mission. When a
    mission can be performed from space, the Air Force will perform it from
     there. . . .” (Armed Forces Management, 10/66, 69)
0 NASA made available a list of abstracts of NASA-owned inventions for

    foreign licensing through the Assistant General Counsel for Patent
     Matters, NASA Hq. (NASA     Release 66-266)
0 AFSC awarded 12-mo. study contracts totaling $900,000 to Lockheed-

     California Co., North American Aviation, Inc., and McDonnell Aircraft
     Corp. to develop a high-altitude, hypersonic Scramjet-powered cruise
                                                          Release 188.66)
     vehicle with potential military applications. (AFSC
  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Znteravia
     that in addition to possible “definite and direct” economic and tech-
     nological benefits, the “greatest impact the continuing exploration of
     space will have upon man will be upon his own philosophy: that is, his
     view of himself in relation to the universe as he imagines it.” (Znteravia,
      10/66, 1479)
0 USAF School of Aerospace Medicine had completed 46-day simulated space-

     flight in which bite-size food diet was tested, Technology Week reported.
      Four airmen, divided into two teams, spent several days at ground-level
      conditions, then entered two high-altitude chambers at simulated
      27,000 ft. Atmosphere was 70% oxygen, 30% hydrogen for one team;
      70% oxygen, 30% nitrogen for second. Final sixteen days were spent
      at ground level. Results had not been released. (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66,4)
                            November 1966

November 1: X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to
    3,750 mph (mach 5.34) and 306,900-ft. altitude in flight test to collect
    micrometeoroids. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to
    check dual channel radiometer, tip-pod accelerometer, and precision
    attitude. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
  An 8,189-hr. test of cesium electron-bombardment engine performed for
    LRC by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., ended when supply of cesium fuel
    was exhausted. Conducted in space simulation chamber, test was part
    of NASA’s electric engine research program. Studies had shown that such
    systems could result in increased payloads in unmanned and manned
    spaceflight missions. (NASA Release 66-306)
  U.S.S.R. successfully launched and recovered aerostat containing 7.6-ton
    rc
       high altitude automatic astronomic station,” to 20-km. (12-mi.) alti-
    tude for rcexplorationof physical processes in the solar photosphere.”
    Equipment, including optical and radio-technical apparatuses, had
    functioned normally, and results were being processed. (Tass, 11/5/66;
    AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/6/66, E26)
0 Test-firings of XE nuclear rocket engine-last   major step before develop-
    ing hardware for flight-rated nuclear engine-would begin in latter half
    of 1968, Milton Klein, Deputy Manager, NASA-AEC Space Nuclear
    Propulsion Office, told Atomic Industrial Forum in Pittsburgh. Klein
    also disclosed that his office had begun preliminary design of new
    facilities with two test positions, each capable of testing a 200,000-1b.-
    thrust engine or an entire propulsion module under simulated altitude
    conditions. (Text)
  Gen. Jacob E. Smart (USAF, Ret.), former Deputy Commander-in-Chief of
    U.S. European Command, was sworn in as a special assistant to NASA
    Administrator James E. Webb. (NASA Release 66-288)
0 George C. White, Jr., chief of NASA Hq. Apollo Spacecraft and Vehicle

    Test Performance Office, was appointed Director of Apollo Reliability
    and Quality. (NASA Ann., 11/18/66)
0 Survival of 17 chimpanzees without permanent damage after 3% min. in
    simulated space environment offered hope that an astronaut outside
    his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak.
    I n 18 tests conducted at Holloman AFB during one year, chimps placed
    in a decompression chamber for time periods that were gradually
    increased from 5 sec. to 3% min. suffered only temporary abnormalities.
    L/Col. C. H. Kratochvil, commander of Holloman’s aeromedical research
    laboratory, said close relationship bet%-eenchimps and humans made it
    possible to assume that findings would be applicable to astronauts.
    (Nelson, Wush. Post, 11/2/66, A E  L)
* Dr. Hugh Odishaw was appointed executive secretary of the NRC Div. of
    Physical Sciences. Space Science Board, Geophysics Research Board,

    336
                                                                           337
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     and Committee on Polar Research-groups with which Dr. Odishaw
     had been closely associated-would be shifted into MC as joint respon-
     sibility of Div. of Earth Sciences and Div. of Physical Sciences. They
     previously had been among 12 NAS groups that functioned outside the
     formal NRC divisional structure. (NAS-RRC-NAE News Report, 11/66, 1)
November 1: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by AFCRL from WSMR
     reached 150 mi. (241 km.) in experiment to measure extreme ultraviolet
     solar radiation. (OAR Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
0 ComSatCorp signed agreements to purchase 210-acre site in Montgomery

     County, Md., for $7- to $10-million Research and Development Center.
     Construction would begin in 1967. (ComSatCorp Release)
November 2: U.S.S.R. launched spacecraft, possibly from Cosmos series,
     which exploded into 32 pieces detectable by radar. GSFC Satellite Situation
     Report would later reveal that 12 pieces of debris remained in orbit Nov.
     15; 20 had reentered. Spacecraft was second Soviet satellite to explode
     in six weeks [see Sept. 171. (GSFC SSR, 11/15/66)
  NASA had extended operational lifetimes of its three Pegasus meteoroid
     detection satellites 12 additional months because of their successful
     operation. Satellites would continue to provide meteoroid data, but
     researchers would concentrate on studying durability of spacecraft
     systems and components. PEGASUS I was launched Feb. 16, 1965:
     PEGASUS 11, May 27, 1965; and PEGASUS 111, July 30, 1965. All had been
    scheduled to operate 18 mos. (MSFC Release 66-264)
  USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg AFB with Atlas-
    Agena D booster. (Tech. Wk., 11/7/66, 10; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act.,
     1966, 157)
* JPL selected Litton Industries, Inc., Guidance and Control Systems Div.,
    for negotiation of a $3-million contract to design, fabricate, and check
    out data automatic subsystem (Das) for 1969 Mariner (unmanned)
    flights to Mars. JPL had management responsibility to NASA for Mariner/
    Mars project. (NASA Release 66-289)
* General Precision Equipment Corp. received $8.6-million NASA contract
    to provide three sets of equipment to modify Apollo simulators at KSC.
     ( E Y , 11/2/66, 3)
* Man must learn to operate effectively and efficiently in space before he
    can reap the full benefits of space exploration, Dr. George E. Mueller,
    NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told the Wis-
    consin State Chamber of Commerce in Milwaukee: “TO employ Apollo
    flight hardware and capabilities beyond the manned lunar landing, and
    to extend the capability of the Apollo spacecraft would make efficient
    use of our national investment. Missions are available to make use of
    the equipment for flights in earth orbit, in lunar orbit, and to the moon’s
    surface. Experiments are being defined to determine the value of such
    missions. Users have expressed interest in the results of such experi-
    ments. But first we must develop the ability to operate in space. . . .”
     (Text)
  Leningrad Institute of Cytology scientists had designed special device to
    permit biologists to study effects on microorganisms of “pure” solar
    radiation. Device, called “Photostate I,” consisted primarily of 18-liter
     chamber in which wide temperature range could be created and observa-
     tions made under any intensity of solar radiation in the field of visible
     and ultraviolet light. (Tass, 11/2/66)
338               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 2: BCA received $2,500,000 fixed-price USN contract for fabri-
    cation, testing, and delivery of six navigation satellites. (DOD Release
    933-66)
November 3: XB-70 No. 1experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by L/Col.
    Joseph Cotton (USAF) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton, reached
    mach 2.1 and 60,000-ft. altitude during two-hour flight to evaluate
    sonic booms and conduct noise measurements for FAA. Flight was first
    since June 8 crash of XB-70 No. 2 near Barstow, Calif. (XB-70 Proj.
    Off.; UPI, Chic. Trib., 11/4/66)
0 USAF Titan 111-C booster launched from ETR released unmanned Gemini

    spacecraft on reentry trajectory and inserted canister containing nine
    experiments and three satellites into high, circular orbit in successful
    mission marking first flight test of hardware for DOD’S Manned Orbiting
    Laboratory (Mol).
       Power flight of Titan 111-C was close to planned parameters. Modified
    Gemini spacecraft was released at 125-mi. altitude in test to determine
    whether new heat shield with hatch could withstand reentry tempera-
    tures. Traveling 17,500 mph, spacecraft followed 5,500-mi. trajectory,
    landing only seven miles off target in the Atlantic. Recovery was made
    by U.S.S. LaSaZZe. Titan 111-C’s transtage restarted twice to achieve
    planned 184-mi.-altitude circular orbit and release 38-ft. experimental
    canister, proving booster’s ability to launch long payload. Canister-
    OV4-111-ejected OV4-IR and QV4-IT comsats and QVl-VI satellite,
    which achieved separate, circular orbits. Launch, sixth in series of 12
    designed to qualify composite Titan 111-6for operational service, was
    characterized by USAF officials as a “major step” in the Mol program.
    (Wilford, NYT, 11/4/66, 1, 10; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, A l ;
    AP, Wash. Post, 11/4/66, A l ; Av. Wk., 11/14/66, 30; U.S. Aeron. &
    Space Act., 1966, 158)
0 Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require

    a “two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the
    evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president
    George H. Stoner before AIAA Forum on “After Apollo, What Next?” in
    Washington, D.C.: “. . . industry must assist NASA and the federal
    government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the
    research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our
    universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized
    space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than
    NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in
    the world market place and in the international technological race on
    the large scale development projects that characterize our modern
                .”
    society. . . Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo
    activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of
    the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2)
    applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3)
    expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from
    space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing
    exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scien-
    tists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
0 Apparent inactivity in Soviet manned space program might reflect “grow-

    ing dismay over the tremendously high cost of astronautics where men
    are involved,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star.
     “The Russians may feel they have better things to do with their money,
    just as the United States would have if the Kennedy ‘moon message’ of
                                                                         339
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    1961 had not been hung like an albatross around the national neck as
    a commitment involving American prestige before the world.” Cost of
    Project Gemini was about $700,000 per man hour. (Hines, Wash. Eve.
    Star, 11/3/66, A12)
November 3: 1966 Nobel Prizes for chemistry and physics were awarded to
    Drs. Robert S. Mulliken, Univ. of Chicago, and Alfred Kastler, Ecole
    Normale Superieure in Paris, respectively. Professor Mulliken was cited
    for “his functional work concerning chemical bonds and the electronic
    structure of molecules by the molecular orbital method”; Professor
    Kastler, for “the discovery and development of optical methods for
    studying Hertzian resonances in atoms.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66,
    A l ; Wiskari, NYT, 11/4/66, 1, 28)
e U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency announced plans for a
    “field exercise” in Ariiona, Nevada, and California, to test methods of
    identifying underground nuclear explosions. Project, which would
    begin in late 1966 and continue through May 1967, would develop
    methods by which international inspection teams might police a ban on
    underground nuclear tests. (UPI, Wash. Post, 11/4/66, A23)
November 4: U.S.S.R. had launched Yantar I ionospheric laboratory equipped
    with gas plasma ion engine to altitudes of 100 to 400 km. (62 to 249 mi.)
    in October “to study the outlook for guided flight in the upper layers
    of the atm~sphere,~’ announced. Data on propulsion-system per-
                           Tass
    formance in electrically charged ionosphere would be analyzed and
    results published in magazines of the Soviet Academy of Sciences.
        Both NASA and USAF had already conducted several ground and flight
    tests of electric engines, and another series was scheduled to begin in
    late 1966. Jerome P. Mullin, of OART’S Nuclear Systems and Space
    Power Div., told the New York Times in a telephone interview that
    electric engines had “demonstrated their practical utility” for maneu-
    vering and stabilizing spacecraft in flight. (Tass, 11/4/66; Grose, NYT,
     11/5/66, 12; Wilford, NYT, 11/5/66, 12)
  Cosmonaut-pilots would head crews of all spacecraft landing on the moon
    in the future because landing recannotbe fully trusted to machines,”
    Soviet Cosmonaut Pave1 Belyayev predicted in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika.
    Belyayev, who manually landed VOSKHOD 11 March 19, 1965, said that
     two methods of braking were possible: jet engines and use of aero-
    dynamic forces. (Tass, 11/4/66)
  Fourth stage of Mu-1, Japan’s newest and most powerful booster, was
     successfully tested in low-pressure chamber in Noshiro, Univ. of Tokyo
     scientists reported. Mu was scheduled to orbit Japan’s first satellite by
     1968. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/8/66)
e U.S. Ambassador-at-Large and newly appointed Ambassador to U.S.S.R.
     Llewellyn E. Thompson and Soviet Minister for Civil Aviation Yevgeni
     F. Loginov signed agreement authorizing direct commercial airline
     flights between New York and Moscow at State De t. ceremony. Service
                                                       PP
     would begin in spring 1967 with weekly flights by an American World
     Airways and U.S.S.R.’s Aeroflot. (Eder, N Y T , 11/5/66, 1; Roberts,
      Wash. Post, 11/5/66, Al)
a Radioastronomers were relying increasingly on ancient Oriental records
     of novae and supernovae because the phenomena could be observed so
     rarely, Xi Ze-zong and Po Shu-jen, Academia Sinica, Shanghai, reported
     in Science. Only one supernova had appeared within Milky Way during
     last 360 yrs., and few of the average of 50 novae that appeared annually
     could be seen with the naked eye. (Xi and Po, Science, 11/4/66, 597)
340               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 5: NASA conducted first rocket-launched test of parachute landing
    system for Voyager spacecraft at WSMR. Honest John-Nike rocket boosted
    200-lb. experimental package to 104,000-ft. altitude, but ground com-
    mand transmission did not correctly trigger deployment. Successful
    balloon-launched test in the LaRc-managed parachute experiment series
    had been completed Aug. 30. Voyager project was managed by JPL.
            Proj. Off.)
    (NASA
  Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., passed their
    medical examinations for the Gemini XI1 mission, scheduled for launch
    from ETR Nov. 9. (Tush. Post, 11/6/66, A17)
November 5-6: FAA, Office of Emergency Planning, and New York City offi-
    cials successfully staged “Metro Air Support ’66,” an exercise in which
    more than 200 Vtol aircraft and helicopters took off and landed at piers,
    parks, and streets with emergency supplies, technicians, and Govern-
    ment officials to demonstrate how aircraft could be used if other
    transportation were paralyzed during emergency or disaster. (FAA
    Releases 66-90, 66-96; Nevard, NYT, 11/6/66, 1)
November 6: NASA’s    LUNAR ORBITER 11 (Lunar Orbiter B) unmanned space-
    craft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from ETR in
    second U S . attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing
    sites for Apollo astronauts [see Nov. 10-301.
       Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161-
    km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 14-min. coast period,
    injecting spacecraft on 94-hr., 232,000-mi. translunar trajectory, and
    separated. On schedule LUNAR ORBITER 11 deployed its four solar panels
    and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only
    difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s star-tracker lost its fix on Canopus,
    delaying critical midcourse maneuver eight hours. Correction was
    accomplished at 44:09 GET and JPL predicted spacecraft would come
    very close to original aiming point.
       Primary objectives of NASA’s      LUNAR ORBITER II mission, second in
    series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar
    orbit; and (2) to obtain high-resolution photos on various lunar surface
    areas to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor
    spacecraft, and to improve our knowledge of the moon. Photos would
    cover 13 primary target sites, located generally within northern half
    of the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. I t would also
    monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment
    and refine definition of moon’s gravitational field. Lunar Orbiter pro-
    gram was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s OSSA. Tracking and
    communications were the responsibility of JPL-operated Deep Space
                       Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-286; O’Toole, Wush. Post,
    Network. (NASA
     11/7/66, Al, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/7/66, A3; UPI, NYT,
     11/9/66, 77; AP, Tush. Post, 11/10/66, A2)
  President Johnson announced appointment of Under Secretary of Com-
    merce Alan Boyd as Secretary of the new Cabinet-level Department of
    Transportation. (Pres. Doc., 11/14/66, 1620-21)
  GEMINI x spacecraft was viewed by more than 13,000 people when it was
    displayed for the day at a Tokyo department store. (Tush. Post, 11/7/66,
November 7: Clarence C . Gay, Jr., Acting Director of Gemini Test, became
    Chief, Apollo Spacecraft Test, Apollo Test Directorate at NASA Hq.
    (NASA Ann., 11/18/66)
                                                                           341
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 7: Western Union Telegraph Co. asked FCC’s permission to create
    domestic comsat system to transmit telegrams. Ground stations would
    be constructed in Oregon, Iowa, Colorado, Louisiana, Alabama, and,
    possibly, West Virginia. (WI, N Y T , 11/8/66, 15)
  Moscow parade celebrating 49th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution
    included rocket which Russians claimed was immune to any antimissile
    defense system and could be dropped out of orbit from any direction.
     (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/7/66, Al, A6)
a NASA Administrator James E. Webb was presented Gen. Benedict Crowell
    Gold Medal by American Ordnance Assn.’s Cleveland Post. (Lewis
    News, 11/10/66, 1)
November 8: NASA’s SURVEYOR I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon’s
    Ocean of Storms June 2, responded to JPL signals almost four months
    after scientists had announced its “death.” Spacecraft did not take
    additional photos of the lunar surface as commanded. (UPI, Wash. Post,
     11/10/66, A7)
  In test of hydrogen peroxide attitude control thrusters, INTELSAT 11-A
     ( “LANI BIRD”) was moved into elliptical orbit with 23,306-mi. (37,523-
    km.) apogee; 2,609-mi. (4,201-km.) perigee; 17” inclination; and 12-hr.
     10-min. period. Systems would be used in future attempt to place comsat
    in “modified orbit with a 12 hour period,” to make possible communica-
    tions with line-of-sight earth stations for a few hours daily. Preliminary
     investigations indicated that INTELSAT 11-A’S failure to achieve planned
     synchronous equatorial orbit Oct. 30 was due to apogee motor mal-
     function; launch of Intelsat 11-B, scheduled for Nov. 23, would be post-
     poned until exact cause of malfunction was determined. (ComSatCorp
     Release)
a NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station
     reached 134-mi. (216-km.) altitude in GSFC experiment to evaluate the
     method of the double floating probe as a tool for monitoring ionospheric
     electric fields. Rocket performance was excellent, and data obtained by
     one of two independent antenna systems was in quantitative agreement
     with the double floating probe theory. Other antenna system failed to
     deploy properly. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
  USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB with Thor-
     Agena D booster. (UPI, N Y T , 11/9/66, 4; U.S Aeron. & Space Act.,
      1966, 158)
   Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was considering USAF proposal
      for an advanced manned strategic aircraft (Amsa) which would cost
      $1.5-$2 billion to develop, William Beecher reported in the New York
      Times. Bomber would reportedly be able to carry internally 25 nuclear-
      tipped short range attack missiles (Sram), plus nuclear bombs; have
      unrefueled range of 7,000 to 10,000 mi.; and be capable of traveling
       1,625 mph-about 2% times the speed of B-52 aircraft, the mainstay
      of current bomber force. (Beecher, N Y T , 11/8/66, 1)
   Concept of “flying saucersyy     violated physical laws of solar system, Rev.
       Francis J. Heyden, Georgetown Univ. astronomer, declared in Washing-
       tan Post interview. Ufo reports, none of which could be adequately
       studied scientifically, were either misinterpretations or hoaxes, he said.
        (Casey, Wush. Post, 11/8/66, B3)
   FAA awarded $65,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., to study
       competing Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Sst designs for
       possible size reduction that would reduce sonic boom. ( WSJ, 12/5/66,12)
342               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 9: NASA launched from Wallops Station an Argentine-designed
    and -produced single-stage solid-fuel Orion I1 sounding rocket with
      ayload for upper atmosphere research. Reaching altitude of 51 mi., pay-
    road was captured by helicopter as it descended by parachute to 2,500
    ft., marking Wallops’ first such mid-air recovery. Test was second
    successful Orion I1 flight in three-flight series which began Nov. 4;
    Nov. 7 launch failed. Six Argentine engineers and technicians from
    Aeronautical and Space Research Institute (IIAE) assisted Wallops per-
    sonnel with launch operations. Arrangements were made by NASA and
    Argentine Space Commission (CNIE) . (NASA Release 66-291; Wallops
    Release 66-53)
0 USAF launched Arcas solid-fuel rocket from Vandenberg AFB to collect

    information on atmospheric temperature, pressure, and movement
    above 98,400-ft. altitude. Data collected would be used to plan glide
    paths of vehicles reentering earth atmosphere. (AP, Phil. Inq., l l / l O /
    66)
  AFSC announced plans to use seven defense communications satellites,
    launched from ETR June 16, in series of experiments to gather data for
    design of improved communications systems between ground stations
     5,000 to 6,000 mi. apart. Using specially equipped (2-121 communica-
    tions research aircraft, Air Force Avionics Lab. engineers would test:
     (1) relay of voice and teletype communications through satellite from
    either aircraft or ground station; and (2) transmission of airborne
    meteorological reconnaissance data to the ground via satellite. Signals
     often would travel 50,000 mi. between terminal points. (AFSC Release
     143.66)
  State Dept. disclosed that “a very small amount” of radioactivity had
    leaked into the atmosphere from AEC’S Sept. 12 underground nuclear
     test, but the incident did not violate limited nuclear test ban treaty
     because no radioactive debris had circulated outside U.S. Disclosure
     was in response to a Soviet inquiry. (WI, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2)
November 10: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill
     Research Range reached 120-mi. (193-km.) altitude in flight to evaluate
     experiments for NASA-west German cooperative satellite program. Pre-
     mature ejection of payload cylinder doors caused overheating and mal-
     function of an electron detector, but all other instruments performed
     satisfactorily. Rocket performance, though slightly in excess of pre-
     dicted, was within normal tolerance range. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
0 XB-70 No. 1 experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by L/Col. Joseph

     Cotton (USAF) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton, reached mach 2.52
     and 60,000-ft. altitude in flight from Edwards AFB for the national sonic
     boom program. (XB-70 Flight log)
0 Dirty windows which obscured astronauts’ vision moderately to severely

     in many of NASA% Gemini missions had been caused by volatile vapors
     produced by silicones used in window seals, Gemini program director
      Charles W. Mathews told news briefing at MSC. Problem would be cor-
     rected by curing silicone seals in a vacuum. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66,
      A4)
    Groundbreaking ceremonies were held for ERC’S t6O-million headquarters
      complex in Cambridge, Mass. (Boston Her., 11/11/66; AIAA Daily,
      11/29/66, 1)
    Three USAF Athena missiles were successfully launched within three hours
0

      from Green River, Utah, to target area at WSMR, in test to determine
                                                                              343
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    how to distinguish armed missile from decoy missile during reentry.
    (AP,   NYT, 11/13/66, 23)
November 10: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, after conferring
    with President Johnson, told newsmen at the Texas White House that
    there was “considerable evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building and
    deploying an antiballistic missile system around its cities, which might
    require an increase in US. offensive capacity. He said the Administra-
    tion would probably recommend to Congress that US. begin production
    and deployment of Poseidon missile-a large submarine-launched mis-
    sile with greater power to penetrate sophisticated defense system than
    Polaris missile. The Secretary reported that no decision had yet been
    made on deployment of Nike-X antimissile missile, on which $500
    million had already been spent for research and development. (Semple,
    Jr., NYT, 11/11/66, 1, 19; Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/11/66, Al, A10;
    Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/11/66, Al)
  MSFC had awarded General Electric Co. a $147,884, 12-&o. contract to
    study design and systems requirements of an electrically propelled
    space vehicle for manned Mars landing missions and to identify areas
    of technology in which concentrated research would produce maximum
    benefit to manned planetary program. (MSFC Release 66-271)
  Najeeb E. Halaby, vice president of Pan American World Airways and
    former FAA Administrator, suggested that Government build two Sst
    prototypes-one        Boeing and one Lockheed-using same prototype
     power plant for both before selecting the final design. “There is no sub-
     stitute for flight testing,” he said. “The whole world would benefit in
     the economics and safety of a flight-tested plane.” Airframe designs by
     Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and engine designs by General
     Electric Co. and Pratt & Whitney Div. had been submitted to FAA Sept. 6
     for evaluation. President Johnson would announce final selection in
     late 1966. (NYT, 11/11/66, 73)
  Columbia Univ. announced creation of Institute for the Study of Science
     in Human Affairs which would seek to clarify present and potential roles
     of science in society. Funded by $1-million grant from Alfred P. Sloan
     Foundation, Institute would work through existing university structure,
     on both graduate and undergraduate levels, to stimulate teaching and
     research and possibly establish visiting professorships. The New York
      Times later editorialized: ‘‘Its goal is to increase public understanding
      of the basic issues arising from the scientific revolution-and to develop
     wise men to lead that revolution.
         “. . . Its beginnings are modest, but the need for it is great and so, too,
     we believe, is its promise.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/11/66, 32; Aarons,
      Wash. Post, 11/13/66, L4; NYT, 11/13/66, 1OE)
   Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to
      historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: ‘‘In just nine
      years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can
      escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase
      about new manned flights.
         “It is too early for anyone to guess how such developmentsmay affect
      the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in -the world and in the
      universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches
      the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place
      in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, l l / l O /
      66, P6)
34                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                         LUNAR ORBITER 11, launched from ETR Nov. 6, became
November 10-30: NASA’s
    second US. spacecraft to enter lunar orbit; five days later it was suc-
    cessfully transferred to final close-in orbit for photography. Orbital
    parameters: apolune, 1,163 mi. (1,870 km.); perilune, 122 mi. (196
    km.) ; inclination, 12.2”; period, 3 hr. 38 min. Spacecraft recorded two
    micrometeoroid hits-first ever detected by U S . spacecraft in moon’s
    vicinity. It performed 205 attitude changes and responded to 2,421
    commands.
       A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential
    Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition
    phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted,
    described as “consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater
    Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr.
    Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as “one of the
    great pictures of the century,” said: “It provides new information,
    which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and
    structures on the moon.” (NASA Proj. Off.; AP, rush. Post, 11/16/66,
    A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36)
November 11-15: GEMINI XII rendezvous-docking and Eva mission, last of
    Gemini series, began with launch of Gemini Agena Target Vehicle
    (GATV) by Atlas booster from ETR’S Complex 14, followed 1hr. 38 min.
    later by launch of GEMINI XII with Titan I1 booster from Complex 19.
    Astronauts were James A. Lovell, Jr., command pilot, and Edwin A.
    Aldrin, Jr., pilot. GATV entered near-circular orbit with 188.5-mi. (303.5-
    km.) apogee and 182.8-mi. (294-km.) perigee. GEMINI XII entered orbit
    with 167.9-mi. (270-km.) apogee and 100-mi. (161-km.) perigee.
        Docking of spacecraft with GATV was in 2.3 revolutions-4:14 GET.
    After plans to use GATV propulsion system to place GEMINI XII into higher
    orbit had to be abandoned because of GATV malfunction, GEMINI XII
    rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and
    made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows.
    Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at
     19:29:01 GET with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities
    revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 GET
    with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin per-
     formed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work
     station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether
     stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for
     tethered operations. GEMINI XII backed out of Agena docking collar about
     47:37 GET and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolu-
     tion later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to
     sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French
     sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing
     experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems
     with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva,
     Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experi-
     ments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 GET for 51-min.
     duration. Total Eva time for GEMINI XII mission was 5 hrs. 28 min.
     Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:OO:Ol GET; reentry in 59th revolution
     after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic
     was at 94:34:31 GET. GEMINI XII landed about three miles from recovery
      ship U.S.S. Vusp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts
      were picked up by helicopter within 20 min.
                                                                                       345
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




November 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA’s         LUNAR ORBITER   11:
one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique
view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov. 25,
confirms the moon’s long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi.
in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of
the crater Marius (upper right).


         White House announced promotion of Aldrin from USAF major to
      lieutenant colonel. Love11 had been promoted to USN captain after
      GEMINI VII mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill
      Moyers said the flight was “the culmination of a great team effort,
      stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people
346                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




November 11-15: Gemini Agena Target Vehicle is shown at the end of tether securing it
to the                spacecraft.
         GEMINI XII



    in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department
    of Defense, and other Government agencies ; in the universities and
    other research centers; and in American industry.” (NASA Proj. Off.;
    NASA Release 66-272; MSC Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT,
    11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17;
    11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, Wush. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al,
    A4; 11/14/66, AI.; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2)
November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at
    2,000 mph €or 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny:
    800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment. NASA’s
    activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian
    scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi.
    strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing
    southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil,
    and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-hes Convair 990A jet aircraft
                                                                          347
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    “Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, success-
    fully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and
    raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic.
    Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets
    launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-
    GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and
    temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision
    frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (TMA)cloud for
    comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no
    photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian
    experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumenta-
    tion, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satis-
    factorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned
    and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space
    Commission. Photographs were taken by NIMBUS 11 meteorological
    satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr.?
    orbiting in GEMINI XII spacecraft.
       AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near
    Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi.
     (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar
    radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density.
    Data were telemetered to ground receivers.
        Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Nether-
    lands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which
    would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s
    atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communica-
    tions, and weather prediction. (NASA     Release 66-285; Wallops Release
    66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; A€’,Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66,
    A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; OAR Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; NASA
    Rpt. SEU)
November 12: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXXI for space research into earth
    orbit with 360-km. (224-mi.) apogee; 205-km. (127-mi.) perigee; 89.8-
    min. period; and 72.9” inclination. (U.N. Public Registry, 1/9/67)
0 NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude

    in GSFC experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs; rocket and instru-
    mentation performed satisfactorily.
        NASA Aerobee 150 launched 25 min. later to 109-mi. (174-km.)
     altitude in NASA-Naval Research Laboratory experiment photographed
     outer solar corona with moon near edge of field of view and sunlit
    particles near the rocket. Flight also obtained heliograms showing inner
     corona and solar disc and data on solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Rocket and
     instrumentation, except for a spectroheliograph, performed satis-
     factorily. (NASA   Rpt. SRL)
                                                Complex 19 began. Equipment
0 Deactivation of Gemini launch pad at ETR’S

     that could be used in other space programs would be salvaged; other
     components would be reduced to scrap. (0,     Wash. Sun. Star, 11/13/66,
     A61
0 New York Times praised success of NASA’s     LUNAR ORBITER II and GEMINI XII
     missions: “This week has seen two impressive demonstrations of United
                                ..
     States space capabilities. .
        reIt is no derogation of the important Soviet contributions to conclude
     that the United States efforts have contributed most of what men now
     know about the moon and about the possibilities and problems of
348                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    manned space flight. In part this lead is the result of the long and un-
    explained halt in the launching of Soviet passenger-carrying rockets.”
    (NYT, 11/12/66,28)
November 12: Congress had “unwittingly” broadly endorsed Sst program by
    approving obscure phrase in Dept. of Transportation bill (H.R. 15963)
    empowering Secretary of Transportation to “develop and construct a
    civil supersonic aircraft,” Evert Clark reported in the New York Times.
    Action strengthened position of the Administration and other Sst sup-
    porters and lessened chances that congressional critics might abandon
    the multibillion dollar project. (Clark, NYT, 11/13/66, 77)
0 Satellite to be launched by U.S.S.R. in near future would carry French

    instrumentation, French Minister of Research Main Peyrefitte an-
    nounced in Caen. France and U.S.S.R. had signed an agreement for
    joint scientific cooperation June 30. (Reuters, NYT, 11/13/66, 45)
  Photos and temperature data gathered by satellites could be used to study
    ice movements on Canada’s lakes and rivers, G. P. Williams, Canadian
    National Research Council, suggested to Canadian Press. Williams said
    predictions of the formation and breakup of ice would be valuable to
    forestry workers who used the waters to float logs, and aviators who
    landed on northern lakes. (Can. Press, NYT, 11/13/66, 46)
November 13: Sunspots as large as 12 times the earth’s diameter were detected
    by Bochum Observatory, West Germany. One group reportedly meas-
    ured about 97,200 mi. across; smaller sunspots were about 27,000 mi.
    wide. (Reuters, NYT, 11/15/66, 61; Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/14/66,
    A23)
  IBM Federal Systems Div. received $218,000 AFSC contract to investigate
    means of reducing operating costs and reaction time of future space
    missions through streamlined guidance and control procedures. (Wash.
    Sun. Star, 11/13/66, D15)
November 14: Team of JPL scientists left Cal Tech on first NASA-sDonsored
    investigation of Antarctica. Scientists would spend 2% mos. i Wright,
                                                                       ;
    Victoria, Taylor, and Beacon Valleys taking samples and conducting
    tests that might prove valuable in future unmanned exploration of Mars.
     (JPL Release, 11/13/66)
  NASA selected Martin Co. for negotiations on a $1-million, 18-1~10.     contract
    to design, develop, fabricate, and test meteoroid detectors for future
    NASA experiments to study penetration hazard in space. Contract would
    be managed by URC. (NASA      Release 66-293)
  ELDO successfully test-fired three-stage Europa rocket from Woomera
     Range, Australia. Booster was blown up over Simpson Desert 6 min. 42
     sec. after launch. (Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 8)
  M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry (WAF), was
     launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in 13th glide flight
     at Edwards AFB. Purposes of this unpowered flight were tests of stability
     and control and determination of vehicle performance characteristics.
            Proj. Off.)
     (NASA
  Military should increase its interest in the Nation’s technological base
     rather than rely so heavily on the civilian sector for basic and explor-
     atory research, suggested William Coughlin in Technology Week. He
                                                                     .
     noted the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program: “. . .much of
     the technology on which this military effort is based was developed by
     the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on programs deliber-
     ately tied to the peaceful uses of space. It is a fair question to ask where
                                                                         349
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    a military space program would be today vis-a-vis the Soviet Union if
    the technological base had not been developed under NASA funding.
        “Other areas of military importance have not been as fortunate be-
    cause they lack a civilian counterpart. Steps must be taken to see that
    development of a technical base in these areas is not overlooked. It is
    not easy to justify expenditure of manpower and funds in this somewhat
                     ..   .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 11/14/66, 54)
    invisible arena.
During week of November 14: Increasing application of engineering tech-
    niques developed in space program to medical problems was reported by
    participants at 19th Annual Conference in Medicine and Biology in
    San Francisco. Among developments reported: application of computer
    techniques to detection of pathological conditions and to mass diagnosis
    of heart disease; automation of classical laboratory techniques in
    hospital, resulting in increased accuracy and speed; use of new engineer-
    ing devices to obtain information for better diagnoses; application of
    new engineering to treatment, including refinements on artificial heart
    and control of photosensitive epilepsy with a real-time computer.
     (Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 30)
November 15: NASA’s Project Gemini officially ended. From first manned
    flight in March 1965, Gemini had achieved its goals: demonstration of
    ability to rendezvous and dock with target vehicle; demonstration of
    value of manned spacecraft for scientific and technological experimenta-
    tion; performance of work by astronauts in space; use of powered,
     fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked
     spacecraft; long-duration space flights without ill effect on astronauts;
    and precision landing of spacecraft. Records set during Gemini program
     included: (1) longest manned space flight (330 hrs. 35 min.); (2)
     altitude (851 mi.); and (3) longest total of Eva (5 hrs. 28 min.) in one
     flight. Total U.S. man hours in space to date: 1,993 hrs. 34 min. MSC
     Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth told a news conference: “We have done
     all the things we had to do as a preIude to Apollo. I believe the Gemini
     program has been most s ~ c c e s s f u l . (NASA Proj. Off.; Wash. Post,
                                                 ~~
     11/16/66, A6; Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 16; NYT, 11/20/66, 2E)
0 NASA announced that NIMBUS 11 meteorological satellite had taken nearly

      1million photos since its launch from WTR May 15. “It has been working
     better than a finely tuned engine,” said GSFC project manager Harry
     Press. “Its performance has exceeded everyone’s expectation.” (GSFC
     Release G-19-66)
0 NAS Space Science Board chairman Harry H. Hess, Princeton Univ.

     geology professor, received Geological Society of America’s Penrose
     Medal “for distinguished achievement in the geologic science^^^ at
     society’s 79th annual meeting in San Francisco. (NAS-NRC-NAE News
     Report, 11/66, 6)
November 16: GEMINI XII Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E.
     Aldrin, Jr., arrived at KSC to begin debriefing. Addressing some 700
     workmen, Lovell said “everyone here has done an outstanding job to
     get us into space”; Aldrin described the four-day mission as a “treat to
     me as an individual that I would like to have shared with every person
     in the world.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 11/17/66)
0 NASA released first 140 ft. of more than 1,500 ft. of color movies taken by

     Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., during their
     Nov. 11-15 space flight. Photography was of high quality. (AP, Wash.
     Eve. Star, 11/17/66, A4)
350               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 16: Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster successfully underwent short-
    duration-35-sec.-static      firing at MSFC. (MSFC Release 66-288)
  Site at Pakachoag Hill outside of Auburn, Mass., where Dr. Robert H.
    Goddard launched world’s fkst liquid-fuel rocket fight on March 16,
    1926, was approved as a national landmark by Secretary of the Interior
    Stewart Udall. (Dept. of Interior; SBD, 11/23/66, 119)
e AFCRL launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from WSMR to 117-mi.
     (188-km.) altitude to collect micrometeorite particles during Leonid
    meteor shower. (OAR Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
  ComSatCorp requested FCC permission to construct $6.5-million, high-
     capacity earth station at Barrio Monte Llano, Puerto Kco, to handle all
     types of communications in the Caribbean area via EARLY BIRD I and
     m T E u A T II-A comsats. April 25 a plication for station at St. Croix,
                                         \
     Virgin Islands, was withdrawn ecause military communications-
                                                                         . .”
     electronics equipment there “might cause harmful interference. .
      (ComSatCorp Release)
  Sst development might be delayed because of current pressures to limit
     Federal spending; growing apprehension that Sst would cause excessive
     property damage and noise from sonic booms; serious safety and techni-
     cal problems; and Sst evaluators’ indecisiveness, Fred L. Zimmerman
     reported in the Wall Street Journal. (Zimmerman, WSJ, 11/16/66,
     23)
* Possibility that US. astronauts might land on moon in 1968 rather than
     1969 “should serve to hasten agreement on international treaty aimed
     at making outer s ace exclusively a dimension of man’s peaceful
     activity,” postulates editorial in New York Times. “Hard decisions”
     about post-Apollo research should be made soon, especially since there
     were “far more possibilities for fruitful activities in space than even the
     United States can afford to carry on simultaneously.” (NYT, 11/16/66,
     42M)
* Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at
     American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and
     petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint explora-
      tion of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the
      world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this
     population would be hungry: “The oceans represent the last great source
      for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water
      to meet all the future needs of man.” (AI?,   Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66,
      C12)
November 16-18:National Conference on the Management of Aerospace
      Programs was held in Columbia, Mo.
         NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), in
      report on CCManagement     Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: “There is no
      single approach to program management that will guarantee success.
      The development of and experience with various management systems,
      techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed exten-
      sively to a more scientific approach. The ‘art’ element remains, however.
      The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated
      procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable
      resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces manage-
      ment to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and
       salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it
       deserves and requires the personal support of the program director
                                                                          351
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and
                                          .. .’, (Text)
    acceptance at the ass roots level.
        DeMarquis D. $att, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming,
    said that NASA7S cost model had “significantly facilitated management
    decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an over-
    night computational capability of great capacity. The computer program
    is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 differ-
    ent hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an
                                                                          ...
    unlimited number of production lines within each plant. It can
    summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can sub-
    divide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or
    users.. .” (Text)
        Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA OMSF,
     outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S.
     national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based
    principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including
     earth-orbital “Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys,
     and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: “At
     the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program
                                                                           . ..
     includes subsystem developments for long deration manned flights.
     This provides a logicat growth pattern toward manned planetary travel
     with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to
     1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
November 17: NASA announced schedule changes in manned Apollo flights
     because of launch vehicle and spacecraft development problems :second
     manned flight of an Apollo spacecraft (AS-205), schedded for spring
     1967, was postponed and no new date set; AS-205 prime crew Walter M.
     Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham became backup crew
     for AS-204 mission-first manned Apollo flight-scheduled for fkst
     quarter of 1967. (NASA Release 66-295)
0 Some 1,000 meteors a minute were recorded at height of Leonid shower by

      Northwestern Univ.’s Observatory near Las Cruces, N. Mex., Dr. J.
      Allen Hynek reported. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/18/66, 39M)
0 Referring to successful completion of Gemini series of space flights as a
      “historic triumph for mankind,” editorial in Washington Post suggested
                                                  . ..
      that “as the conquest of space proceeds it        gives the world a nobler
      and higher destiny and purpose than fratricidal strife for nationalistic
      objectives.” (Wash. Post, 11/17/66, A22)
November 18: Maj. William J. Knight (USAF) flew X-15 No. 2 to 4,250 mph
       (mach 6.33) and 98,900-ft. altitude during 9-min. flight, successfully
      using full external propellant tanks for first time and setting new speed
      record for X-15 aircraft. Previous 4,104-mph (mach 6.059) record had
      been set by the late Joseph A. Walker (NASA), June 27, 1962. (X-15
      Proj. Off.; UPI, NYT, 11/19/66, 24)
 e NASA Nike-Apache launched from WSMR to 100-mi. (161-km.) altitude
       carried NASA-Dudley Observatory (Albany, N.Y.) experiment to collect
      micrometeorite particles at time of 33-yr. maximum of Leonid meteor
       shower and GSFC experiment to determine vehicle slant ran e. Rocket
                                                                    %
       and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payloa was not
       recovered and no data were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
 a US. had notified Government of Nigeria that, with conclusion of Gemini
       program, NASA would close tracking station at Kano. (NASA Release
       66-296)
352               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 18: George Cooper, ARC’S Chief Test Pilot and Chief of Flight
    Operations, received Admiral Luis de Florez Flight Safety Award at
    International Air Safety Seminar in Madrid. He was cited for “his
    contribution to the safety of air transportation through improved under-
    standing of the relation between pilot and aircraft.” (ARC Release 66-17)
November 19: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXXII for continued space research
    into earth orbit with 280-km. (174-mi.) apogee; 207-km. (129-mi.)
    perigee; 89.3-min. period; and 65” inclination. Equipment was func-
    tioning normally. (Tass, 11/19/66)
November 20: U.S.S.R. began new carrier rocket tests in the Pacific that
    would last until Dec. 30. Tass said area with 56-km. (35-mi.) radius
    had coordinates of O”5’ south latitude and 163”45‘ west longitude.
    Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between
    noon and midnight local time. (Tass, 11/19/66)
  ESRO successfully launched France’s Centaure rocket from range at
    Paksuniemi, Sweden, to study the aurora borealis. (Reuters, Wush.
    Post, 11/21/66, A14)
0 High military potential of space was discussed by Hanson W. Baldwin in

                         ..
    New York Times: “. the advent of the military man in space is inevi-
    table. For man can supply the judgment that no machine can offer; he
    can monitor and correct and interpret the instruments and aids essential
    to space flight; he will be able to repair satellites and assemble space
    platforms. He will pilot tomorrow’s fighting machines in the cosmos.
    And in time he may actually be able, with a whole host of scientific
    aids, to control the weather with all the tremendous military and social
    consequences this implies.” (Baldwin, NYT, 11/20/66, A7)
November 21: NASA successfully conducted second rocket-launched test
     [see Nov. 5 of a Mars entry parachute as part of an advanced tech-
                  1
    nology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for
    Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from
    WSMR ejected parachute at 120,000-ft. altitude. Parachute descended
    to earth 40 min. later carrying 200-lb. payload with instrumentation
    for measuring shock of parachute opening and its oscillation charac-
    teristics. Ekperiment series was managed by L ~ R C . (NASA Release 66-298)
  MSFC awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $l4l-million, cost-plus-
     incentive-fee contract to provide 30 F-1 rocket engines, beginning in
     November 1967, and varied support services. (NASA Release 66-297)
0 NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude

     carried GSFC experiment to obtain ultraviolet spectral scans of bright
     stars from 1110 A to 4000 A. Rocket and instrumentation performed
     satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
* Commenting on success of Project Gemini in developing techniques and
     experience vital for manned lunar landing, William J. Coughlin said
                                                         .
     in Technology Week: “Gemini technology will . . be applied to the
    manned scientific space stations still to come. This fanning out of tech-
     nology from the direct-line effort to effect a manned lunar landing is
     a dramatic demonstration of the rapid maturing of the national space
     program.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 50)
  Final glide flight of M2-F2 lifting body vehicle before installation of XLRll
     8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine [see Dec. 301 was made at Edwards AFB
     with Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry as pilot. Purposes of flight, 14th in un-
     powered series, were testing of stability and control and determination
     of vehicle performance characteristics. (NASA Proj. Off.)
                                                                          353
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

November 21: Reported that USAF Titan I1 launch vehicle, which launched
    12 out of 12 missions in the Gemini series, was expected to win a USAF
    incentive fee of over $2 million for Martin Co., the prime contractor
    for two-stage booster. (Av. Wk., 11/21/66, 28)
* U.S.S.R. had orbited an atomic clock of the ammonia type in COSMOS
    XCVII, launched Nov. 26,1965, a brief article in Pravda disclosed. Soviet
    Academician N. G. Basov, explaining possible uses of an ammonia fre-
    quency standard in a satellite, said it ‘permits carrying on communica-
    tions with space devices, control over them, and transmission of
    telemetric information for very great distances. In addition, there is in
    this case a considerable increase in the operating precision of program
    timer devices and systems for determining the trajectory of the satellite’s
    movement.” (Av. Wk., 11/21/66, 36)
* Beryllium ball floating in electrostatic field and spinning at some 60,000
    rpm was part of new electrostatic gyroscope (Esg) being flight-tested
    by USAF at Wright-Patterson AFB aboard C-124 Globemaster aircraft.
    Instability formerly found in the spinning gyroscopehad been eliminated
    in Esg since there was virtually no friction between the sphere and its
    cavity. Sphere would spin for three years without power source. (AFSC
    Release 221.66)
* Pressure for early action to establish Canadian domestic comsat system
    was rising, both within the Canadian government and in telecommuni-
    cations and broadcasting industries, Aviation r e e k reported. Govern-
    ment advisory team was planning to complete report by end of 1966
    making recommendations to Canadian Cabinet on technical aspects
    of system and on controversial policy issues. Team was under direction
    of Dr. J. H. Chapman, deputy chief superintendent, Defence Research
    Telecommunications Establishment, Dept. of National Defence. (Av.
     Wk., 11/21/66, 35)
* Guy Warner Vaughn, president and chairman of Curtiss-Wright Corp.
    and among first to apply mass-production techniques to aviation
    industry, died in New Rochelle, N.Y., at 82. (NYT, 11/22/66, 39M)
November 22: GSFC awarded Hughes Aircraft Co. a $4.275-million, cost-plus-
    incentive-fee contract for reconfiguration of three gravity-gradient
    Applications Technology Satellites scheduled for launch in 1967 and
     1968. (NASA Release 66-299)
* NASA awarded Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. nine-month,
    $250,000 contract extensions to continue evaluating optical experi-
    ments for possible future extended Apollo space flights. (NASA Release
    66-300)
0 AFSC presented first USAF Craftsmanship Awards in Industrial Zero Defects

    Program to RCA’S Astro-Electronics Div., Communications Systems
     Div., and Missile and Surface Radar Div.; GE’s Flight Propulsion Div.
     and Evendale Facility; Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. ; Aerojet-
    General Corp., Sacramento Plant; and Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc.,
     Missile and Space Systems Div. (AFSC Release 245.66)
November 23: GEMINI XII pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., told MSC news conference
     that with proper equipment, like the waist straps and foot restraints he
     used during Eva, a man could work outside with no fear of fatigue-if
     he were well trained. Following press conference, Astronauts James A.
     Lovell, Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of MSC, KSC, NASA Hq., and
    industry Gemini program participants flew to LBJ Ranch for visit with
     President Johnson, who said: “The splendid performance of man and
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
354

    machine in Gemini has been a product of the American system at its
    best.
                                                                          ..
       “The months ahead will not be easy as we reach toward the moon. .
    But with Gemini as the forerunner, I am confident that we will over-
    come the difficulties and achieve another success.” Group returned to
    MSC for formal awards ceremony.
       Receiving NASA Exceptional Service Medal were GEMINI XII crewmen
    James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Col. John G. Albert
    (USAF), ETR; Osro H. Covington, GSFC; and John D. Hodge, MSC.
       NASA Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. George E. Mueller, OMSF;
    and Charles W. Mathews, MSC.
       Outstanding Leadership Medal: Robert F. Thompson, MSC; John J.
    Williams, KSC; and M/G Vincent G. Houston (USAF), ETR.
       NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: James A. Cham-
    berlin, MSC.
       NASA Public Service Award: John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft
    Corp.; Bastian Hello, Martin Co.; Bernhard A. Hohmann, Aerospace
    Corp.; Walter D. Smith, Martin Co.; Walter F. Burke, McDonnell;
    Louis D. Wilson, Aerojet-General; Lawrence A. Smith, Lockheed;
    William B. Bergen, Martin Co.; George M. Bunker, Martin Marietta;
    B/G Paul T. Cooper, AFSC Space Systems Div.; Daniel J. Haughton,
    Lockheed; Roger Lewis, General Dynamics; James S. McDonnell,
    McDonnell Aircraft; R. I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L. Eugene Root,
    Lockheed; David S. Lewis, McDonnell; and Jack A. Bowers, Martin
    Marietta.
       NASA Superior Achievement Award: Arthur W. Vogeley, Richard J.
    Allen, LeRoy E. Day, John A. Edwards, Eldon W. Hall, Vearl N. Huff,
    and William A. Summerfelt, NASA Hq.; and Anthony L. Liccardi.
       NASA Group Achievement Award: Gemini Astronaut Team, Manned
    Spaceflight Network Team, Gemini Spacecraft Launch Team, Gemini
    Program Office at MSC, Gemini Program Office at NASA Hq., and Gemini
    Support Team at MSC. (MSC Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 8; Sheehan, NYT,
    11/24/66, 36; Pres. Doc., 11/28/66, 1718-9)
November 23: XB-70 No. 1 supersonic aircraft, piloted by North American
    Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van H. Shepard and L/Col. Joseph Cotton
     (USAF), reached mach 2.51 and 60,000-ft. altitude in flight from Edwards
    AFB for the national sonic boom program. (XB-70 Flight Log)
November 24: European conference on satellite communication, meeting at
    The Hague, Netherlands, requested ESRO to study feasibility and desir-
    ability of European comsat. (NYT, 11/25/66, 4)
* Airport built on artificial island on Goodwin’s Sandbank-12 mi. off
    coast of England in English Channel-was London consulting engineer
    G. E. Bratchell’s answer to noise problem anticipated from projected
    Anglo-French Concorde Sst and other planned supersonic jet aircraft,
    Reuters reported. Takeoffs and approaches would be made over sea,
    avoiding danger of crashes in populated areas. By time aircraft was
     over land, it would be at height where noise was no longer a problem.
    A natural gas fog-dispersal system would make the airport accessible
     every day of the year. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/24/66, K10)
November 26: President Johnson established White House committee headed
     by Dr. Donald F. Hornig to study ways to help West European nations
     improve their technology. Serving with Dr. Hornig would be represen-
     tatives of Depts. of State, Defense, and Commerce; NASA; AEC; and
                                                                         355
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Council of Economic Advisers. (AP,NYT, 11/27/66, 41; Wash. Post,
    11/27/66, A6)
November 26: U.S.S.R.’s LUNA XII, launched into lunar orbit Oct. 22, had com-
    pleted 220 orbits, taken “unique photographs,” and was continuing its
    mission, Tass reported. Satellite had transmitted data on lunar x-ray
    and gamma radiation and micrometeoroids. (Tass, 11/26/66)
  U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have reached basic agreement on text
    of treaty for free and peaceful exploration of moon and outer space.
    Text would be presented within next two or three weeks for approval
    of U.N. General Assembly. U S . was said to have agreed that all countries
    -not just U.N. members-should be allowed to sign treaty. Communist
    China, East Germany, North Vietnam, and North Korea would then be
    free to adhere t o it if they chose. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 78)
0 High-quality photographs of earth taken during Nov. 11-15 GEMINI XII

    mission had revealed substantial inaccuracies and omissions in geologic
    maps, GSFC scientist Paul D. Lowman, Jr., said in press interview. He
    added that space photography might someday help solve such geologic
    problems as continental drift, the relationship of volcanic activity to
    mountain building, and the formation of regional sand dune fields.
    (AP,NYT, 11/26/66, 26)
0 US. was studying feasibility of defense against nuclear missiles for all

    or part of Western Europe, New York Times reported. Administration
    officials said that although there would be political, financial, and
    technical problems, missile shield could be developed at estimated cost
    of $3-$12 billion. (NYT, 11/27/66, 9)
November 27: Two propulsion developments emerging from engineering
    research might open Jupiter, the regions outside the solar system, and
    even the sun to closeup inspection during 1970s, said Dr. Homer Joe
    Stewart, manager of JPL’S Advanced Studies Office. Developments were
    use of planetary gravitational drag and solar-electric propulsion. When
    a spacecraft neared a planet, it would gain speed from gravitational pull.
    While traveling under planet’s gravitation attraction, it would pick up
    planet’s own sun-orbit speed. This, added to spacecraft’s momentum,
    would be enough to propel spacecraft past planet’s gravitational field
    and toward another planet. Travel between gravitational fields would
    be powered by spacecraft’s solar-electric system. Solar-electric propul-
    sion would double useful payload for a Mars-orbiter mission, Dr.
    Stewart said, and it would offer the advantage of high specific impulse
    €or a Jupiter flyby. (JPL Release; A&A, 12/66, 26-31)
0 Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF, Ret.) said on ABC-TV’S “Issues and

    Answers” that the US. should concentrate on developingbetter missiles
    rather than antimissile defense system. He said there was “a grave
    question with respect to the effectiveness” of an antimissile system
    aimed at stopping the sophisticated weapons the U.S.S.R. probably had.
     On the other hand, the US. could build a defense against the type of
    missile the Communist Chinese were presently capable of launching.
    Schriever said he believed US. missiles would get through the anti-
    missile system reportedly being deployed in U.S.S.R. (AP, NYT,
     11/28/66, 53)
  Analysis of NASA LUNAR ORBITER 1’s orbit led to assumption that moon is
     homogeneous, not layered, Dr. 6. L. Goudas of Boeing Scientific.
     Research Laboratories said in an interview with Walter Sullivan of the
     New York Times, He said its shape--flattened at the poles with several
356                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      bulges at the equator and slightly pear-like-was not “dominated by a
      ‘frozen tide.’ ” Gamma ray recordings by U.S.S.R.’s LUNA x spacecraft
      indicated similar conclusion; lunar surface lacked emissions typical of
      granites, which are associated with layering. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/27/66,
    E71
November 28: NASA’s    MARINER IV had completed two years in space, flown
    1,025,082,830 mi., and continued to operate properly, reporting its
    condition to earth three times a week. Launched Nov. 28, 1964, space-
    craft had completed primary mission Aug. 2, 1965, after transmitting
    to earth 22 pictures of Martian surface. Photos were made when it
    flew within 6,118 mi. of planet July 14, 1965. (NASA Release 66-304;
    JPL Release)
0 NASA awarded contracts totaling $825,000 for study of methods to explore

    the planets and to design advanced launch vehicles : Lockheed Missiles
    and Space Co., $200,000; Boeing Co., $150,000; Lockheed-California
    Co., $250,000; and North American Aviation, Inc., $225,000. Contract
    management would be performed by NASA Hq. Mission Analysis Div.
    (NASA Release 66-302)
0 White House announced agreement for establishment of an ESRO station

    near Fairbanks, Alaska, to receive telemetry from and send commands
    to ESRO scientific satellites. This would be first foreign ground station
    on US. soil. (Pres. Doc., 12/5/66, 1740)
  Partial nationalization of U.K.’s two large airframe manufacturers-
    British Aircraft Corp. and Hawker Siddeley Aviation Go.-was being
    planned on grounds no real competition existed between the two firms,
    Aviation Week reported. Also, U.K.’s Ministry of Aviation would merge
    with Ministry of Technology and be represented on Cabinet by Minister
    of Technology Anthony Wedgewood Benn. (Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 23)
  U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXXIII into earth orbit with 232-km. (144-mi.)
    apogee; 181-km. (112-mi.) perigee; 51.8” inclination; and 88.4-min.
    period. Equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 11/28/66)
  U.S.S.R. was showing increasing signs of having conceded manned lunar
    landing race to U S . as part of vastly revamped space program, Donald
    C. Winston postulated in Aviation Week. Significance of new program
    was that it reflected emphasis Premier Alexey Kosygin had fomented in
    Soviet planning. Brezhnev and Kosygin, who came to power while three-
    man VOSKHOD I was still in orbit in October 1964, ordered the space-
     craft to earth prematurely as one of their first moves even before the
    overthrow of Nikita Khrushchev was made public. It was not long before
    Kosygin grounded the rest of the Voskhod series, which was to have
     continued with at least five launches through 1965. Only VOSKHOD II
    was permitted off the ground after Kosygin took power. The March 1965
    mission was conducted because planning had reached an advanced
     stage by the time Khrushchev was ousted and because Cosmonaut A.A.
    Leonov’s Eva-first in history-had high propaganda value. Winston
     theorized that the new space philosophy could produce a much less
     complex manned circumlunar mission without landing within the next
     year. (Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 22)
  NASA selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $6.9-million MSFC contract
     to develop and produce three pointing-control-system (Pcs) units for
     the Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm). (NASA Release 66-309)
 Week o November 28: French space officials reported partial success for
        f
     first firing of an experimental Coralie rocket from Hammaguir Range.
                                                                          357
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIC§, 1966

    Rocket, second stage of ELDO’S Europa booster, underwent nominal
    countdown, launch, and flight until T+62 sec., when circuit malfunc-
    tion prevented monitoring to T+100 sec. as planned. (Av. E%.,
    12/5/66, 30)
November 29: President Johnson said at news conference at Texas White
    House that there would be $60-million program reduction in NASA FY
    1967 budget requiring some contract cancellations. About $30 million
    in expenditures was involved. Asked if changes in the NASA budget
    would cause postponement of target dates for any of the space programs,
                        ..
    Johnson said: “.              $30-million out of some several billion dollars
    wouldn’t cause a change in the target date of the moon schedule, if
    you are talking about that.” (Pres. Doc., 12/5/66, 1741; Transcript,
    NYT, 11/30/66, 18)
  X.15 No. 3 was flown by Maj. Michael J. Adams (USAF) to 3,204.5 mph
     (mach 4.65) and 92,100-ft. altitude in pilot familiarization flight. As
    secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to evaluate aircraft’s
    controllability and natural stability. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
  Canada’s ALOUETTE 11 had traveled about 135 million mi. in 4,037 orbits
    since launch Nov. 28, 1965, Defence Research Board announced. The
    32-lb. spacecraft had obeyed 11,200 commands; all experiments had
    been carried out as planned. (AP, NYT, 11/30/66, 9)
  Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at MSFC for
     145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million Ibs.
    thrust. (MSFC Release 66-288)
November 29-December 2: AIAA’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Dis-
    play was held in Boston. In keynote address, NASC Executive Secretary
    Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the
     most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation.
     Panel discussion followed on future of US. space program.
        Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, pre-
     dicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a ccrepairmany’
     for scientific instruments. “The science . . . will be carried out on the
     ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discus-
     sion are a ~ a i l a b l e . ~ ~
        Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (USAF, Ret.) said emphasis on space
     activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preserva-
     tion of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into
     space. With advances in technology, US. must convert from “throw-
     away” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and
     recoverable boosters, he added.
        This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
     Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: “. . . all of the hardware
     developed for futiwe projects would reflect our concern over . . .greater
     cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles
     and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space
     stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no
     need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be
     used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential
     benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic
     control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting
     systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather.
        Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the
     House Committee on Science and Astronautics-of which he was chair-
358                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      man-was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the
      space program. It was a di5cult task, he said, to ‘ustify space expendi-
      tures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign ai(i, and Great Society
      projects. But, he insisted, ‘‘it is the translation of space technologies
      into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.”
       (Texts; AIAA Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7)
         Results from NASA’s    EXPLOBEB XXXIII had shown for first time that
      tail of earth’s magnetosphere “extends more than 75,000 miles beyond
      the orbit of the moon,” reported GSFC scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness.
      Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and col-
      leagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric
      tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from LUNA x between
      April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that LUNA x
      data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral
      sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be
      expected. (GSFC Release 20-66)
         In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of PAA
      said problems in air transport industry “are being created by the phe-
      nomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed
      no signs of slackening in the coming years, continued development and
      extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but
      essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747-
      which would carry 2% times more passengers than present inter-
      continental transports-was      being developed with only commercial
      airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history
      that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis.
      Borger noted that a major requirement for the “jumbo jets” was that
      they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that
      initial development and operation costs could be recovered.
         H. F. Klnmp, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche
      Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s
      cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities
      enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material
      “dumped on them.”
         W. D. Perreault, program director €or Lockheed 500-a giant com-
      mercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s-discussed evolution of the 500
      from C-5A transport under development for USAF. After reviewing three
      proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them “will
      provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of
      less than 2# er ton statute mile.” (AIAA Daily, 11/30/66, 1,31; Hines,
      Wash. Eve. &ar, 11/29/66, A10)
         Commenting on the report of the AIAA Launch Vehicle and Missile
      Technical Committee, “The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles-
      Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and
      Technology said: “. . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed
      €or reasons of economy then development cost per booster must he so
      low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively
      small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable
      booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would
      pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbit-
                                    .
      ing capacity. This reasoning . . casts considerable doubt on the Com-
      mittee’s suggestion that a ‘bold step’ leading to the development of
      reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text)
                                                                    359
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

         Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applica-
  NASA
tions Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on
“DO We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary
Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years
would probably “not require either new propulsion systems or new
launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified
Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may
require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the
                  . . .”
S-IV-B Centaur.            Cortright recommended that current launch
capability be put “to effective use in exploring space and in developing
practical applications of space flight.” (Text)
    During panel on -Space and Public Policy, “poor communications”
between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for
death of Project Mohole-killed by Congress because it would have
cost at least three times the original estimate. NAS president Frederick
Seitz said such escalations in cost were “not unusual” for such scien-
tific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a
different name such as “deep ocean drilling.”
    “The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not
 technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and
 history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the
 President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science
 Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program
 purely as a “spectator sport,” and that space programs should be con-
 ceived to “maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same
 subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: “We
 must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This
 is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of AIAA advice to
 Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario
  (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
  said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other
  disciplines eying the space money. “I call on AIAA to come to Congress
 with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of
  35,000 members.”
     Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that “AIAA is
  not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the
  society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could,
  the assignment r‘would induce strains within AIAA and change its com-
  plexion.” (AIAA Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29)
     Four major AIAA awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W.
  Randolph Lovelace I1 (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award “to
  honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences
  in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering develop-
  ment of protective devices enabling the human body to function and
  operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA
  FRC, the Lawrence Sperry Award for “outstanding contribution to
  aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various space-
  probing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of MSC,
  the De Florez Training Award for “contribution to astronaut training
  and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned
  space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the 6. Edward Pendray
   Award for “outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and
360              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave
                        Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19)
    dynamics.” (AIAA
November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ftAong Nike-Tomahawk sounding
    rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment
    for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223
    mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean.
    Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded
    at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. SRL)
  NASA Aerobee 150 launched from WSMR reached 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude
    in NASA-Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure atmospheric tem-
    perature and composition from 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.)
    altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
0 Charles W. Mathews, MSC Gemini Program Manager, was named Director

    of Saturn-Apollo Applications in NASA Hq. Office of Manned Space
    Flight. He would replace M/G David M. Jones (USAF),      Deputy Associate
    Administrator for Manned Space Flight Programs, who had been Acting
    Director. (NASA   Release 66-310)
0 First AEC-NASA Tech Brief was published, launching joint program for

    announcing to US. industry useful technical innovations resulting
    from their research programs. Tech Briefs would be issued in five cate-
    gories: electrical and electronic; energy sources; materials and chem-
    istry; life sciences ; and mechanical. (NASA Release 66-307)
  National Science Foundation and National Foundation for the Advance-
    ment of Arts and Humanities urged in comments filed jointly with FCC
    that satellite system be devised that would “permit the distribution of
    high-quality programs in the arts, humanities, and sciences to remote
    areas in the Nation where educational and cultural opportunities are
    often minimal.” Comments were filed in response to FCC request for
    suggestions on establishment of comsat facilities by organizations other
    than Government and communications companies. (AP, Wash. Post,
     12/1/66, A18)
During November: Two tests important to launch of NASA’S first manned
    Apollo mission had been successfully completed at MSC. First was six-
    day manned Apollo systems test of spacecraft 008 which was conducted
    in Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory chamber. Second was
    entry-egress training in Gulf of Mexico for AS-204 prime and backup
                  Roundup, 11/11/66, 8; NAA S&ID Skywriter, 11/11/66, 1, 2)
    crews. (MSC
  ComSatCorp conducted test transmissions via INTELSAT 11-A (“LAN1 BIRD”)
    comsat, launched by NASA Oct. 27, which included: first live color
    programs between U S . mainland and Hawaii, featuring Notre Dame-
    Michigan State, Army-Navy, and Green Bay Packers-Chicago Bears
     football games; first live news and public affairs programs between U S .
     and Japan; and first live telecast between Great Britain and Australia.
    Comsat had failed to achieve desired synchronous orbit Oct. 30, but
    its communications system was functioning well and could be used
    for short periods of time when in line-of-sight of ground stations. Orbit
    would be adjusted in early December to maximize use of comsat for
     transmissions between ComSatCorp earth stations. (ComSatCorp
    Release; Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/26/66, A4; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/25/66,
     AS; AP, Wash. Post, 11/28/66, Al)
0 Management organization to direct Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) project

     at MSFC was announced by MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun:
                                                                          361
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Leland Belew, Program Manager;
     Keathley, Project Experiments
     Officer; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger,                entist. MSFC’S Astrionics
     Lab., headed by Dr. Walter Haeussermann, Director, and William
     Horton, Assistant Director, would be responsible for overall technical
     aspects of Atm development. (MSFC Release 66-270)
During November: Two experiments developed at ARC and flown on Nov. 11-15
     GEMINI XII mission were highly successful. Five runs with hand-held
     sextant proved it could deliver required accuracy of 10 see. of arc
     (1/360th of one degree of a circle) in actual space flight. In experiment
     to study effects of weightlessness on living cells using newly fertilized
     frog eggs, astronauts arrested cell growth at programed intervals during
     mission. Data were being analyzed. (ARC Releases 66-15, 66-16; ARC
     Astrogram, 11/23/66, 1, 4)
   NASA selected Westinghouse Electric Corp. for an $&million contract to
     install semiautomatic systems in tracking stations to speed compilation
     of satellite data. The data acquisition system would be used in NASA’s
     Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) program; it would make pos-
     sible reduction of data within 90 days of satellite launch. Systems would
     be installed at Rosman, N.C., Goldstone facility, and Toowoomba,
     Australia, tracking stations. (WSJ, 12/1/66, 8)
0 NASA Hq. OSSA issued report for NRC Space Science Board describing past

     achievements and outlining plans for future missions. (Text)
   Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling more than $25 million to Lock-
     heed Aircraft Corp., General Precision Equipment Corp., Litton
      Industries, Inc., North American Aviation, Inc., General Telephone &
      Electronics Corp., and Universal Match Corp. for help in developing
      a short-range attack missile (Sram). Boeing had received $142.3-million
      USAF contract Oct. 31. (WSJ, 11/8/66, 13)
0 Human voice was successfully relayed via DOD’s Initial Defense commu-

      nications Satellite Project (Idcsp) from terminal in Nhatrang, South
      Vietnam, to Camp Roberts, Calif. US. Ambassador to South Vietnam
      would probably use military system to talk to President Johnson in
      times of crisis. (Wilson, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, M7)
* French Minister of Research Alain Peyrefitte, commenting on the 1967
      space budget, disclosed that France planned to launch two D-1-type
      satellites from Hammaguir Range in February 1967 and one D-2-type
      satellite from Guiana Range in 1969, Technology Week reported. He
      said a Super Diamant booster was under development to launch French-
      built satellites from Guiana, but stressed that main French effort was
      centered on continuing development of ELDO booster. (Tech. Wk.,
      11/14/66, 3)
 * Joint PUS-NAE Committee had been established to provide continuing
      advisory services in science and engineering to ESSA. Verner Suomi,
      professor of meteorology at Univ. of Wisconsin, had been named
      chairman. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 11/66, 3)
    Biologist Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, Dean of Princeton Univ. Graduate
      School, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics that biological exploration
       of the planets would be “a milestone in modern science,” but such an
       undertaking, he cautioned, would first require scientific readiness and
       organization. Without adequate preparation, outright commitment now
       would risk the political consequences that would attend failure of a
       major, costly project. “Could commitment now to the opportunities
362               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    in mid-1970s fail to freeze an inadequately formulated strategy? Could
    it avoid outright assignment of responsibility and the authority for
    decision on design and tactical detail to one of several single labora-
    tories, no one of which can marshal the necessary scientific talent to
                                    ..    . The task immediately confronting
    ensure a competent project?
    those of us anxious to see Voyager go in the 1970s is thus more orga-
    nizational than scientific. . . .” (A&A, 11/66, 76-89)
During November: Department of Transportation would be the means and
    choice to begin a new era in transportation planning, Alan S. Boyd,
    Under Secretary of Commerce for Transportation, wrote in Astronautics
                             .
    & Aeronautics. “. . transportation policy-making today necessitates
    a resolving of three different elements: The methodology for planning
    and programming; the organization to parallel such methods; and the
    leadershi to carry them out. These three ingredients have never been
             B
    combine in an effective manner. . . . If the nation takes this oppor-
    tunity, benefits to the public and to the users of transportation will be
                      . .”
                         (A&A, 11/66, 112-116)
    tremendous..
* DOD was successfully using SYNCOM 11 comsat 12 hrs. daily and SYNCOM 111
    comsat 22 hrs. daily for military communications across the Pacific,
    Technology Week reported. DOD had assumed control of both satellites
    -launched by NASA July 26, 1963, and Aug. 19, 1964, respectively-
    July 8, 1965. (Tech. Fk.,     11/21/66, 9)
* “The outstanding achievements of air transportation and associated social
    and economic gains have been paced in the main by the continued
    development of the gas-turbine propulsion system,” LRC Director Dr.
    Abe Silverstein wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics. “Despite the out-
    standing developments of the past 20 years, however, there still remain
    large gains in performance and operational capability to be achieved.”
    Potential for major advances, Silverstein continued, existed in several
    areas : noise reduction, engine cooling, engine-inlet matching, develop-
    ment of improved materials, determination of engine temperature
    values, and use of liquid-methane fuel. (A&A, 11/66, 96-104)
* Trendex poll indicated favorable attitude toward NASA’sProject Apollo
    had increased 13% over past three years; negative attitude had decreased
    40%. Sentiment to speed up program was greater than to slow down,
    but majority of respondents were content with present progress. While
    there was evidence of some increase in desire to reduce expenditures
    on space program, this attitude was in line with public’s increasing
    concern with governmental expenditures of all kinds because of the
    defense buildup. Public appeared receptive to news and information
    of further space programs and plans. (Text)
* “In the last analysis, the only reason for having a space program is to
    satisfy the needs of society,” editorialized AIAA President Dr. Raymond
    L. Bisplinghoff in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ccUnlessthe space program
    serves people in a useful way, it will be transitory and fade into history
    as a curiosity. It will not even be enough for the program to serve people
    by measuring interesting scientific data. It must eventually serve the
    masses of people of the Earth, if it is to command substantial resources.”
    Communications, geodetic, navigation, and meteorological satellites,
    and other satellites designed to study and manage the world’s natural
    resources could, in Bisplinghoff‘s estimation, contribute to meeting
    man’s needs, but international cooperation would be essential. (A&A,
      11/66, 54-55)
                                                                          363
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

During November: Viewing space program in “historical perspective,”
    Solomon W. Golomb wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “The Manhat-
    tan Project established that we could run a program for three years and
    two billion dollars. This was the size limit for maj or technological proj-
    ects until Apollo escalated the level to ten years and thirty billion
    dollars. The next major goal will be the establishment of permanent
    colonies on other planets. This may mean a commitment of 50 to 90
    years and a price tag measured in Terabucks.” (A&A, 11/66, 14)
                            December 1966

December 1: Deadline for outlining major national space objectives as
    requested by House Science and Astronautics Committee’s NASA Over-
    sight Subcommittee on Aug. 9. NASA told subcommittee chairman Rep.
    Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) that “any detailed report on future goals must
    be made in light of our fiscal 1967 operating and the President’s fiscal
    1968 budget request. Since these budgetary considerations are not
    resolved now . . . any elaboration on future goals cannot be made. . . .”
    Representative Teague agreed NASA was powerless: “Until the Bureau
    of the Budget and the President make a decision, there isn’t much NASA
    can do. . . .” (NASA Hq. PAO; SBD, 12/2/66,159; Av. Wk., 12/5/66,22)
  Successful 384-sec. captive firing of first flight model of Saturn V 2nd
    stage (S-11) was conducted at MTF by North American Aviation, Inc.,
    prime contractor. State was powered by five Rocketdyne 5-2 liquid-hy-
    drogen-fueled engines capable of developing a total of 1 million lbs.
    thrust. (MSFC Release 66-290; UPI, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A4; AP, Wash.
    Eve. Star, 12/1/66)
* Problems of construction industry were discussed by William Rieke, NASA
    Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, at Construction Industry
    Joint Conference in Washington, D.C. Rieke praised accomplishments
    such as KSC’S Vertical Assembly Building but urged management to
    increase its effectiveness, labor to expand apprentice programs and
    control rate escalation, and Government to examine labor policies and
    maintain knowledgeable labor relations staffs. (Text)
0 McDonnell Aircraft Corp. study prepared for FAA concluded that new

    family of 100-passenger V/Stol aircraft operating from small airports
    close to downtown city areas could offer both greater convenience and
    reduced ground travel time between city and airport than the present
    air travel system. (FAA Release 66-102)
December 1-6: LUNAR ORBITER 11 continued transmitting photos of the lunar
    surface [see Nov. 10-301. On Dec. 6-one day early-spacecraft’s
    photography readout terminated when high-power transmitter failed.
    Breakdown resulted in loss of three medium-resolution and two high-
    resolution photos of primary site I, but full coverage of site had been
    provided by medium-resolution photography readout. Environmental,
    engineering, and selenodesy tracking data continued to be received
    through low-power transmission. (NASA Proj. Off.)
December 2: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wSMR
    to 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude to measure atmospheric composition and
    temperature at 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude range. (NASA
    Rpt. SRL)
  NASA announced sponsorship during 1967 of seven specialized summer
    programs of research and study for about 245 college and university
    faculty members in engineering and science. Developed by NASA and

     364
                                                                          365
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    American Society for Engineering Education, programs would combine
    space research at NASA centers and parallel seminar-type studies at
    adjacent universities. Fellowships would be available for about 225
    faculty members. Participating were: (1) Univ. of Alabama, Auburn
    Univ., and MSFC; (2) Case Institute of Technology and LRC; (3) Univ.
    of Houston, Texas A&M Univ., and MSC; (4) Univ. of Maryland, Catholic
    Univ., and GSFC; (5) Virginia Associated Research Center (Univ. of
    Virginia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, and College of William and
    Mary) and L ~ R C . Also, NASA would sponsor five-week summer faculty
    program in space physics at Yeshiva Univ. in cooperation with Goddard
    Institute of Space Studies. (NASA Release 66-305)
December 2: The Washington Post commented on criticism of NASA spending:
    “What an uproar there was in 1957 when Sputnik showed us we were
    second in space! The Eisenhower Administration was roundly con-
    demned. Congressmen and Senators clamored for a stepped-up space
    program and promised all the money needed. President Kennedy, in his
    1960 campaign . . . said repeatedly: ‘I am not satisfied to be second in
    space.’
        “Well, we are no longer second in space. And the critics of the
    Johnson Administration are now not satisfied to be first in space-
    unless it can be done cheap. As a result of the space program we are not
     only going to be first on the moon and first in space. We are going to
     be first in a thousand fields of science, education, and industry.
        “This country does not have to choose between a space program that
     will keep it in first place and a poverty program that will keep it first
      .
     . . in national exertion for the disadvantaged. It can be and ought to
     be first in both.” (Wash. Post, 12/2/66, A16)
e First program to provide pilots with current satellite photos adapted for
     their use in flight planning began at Kennedy International Airport
     under ESSA direction. Photos transmitted by ESSA 11 and 111 and NIMBUS
     11 were composited by computer into a single picture showing cloud
     patterns over eastern North America and the North Atlantic and
     analyzed by meteorologists. (ESSA Release)
e USAF awarded contracts totaling over $6 million to Lockheed-Georgia co.
     and North American Aviation, Inc., to advance Vtol aircraft develop-
     ment. NAA received $5,671,000 to develop and demonstrate a Vtol
     integrated flight system; Lockheed received $975,000 to modify XV-4A
     “Hummingbird” to new system with direct lift and diverted thrust
     engines. (AFSC Release 288.66)
  AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg believed man could modify weather
     in this century through a global center operating a vast satellite system,
     AP reported. With international cooperation, he said, a worldwide
     forecasting system could become operational in 20 yrs.; later it might
     be possible to actually control the weather. (AP, NYT, 12/2/66)
December 3: ComSatCorp’s INTELSAT 11-A (“LANI BIRD”) comsat, launched by
     NASA from ETR Oct. 27, began commercial service under temporary FCC
     authorization which would expire Feb. 2, 1967. Satellite, which had
      failed to achieve planned synchronous equatorial orbit Oct. 30, had
     been moved into modified 12-hr. orbit Dec. 1, to provide maximum
     visibility: eight to nine hours daily between US. mainland and Hawaii;
      over seven hours between U.S. and Japan; and about four hours between
      U.S. and Carnarvon, Australia. Authorized communications carriers
      could use satellite for television and telephone communications about
366               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

         t hours daily. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 12/2/66, F1;
          WSJ, 12/5/66, 15; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/66, A3)
December 3: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS cxxxw into earth orbit with 319-km.
    (197-mi.) apogee; 214-km. (133-mi.) perigee; 89.6-min. period; and 65”
    inclination. Equipment “for continuation of the exploration of outer
    space” was functioning normally. (Tass, 12/5/66)
9 AEG conducted 350-ton nuclear detonation for DOD near Hattiesburg,

    Miss., in underground cavity formed by previous nuclear explosion.
    Purpose of test was to determine extent of decoupling-a reduction of
    ground shock and other seismic signals. (AEC Release 5-273)
December 4: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown had indicaten
    that future US. military exploration of space would concentrate od
    existing and proved technologies, Dr. I. M. Levitt, director of Fels
    Planetarium, reported in the Philadelphia Inquirer. Dr. Brown had
    isolated three areas of vital interest to the military: (1) electronic
    systems which would ensure long life and reliability in orbit; (2)
    reusable materials for spacecraft, launch vehicles, and propulsion
    systems; and (3) space electrical power systems which would provide
    better power-to-weightratios at reduced cost per kw for long duration
    missions. (Levitt, Phil. Znq., 12/4/66, 5)
December 4-6: At 43rd annual convention, National League of Cities meeting
    in Las Vegas adopted resolution challenging priority given to US.
    space program and the Vietnam war and urged President Johnson to
    establish “a national rebirth of the American city.” Detroit Mayor
    Jerome P. Cavanagh argued that if funds for low-income housing,
    poverty, and education were restored by cutting NASA’s appropriation,
    space programs would be delayed only a few weeks. Budget requests
    for housing and urban development, he charged, had been cut 17 times
    as much as the NASA budget. (Janson, NYT, 12/5/66, 1 ; Wash. Post,
    12/6/66, A8)
       NASA Administrator James E. Webb responded to accusations that
    he was more concerned with life on Mars than with life in Chicago or
    Los Angeles: “Neither I nor any other leader in the space program has
    ever suggested that the space program should have any priority over
                                      . . .”
    the needs of the American City.          He agreed that cities needed more
    Federal funds, but suggested that they fust offer greater assurance that
    their pro ams would work well. Benefits in medical, industrial, and
              f
    other fie1 s added dimensions to mace Drogram far bevond the value of
    the lunar-landing program alone: he ;aid’: (TranscriGt; Janson, NYT,
     12/6/66, C34)
December 5 Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned
           :
    Space Flight, c o k e n t e d on national impact of US. s ace program in
                                                             P
    a speech before ARCS (Achievement Rewards for Co lege Scientists)
    Foundation in Los Angeles: “Space exploration in its broadest meaning
                                                                  ..
    and in all of its ramifications has become a powerful force . socially,
                                                  .. . It is the creator of new
    economically, politically, and even morally.
     technologies, new techniques, and new methods of management. It has
    great significance for our national security. It is a stimulus for our
     economic and national growth. It is a catalyst to the achievement of the
    goals of our society. And it provides us with the dimensions of a
                                                                        (E;
     challenge-to explore space for the benefit of all mankind.”
0 Project Makai-program         to construct manned laboratories at various
    underwater depths near Honolulu to increase man’s ability to work
                                                                           367
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    productively under the sea-was described in New York T m s interview
                                                                ie
    by Wayne Collins of Oceanic Institute, which was cosponsoring project
    with several industries. First phase was $3-million, 3-yr. effort to
    establish two test ranges at 70 and 200 ft. below sea level. Each range
    would consist of multilevel habitat and laboratory linked to shore by
    an “umbilical cord” and capable of housing four to six men for at least
    one month. Work environments under consideration for aquanauts
    included a simulated oil field, an experimental mining area, an under-
    water “weather” station, and instrument and material testing sites.
    (Brody, NYT, 12/5/66, 56)
December 5: AFSC would offer research opportunities in 17 scientific disciplines
    through National Research Council postdoctoral resident research
    associateships during 1967 and 1968. Associateshipswould be suppsrted
    by ten separate AFSC laboratories and research centers located in Ohio,
    New Mexico, Texas, New York, and Alaska. (AFSC Release 249.66)
0 USAF launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from WTR.

    (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 159)
December 6: NASA released summary of report on observatory-class earth
    satellites. Recommendations included: (1) redesign of outmoded elec-
    tronic equipment that had performed poorly in space; (2) rigorous pre-
    flight testing with prototype models under simulated space conditions;
     (3) stronger management of observatory program within NASA; and (4)
    increased surveillance of performance at contractors’ plants. Report
    was compiled by five-man board appointed April 21 by NASA Associate
    Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newel1
    and chaired by his Deputy for Engineering Robert F. Garbarini. It
    studied OAO I mission, which failed two days after April 8 launch because
    battery overheated, and reviewed Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso),
    Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) , and Nimbus meteorological
    satellite project practices. All programs were managed by GSFC. (NASA
    Release 66-313; UPI, NYT, 12/8/66, 53)
* U S . must continue to press for advanced technology to ensure T h e
    fundamental strength of our society for all purposes,” Karl Harr,
    president of Aerospace Industries Assn., told Town Hall in Los Angeles.
     rc
       Because technological advance is largely indivisible, a nation either
     opts for technology or it doesn’t. As some sister nations have learned,
    you either move with the tide of technological advance or you fall
                             ..
    behind on all fronts. .
         Today the question becomes the same for us. It is not should we as
       ‘C


     a nation have space or other things, but rather can we have the ‘other
                                                                           .
     things’ if we reject the technological reach required by space. . .”
     (Text)
* USAF had successfully penetrated ion-sheath blackout phase of an Athena
    missile’s reentry in test at WSMR, AP reported. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     12/7/66)
0 All F-104G Starfighter aircraft in West Germany’s Air Force were grounded

    indefinitely as result of Nov. 28 air crash which killed pilot. Since 1962,
     65 of Luftwaffe’s 700 Starfighters had crashed, killing 37 pilots. Aircraft
     was manufactured by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (Shabecoff, NYT,
     12/7/66, 15)
December 6-7: NASA’s I (Ats-B), first satellite in Applications Technology
                       ATS
     Satellite (Ats) program, was successfully launched from ETR by Atlas-
368                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      Agena D booster into elliptical transfer orbit with 22,831-mi. (36,758-
      km.) apogee; 114-mi. (183-km.) perigee; 650-min. period; and 31”
    inclination. At 16:30 GET, apogee motor was fired to place satellite into
    near-synchronous 22,300-mi.-altitude orbit. I t would be allowed to
    drift 12 days to stationary position over the Pacific at 151” west longi-
    tude.
        One of the most versatile satellites ever developed, 775-1b. ATS I
    carried 15 communications, technology, and scientific experiments,
    including camera systems for cloud-cover photos; two-way VHF trans-
    ponder for voice communications between ground stations and aircraft
    in flight; electronically despun antenna to continuously direct a radio
    beam toward earth; and low-thrust resistojet which produced thrust of
    450 millionths of a pound. Capable of multiple-access communications,
    satellite would be able to transmit TV and voice communications among
    stations in North America, Asia, and Australia. It would also be used to
    send weather data from ESSA facility at Suitland, Md., to Automatic
    Picture Transmission (Apt) stations in US., Japan, and Australia.
    Mission objectives were to inject spacecraft into synchronous orbit and
    place it on station; operate spacecraft for at least 30 days; and conduct
    experiments. Ats program-a five-satellite project managed by GSFC
    under OSSA direction-sought to investigate technology common to
    various spacecraft applications through flight experiments carried on
    spin-stabilized and gravity-gradient-stabilized spacecraft. (NASA Proj.
    Off.; NASA Release 66-308; Marshall Star, 12/7/66, 1, 4; Wash. Post,
    12/8/66, A2; UPI, NYT, 12/9/66, 57; UPI, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, A15)
December 7: US. confusion and concern over U.S.S.R.’s space objectives
    had increased because of the “long gap” in Soviet manned space flights
    and three recent Soviet launches “surrounded by unusual secrecy,”
    Evert Clark reported in the New York Times. Two of the spacecraft,
    secretly launched Sept. 17 and Nov. 2, had exploded in orbit; the third,
    Nov. 28, had been announced as COSMOS CXXXIII but orbital inclination
    usually given in Cosmos launch reports was not disclosed. Clark warned
    that U S . experts might be “underestimating the Soviet Union’s com-
    mitment to space exploration” and suggested U.S.S.R. was either: (1)
    preparing to secretly launch manned spacecraft with three- to six-man
    crew in early 1967; (2) conducting tests to precede new missions to
    Mars and Venus; (3) changing its emphasis from manned lunar ex-
    ploration to manned earth-orbiting stations; or (4) trying to provide
    maximum coverage of US. by launching additional reconnaissance
     satellites. (Clark, NYT, 12/8/66, 1)
  FCC ruled that ComSatCorp must share ownership of its ground stations
    with US.-owned international common carriers. Effective until late
     1969, decision-which gave ComSatCorp controlling interest in existing
    and future ground stations-modified FCC’S May 12, 1965, interim
     ruling awarding ComSatCorp “sole responsibility” for stations at least
     during “critical early years.” (UPI, NYT, 12/8/66, 52; WSJ, 12/8/66,
     3)
0 AFSC awarded $B.S-miuion, fixed-price-incentive-fee contract to Douglas
     Aircraft Co., Inc., for design, development, and fabrication of Titan
     I11 launch vehicle components. (DOD Release 1029-66)
December 8: President Johnson announced US. and U.S.S.R. had reached
     agreement on space law treaty under consideration by U.N. Committee
     on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space since May 7. Calling agreement
                                                                             369
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     “the most important arms control development since the Limited Test
     Ban Treaty of 1963,” the President said he would seek fast Senate
     approval so US. would be first nation to ratify it. Primary provisions:
    (1) moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration, use,
    and scientific research to all countries and international organizations
    exclusively for peaceful purposes; (2) no country should be ermitted
                                                                     up
    a claim of sovereignty or appropriation; (3) no country sho d be per-
    mitted to place weapons of mass destruction, establish military bases,
    or conduct military activities on moon and celestial bodies; (4) all
    outer space activities would be subject to international law and should
    be reported to U.N. Secretary General; (5) cooperative efforts should
    be made to avoid harmful contamination, conduct scientific research,
    and assist all astronauts in need of aid; and (6) all stations, installations,
    and space vehicles on moon and other celestial bodies should be open
    to other countries on reciprocity basis. Use of ICBM’s, reconnaissance
    satellites, and USAF’S Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) were not
    affected.
       Treaty would be considered by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19.
    (Frankel, NYT, 12/9/66,1,18C; Gwertzman, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/9/66,
    Al; Pres. Doc., 12/12/66, 1781-2; Roberts, Wush. Post, 12/9/66, Al,
    A8, A10; NYT, 12/20/66, 6)
December 8: LUNAR ORBITER 11 executed plane change-possibly the first ever
    accomplished by satellite in lunar orbit-to obtain information about
    moon’s gravity field and gain experience in flight operations at high
    indinations. (NASA Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-316)
December 9: NASA’s I satellite took first U.S. high-quality photos of the
                     ATS
    earth from synchronous orbit altitudes. Photos showed changing cloud-
    cover pattern over 40 per cent of the earth’s surface. (NASA Proj. Off.)
  NASA’s second Project Scanner instrument package was successfully
    launched by three-stage solid propellant Trailblazer booster from NASA
    Wallops Station on suborbital trajectory to gather information on
    earth’s horizon. Two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy
    emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-
    mapper telescope provided data on attitude of spin-stabilized spacecraft.
    Project Scanner was a phase of horizon definition research conducted
    by LaRC. (Wallops Release 66-58)
  Complexities of modern society required a new concept of management,
    NASA Administrator James E. Webb told graduation class of Harvard
    Univ.’s Graduate School of Business Administration. “The kind of
                                                              .
    challenges that we in management are facing today . . call for new and
                                                         .
    experimental approaches to organization. One . . is the question of
    the chief executive function. In traditional thinking, the structure of
                                                       .. .
    an organization peaked in the chief executive.          However, as organi-
    zations have become more complex and their challenges more inter-
                  ..  . there has been an increasing tendency to experiment
    disciplinary
                                                 .
    with the idea of the multiple executive. . . We saw this kind of need
    at the very beginning of NASA’s    history. We evolved, therefore, a part-
    nership arrangement which included Dr. Hugh Dryden, Dr. Robert
     Seamans, and myself. We all had many common ideas, and yet each
    brought to our work on the critical decisions affecting the nation’s space
     effort certain specialized experience. To do it any other way would have
     deprived us of the kind of mutual support and broadly-based leadership
     that I think we achieved.” (Text)
370               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

December 9: French President Charles de Gaulle and Soviet Premier Aleksey
    Kosygin signed extension of scientific, technical, commercial, and cul-
    tural cooperation between U.S.S.R. and France provided for by June 30
    agreement. Declaration followed eight-day visit to France by Kosygin
    who had toured the Center for Nuclear Studies and Air Liquide labora-
    tory and inspected prototype of the Concorde supersonic aircraft.
    (Reuters, NYT, 12/10/66, 16; Nossiter, Wash. Post, 12/8/66, A32;
    Mooney, NYT, 12/6/66, C10)
  Report on national document-handling systems in science and technology
    prepared by Federal Council for Science and Technology’s Committee
    on Scientific and Technical Information (COSATI) was summarized in
    Science by Launor F. Carter, vice president of System Development
    Corp.-a participant in the study. Report had recommended that Office
    of Science and Technology: (1) accelerate its efforts to organize an
    integrated national network of information and document-handling
    systems in science and technology; (2) collaborate with other Federal
    agencies and private organizations to develop comprehensive, coordi-
    nated program and sponsor effective legislation; (3) encourage private
    sector to formulate plans for its consideration; and (4) encourage
    Federal support of experiments in information technology, including
    prototype information systems. (Carter, Science, 12/9/66, 1299-1304)
December 10: Editorial comment on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement on space law
    treaty announced Dec. 8.
        New York Times: “No one has yet demonstrated that there would be
    any military advantage to placing bombs either in orbit or on celestial
    bodies. But there is a clear need both for space law and for reducing the
    wasteful competition in space exploration. The ability of Moscow and
    Washington to reach agreement . . . offers hope of further East-West
    cooperation on space problems.” (NYT, 12/10/66, 36C)
                                 “. . .reason and peacefulness have prevailed.
        Washington Daily News:
    And we will all benefit. There will be no military bases or forts, no
    testing of weapons and tactics-nor their threat or expense. And no
    claims to territory in space, and thus no arguments and battles over
    conflicting claims.” (Wash. Daily News, 12/10/66)
                          “. . . the treaty can be applauded for the good that
        Washington Post:
    it has achieved as of today; and it can be praised for the larger good that
    it will do tomorrow when the practical aspects of space relations have
    become infinitely more pressing. The world will surely have occasion
     to look back to this day as one that set the nations on the right path
    and on which the great powers made a wise decision to shun the military
     exploitation of celestial bodies and of outer space for narrow, national-
    istic purposes.” (Wash. Post, 12/10/66)
0 NASA successfully completed third rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5 and

     211 of Lam-managed parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft.
     Honest John-Nike rocket launched from WSMR deployed 30-ft.-dia. disc
     gap band parachute at approximately 130,000-ft. altitude. Voyager pro-
     gram was managed by JPL. (NASA Proj. Off.)
December 11: USAF successfully launched OV1-IX and OV1-X research satel-
     lites pickaback from Vandenberg AFB with Atlas D booster. Each 220-lb.
     spacecraft carried 12 radiation-measuring experiments. (AP, Wash.
     Eve. Star, 12/12/66, Al; Tech. Wk., 12/19/66, 13)
  Ford Foundation President McGeorge Bundy announced $10-million
     grant to show potential of educational television through a series of
                                                                                 371
                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    national programs. Series would be carried by Nation’s 125 noncom-
    mercial educational TV stations joined by coaxial cable and microwave
    relay for the demonstration. In a brief to be fded with FCC, Bundy
    defended Foundation’s Aug. 1request for formation of nonprofit nation-
    wide satellite system that would carry extensive schedule of educational
    programs financed by transmission of commercial programs. (NYT,
    12/12/66, 1, 95; Wash. Post, 12/12/66, Al, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
    12/12/66, A3)




December 11: Photograph of earth from ATS I, in 22,300-mi. synchronous orbit. This is
one of seven pictures which together show changing cloud pattern over the earth for an
entire day. ATS I began its photography Dec. 9.


December 11: Aerospace rather than shipbuilding companies were competing
    for $1-billion Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet (Fdl) program because of
    USN’S new contract policy, Robert Wright reported in the New York
    Times. Under new policy, firms were required to bid for total package-
    concept, design, and construction-instead of construction only.
    Vernon A. Johnson, a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president, believed
    Lockheed, General Dynamics Corp., and Litton Industries, Inc., were
    competing exclusively for contract because shipbuilding industry lacked
    resources and experience for total-package systems design. Goal of Fdl
    program was fleet of 30-40 ships capable of remaining at sea for indefi-
    nite periods and making fast delivery of heavy supplies to fight small
    wars. (Wright, NYT, 12/11/66, 12)
372               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

December 12: XB-70 No. 1 experimental research aircraft, piloted by NASA
    test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., pilot
    Van Shepard reached mach 2.52 and 60,000-ft. altitude during national
    sonic boom program flight. (NASA Proj. Off.)
* Howard H. Haglund, formerly Deputy Project Manager and Spacecraft
    System Manager for Surveyor at JPL, had been named Manager of JPL’S
    Surveyor Project Office. He succeeded Robert J. Parks, who returned
    to his former position of JPL Assistant Director for Lunar and Planetary
    Projects. (JPL Release 426)
0 Efficient management in both industry and Government was the key to a

    continuing successful space effort, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive
    Secretary, told the Management Club at Patrick AFB. “The space chal-
    lenge is unique. To face up to its imperatives calls for new ways of doing
    things. The pacing item is as much managerial competence as it is
    technology or money. . . .
       “Under the stress and pressure of getting the job done, there is
    imposed a harsh necessity which breeds innovation. So long as purpose-
    ful men accept such challenges, this nation will flourish and its economic
    and political systems will continue to lead the way. On the other hand,
    should we slip into the path of the familiar and decline to accept the
    challenge of the new, this nation will suffer a grievous loss and so will
    the eoples throughout the world. . . .” (Text)
  MSFC &rector Dr. Wernher von Braun discussed U.S. space objectives
    and accomplishments in U S . News & World Report interview. Im-
    mediate objective, he explained, was “to land an American on the moon
    in this decade and bring him back alive”; far-reaching goal was “to
    develop a broad, national spaceflying capability.” He described Gemini
    program as ‘‘a smashing 100 per cent success. . . . The purpose of
    Gemini was to learn the kind of things you can’t learn on the ground
    . . . and we did make some surprise discoveries, for which we are more
    than grateful. . . .” Dr. von Braun said there was a “distinct possibility”
    US.might land a man on the moon in 1968. ( U S . News, 12/12/66,62-7)
e U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS cxxxv into earth orbit with 662-km. (411-mi.)
    apogee, 259-km. (161-mi.) perigee, and 48.5” inclination. (U.N. Public
    Registry, 1/9/67)
* New Soviet launch site near Archangel was discovered by British school-
    boys after they had tracked several Cosmos satellites and fed informa-
    tion, including data on orbital intersections, into a computer. U S . later
     confirmed U.S.S.R. had been launching satellites from large military
    base south of Archangel. Only two Soviet launch sites-Baikonur and
    Kapustin Yar-had previously been publicized. Schoolboys’ informa-
    tion, which appeared in Flight International, represented important
    break in secrecy surrounding Soviet reconnaissance satellites. (Wash.
    Post, 12/13/66; 12/19/66, Al, A8; NYT, 12/21/66, 25; Time, 12/
     30/66)
December 13: Versatility of ATS I satellite, launched by NASA from ETR Dec.
     6, was demonstrated in program at GSFC. In first test, satellite relayed
     color TV show from Goldstone, Calif., to GSFC via Rosman, N.C.,
     ground station. In second test, voice signals transmitted from GSFC to
     Goldstone and beamed by dish antenna to satellite were successfully
     relayed to three aircraft in flight, demonstrating publicly for the first
     time that 50,000-mi. earth-to-space circuit could be used with existing
     airline radio equipment in VHF range. Concurrent with these tests,
                                                                         373
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    satellite transmitted high-quality photos of weather over eastern Asia,
    Pacific Ocean, and western US. It had begun relaying photos Dec. 9.
    NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the press
    ATS I was ‘‘a major step forward” toward practical satellites and would
    have “an impact on everyone in the world.” (Clark, NYT, 12/14/66,
    38; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, A4; Reistrup, Fa&. Post,
    12/14/66, A12)
December 13: NASA had eliminated final three Surveyors because of good
    results from Ranger series, SURVEYORS I and 11, and LUNAR ORBITERS I
    and 11. It had been determined that five remaining Surveyor spacecraft
    would provide necessary additional information about the moon to
    support Apollo manned lunar landing mission. (NASA Release 66-318)
0 Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA and Brazilian Space Com-

    mission (CNAE) from mobile facility at Natal, Brazil, carried 225-113.
    payload of four x-ray detectors on ballistic trajectory to 120-mi. (193-
    km.) altitude. Payload, which impacted 66 mi. downrange in the
    Atlantic, telemetered scientific data to ground stations. First NASA x-ray
    astronomy experiment on a sounding rocket in the Southern Hemi-
    sphere, flight searched for specific galactic x-ray sources, observed
    Magellanic clouds for x-ray emissions, and obtained spectral information
    on known x-ray sources. (NASA Release 66-311)
0 Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aero-

    nautical and Space Sciences Committee, told AP he saw “no urgency’’
    in landing on the moon first. Discounting the theory that a manned
    lunar landing would have military significance, Senator Anderson said
    “had the United States and the Soviet Union cooperated from the start
    in space exploration, more knowledge at less expense might have re-
    sulted.” (AP,   NYT, 12/15/66, 34)
e Informed sources said U.S.S.R. had cut its nonmilitary space budget by
    one third and increased general military spending, according to AP.
    Report could not be confirmed. (AP, NYT, 12/14/66, 3; AP, Wash.
    Ewe. Star, 12/14/66, A7)
e There might be a connection between period of inactivity in Soviet
    manned space flight and Soviet efforts to create an effective antimissile
    system, speculated Crosby S. Noyes in the Washington Evening Star.
       .
    “. .The Russians, in assessing the present state of the world, [might]
    have radically readjusted their priorities in favor of earthly defenses
    over celestial exploration.. . .” Noyes suggested US. might have to
    choose soon “between the astronomical costs of continuing exploration
    of space, and those of the best possible antimissile defense system.
    If the Russians have, in fact, already made their choice, our own
    dilemma should besasier to resolve. But in any event, the new Russian
    defense system raises military and political problems which cannot be
    simply ignored.” (Noyes, Wash. Ewe. Star, 12/13/66, A l l )
December 14: U.S.S.R. had successfully completed series of carrier rocket
    tests in the Pacific 16 days early, Tass reported. Nov. 20 Tass statement
    had said that tests would continue until Dec. 30. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     12/14/66, D11)
e USAF launched unidentified satellite with Titan 111-B-Agenabooster from
     WTR. (US.   Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 159)
  NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward 6. Welsh spoke at the dedication
     of Boeing Co.’s Industrial Research Center in Huntsville, Ala. “I
     believe that the next decade will find us marrying more closely the
374               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    major features of aeronautics and astronautics so that manned space-
    craft will take off and return to spaceports with reusable propulsion
    systems and reusable spacecraft. The near future will find us engaged
    in the exploration of the lunar surface, the development of manned
    earth orbiting permanent space stations, unmanned and then possibly
    manned travel to the planets, as well as in the progressive utilization
    of space technology in such fields as communications, navigation,
    meteorology, and observation.
        “In addition, I believe the next decade holds great promise for the
    utilization of space systems technology in the solution of many of the
    economic and social problems of this complex civilization. . . .” (Text)
December 14: NASA Hq. released LUNAR ORBITER 11 photo of Ocean of Storms
    which confirmed moon’s history of volcanic activity. Taken Nov. 25
    from an oblique angle at 28-mi. altitude, photo showed an array of
    lunar dunes 2-10 mi. in diameter and about 1,000-1,500 ft. high
    which resembled volcanic domes of northern California and Oregon.
    Scientists believed they had been caused by upwelling of molten rock
    from moon’s interior “which warped the overlying rock and in some
    cases spilled out on the surface as lava.” Dr. Lawrence Rowan, U.S.
    Geological Survey, commented: “It is the most spectacular evidence
    of volcanism that we’ve had yet.” (O’Toole, Wash. Post, 12/15/66, E2;
    UPI, NYT, 12/15/66, 34; Tech. Wk., 12/9/66, 19)
  Skin from three Soviet researchers had been orbited in special sterilized
    bottles onboard LAMBDA satellite Aug. 19, 1960, and successfully grafted
    back three days later to test effects of space travel, Trud reported.
    Experiment had convinced Soviet scientists that human organisms
    would not be dangerously affected by cosmic rays. (Reuters, Wash.
    Post, 12/15/66, El)
December 14-17 NASA’s BIOSATELLITE I (Biosatellite A) carrying more than
                 :
    10-million tiny living organisms was successfully launched from ETR
    by two-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta booster on
    mission to study effects of weightlessness and space radiation on
    growth of plants and animals. Orbital parameters: 197-mi. (317-km.)
    apogee; 191-mi. (308-km.) perigee; 91 min. 16 sec. period; and 33.5”
    inclination. After 47 orbits, satellite had been scheduled to reenter
     earth’s atmosphere over the Pacific, deploy a parachute, and be re-
     covered aerially for return to NASA laboratories. Retrorocket failed to
     fire, however, and satellite remained in orbit.
        First of three spacecraft in NASA’s Biosatellite program, 936.5413.
     BIOSATELLITE I carried 13 biological experiments to study physiological
     effects of weightlessness at three different levels: (1) growth and form
     of entire plants and animals; (2) structure and growth of cells and
     tissues; and (3) basic biochemistry of the cell. Mission also studied
     effects of radiation on organisms in weightless environment. Bio-
     satellite program was managed by ARC under OSSA direction. (NASA Proj.
     Off.; NASA Release 66-312; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A3; AP,
     NYT, 12/18/66, 86; WI, NYT, 12/19/66, 66)
December 15: Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon
     International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to GEMINI VI
     Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and GEMINI
     VII Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving
     first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable
     spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told
                                                                          375
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    newsmen he was one of those “manning the ramparts” against those
    who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He
    thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational
    system, increased industrial competence, new products, “and if it
    hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast under-
    takings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
December 15: President Johnson’s waning interest in space was postponing
             decision on a post-Apollo program, William Hines suggested i n
    NASA’s
                                           ..
    the Washington Evening Star. “NASA . is more to be pitied than cen-
    sured for this silence. The agency has been led down the primrose path
          .
    by . . [President Johnson] who suddenly lost interest in the now shop-
    worn ingenue.
                                     .. . [he] has permitted it to make none;
        “NASA has no plans because
                                    ...  ” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66,
    aspirations yes, but plans no.
    A2 3)
e NASA would negotiate $lS-million fixed-price incentive contract with
    Douglas Aircraft Co. for 14 improved 2nd stages for Delta launch
    vehicle. GSFC would manage contract. (NASA Release 66-321)
e AFSC announced awards to four aerospace companies: Lockheed Missiles
    and Space Co., $2-million initial increment to a $14-million fixed-price
    contract for production of Agena launch vehicles; Douglas Aircraft Co.,
    $2.5-million initial increment to a $17.5-million fixed-price letter
    contract for production of Thor launch vehicles; and Aerojet-General
    Corp., $2.9-million initial increment to a $54.5-million contract, and
    TRW Inc., $2.9-million initial increment to a $5O-million contract,
    both for R&D in an unmanned space technology program. (DOD Release
     1048-66; WSJ, 12/16/66, 4)
December 15-16: ComSatCorp and AT&T filed separate plans with FCC to
     establish domestic comsat system. AT&T would orbit three synchronous
     satellites starting in 1969, eventually replacing them with four satellites
     of advanced design by 1976; under AT&T plan, ComSatCorp would
     own the satellites, and common carriers, the earth stations. ComSat-
     Corp, in its filing, proposed launching four-satellite system beginning
     in 1969; more powerful comsats would be launched into synchronous
     orbit over equator and spaced over Nation’s time zones in 1973 and
     1978. Both AT&T and ComSatCorp objected to Ford Foundation’s
     Aug. 1 proposal for nonprofit comsat system whose income would be
     used to support educational TV. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 12/16/66,
     85M; 12/17/66, 59; Wash. Post, 12/17/66, C16; Wash. Eve. Star,
     12/16/66, A24)
0 News briefing on Project Apollo was held at MSC. Dr. Joseph Shea, manager

     of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at MSC, said NASA hoped to launch three
     manned Apollo missions in 1967 involving “essentially every test that
     needs to get done in order to insure that the lunar operation is proper.”
     He outlined the flights: (1) AS-20&three-man, earth-orbital mission
     of up to 14 days to check out crew, spacecraft, and ground equipment;
                               to 12-day flight in which Uprated Saturn I
      (2) AS-205/208-10-
     boosters would launch an Apollo spacecraft with three-man crew and
     an unmanned Lunar Module (Lm) on successive days for rendezvous
     mission; and (3) AS-503-full-duration lunar mission rehearsal in
     earth orbit in which single Saturn V would launch manned Apollo
     spacecraft and Lm. Shea warned against undue optimism about a
     manned lunar landing in 1968. “It is literally true that there is no
376              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                                  ..
    planned date at the present time for the lunar operation. and I
    don’t see how there can be until we have had hardware in orbit to
    understand what vestigial problems still remain.”
        Donald Slayton, MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations, said that
    third, nonflying crew had been added to each Apollo mission for addi-
    tional ground support. He also revealed that training for astronauts
    selected for Apollo lunar missions would be 40 weeks-14 weeks
    longer than Gemini training course.
        Comparing Mercury and Apollo training programs, AS-204 Command
    Pilot Virgil I. Grissom said: “When we started training for Mercury,
                                                            ..
    we didn’t know what to train for. So we did everything. . Training for
    Apollo has been pretty straight forward. We know what we need to
    know and we know that we have to learn about the spacecraft, how to
    operate it and get our flight plan and our mission rules squared away.
    Back early in Mercury.. . we were worried about whether a man
                            ..
    could live and survive . so we did a lot of things like spinning around
    in 3 axis machines that we don’t feel you really need anymore. . . .”
    Grissom confirmed that AS-204 mission would carry camera for live
    television coverage. (Text; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/66, A3)
December 16: XB-70 No. 1 experimental research aircraft, piloted by North
    American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van Shepard and NASA test pilot
    Fitzhugh Fulton, reached mach 2.55 and 60,300-ft. altitude in national
    sonic boom program flight. (NASA Proj. Off.)
  Almost all orbiting West Ford dipoles (launched by USAF May 10, 1963)
    had reentered the atmosphere during period of several months centering
    on predicted Jan. 1 reentry date, Irving I. Shapiro wrote in Science.
    Some dipole clusters had remained in orbit, but these, with few excep-
    tions, were expected to return to earth within two years. Experiments
    performed while dipoles were in orbit had verified calculations that
    predicted interference with optical and radio astronomical observations
    would be negligible. (Shapiro, Science, 12/16/66)
* New York Times correspondent Evert Clark was selected for AAAS-Westing-
    house science writing award for reporters on newspapers with 100,000
    or more circulation. Clark was cited for nine articles about NASA’s
    SURVEYOR I published between May 31 and July 14. (Science, 12/16/66,
     1431)
e U.S.S.R. would cooperate with “any country in developing space com-
    munications,” Deputy Communications Minister Nikolay Talyzin told
    Tass in a Moscow interview. He claimed that four Soviet Molniya I
    comsats could ensure multi-channel telephone, telegraph, and photo-
     telegraph links between countries in the Northern Hemisphere such
    as US., Japan, Cuba, and Southeast Asia. (Wash. Post, 12/17/66, C16)
0 DOD’S Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA)       announced establish-
    ment of an Office of Advanced Engineering under Dr. Chiao Jen Wang,
    former Booz-Allen Applied Research, Inc., executive. (DOD Release
      1053.66)
*     had selected Weston, Ill., site near Chicago for proposed ZOO-billion-
    AEC
    electron-volt (bev) proton accelerator. Six sites recommended by NAS
    had been under study since March. (AEC     Release J-282)
December 17: Dr. J. Allen Hynek, head of Northwestern Univ.’s Dept. of
    Astronomy and USAF consultant on Ufo’s, writing in Saturday Evening
    Post, offered four possible explanations for the Ufo phenomena: (1)
                                                                           377
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    hoaxes or hallucinations; (2) military weapons being tested in secret;
     (3) something from outer space; (4 unknown natural phenomena. Of
                                             )
    the 15,000 cases that had come to his attention, Hynek considered
    several hundred “puzzling” and perhaps one in 25 of puzzling incidents
     “bewildering.” Because of these arresting cases, he urged serious
     study of Ufo’s and suggested, as two initial steps to help solve the
    problem, computerization of data and improved photography of Ufo’s.
     (Hynek, Sat. Eve. Post, 12/17/66)
December 17: 63rd anniversary of first powered flights by Orville and Wilbur
     Wright from Kitty Hawk, N.C.
December 18: USAF awarded Boeing Co. $6-millionY2%-yr. contract to
     develop automatic flight control system that could double useful life-
     time of large, flexible aircraft such as B-52, XB-70, and C-5A by dampen-
     ing structural oscillations and reducing stresses from wind gusts and
     maneuvering loads, all of which caused metal fatigue. (AFSC Release
     234.66)
0 Dr. Jan H. Oort, recipient of Columbia Univ.’s 1966 Vetlesen Award for

     his work in earth sciences, told Washington Post that Univ. of Leiden
     Observatory, which he directed, was building world’s largest radio-
     telescope. A one-mile-long row of twelve 83-ft.-dia. parabolic disks in
     a remote area of the Netherlands, device would enable Oort and his
     colleagues to extend their explorations beyond earth’s galaxy. 1968
     was scheduled completion date. (Wash. Post, 12/18/66, B19)
0 U S . and Soviet scientists had advanced two related theories to explain

     radio emissions that made Venus seem lethally hot, Walter Sullivan
     reported in the New York Times. Soviet scientists V. M. Vakhnin and
     A. I. Lebedinsky, writing in Zemlya i Vselennaya, proposed that the
      two halves of Venus’ atmosphere, the sunlit and the dark, were of
      opposite electric charges, and, where the two halves met, lightning
      flashes could account for emissions. U S . scientists Dr. Paul Harteck,
      Dr. Robert R. Reeves, Jr., Dr. Barbara A. Thompson, and D. C. Apple-
      ton of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, in Journal o Geophysical
                                                                  f
      Research, reported on effects of electric discharges, such as lightning,
      in a simulated Venus atmosphere of carbon dioxide and sulphur
      dioxide. Investigation revealed that such discharges produced intense
      radio emissions in same region of microwave spectrum as observed
      emissions from Venus. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/18/66, 35)
 0 FAA announced allocations of $72.5 million in Federal matching funds

      to help local communities construct and improve 341 civil airports
      under Federal-Aid Airport Program for FY 1967. (FAA Release 66-107)
 0 25th anniversary of Reaction Motors, Inc. Formed to develop James H.

       Wyld’s liquid-fueled rocket, corporation became in 1958 Reaction
      Motors Div. of Thiokol Chemical Corp. (Thiokol, Aerospace Facts,
       11-12/66, 2)
 December 19: U.N. General Assembly unanimously approved space law
       treaty agreed upon by U S . and U.S.S.R. Dec. 8. Treaty would become
       effective when ratified by five nations which must include US., U.S.S.R.,
       and U.K. (NYT, 12/20/66,6)
                                   (1) Samuel H. Hubbard, Director, Gemini
 0 NASA personnel changes:

       Flight Operations, had been redesignated Special Assistant to the
       Director, Gemini Program Office; and (2) General Counsel Walter D.
       Sohier had resigned effective Dec. 31, to enter private practice. Deputy
378               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    General Counsel Paul G. Dembling would succeed him. (NASA Ann.;
           Release 66-322)
      NASA
December 19: U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS CXXXVI for space research into
    earth orbit with 305-km. (190-mi.) apogee, 198-km. (123-mi.) perigee,
    and 64.6” inclination. (U.N. Public Registry, 1/9/67)
December 20: XB-70 research aircraft, flown by Col. Joseph Cotton (USAF)
    and NAA pilot Van H. Shepard, reached mach 2.53 and 60,800-ft.
    altitude in flight to generate sonic booms over instrumented sites and
    test structures at Edwards AFB. (NASA Proj. O f ; UPI, NYT, 12/22/66,
                                                     f.
    20)
0 NASA announced sponsorship of four institutes in the summer of 1967 to

    acquaint about 160 nationally selected undergraduates with problems
    of space science and engineering. The institutes will be carried out by
    the following universities and NASA field centers: Columbia Univ. and
    Goddard Institute for Space Studies (space physics), USC and JPL
     (spacecraft technology) , Univ. of Miami and KSC (environmental and
    planetary sciences) , and UCLA and ARC (space physiology). (NASA
    Release 66-324)
0 MSFC awarded $7.2-million contract modification to Chrysler Corp. to

    begin procurement of long-lead-time items for 12 additional Uprated
     Saturn I 1st stages (S-IB). (MSFC Release 66-295)
  Japan’s second attempt to orbit a satellite failed when 4th stage of Lambda
    4s-2 booster failed to ignite. First failure was Sept. 26. Both launches
     were conducted from Uchinoura Range, Kyushu Island. ( Wush. Post,
     12/20/66, A13; UPI, Wush. Post, 12/21/66, A2, A24)
  Karl Harr, president of Aerospace Industries Assn., spoke before the
     Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn.: ‘?ASwe stand at the end of one record
     year of achievements and at the beginning of a year that we confidently
     predict will establish new records on all fronts, will historians view
     this point of time as having any particular significance from an aero-
     space point of view? After all we’re not going to the moon next year
     and we didn’t inject man into space for the first time last year. . . .
        “I believe historians may come to regard about this point of time
     as being the point when the aerospace business completed its transition
     from a matter of only peripheral concern to the total public interest,
                                               .”
     into the mainstream of American life. . . (Text)
0 West German Defense Ministry ordered limited resumption of flights by

     F-104G Starfighters-Lockheed-manufactured aircraft which had been
     grounded since Dec. 6 after 37 pilots had been killed in series of 65
     crashes. (AP,   NYT, 12/21/66)
December 21: USAF SV-5D lifting body was successfully launched from WTR
     by Atlas booster on reentry mission, but ‘qdue to an undetermined
     malfunction in the final phases of descent” was not recovered. Released
     at desired altitude, the 900-lb. vehicle had deployed parachute to slow
     its descent rate and reentered planned recovery area using lifting body
     principle. Goals of mission-first of four in USAF’S Precision Recovery
     Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program-were to study aero-
     dynamic characteristics of SV-5D shape, heat shield performance,
     guidance and flight control systems, instrumentation, and recovery
     system. (WI, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A4)
   U.S.S.R. launched two unmanned spacecraft. LUNA XIII, on mission to
     study the “moon and its close environments,” was following trajectory
      close to calculated one. COSMOS CXXXVII, carrying instruments for
                                                                          379
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    further investigation of outer space, was in orbit with 1,672-km.
    (1,032-mi.) apogee; 225-km. (140-mi.) perigee; 104-min. period; and
    49” inclination. (UPI, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A3; Anderson, NYT,
    12/22/66, 20)
December 22: NASA named crews for second and third manned Apollo
    missions, scheduled for 1967. Prime crewmen for AS-205/208 were
    James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell Schweickart; backup
    crew was Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan.
    Prime crewmen for AS-503, first manned flight using Saturn V launch
    vehicle, were Frank Borman, Michael Collins, and William A. Anders ;
    backup crew was Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and
     C. C. Williams, Jr. (NASA Release 66-326)
                                 HL-10 lifting body vehicle was successfully
0 First free flight of NASA’s

     conducted at Edwards AFB. Air-launched from B-52 bomber flying at
     45,000 ft. and 450 mph, vehicle was maneuvered by NASA test pilot
     Bruce A. Peterson to 200-mph landing three minutes later. Purpose of
     flight was complete design and systems checkout and evaluation of
     basic stability and control. NASA and AFFTC were studying lifting body
     concept inflight to help establish the technological base for design of
     future manned spacecraft capable of maneuvering inflight to pilot-
     controlled ground landing. (FRC Release 29-66)
0 NASA announced sponsorship in 1967 of three specialized summer pro-

     grams in systems engineering design for engineering faculty members.
     Undertaken as cooperative efforts between NASA research centers and
     adjacent universities, programs would enable faculty members from
     various engineering disciplines to work together as a team to design a
     complex space system. Fellowships would be available for about 70
     faculty members. Participating universities and cooperating NASA
     centers: Stanford Univ. and ARC; Auburn Univ., Univ. of Alabama,
     and MSFC; and Univ. of Houston, Rice Univ., and MSC. (NASA Release
     66-325)
 0 U S . R&D funding in 1967 would total about $23.8 billion-$500       million
      more than in 1966-Battelle Memorial Institute said in its annual
      forecast. For the first time in a decade, the Government would not be
      the dominant factor in the growth; 80 per cent of predicted increase
      would come from industry, universities, and nonprofit institutions.
      (BMI Release 124-66)
   Static test of Saturn V 2nd stage (S-11) at MTF was postponed 2 min. 31
      sec. before ignition when electrical cable in one of its two engines
      short-circuited. (UPI, NYT, 12/23/66, 12; 12/25/66, 32; AP, Wash.
      Post, 12/23/66, A2)
 0 Tests showed that as little as one or more inches of continuous snow

      cover could be reliably identified from satellite photos, ESSA’S Office of
      Hydrology reported. Associate Director of the Weather Bureau William
      E. Hiatt commented: “An increased capability of assessing snow
      accumulations, especially in remote sections where observation stations
      are limited, could result in faster appraisal of river conditions and
       contribute to more timely release of river forecasts and flooding
      warnings.” (ESSA Release 66-71)
 0 Inactivity in Soviet manned space program could be explained by “strict

       economy” and preparations for ambitious new manned missions, Radio
       Prague’s Moscow correspondent reported. The new missions--“flights
       of much higher standards”-would include “a flight of man to the
380              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1%6

    moon and the creation of a large orbiting laboratory.” Correspondent
    also predicted that the U.S.S.R. would launch a “group of rockets7,-
                                               Mars about Jan. 4. (NYT,
    presumably unmanned ones-toward
    12/23/66, 12)
       New York Times later editorialized: “. . . The possibility is raised
    that the Soviet strategy for a manned lunar landing may be based on a
    direct earth-moon trip. In that case there would be no need for the
    rendezvous and docking maneuvers.. . . Enormously powerful rockets
                       ...
    would be required       but if Moscow has them they might make possible
    the spectacular achievement of a goal the Kremlin must want very
    much: a manned lunar landing on the moon by the fiftieth anniversary
    of the Bolshevik Revolution next Nov. 7.” ( N Y T , 12/26/66, 20)
December 23: NASA announced Atlas-Centaur booster would replace Atlas-
    Agena for launching Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) satel-
    lites and Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) D and E. Launches
    were scheduled to begin in 1968. Centaur stage-first to use liquid
    hydrogen as a fuel-was capable of boosting about 40 per cent greater
    payload than the Agena into near-earth orbit and about three times the
    payload on lunar trajectory. (NASA Release 66-328)
0 NASA Administrator James E. Webb appointed B. L. Dorman, vice presi-

    dent of Aerojet-General Corp., Assistant Administrator for Industry
    Affairs, effective Jan. 16, 1967, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (USAF, Ret.)
    Acting Administrator for Administration, effective Jan. 1, 1967. Both
    positions were formerly held by William B. Rieke, who resigned to
    return t o Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. (NASA Release 66-327)
0 NASA awarded General Electric Co. $22.3 million to continue in its fourth

    year as general support contractor for NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility.
    Award was for period November 1966 to July 1967. (MSFC Release
    66-298)
0 Bell Telephone Laboratories      had developed experimental method of
    impressing over 57,000 two-way telephone conversations on single
    laser beam-a process essential for the commercial use of the laser in
    communications, Wall Street Journal reported. Researchers hoped to
    eventually replace coaxial cables, which could carry only about 32,000
    telephone conversations, with cables of laser beams. ( WSJ, 12/23/66,
     12)
December 24: Tass reported that detailed chart of earth’s magnetic field
    which would enable cosmonauts to determine radiation conditions in
     earth’s environs had been compiled by scientists using data from
     Cosmos satellites. (Reuters, Wush. Post, 12/25/66, A3)
0 Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Univ. of Chicago astrophysicist, was one

     of 1 scientists named by President Johnson to receive 1966 National
         1
     Medal of Science. (Pres. Doc., 1/2/67, 1832-3)
December 24-31: U.S.S.R. achieved her second soft-landing on the moon
     when LUNA XIII spacecraft landed an instrument package near Ocean of
     Storms to photograph and test the lunar surface.
        Landing sequence began when spacecraft was oriented vertically to
     the moon. At 43-mi. (69-km.) altitude, radar system aimed at lunar
     surface and turned on retrorocket, and shock-absorbing system was
     prepared. Less than one second before impact, after spacecraft had been
     slowed to 18 mph, instrument capsule was ejected and softlanded.
     Four minutes later, its petal-like covering opened, its antenna opened,
     and radio transmissions began.
                                                                         381
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

       18 hrs. after touchdown, LUNA XIII began photographing a panorama
    of the moon’s surface. Pictures showed barren, heavily pitted land-
    scape littered with stones ranging upward in size from one inch, which
    Soviet scientists concluded had resulted from either volcanic eruptions
    or impacting meteoroids. There was no evidence of a thick layer of
    dust.
       In addition to photographic equipment, spacecraft also carried two
    mechanical manipulators to test firmness and density of lunar soil:
    (1) a rod which was driven into surface with specific force; and (2) a
    meter which measured soil’s resistance to radiation. Analysis of data
    indicated that lunar surface could bear manned spacecraft and that
    soil from 8- to 12-in. depth was similar to medium-density terrestrial
    soil. Also onboard were a dynograph which tested firmness of lunar
    surface by recording duration and force of impact impulse, and a
    radiation meter which revealed that moon’s surface reflected about
    25 per cent of electrically-charged particles which struck it.
       Tass commented on LUNA XIII’S successful mission: “There is no doubt
    now that it is these cosmic stations that can supply the information
    permitting a new approach to solve such important problems of science
    as the origin of the solar system, the origin and development of life on
    other planets, and the internal structure of celestial bodies.’’ (NYT,
     12/25/66, 1, 40; 12/26/66, 19; 12/31/66, 6 ; AP, Wash. Eve. Star,
     12/26/66, A3; 12/27/66, A4; UPI, Wash. Post, 12/27/66, A l ; 12/31/66,
     1’ 7)
December 25: Nationalist China would build $10-million ground communica-
    tions station by early 1969 to participate in Intelsat’s planned worldwide
    satellite communications system, Reuters reported. (Reuters, NYT,
     12/25/66, 40)
December 26: NASA, Japanese Science and Technology Agency, and Japanese
     Meteorological Agency agreed to launch jointly 10 Japanese MT-135
     sounding rockets beginning in March 1967 to study rocket and payload
     performance and gain information on diurnal cycles of wind and
     temperature in the stratosphere. MT-135 could boost 6.6-lb. payload
     to 200,000-ft. (322,000-km.) altitude. (NASA Release 66-331)
December 27: Clear air turbulence (Cat)-unexplained disturbances en-
     countered by pilots flying at high altitude in seemingly calm weather-
     should be studied by NASA, DOD, FAA, and Dept. of Commerce, National
     Committee for Clear Air Turbulence recommended. One committee
     official estimated that Cat had been “highly suspect” in six recent air
     crashes. (Balt. Sun, 12/28/66)
0 NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Univ. of New Mexico,

     urged establishment of a seminar where experts could exchange
     scientific and industrial knowledge to bridge “the tremendous gap
     between physical development and social inventions.” Mr. Webb also
     recommended a national rocket foundation to provide facilities for
     amateur rocket enthusiasts. (AP, NYT, 12/28/66, 4)
0 “The American Space Outlook” for 1967 was summarized by Albert

     Sehlstedt, Jr., in the Baltimore Sun. “.. . 1967 shouId be a year of
     genuine accomplishments in space for men and machines.
        “. . . astronauts will begin to fly around the earth in the kind of
     spacecraft that will carry them to the moon in 1968 or 1969. . . .
        “New unmanned spacecraft will climb into orbit for additional views
     of the earth’s weather. Other craft will fly away to study the science of
382               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     the sun; make further on-the-spot examinations of the moon’s surface,
     probe the nature of the stars and take another close look at Venus.
          ..  the Defense Department will lay the groundwork for the 1969
        cr.
     launching of a manned orbiting laboratory to study possible military
                                 .
     roles of men in space.. the people who make airplanes will be
     planning the big jumbo jets and, in Europe, fashioning airliners that
                                                 ..
     will go faster than the speed of sound. .” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun,
     12/28/66)
December 27: Communist China exploded its fifth nuclear device at Lop Nor
     test site in Sinkiang Province. (Roberts, Wash. Post, 11/29/66, A17)
0 Astronaut Bruce McCandless 11, discussing role of manned space flight

     in science in address before Washington, D.C., Junior Academy of
     Sciences’ annual meeting, concluded: “Man is flexible; he is capable of
     responding to unforeseen situations intelligently and effectively. He
     has a limited and on-the-spot redesign capability built in and contrib-
     utes to mission success through improved reliability. He is capable of
     evaluating and screening information and making decisions accordingly
     and independently. As long as these elements are required, man’s
     participation will be beneficial.” (Text)
December 29: Aerospace industry believed 4,000-mph hypersonic transport
      (Hst) could be ready for commercial service in 1990’s-but only if
     Government would support its development, Richard Cooke reported
     in the Wall Street Journal. ccAerospace.. . officials agree that the rate
     at which new developments in air transportation come along will hinge
     in large measure on Government policy. They note that the military
                                                                           . ..
     has sponsored the development of every large American jet engine.
     A military version of the craft will almost certainly have to precede the
     commercial one-but right now there’s no driving military sponsor at
     high level behind these advanced materials and engines.” Development
     of Hst would require new heat-resistant materials, a more efficient fuel,
     and higher-capacity engine. (Cooke, WSJ, 12/29/66)
   American Astronautical Society (AAS) held symposium on the moon in
      Washington, D.C., as part of American Association for the Advance-
     ment of Science’s (AAAS) annual meeting.
         Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said NASA’s LUNAR
      ORBITER I photos had revealed “mass wasting” on the moon-a         proc-
      ess similar to “downhill creep” which produced slopes of fragmented
     dirt and rock debris on earth. Accelerated by small local earthquakes
      caused by impacting meteorites, wasting process was rapidly covering
      all of moon’s small craters, Shoemaker said. He believed majority of
      lunar craters were caused by high-velocity explosive impacts of me-
      teorites.
         Dr. Donald H. Menzel, Harvard Univ., told the press that man would
      make profound changes on the moon in 15-20 yrs.-particularly           if
      lunar rock were found to contain water of crystallization. ccThereis a
      real possibility for man. . . to establish self-support expeditions on
      the moon. Using solar or atomic energy for melting rocks, man could
                                                                                  .
      get water and then use the debris for building blocks. Lunar gardens
      could be established and animals could be raised there.” (Hines, Wash.
      Eve. Star, 12/29/66, Al, A6; Clark, NYT, 12/30/66, 8)
 0 USAF launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from
      WTR. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 160)
                                                                         383
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

December 29: National Aviation Hall of Fame announced six additions:
     Glenn L. Martin and William F. Boeing, both aircraft designers; Adm,
     John H. Towers, commander of first attempt at trans-Atlantic flight;
     B/G William Mitchell, pioneer advocate of aerial bombing; Robert
     Hutchings Goddard, US. rocket pioneer; and Lincoln Beachey, early
     designer of dirigibles. All were deceased. (AP, NYT, 12/29/66, 14)
* Robert L. Hallett, Head of Communications and Control Section at NASA
     Wallops Station, retired after 20 yrs. with NACA and NASA. (Wallops
     Release 67-1)
December 30: NASA and ESRO signed first agreement under which foreign
     country or organization would purchase satellite launch services from
     U S . on reimbursable basis. ESRO would furnish flight-ready scientific
     spacecraft and NASA wodd provide launch vehicle, range and launching
     facilities, and other support including initial tracking and telemetry
     reception. ESRO would reimburse NASA for launch vehicles and all
     identifiable direct costs of equipment and services furnished by or
     through NASA. First launch-~s~O’s Heos-A interplanetary physics
     satellite-was scheduled for late 1968. (NASA Release 66-332)
  Successful full-duration static firing (364 sec.) of the S-11-1, first flight
     model of Saturn V’s 2nd stage, was conducted at MTF. This was second
     and last full-duration acceptance firing for the stage, which would now
     be shipped to KSC. (MSF Historian)
  NASA announced plans to begin powered flights of M-2 and HL-10 manned
     lifting bodies at Edwards AFB in early 1967. Equipped with 8,000-1b.-
     thrust rocket engine, vehicles would be flown at altitudes up to 80,000
     ft. and speeds of 1,000 mph in series of 8-min. test flights designed to
     simulate spacecraft reentry conditions. (NASA Release 66-329)
0 John A. Edwards, NASA Deputy Director, Gemini Program, had been

     designated Director of Operations for Saturn/Apollo Applications in
      OMSF. (NASA Ann., 12/30/66)
* MSFC awarded Douglas Aircraft Co. a $300,000 9-month contract to analyze
     needs of an orbital support facility for future astronomical research
     from space. (MSFC Release 66-302)
0 NASA awarded one-year, $360,094, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Philco

      Corp. for engineering support services at Wallops Station. (Wallops
      Release 66-60)
   Dr. Robert M, Page, retired as chief scientist and director of research at
      Naval Research Laboratory after nearly 40 yrs. service. One of fore-
      most U S . experts on radar and a pioneer in space exploration and rocket
      astronomy, Dr. Page warned that U S . research was being threatened
                                            ..  A complete lack of confidence
      by “dangerous trends and controls..
      is being shown in the integrity and judgement of responsible operating
      officials which will certainly lead to bad management of Federal pro-
      grams.,’ (Naval Research Lab.; Kluttz, Vmh. Post, 1/8/67, A2)
 December 31: Boeing Co. and General Electric Co. had been selected to
      continue development and refinement of designs for first U.S. super-
      sonic transport (Sst), FAA announced. Decision climaxed 30 mos. of
      intense competition between Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.
      for airframe design; and GE and United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt i?z
      Whitney Div. for engine design. Boeing’s 350-passenger, 1,800-mph,
      variable-sweep-wing model would be powered by four 4.5-ton GE
      engines capable of generating 600,000 lbs. thrust. Approval for proto-
384               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    type construction was expected in early 1967. (FAA Release; AP, Wash.
    Post, 1/1/67, Al; Wash. Sun..Star, 1/1/67, A10)
December 31: New York Times characterized 1966: “In all future histories of
    lunar exploration the year 1966 will hold an honored and important
    place. In effect, it was the year of the moon, the year in which a dazzling
    array of Soviet and American instrumented capsules photographed,
    measured and probed the moon to an extent never before known. As a
    result of the successful flights of the Soviet Luna vehicles and of the
    American Surveyor and Lunar Orbiters, it is probable that more detailed
    information about earth’s natural satellite was gained in 1966 than in
    all the rest of human history. . . .” (NYT, 12/31/66, 18C)
e Fourth earth-orbiting object [see Sept. 301 not identified “with any
    launching or country of origin” was reported by GSFC in Satellite Situ-
    ation Report. Object apparently decayed Dec. 30. (GSFC SSR, 12/31/66)
During December: NRC’S Space Science Board was studying possible harmful
    effects to astronomy and other sciences of proposed NASA project to
    orbit large reflecting mirror that could illuminate land masses at night,
    NAS announced. NASA’s     support for the study was expressed by Associate
    Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E.
    Newell in a letter to Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of NAS Space Science
    Board: “I am gratified that the committee has promptly undertaken
    work on this task and am looking forward to their review for guidance
    with regard to the possible adverse effects of such a project.” (NAS-
    NRC-NAE News Report, 12/66, 7 )
* Proposal for fleet of 25 stand-by spacecraft which could be launched
    within three hours of a distress signal to rescue astronauts stranded
    in orbit was submitted to NASA by MIT aeronautics students. Each
    13,000-lb., four-man Nero (Near Earth Rescue Operation) spacecraft,
    designed with wing-like lift similar to M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, would
    be launched with Titan 111-C booster to rendezvous with target; it
    would glide to a landing at a jet airport. Vehicles could also repair
    crippled satellites, resupply manned orbiting laboratories, inspect
    unidentified satellites, and remove orbiting debris. System could be
    implemented with current technology and be in operation by early
    1970’s at total cost of $2 billion. (Wilford, N Y T , 12/6/66, 60C)
e NAS published History o the Proceedings of the National Academy of
                             f
    Sciences; 40-page study was prepared by Edwin B. Wilson, managing
    editor of Proceedings from 1915 until his death in 1964. (NAS-NRC-NAE
    News Report, 1/67, 8)
* “Love as an emotion will play a very important role in the future in the
    populating of outer space,” Soviet scientist Igor Zabelin wrote in
    Moskva. “In the future when mankind will fulfill its mission of populat-
    ing outer space, men and women will be sent in spacecraft somewhere
    for many years.” Noting that “when a couple lives together for five to
    seven years, they may get sick of each other and very often there is a
    divorce,” Zabelin warned that such coolness could cause grave problems
                            Wash. Post, 12/4/66, M7)
    in outer space. (mi,
During 1966: In 1966, NASA attempted 36 major launches with 34 successes.
    Of 29 NASA missions, 22 were successes. DOD orbited 70 payloads in 43
    launches. U.S.S.R. launched 43 payloads and France, one.
       Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of
    the moon provided by SURVEYOR I and LUNAR ORBITERS I and 11, the soft-
    landing on the moon by SURVEYOR I, and the five two-man Gemini space
                                                                          385
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    flights. SURVEYOR I transmitted more than 10,000 photographs of the
    moon; the two LUNAR ORBITERS returned a total of 635 lunar photo.
    graphs. Engineering data from these spacecraft indicated Apollo Lunar
    Module (Lm) could land and operate safely on the lunar surface. In
    Project Gemini, NASA conducted five two-man space flights, successfully
    concluding the project [see Nov. 151 and bringing US. manhours in
    space to 1,993 hrs. 34 min. (compared to 507 hrs. 16 min. for U.S.S.R.).
       Major ground and flight tests in Project Apollo accelerated preparatory
    to 1st three-man Apollo/Saturn spaceflight, planned for early 1967.
    Three Uprated Saturn 1’s were launched; Saturn V stages for the 1st
    flight model passed their final ground test firings.
       Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueledbooster completed its develop-
    ment testing, demonstrating restart capability in space.
       Applications satellites launched were NIMBUS 11 meteorological satel-
    lite, three ESSA satellites inaugurating ESSA’s operational meteorological
    satellite system, and INTELSAT II-A communications satellite for Com-
    SatCorp. The first ApplicationsTechnology Satellite, ATS I, was launched
    into synchronous orbit. Scientific achievements included orbiting of
    OGO 111, PAGEOS I, EXPLORERS XXXII and XXXIII satellites, and PIONEER VII
    interplanetary spacecraft.
       More than 300 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific
    sounding rockets were launched. A total of 20 flights of the X-15
    research aircraft were conducted; X-15 No. 2 piloted by Maj. William
    J. Knight set a new record speed of 4,233 mph (mach 6.33). NASA-USAF
    flight research investigating sonic booms got underway in six flights
    with XB-70 aircraft; research for the U.S. supersonic transport program
    continued. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle made 14 unpowered flights, and
    HL-10 lifting body made its first flight.
       Among the highlights in propulsion technology was static test firing
    of the 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 3.5 million
    Ibs. of thrust. Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted.
    One, in 110 min. of power operation, demonstrated stability and con-
    trollability of the hot-bleed cycle nuclear rocket engine. The other
    involved first successful full-power operation and a restart operation,
    ending the program with an accumulation of more than 105 min. of
    reactor operation at full or near-full power.
       USAF flight tested its powerful Titan 111 booster and used it to orbit
    the first seven Idcsp satellites of an eventual worldwide military comsat
    system.
        Of the 43 Soviet payloads, 34 were Cosmos satellites and five, Luna
    spacecraft. Notable among these were COSMOS CX, orbiting two dogs
    for prolonged period; COSMOS CXXII, apparently first Soviet weather satel-
    lite; LUNA IX, achieving first soft-landing on the moon; and LUNA X,
    achieving first orbit of the moon. Also orbited were two MOLNIYA 1 com-
    sats and the 12-ton PROTON 111 unmanned spacecraft used for cosmic-ray
    research; Yantar I ion-engine payload was flown in suborbital space-
    flight test.
       France orbited her first instrumented scientific satellite, DIAPASON I,
    the second satellite built and launched by France. (NASA Release 66-319;
    Major NASA Launches; NASC; Tass; U S . Aeron. & Space Act., 1966,
    passim; A&A 1966,passim)
During 1966: International space events were highlighted by the U.N.’s
    agreement on a space treaty to govern “activities of states in the explora-
386                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

      tion and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial
      bodies.” The draft treaty-suggested by President Johnson May 7-was
      negotiatedby the LegalSubcommitteeof theU.N. CommitteeonthePeace-
      ful Uses of Outer Space. On December 19 the U.N. General Assembly
      adopted a resolution endorsing the treaty, subject to ratification by five
      nations including US., U.S.S.R., and U.K.
         By the end of 1966, 72 countries had cooperated with the US. in
      space research activities.
         Six countries joined the International Telecommunications Satellite
      Consortium (Intelsat), bringing the total membership to 54.
         France and U.S.S.R. entered into agreement on cooperative space
      research, including experiments in astronomy and communications.
      (US.  Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim)
                           Appendix A
   SATELLITES, §PACE PROBES, AND MANNED
               SPACE FLIGHTS
                    A CHRONICLE FOR 1966
   The following tabulation was compiled from open sources by Dr. Frank
W. Anderson, Jr., Deputy NASA Historian. Sources included the United
Nations Public Registry; the Satellite Situation Report issued by the Space
Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center; public informa-
tion releases of the Department of Defense, NASA, and other agencies; and
the Report to the Congressfrom the President of the United States: United States
Aeronautics and Space Activities, 1966. Russian data are from the U.N. Public
Registry, the Satellite Situation Report, translations from Tass News Agency,
statements in the Soviet press, and international news services’ reports.
    It might be well to call attention to the terms of reference stated or implied
in the title of this tabulation. This is a listing of payloads that have (a)
orbited, (b) as probes, ascended to at least the 4,000-mile altitude that tradi-
tionally has distinguished probes from sounding rockets, etc., or (c) conveyed
one or more human beings in space. Furthermore, only flights that succeeded
-or at least are not known to have failed-in doing one of the above are
listed. Date of launch is referenced to local time at the launch site. An
asterisk by the date marks those dates that are one day earlier in this tabula-
tion than in listings which reference to Greenwich time.
    This was the year in which world space activity leveled out. After a decade
of virtual doubling of activity each year, 1966 showed only a slight rise in
total launches-116 against 102 in 1965-and a decline in the total number
of payloads orbited-143 against the record 160 in 1965. At first glance there
seems to be an inconsistency in a rise in number of launches and a drop in
number of payloads; the answer is found in the abrupt switch away from
multiple payloads that was one of the notable changes of direction in 1966
 (DOD still flew16 multipayload flights totaling 42 individual payloads, including
the 8-satellite Titan IIIC, but the Soviets launched none, compared with 7
flights for a total of 23 payloads in 1965, and NASA none, compared with 3
flights for a total of 6 payloads in 1965). Of the 1966 total, the U.S. launched
92 boosters carrying 100 payloads (compared with 61/94 in 1965), the
U.S.S.R. launched 43 (compared with 50 launches for a total of 66 payloads
in 1965), and France joined the space club with one satellite in 1966. Of the
U.S. total, DOD accounted for 70 payloads and 42 launches (compared with
67/39 in 1965), NASA 30 (compared with 27 payloads in 22 launches in 1965;
 one of the 30 was a Don-NASA mission, INTELSAT II-A, launched by NASA for
ComSatCorp). Two areas of concentration were again significant: the U.S.
 continued to dominate manned space flight, with 5 Gemini manned flights
 during the year, while the Soviets had no manned flights (compared with
 511 in 1965);the Soviets continued their numerical edge in lunar exploration
 with 5 lunar flights to 4 for the U.S. (compared with 5/2 in 1965).
    As we have cautioned in previous years, the “Remarks” column of these
 appendixes is never complete because of the inescapable lag behind each
 flight of the analysis and interpretation of scientific results.
                                                                         387
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                           I
          I
     m
W               t-
     W                0
N               N     D
                rl    rl
r(
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966         389




                                                m
                                           Y
                               2
Y                         c9         @?         Y
                                                         3
0                                          W
                         d                      W
                                     m
     0                               W
m                              m           m    m
                         rn                              m
     0
     r(



                                                     ~




                                                c
                                           m
                               t-
     3                   2           rl                  N
                                                         m
                                           01
                                     2
2                              N
                               rl
                         a
rl




                                     z
     a
B                                               a        a
                                           dc
                               0
                         W
                         co                lo
                                           rl
                               N                Lo
                               0                4
                         r'l
     W
     N
N                                    Lo                  rl




     m
N

d
c
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




0                         0
dc                        dc
3                         u!              0
                                          rl
                          Lo
                    Lo
                    W     rl
n                                         0
                                          rl




'4
                    2     2
2                   m     a2
rl



                    0
N                         W
                    m     rl
rl
0)
                    rl




                                          Lo
                    N
0
rl                        N
                    m                     m
                          Lo
                          W
f                   rl                    00




                                          le
*                                         Y
                                          A


                                          B
KJ
                                          6
                          *
                    c1

a                   K     2               ;
                                          1
-4
                                          1
n
rl                                        rl
d                                         W
W
m                                         a2
rl                                        rl




                    m                     N
                                          00
                          N
                    %I
                     -

                    Ji    Ji              Ji
                    c     L
                                         391
    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




0                        c
                         -
              W
        0
        W
              m
2             rl         rl
                         W
        N
      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                           '4
                                           Lo
                                           0
                                           rl




                      :
                      :     :
                            :
m          VJ    0
     rl                                    b
           m
     m
2                2                         W
                                           0
                      Lo    Lo




                 m
           *          m     L.j
                            -              N
     t
     -
rl         W
n    m                      W
     rl                                    W
Lo         rl                              (0
                            c
                N
                0     '0




                                           8
                 $    3     2
                            N
                                           N
                 N     N
N    N
           2                               W
                       W    W
                 W
W    W                                     (0
           W
                            m              m
                       m
                 m
           m
m
     2           rl                        rl
rl         rl               rl
                       r(




                 N     N
                       10   0
                 rl


                 g     c     c
                       i    i
                                               393
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                    t-
                                    9
                              0

                              c           0
                                          m
                                    W     rl
                                    t-



2                             2           0
          0
                              m           m
          m
0
rl        4




                                          e:
P                             0
          5                         W
                                    rl
                              2
m         nr                        rl    Fi




                                          m
                                    t-
                              N
                              m     W
                              N           N
                                    r(    0




     (Y

.-   4
I
.

     .-
     E
9i
!    Y
sl
E


                              1     2     %
$    3
N    N                              N
                              N
                                    &     $
W    W                        W     W
m                                         m
                                    m
                              m
     2
rl                                        rl
                                    rl
                              M




                                    t-    t
                                          -
                              W
0    01
     rl
m
i    i                         i          i
                                    i
i    i                              4
                              4           4
           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
394




                                       W
                                       0
                           0                    0
                           ?           4        vi
      0
      co
      In                               m
                                 W
                                 W
                           W           N
                           rl
                           ,I
                            -




                                       m
                                 3
                           8
      co                                        O
      a
      m                                         l4
                                       El       0)
                                       rl
                                 rl




                                       c-
                                 1              a
                                                Lo
      I
      n                    0)          W
                           co
      W
      0                    N
                                       s
                                 l-4
                                       a        a
                                                N




                                                N
                                                Lo


                                                k
                                                4
      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966   395




            c           2
                  2
1     Y                       m
      m
m                       m
                  m
            m                 0
                              %-I




                              m
      m
0           m     n
                  m     N
m
      E:                      t
                              -
                              W
                        n
            n
%-I
      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




           I
4    '9
a    m
           m     (d
     W           rl
0
rl




           *
m                                          m
                 W                         0
     N
     0)
rl
           N     N


                                           B
     R     R
                 B
B    a     a
                                     397
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




     5          W
                rl
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                               0
0
0                                       0           W
                                               d
                                               x
t                                       o?          9
     0        0
                                        "
              rl                                    0
     %                                  10     m    m
W             CO




d:
              "
     2        W
00
W    m
              3
                                                    "
              m
     le                                 d
%                                              Lo
              "                                rl
                                               "    W
              m
     L-
                                        1           0




L-
              3
     L-
     10
A
              3




m                                       m      m
              W
                                          399
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




.-
 n

m




                                m
                                00

                                2
         s                      t
El
rl       00
                                2
                                N




2
h
a
W
(0

2




                            W
                            rl



                            1
                            h
        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




    0
    m                                 m
0

                                      9
9            0

x            s             0
    2                      In
                           W
    W                                 N




                           I
9                          t-
    0        N
    m
m            W             o)
             -I




             m
0   -I                     W
                           m
             0             W
3   2        'p
             N



             -#            W
    N
    -I
0            u)
                           n
                           W
N
             '9
    N
             N




                                      1
                           3          I
                                      n
                           u)

                                      W
                           W          (0
                           (D
                                      m
                           m          -I
                           -I
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




          0

          Y
          m
          W




          x
rl

                                 2
                           2              2
2                     n!
                                          m
          m                m
m                     22         0
                                 rl



          m           m                   m
                           m     2
                           m
t
-
                                          3
4
rl                    W
          rl          rl         W




z                     m
          rl
                                          m
                                 E-
                           N
                      N
          m                      N
                                 W
          m                W
                           rl
                      m                   rl
rl




          d
          10
          W
          m
          rl




l
a         W



          3'
3
h         h
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




0        0
P-
         2
         0
2
N



         m
                                     L4
         2                                      2
2                                         0
                                     8
m        m                                m     m




                                                *
b                                    Lo
         Lo                                     0
                                          CI)
m        W                           Lo
         H                           H    N     r(
r(




                                                m
                                          m
          m                          0
                                     N          N
                                          N
          r(



                                     i    h
                                          i     g
          4
         h
                                             403
        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




0
L-             0     0
                     r!
2              2     8
m              10
                     rl



                                2
               2     N.
                     m          N
               m


                     m          2
n              L-
N              N
N              rl    rl
                     H          H




rl
m
k
N




                     m
               m           0
                           rl


    P
4
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                  0
       0
       W
                  %
       1          m
                  9
       m




             P-
d            d
(0



             3
3
4            4
               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966        405




          0
0    0                                              0
                         4
                         0
                                                    co
     co   N
10
     a
9                                                   9
                         2
          2                                  ID
                                             W
m    m                   m
          m                                         N




     ld
     f
     4
LI
     $2
     4
v1


S    $    C              2      1
     L-   L-
P-

                                3
                         z
W         W
     W
                                m
          (0
                         W
m                        m
     4    2
rl                       rl     rl
$06       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                                z
      I
                                    N
                                                    3
                                           r(
                                           m
                                    a
                                    dl          N




                                    m      a    0
                                                    $
                                    Lo     N
                                           0    a




                                                    0

                                    I               B
                                           I        B
                                    B
                                                    2
                                    r
                                    a
                                     2.
                                    ,oun            Y

                                           4
                                    E
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966           407




                                     o   m
                                     N   N
40%      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




Ip I P                                              m
                                              La
                                              m     0
                                                    3


 a3
                                                    a
                                              3
                              m     m
                              m     m         m     0
                                                    3
                              cv              l-4
                                    N,
                                    N
                              N




                              -
                              0
                              4
                              .-
                              E
                              Y
      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966   409




     Q?           Lo
                  0
     2
Lo
W                 W




-m
 +                2
m                            Lo
                             0
     1                       N
     f-


     rl           rl         N
                             W
W
N    co
rl
                  $:
     0




     4            o     o
4
W
.-                      B
                  4
     s
                        4
                  B
     E
E                       2
                  $
*                 *
     CI                 +)

                  K
     2
2                       2
                  $     9
3    1                                3
     m
m                 m                   m
                        I
                        W
W                                     W
     W            W
                  (0
01
W
                                      m
     m            m     m             rl
     rl           rl    rl




     0
2
4                 N     N
                  0
     N

J    J            J     J
0"   8            8     8
           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966
410




                                                0
      0                                         16
              0                                      0
                                                m
              '4                                     2
      3                                         d)
              2
      N                                              0
                                                0




                                                     s
      '4                       2
              m
              c
      8                                         m
                                                m    m
                               0
                               rl
      W


                               m
                                                     2
                                                0
                               2                0
                                                rl
                                                     rl




                               m                N
                               N

                                                5
                               J
                               B                2
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966        411




                         0                     0
     Lo
     0
                                      m
                         eo                    dl
                         m            m        m
     2                   I                     I
                                      eo
                                      N
     m


                                      2
3    2                   2                     2
m    m                   m            m        m


     m
                                      F
f                                              F
                         00
                         0
     2                                rl
                         F4                    rl




                                               c-
                         N
     d
                                               m
     2                   2                     rl




A                                              B
     1
0
rl

                                               2
     f
     W
W
W                                              W
m                                              m
     rl
     01
4                                              rl
412       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                    2
          W                               0
          4
          N
                                          m
                                    CQ




                                    s
          N                               W
          El                              W
                                          rl
                                    rl




      I
      z
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966             413




                          m     N     OD       W
0                   0)
                    n                 1
                    rl
rl
0                         rl
                          N     rl




P-
W
r(




                     3     1    3     1        1
                                               0
                                      rl
                           0     rl
                           rl         0
                     0
                     rl          0             rl
                                               W
                                      W
                           W     W
                     W
                                               m
                                          m
                           m
                     m                         rl
                                      Fl
                                 rl
                           rl
                     rl




                                          co
                           m     W             10
                     N
rl                   rl          N
                           rl
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




0    0                               0
m                                         m
     63                              d
                                     2    5
2    2
co                                   m    m




                                          c-
                                     O
                                     u
                                     2
                                          P-
                                          d
                                     N
                                     .
                                     N




d

E
                                          415
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




               s
          m
t-
m
a              rl
416         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                          0
                                          N
                                          2
      (4                            0

                                     *
                                    m
                                          c.
      W




      a
                                     *    0
                                     0    0
                                    rl
      N
      rl                                  a


                                          m
                                    N
                                    a     N
                                          a
                                    3




                                     W


                                    -
                                    4      Ld

                                           B
                                    .-
                                     E    ?
                                          ga
                                     *
                                          E

                                    $     1
      1    1                              74
           ,I
           -
                                    74
                                    rl
      rl                                  rl
           rl
           dl                       W     W
                                    0     (0
      W    W
                                     m    m
      m    m                         rl   rl
      rl   rl




           4                         4
      6                                    6
      d    d                        B     B
                         Appendix B
 CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR NASA LAUNCHINGS
JANUARY 1, 1966, THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 1966
   This chronology of major NASA launchings in 1966 is intended to provide
an accurate and ready historical reference, one compiling and verifying
information previously scattered over several sources. It includes launchings
of all rocket vehicles larger than sounding rockets launched either by NASA
or under “NASA direction” (e.g., NASA provided vehicle, launch facilities,
and performed the launch for the ComSatCorp INTELSAT 11-A).
   An attempt has been made to classify the performance of both the launch
vehicle and the payload and to summarize total results in terms of primary
mission. Three categories have been used for vehicle performance and
mission results-successful (S), partially successful (P) , and unsuccessful
 (U). A fourth category, unknown (Unk), has been provided for payloads
where vehicle malfunctions did not give the payload a chance to exercise its
main experiments. These divisions are necessarily arbitrary, since many of
the results cannot be neatly categorized. Also they ignore the fact that a
great deal was learned from shots that may have been classified as unsuccess-
ful.
   Date of launch is referenced to local time at the launch site. Sources used
were all open ones, verified where in doubt from the project offices in NASA
Hq. and from the NASA Centers. For further information on each item, see
Appendix A of this volume and the entries in the main chronology as refer-
enced in the index. Prepared January 1967 by Dr. Frank W. Anderson, Jr.,
Deputy NASA Historian (EH).




                                                                     417
418           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                  m     m
      m   m                    m      F4




      m   m       m            m
                        m             PI




                  r
                  n     m      m
      m   m                           m            F   4   m
                                                     419
            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




    :
    ,                5
m                                      m     m   m
                              m   m
        m      m


    3
                     a
                     :
                     ,                 m     m   m
                              m   m
m              m
    B   "
m       m                     m   m          m
    5                mD
               m                                 m
                                       PI
420        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                                    9
      m       m      m       m                  m   m



                                    9
              m      m       m                  m   m
      &




                     m                              m
      m       m              m      m           m




                                                N
                     10
              2              N      0
                                    N
                             .I
                             -
      0                                             N
                                                    W
      .I
      -
  2                  N
                                                *   *
                     <
  n                  M
      7"                                        -
                             a
              9                     Q               :
                                                    :
                             t      m
              4
      4
                                               421
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




*
d         m        m
     m



                   m
           m
     v1
P4




                             m
                   m
m    m     m
                          Appendix C
CHRONOLOGY OF MANNED SPACE FLIGHT, 1966
   This chronology contains basic information on all manned space flights
in 1966. The information was compiled by William D. Putnam, Assistant
NASA Historian for Manned Space Flight.
   The year 1966 was marked by the last five missions of the United States'
Gemini program and continuation of the hiatus in Soviet manned space
flights (since VOSKHOD 11 in March 1965). Major historic milestones in
manned space flight were rendezvous and docking with another space vehicle
on GEMINI VIII, the use of a propulsion unit placed separately into orbit to
propel the assembled combined spacecraft to new altitude and speed records
on GEMINI x and XI, and extensive astronaut extravehicular activity on
GEMINI x, XI, XI. Numerous technological and scientific experiments con-
ducted in Gemini made significant contributions to man's knowledge of the
space environment, the earth as observed from the vantage point of space,
and astronomical phenomena.
   By the end of 1966, the United States had conducted a total of 16 manned
space flights, 14 of these orbital, with a total of 19 different crewmen. Seven
of the 19 American astronauts had participated in two flights. The Soviet
Union had conducted a total of eight manned flights, all orbital, with 11
different crewmen. No Soviet cosmonaut had yet experienced two space
flights. Cumulative totals for manned spacecraft hours in flight had reached
1,023 hours 45 minutes for the United States and 432 hours 33 minutes for
the Soviet Union. Cumulative total manhours in space were 1,993 hours
36 minutes, and 507 hours 9 minutes, respectively.
   Data on United States flights are the latest available to date within NASA.
Although details are subject to modification as information is refined, the
major aspects of United States manned flihts have been subject to direct
 observation by the interested citizens of the world.
    Weight given is the weight of the total spacecraft as placed in orbit.
Maximum altitude is chosen from many possible performance measurements
because it represents a world-record category as recognized by the FBdQation
AQonautique Internationale.
                                                                      423
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




                   m
                   W

                   2




W                  W
,I
-




                   a

                   1
                   h
                                          425
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




*                 t-
t-                rl

d                 d
a"                B
t
-
0                 t
                  -
                  4


                  n
*
W
t-                W
                  Lo




                  *
m
*




m
4

A
;?
426        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




      m
      10




  t
  8
                           Appendix D
                 ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES
  Listed here are abbreviations for sources cited in the text. This list does
not include all sources provided in the chronology, for some of the refer-
ences cited are not abbreviated. Only those references which appear in
abbreviated form are listed below. Abbreviations used in the chronology
entries themselves are cross-referenced in the Index.

A&A                            AIAA’S magazine, Astronautics & Aeronautics
A & A 66                              Astronautics and Aeronautics 1966 [this pub-
                               NASA’s
                                 lication]
                               American Broadcasting Com any
ABC
    Release                    Atomic Energy Commission %ews Release
AEC
AF Info. Pol. Ltr.             Air Force Information Policy Letter for Commanders
AFISD                          Air Force and Space Digest magazine
AFOSR Release                  Air Force Office of Scientific Research News Release
AFSC Release                   Air Force Systems Command News Release
AGU Transactions               American Geophysical Union Transactions
AIAA Release                   American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                 News Release
AIP News                       American Institute of Physics News
AMR                            Applied Mechanics Reviews
AP                             Associated Press
ARC Release                    NASA Ames Research Center News Release
Atlanta JIConst.               Atlanta Journal and Constitution news aper
Atomic Energy Programs, 1966   AEC, Major Activities in the Atomic L e r g y Programs,
                                  1966
Av. Daily                      Aviation Daily newsletter
Av. Wk.                        Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine
Balt. Sun                      Baltimore Sun newspaper
                               Columbia Broadcasting System
                               Chicago Tribune news aper
                               Communications Sateylite Corporation News Release
                               Congressional Record
CSM                            Christian Science Monitor newspaper
                               Chicago Tribune News Service
CTNS
DAC Release                    Douglas Aircraft Co. News Release
                               Dow Jones News Service
DJNS
DMSSD Apogee                   Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. Apogee
DOD Release                    Dept. of Defense News Release
EH                             NASA Historical Staff (former1 EPH)
                               NASA Historical Staff (now E&
EPH
       Release                 Environmental Science Services Administration News
ESSA
                                  Release
FAA Release                    Federal Aviation Agency News Release
FonF                           Facts on File
FRC Release                    NASA Flight Research Center News Release
                                                                             427
42%                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

FRC X-Press                               Flight Research Center’s FRC X-Press
                                    NASA
GE Forum                            General Electric Forum magazine
Goddard News                        NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News
GSFC Release                        NASA Goddard Space Flight Center News Release
GSFC SSR                            NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situation
                                       Report
Houston Chron.                      Houston Chronicle newspaper
                                    New York Herald Tribune News Service
ATNS
Int. Science and Tech.              International Science and Technology magazine
J /Armed Forces                     Journal o the Armed Forces
                                              f
                                    Jet Propulsion Laboratory News Release
      Release
JPL
KB                                  NASA Inventions and Contributions Board
                                    John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, News Release
       Release
KSC
Langley Researcher                  NASA Langley Research Center’s Langley Researcher
L a R c Release                     NASA Langley Research Center News Release
L.A. Times                          Los Angeles Times newspaper
Lewis News                          NASA Lewis Research Center’s Lewis News
LRC Release                         NASA Lewis Research Center News Release
M&R                                 Missiles and Rockets magazine
Marshall Star                       NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center’s Mar-
                                       shall Star
Minn. Trib.                         Minnea olis Tribune newspaper
    Release                         NASA d n n e d Spacecraft Center News Release
MSC
    Roundup                         NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Space News Roundup
MSC
MIS Daily                           Missile Space Dail newsletter
                                    NASA George C. d r s h a l l S ace Flight Center Release
MSFC Release
N A A Skywriter                     North American Aviation, Pnc., Los Angeles Skywriter
                                    North American Aviation, Inc., News Release
NAA Release
                                    National Aeronautic Association News Release
Nat’l. Aeron. Assn. Release
                                     North American Newspaper Alliance
NANA
                                    NASA Announcement
     Ann.
NASA
                                    NASA Authorization FY 19671 Hearings
NASA Auth. Hearings
                                    NASA Headquarters’ Weekly Bulletin
NASA Hq. Bull.
                                    NASA Headquarters Personnel Bulletin
NASA Hq. PB
NASA LAR V 150                      NASA Legislative Activities Report, Vol. V, No. 50
                                    NASA Office of International Affairs
NASA Off. Int. Aff.
                                    NASA Project Office
NASA Proj. Off.
                                    NASA (Hq.) News Release
NASA Release
                                    NASA Report of Sounding Rocket Launching
NASA R t. SRL
                                    NASA S ecial Publication #4006
NASA SF-4006
                                    NASA (6s.) X-15 Project Office
NASA X-15 Proj.    Off.
                                    National Aeronautics and Space Council News Release
NASC Release
                                    National Academy of Sciences-National Research
NAS-NRC Release
                                       Council News Release
                News Report         National Academ of Sciences-National Research
NAS-NRC-NAE
                                       Council-Nationd Academy of Engineering News
                                       Report
                                    National Broadcasting Company
NBC
                                    NASA Management Instruction-
NMI-
NN                                  NASA Notice
                                    National S ace Club News Release
    Release
NSC
N.Y. Her. Trib.                     New York herald Tribune newspaper
N.Y. J IAmer.                       New York Journal-American newspaper
NYT                                 New York Times newspa er
                                    New York Times News gervice
NYTNS
OAR Release                         Office of Aerospace Research (USAF) News Release
Orl. Sent.                          Orlando Sentinel newspa er
     Release                        Pratt & Whitney Div. Jews Release
P&W
Phil. Eve. Bull.                    Philadelphia Evening Bulletin newspaper
P i . Inq.
 hl                                 Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper
Pres. Doc.                          National Archives and Records Service’s Weekly Com-
                                      pilation o Presidential Documents
                                                 f
Sat. Eve. Post                      Saturda Evenin Post magazine
SBD                                 space dsiness A i l y newsletter
Sci. Amer.                          Scientijc American magazine
                                    Science Service
Sci. Serv.
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                            429
                                San Francisco Chronicle newspaper
S.F. Chron.
                                Saturda Review magazine
SR
                                Technol?l Week magazine (formerly Missiles and
Tech. Wk.
                                  Rockeg
                                Congressional testimony, prepared statements
Testimony
                                Prepared report or speech text
Text
                                Official transcript of news conference or congressional
Transcript
                                  hearing
                                United Press International
UP1
                                President’s Re ort to Congress, United States Aero-
U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966
                                  nautics and 8pace Activities, 1966
                                U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings magazine
U.S. Naval Inst. Proc.
                                U S . News and World Report magazine
U.S. News
                                Translation by NASA Scientific and Technical Infor-
USS--T
                                  mation Div., Translators
Wallops Release                 NASA Wallops Station News Release
Wash. Daily News                Washington Daily News newspaper
Wash. Eve. StarlWash. Sun. Star Washington Evening /Sunday Star newspaper
Wash. Post                      Washin ton Post newspaper
WBE Sci. Serv.                  World gook Encyclopedia Science Service
                                Wall Street Journal newspaper
WSJ
                                    INDEX
                                                 150-A
A-1 (French satellite), 56, 94
                                                     ultraviolet astronomy, 18, 182
Aa. See Apollo Applications program.
                                                     upper atmosphere data, 79, 84, 276
        See American Association for the
MAS.
                                                 350-269
  Advancement of Science.
                                              Aeroiot, 50, 339
AAS. See American Astronautical Society.
ABC. See American Broadcasting Co.            Aerojet-General Corp., 62, 103, 110, 235,
Abelson, Dr. Philip H., 1                        259, 283, 295, 353, 375
Abhau, R /A&. Conrad (USN),                   Aeronautical and Space Research Institute
                                332
                                                  (IIAE),342
Able, Charles R., 167
                                              Aeronautical Research Associates of
Abraham, Karl, 18
                                                 Princeton, Inc., 151
Abres. See Advanced Ballistic Reentry
                                              Aeronautics, 66, 208, 223, 280, 323
  Systems.
                                              Aeronomy satellite (see also EXPLORER
Academia Sinica, 339
Accelerator, 376                                 X ~ X I I ) , 192,289
Accident (see also Aircraft, accident), 25,   Aerospace, 200
  55, 129, 183, 281                           Aerospace Corp., 354
                                              Aerospace Education Foundation, 36
Acv. See Air-cushion vehicle.
Adam (Air Deflection and Modulation) I1       Aerospace Industries Assn., 97, 122, 160,
  (V/Stol aircraft), 309                         230, 295, 367, 378
                                              Aerospace industry, 97, 230, 295, 350,
Adams, Rep. Brock, 90
Adams, Dr. Mac C., 1, 62, 92, 111                372,378,382
Adams, Maj. Michael J. (USAF),                Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories,
                                  313, 357
Adams, Dr. Thomas W., 55                         203
                                              Aerospace medicine. See Space biology.
Adcsp. See Advanced Defense Commu-
                                              Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Third, 26
  nications Satellite Project.
                                              Aerospace Systems Conference, 238
Adelaide, Australia, 162
                                                       See Air Force Assn.
Adler, Fred, 250                              AFA.
Administrative Hsoy of NASA, 1958-63,
                 itr                                      See Air Force Cambridge Research
                                              AFCRL..
                                                 Laboratories.
  231
                                                            See Air Force Flight Test Center,
Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems            AFFTC.
                                                 Edwards AFB, Calif.
   (Abres), 54
Advanced Defense Communications                                See American Federation of
                                              AFL-CIO.
                                                 Labor-Congress of Industrial Organi-
  Satellite Project (Adcsp), 200
                                                 zations.
Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft
                                              AFSC. See Air Force S stems Command.
  (Amsa), 72, 341
                                              Agaltsov, Air Marshal $: A., 270
Advanced Research Projects Agency
                                              Agena (booster) (see also Atlas-Agena,
   (ARPA), 322, 376
           15,
                                                     Thor-Agena), 54, 67, 92
Advanced Vidicon Camera System (Avcs),
                                                 High-reliabilit 213
  178, 283, 310
       See Atomic Energy Commission.          Agena Tar et Vebcle. See Gemini Agena
AEC.
                                                 Target gehicle.
         See Arnold Engineering Develop-
AEDC.
                                              Agency for International Development
  ment Center.
                                                -(AID), 34
Aegean Sea, 87
Aerial Coast Patrol (US. Coast Guard),        AGM-69A (Short Range Attack Missile),
                                                 334
  278                                             _.
                                              Agreement, 179, 208
Aerobee (sounding rocket)
                                                 FAA-AID, 34
  150
     booster test, 297                            international, 125, 155, 198, 220, 236,
     micrometeoroid sampling, 326, 328,              285, 330
                                                  NAs-Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences,
        350
     radar test, 171                                 231
     solar astronomy, 156, 187, 337, 347        NASA
                                                   -Argentina, 253
     ultraviolet astronomy, 145, 190, 241,
                                                   -Brazil, 14, 161, 310, 320
        242>295,352
     upper atmosphere data, 60, 138, 277,          -ComSatCorp, 235
                                                   -Department of Commerce, 103
        360
                                                   -DOD,7,29,43,110,150,198,305,334
  x-ray astronomy, 89, 219, 319

                                                                                  431
432                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                              Aircraft (see also individual aircraft, such
    -ESRO, 383
                                                   as B-52, X-15, etc.), 139-150, 267,
    -France, 195
                                                   282.329
    -Naval Oceanographic Office, 19                - - - , ~-
                                                accident, 3,28,58,64,76,159,211,214,
    -Spain, 15, 137-138
    -USAF, 128-129                                    250, 263, 367, 378
    -USN, 8                                        liability, 43, 165
                                                   prevention, 159, 262, 265, 284
    -U.S.S.R., 90, 156
    -Vocational Rehabilitation Admin-           anniversarv. 259. 377
    istration. 222. 328                         bomber, 6i,’ 72,153,270, 341
                                                cargo, 164,333, 358
                                                carrier, 228
                                                fighter, 94, 111, 116, 119, 168, 195, 256,
                                                   262. 288.323. 367. 378
                                                foreign, 43; 50, ‘58, 118, 196, 226, 235,
      370, 386
Agriculture, Dept. of, 3, 117                      270,333
AGU. See American Geophysical Union.            general-aviation, 250, 295
Ahmedabad, India, 235                           helicopter, 60, 132, 187, 194, 290, 291,
AIAA. See American Institute of Aeronau-           326.340.344
  tics and Astronautics.                        hypersonic; 66, 382
AIAA-USN Marine Systems Conference, 271         interceptor, 27
AID. See Agency for International               personal, 37, 134
  Development.                                  reconnaissance, 27, 28, 251, 253
Aimp. See Anchored Interplanetary               record, 62, 132, 134, 187, 250, 251, 253,
  Monitoring Platform.                             291, 302, 333, 351, 385
Air cargo, 197                                  research, 5, 16, 47, 62, 114, 129, 158,
Air-cushion vehicle (Acv), I f 8                   211, 223, 225, 338, 378, 385
Air et Cosmos, 22, 82                           statistics, 172, 210
Air Force Academy, 139                          tracking, 128
Air Force Assn. (AFA) , 36, 58,60, 113, 294     training, 76, 85
Air Force Avionics Laboratory, 330, 342         trans ort (see also Aircraft, V/Stol,
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories             JeTtol; Supersonic transport)
   (AFCRL), 79, 84, 124, 146, 161, 337, 350        air-bus, 323, 330
Air Force Flight Test Center (AFFTC),              jet, 58, 137, 143, 145, 149, 153, 235,
   Edwards AFB, Calif., 3, 180, 264                   250, 285, 330, 334, 358
Air Force Man of the Year, 60                      military, 57, 281
Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), 6, 57,        variable-sweep-wing,61, 116, 168, 215,
      66, 77, 87, 111, 129, 172, 188, 285,         38.1
      295,316                                   V / s t l , 72, 106, 131, 185, 194, 253, 309,
   Aeronautical Systems Div., 114                  330,364
   arresting gear, aircraft, 180                Vtol. 94, 284, 340, 365
   associateships, 367                        Airlessness‘, 61
   award, 168, 268, 294, 315, 353             Airlines, 180, 223,272,334, 339
   contract, 72, 88, 159, 177, 220,225,284,     anniversary, 159
      335,348,368, 375                          forecast, 11, 172, 197
   Electronic Systems Div., 283                 statistics, 165, 209, 250
                                                strike, 236, 254, 257, 272
   experiment, 342
                                              Airlock, 272
   Flight Dynamics Laboratory, 87
                                              Airports, 91, 155, 217, 243, 330, 354, 364,
   personnel, 146, 148
                                                377
   Space Systems Div., 255, 268
                                              AiResearch Manufacturing Div., 156
   Systems Engineering Group, 284
                                              Alabama, 341
 Air-Launched Air-Recoverable Rocket
                                              Alabama, Univ. of, 365, 379
    (Alarr), 118-119
                                              Alarr. See Air-Launched Air-Recoverable
 Air Line Pilots Assn., 64
                                                 Rocket.
 L’Air Liquide, 370                           Alaska, 161, 216, 221, 226, 260, 265, 310,
 Air Museum Act, 49                              356,367
 Air pollution, 142, 194                      Albert, Col. John G. (USAF), 354
 Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., 114, 257   Albuquer ue, N. Mex., 221
 Air Proving Ground Center (Eglin AFB,        Aldrin, LqC Edwin E., Jr. (USAF), 110, 219,
                                                                                *
   Fla.), 131                                    327, 340, 344, 349, 353
 Air Research and Development Command,        Alexander, George, 261
   316                                        Alfven Propulsion Engine (Ape), 152
 Air traffic control. 18                      All-weather landing system (Awls), 66
                                              Allen, Alice S., 154
 Air Transport Association of America
                                              Allen, H. Julian, 145
    (ATA), 165, 197, 250, 265
                                              Allen, Richard J., 354
 Air University Review, 253
                                                                                    433
                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

 Allentown, Pa., 325                           Amsa. See Advanced Manned Strategic
"Alleviation of Jet Aircraft Noise Near Air-       Aircraft.
~ r t s ' (report), 107
            '                                  AMTRAN. See Automatic Mechanical
    ied Research Associates, Inc., 214, 275        Translator.
Allmanna Svenska Elektriska, A.B., 239         Amu. See Astronaut Maneuvering Unit.
ALOUETTE 11 (Canadian satellite), 63, 357      An-2 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 256
Alpha L ae (star), 241                         An-10 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 256
       v4"
Alpha irginis (star), 40                       An-22 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 50
Alsep. See Apollo Lunar Surface Experi-        An-154 (U.S.S.R. double-decked airliner),
   ment Package.                                   50
AMA. See American Medical Association.         Anaheim, Calif., 189
America Illustrated, 304                       Anchored Interplanetary Monitoring Plat-
American Academy of Political and Social           form (AimD). 231
   Science, 141                                Anders, Edw&d, 144
American Association for the Advancement       Anders, William A., 110, 379
   of Science (AAAS), 22, 382                  Anderson, Sen. Clinton P., 157, 208, 373
American Association of School Adminis-        Anderson, Roy E., 321
   trators, 52                                 Anderson, Wendell, 82
American Astronautical Society (AAS), 61,      Andoeya, Norway, 1 1 124,322
                                                                      1,
   121, 134, 160, 189,221,225,314,382          Andover, Me., 122, 278, 314,331
American Broadcasting Co. (ABC), 46, 256,      Andrews AFB, Md., 131
   287, 355                                    Andrews, Rep. Mark, 104
American Chemical Society, 322                 ANL. See Argonne National Laboratory.
American Federation of Government              Ann Arbor, Mich., 110, 113, 116
  Employees (AFGE), 33, 258                    Anna (geodetic satellite), 162
American Federation of Labor-Congress of       Anniversary, 15, 193, 278, 304
  Industrial Organizations, 271                   flight
American Geophysical Union (AGU), 38, 79,             manned, 107, 135,259
   144, 215                                           unmanned, 103, 240
American Institute of Aeronautics and             Government, 123, 217, 224, 302,310
      Astronautics (AIAA), 74, 159, 307           industry, 159, 241, 347
  award, 323                                      institution, 217, 329
   fellows, 235, 289                              LRC, 23,312
  meeting, 26-27,89-90,119-120,134,162,           satellite, 28, 35, 106, 227, 312, 322
      235, 271, 314, 338, 357-359              Anosov, Aleksey, 291
American Institute of Physics, 4647            Antaeus (U.S.S.R. cargo aircraft), 333
  Center for History and Philosophy of         Antarctica, 157, 170, 348
      Physics, 229                             Antenna, 88, 157, 197, 372
American Legion, 137                           Antimissile missile, 72, 170, 343, 355
American Medical Assn. (AMA), 8                Antioch, Calif., 237
American Meteorological Society, 325           Antiparticles, 225
American Optical Co., 209                      Antonov, Oleg K., 50
American Ordnance Assn., 168, 341              AP. See Associated Press.
American Petroleum Institute, 350              Ape. See Alfven Propulsion Engine.
American Philosophical Society, 147            Apollo (program), 238,246
American Physical Society, 31-32, 150-152         astronaut, 57, 110, 144, 241, 243, 269,
American Science and Engineering, lnc.,               306,375,379
  89,.219, 229, 319                               ex eriment, 15, 29, 255, 322
American Society for Engineering Educa-              iydrogen tank conversion, 167, 272
  tion, 365                                       facilities, 122, 176, 311, 331
American Society for Microbiology, 166            funds for, 24, 288, 301
American Society for Public Administra-          launch (see also Apollo spacecraft)
  tion (ASPA), 21-22, 140                            AS-201, 67
American Society of Civil Engineers, 315             AS-202,274
American Society of Mechanical Engineers             AS-203; 233
  (ASME), 166                                    lunar exploration, 5, 1 , 25, 314
                                                                           1
American Society of Tool & Manufacturing             landing site, 96, 296, 313
  Engineers, 108                                 management, 268,289,291
American Telephone & Telegraph Co.               plans for, 5,64,72,75,93,127,167,229,
  (AT&T), 114, 126,131, 152,256,278,375              332,350,375                      '
Ames, Milton B., Jr., 99                         progress, 95, 167, 179, 193, 362
Ames Research Center (ARC), 258, 378             test, 127, 167, 375, 384-385
  award, 20, 145, 352                            tracking, 30, 81, 128
  H erveIocit Free Flight Facility, 246          training, 40, 144, 360, 376
    r%e, 79,2&, 301                            Apollo (spacecraft), 25, 193, 332, 351
  groject Luster, 326                            Command Module (Cm), 21, 25, 40, 67,
  research, 74,152-153,271,347,361,374               93,156,272,274; 298; 313
434                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   heat shield, 67, 112, 274                         107, 112, 117, 131
   launch                                        training, 90, 131
      AS-201, 51, 67, 93                       Army Aviation Materiel Laboratories
      AS-202,274                                 (AWABS), 156
                                               Army Corps of En ‘neers, 1 , 114,154,332
                                                                             1
  launch vehicle. See Saturn.
  Lunar Module (Lm), 25,40,%, 272,375,         Army Electronic roommand Labs., 254
      385                                      Arnold Air Society, 129
   Service Module (Sm), 25, 132,272, 274,      Arnold Engineering Development Center
      328                                            (AEDC), 8, 53, 54, 67, 86, 121, 126,
   test, 328, 360, 385                               132, 189, 221
      Launch Escape System (Les), 19, 21,        Rocket Propulsion Research Laboratory,
         42                                          11
                                                      1
      recovery, 35                             Arnold, Gen. Henry H. (“Ha ), 168
Apollo Applications (Aa) program               Arnold, Henr H., Gold Medi: 168
   contract, 195, 315                          Arons, DanieKM., 282
  funds for, 23, 138, 149, 171, 278            Arp, Dr. Halton C., 93
  management, 235,239                                   See Advanced Research Projects
                                               ARPA.
  plans for, 13, 52, 59, 261                     Agency.
   proposed merger, 1 1 137,307
                        1,                     Asahi Shimbun, 109
Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package        Ascension Island, 69
   (Alse ), 6, 29,83, 104, 221                 Asia, 54, 61, 95, 152
Apollo kange Instrumentation Aircraft          Asia-Pacific Seminar, 25
                                               Asia, Southeast, 376
   (A /Ria), 7
Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm), 239, 289,        ASME. See American Society of Mechani-
  303, 325, 356, 360                             cal Engineers.
Appleton, D. C., 377                           Aso, Japan, 299
Applications Technology Satellite (Ats) (see   Asp (booster), 236
      also ATS I), 77, 84, 295,353,361, 372,   ASPA. See American Society for Public
      380,385                                    Administration.
  launch, 367                                  Assembly of the Western European Union,
Ap lied Ph sics Laboratory (APL) (Johns          210
   iopkins bniversity), 162                    Associated Electrical Industries, Ltd., 136
                                               Associated Press (AP), 55, 149, 161, 264,
Apt. See Automatic Picture Transmission.
Aquanaut, 316,367                                322, 327, 332, 365, 367, 373
ARC. See Ames Research Center.                 Associated Universities, 257
Arcas (sounding rocket) (see also Boosted-     Asteroid, 69, 317
   Arcas), 15, 65, 87, 117, 173, 342           Astronaut (see also Extravehicular
Archangel, U.S.S.R., 227, 372                        activity), 25, 98, 109, 189, 203, 213,
       of
Arches Science Award, 312                            217,246,248,313,323,381,382
Arm, Ida., 276                                   Apollo mission, 106, 110, 351, 360, 376,
ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College                379
   Scientists) Foundation, 366                   contract, life story, 161
Arctic Circle, 299                               death, 72,76, 85
Arencillo, Spain, 322, 325                       flights
Arendt, Dr. Paul R., 254                             GEMINI IV, 9, 105,208, 232
Arenstorf, Richard F., 315                           GEMINI v. 9. 105. 304
Argentina, 14, 60, 154, 253, 297, 342, 346           GEMiNI vi-A (Gemini VI), 8,30,54, 86,
Argentine Space Commission (CNIE), 154,                226,259,374
   253,342                                           GEMINI VU, 12, 54, 86, 87, 170, 203,
Argo D 4 (sounding rocket). See Javelin.               208,226,259,374
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL.), 142,             GEMINI VIII, 17, 53,86,96,99,100,104,
   240                                                 105,145,162,226
A /Rim. See Apollo /Range Instrumenta-               GEMINI IX-A (Gemini IX), 85,105,110,
   tion Aircraft.                                      192, 178, 180, 206-207, 208, 209,
ARINC Research Corp., 165                              213, 218, 236
                                                     GEMINI x, 27,226, 240,243-244, 247,
Arizona, 12,339
Arizona, Univ. of, 44,96,116,187,224, 325              248, 249,255
Arlington National Cemetery, 85                      GEMINI XI, 110,290,293,294,297,301,
Armed Forces Communications and                        304
   Electronics Assn., 212                            GEMINI XII, 218,327,340, 344,347
Armed Forces Management, 335                     former, 54, 60, 105, 169, 191, 242, 314,
Armed Forces Management Assn., 172                   328
Armstrong, Neil A., 110,137,208,214,297,         good-will tour, 54,60,69, 72, 169,297
      3 16                                       honors, 9, 12, 16, 22, 30, 69, 87, 191,
            117                                      208,209,225,232,236,255,259,304,
           m(              101,104,105,106,          374
                                                                                      435
                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   performance, 7, 69, 243                     Atlas-Centaur (booster) (see also Centaur),
   physiolog 166, 243, 273, 285, 308                58,238,380,385
   press congrenee, 92,218,257,301,353,          AC-7, 296
      375                                        AC-8, 120, 131, 164
   record, 251                                   AC-9, 329
   rescue, 78, 111, 145, 164, 192, 250, 269,     AC-10, 164, 196
      297, 336. 384                            Atm. See A 0110 Telescope Mount.
   scientist-astronaut, 302                    Atmos here t e e also Ionos here)
   selection, 7, 127, 134                        artilcial, 12, 13, 285, 339
  training, 14, 76, 122, 130, 198, 240,          meteorological experiments, 3, 221, 260,
      375-376                                          265. 276. 342. 360. 364
   vision, 7, 57, 78, 236, 294, 342                 grenade, 23,39,51,161,164,216,226,
   women as, 7, 107, 324                              260, 307, 310
Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu), 206,           upper, study of, 59, 79, 237, 267, 276,
   304                                              37
                                                     .7
Astronautics & Aeronautics, 37,73, 159,200.    Atomicbomb, 232, 246
   229,253,281, 308,361, 362,363               Atomic clock, 353
Astronautics Engineer Award, 103               Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) (see also
Astronomical clock, 169                           NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion
Astronomisches Rechen Institut, (Heidel-             Office, Snap, Nerva, Rover, and Vela
  berg, W. Germany), 220                             programs), 19, 41, 128, 147, 165
Astronomy (see also Radioastronomy;               accelerator, 10, 376
     Star), 39, 40, 63, 65, 95, 121, 125,         annual re ort 35
     339, 384                                     Argonne kational Laboratory, 142, 240
  gamma-ray, 151, 263                             award. 259
  optical, 95, 219                                Brookhaven National Laboratory, 10,
  solar, 11, 79,87, 137, 156, 174,187, 274,         225, 257
     278, 337, 341, 346, 347                      budget, 24, 171
  star catalog, 107                               coniiract, 112
  ultraviolet, 18, 79, 138, 145, 182, 190,        cooperation, 42, 82, 240, 336, 360
     241, 242, 295, 352                           National Reactor Testing Station, 13, 276
  x-ray, 79,89,96,219, 229, 319,328,347,          nuclear reactor, 13, 56-57
     373                                          nuclear rocket engine, 42, 52, 82, 103,
Astrophysical Journal, 141, 229                     115, 14.5, 211, 336, 385
ATA. See Air Transport Association of             nuclear test, 49, 342, 366
  America.                                        Oak Ridge National Institute, 243
AT&T. See American Telephone & Tele-              radioisoto e generator, 83, 112, 227
  graph Co.                                       space nucrear ower, 27, 56, 273
Atacama Desert, Chile, 202                     Atomic Industria! Forum, 336
Atda. See Augmented Target Docking             Ats. See Applications Technology
  AdaDter.                                       Satellite.
Athen; (missile), 342, 367                     ATS I (Ats-B) (Applications Technology
Athens, Greece, 206                              Satellite), 367, 369, 372, 385
Atlantic City, N. I, 52, 136, 233
                    .                          Auburn, Mass., 103, 263, 350
Atlantic Ocean, 235, 247, 269, 290, 308        Auburn Univ., 365, 379
Atlantic Research Co        117                Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda),
Atlas (booster), 92, 9z'i21, 180, 182, 193,      8, 181, 202,206
     202, 213, 243, 290, 378                   AURORA 7 (spacecraft), 107
  D,320                                        Aurora borealis, 95, 137, 299, 352
Atlas (missile), 54                            Austin, Tex., 287
  D, 108                                       Australia, 288, 315
  F, 261                                         good-will tour, 54, 95
Atlas-Agena (booster), 92, 380                   INTELSAT 11-A transmissions, 360, 365
  Gatv 9, 180-181                                international cooperation, 123, 191,
  launch, 180                                       267, 329
     Agena B (OGO 111), 209                      tracking stations, 64, 162, 234
     Agena D                                   Automatic Mechanical Translator
        ATS I, 367                               (AMTRAN), 81
        Ers satellites, 212, 272               Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt), 70,
        Lunar Orbiters, 257, 263, 340            178, 284, 368
        OVl-IV, v, 121                         Avco Corp., 230,264,327, 359         *
        Secor sateliites, 212, 272, 312        AVCS. See Advanced Vidicon Camera
        unidentified, 20, 54, 106, 121, 132,     System.
                                               Aven. Alex P.. 173
          143, 178,208,238,268,293,319,
          337, 367                             AviaGon /Spa&Writers' Assn., 166,
     high-reliability Agena, 213                 191-192, 223, 275, 378
436                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Aviatwn Week and Space Technology               Baum, Dr. Werner A., 293
                                                Bazykin, Prof. Victor, 12
  aviation, 143, 197, 308
                                                BBC. See British Broadcasting Corp.
  defense, 49,72, 213,243
                                                Beachey, Lincoln, 383
  Government, 19,128,317
                                                Beale AFB, Calif., 9
  international, 220,285, 334, 356
                                                Beaudry, Col. Emil G. (USAF), 78
  space, 2,11,96,149,150, 171,232-233,
                                                Becker, H. S., 284
     250, 261, 273, 295
                                                Becklin, Eric E., 277
Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika, 55
AVLABS. See Army Aviation Materiel              Beecher, William, 200
                                                Belai. U. E.. 318
  Laboratories.
                                                Belew, Leland F., 235, 315
Awards
  civic, 331                                    Belgium, 125, 191,210,220
  Government, 43, 50, 57, 77, 117, 218,         Belka (dog), 154
                                                Bell AerosDace CorD., 78, 106. 225
     223, 259, 304, 314, 380
                                                Bell AeroGstems Ck.; 168 .
  institutions, 22, 140, 324, 377
  societv                                       Bell, Rep. Alphonzo, 128
     aerAnautics, 20, 166, 188, 208, 235,       Bell Telephone Laboratories, 31, 51, 329,
                                                  mn
        298, 301, 308, 323, 374
                                                Bei& William S., 232
     astronautics, 103, 225, 235, 321
                                                Belossov, Dr. Vladimir V., 251
     engineering, 145, 213, 230, 296
                                                Belton, M. J. S., 9
     medical. 215
                                                Belyayev, Col. Pave1 (U.S.S.R.), 92, 107
     military, 168, 294
                                                Bendix Corp., 104, 210, 244, 261, 288
     science, 376, 380
                                                Bendix Field Engineering Co., 315
Awls. See All-weather landing system.
                                                Bennett, Dr. Ivan L., Jr., 111, 328
Ax-4 (balloon), 319
                                                Bennett, Robert A., 251
Aykovlev, Col. Gen. Alexander (U.S.S.R.),
                                                Benton, Dr. George S., 111
   118
                                                Bergeron, Prof. Tor, 210
                                                Berkeley, Calif., 221, 283
                     B
                                                Berkner, Dr. Lloyd V., 146, 251, 315
B-52 (Stratofortress), 168, 377                 Berlin, Germany, 324
  M2-F2 flights, 114, 237, 244, 264, 274,       Berman, Col. Robert A. (USAF) 294,
     284,293, 297,298,306,312, 319, 330,        Blue Book, Project, 326
     348                                        Berry, Dr. Charles A., 8,134,166,208,225,
Bacchus, Utah, 226                                294, 318, 323
Backus, George E., 52                           Berry, William R., 237
Bahrein Island, 219                             Beverly Hills, Calif., 299
Baikonur, U.S.S.R., 121, 223, 324, 372          Bhabha, Dr. Homi J., 46,85
Bailey, F. John, 149                            Bhagavantam, Dr. S., 106
Baja California, 297                            Binder, Alan B., 187
                                                Bioastronautics. See Space biolog .
Bak-11 (barrier arresting component
  device), 180                                  Biology and the Exploration of Mars Jeport),
Baldwin, Robert H. B., 13                         199
Ball, Robert S., Memorial Award, 166            Biosatellite (program), 84, 187
Balloon, 185,251                                BIOSATELLITE I (Biosatellite A), 374
  accident, 161                                 Bioscience. See Space biology.
  award. 225                                    Birmin ham, Ala., 312
  high-h&de,       152, 153, 242, 263, 275      BIS. !e British Interplanetary Society
                                                       e
  record, 40, 237, 319                          Bisplinghoff, Dr. Raymond L., 26, 74, 128,
  weather, 3, 89, 141, 168, 195, 287, 333         159, 223, 280, 307, 362
Baltimore, Md., 134, 167, 325                   B'urstedt, H. B., 318
Baltimore Sun, 5, 210, 381                      Black and Decker Tool Co., 78
Bangkok, Thailand, 72                           Blackman, A. W., 27
Barabashov, Nikolay, 47                         Blagonravov, Dr. Anatoli A., 28, 46, 173,
Barber, Richard J., 165                           175. 287
Barbon, Dr. Roberto, 287                        Blanchard, Gen. William H. (USAF), 199
Barium, 299, 301                                Blessley, L/C R. C. W. (USAF), 116
Barnes, Tracy, 289                              Bleymaier, B /G Joseph S. (USAF), 113
                                                                            ..
Barron, Paul A., 139,396                        Blobm, Harold L., 192
Barstow, Calif., 211, 263                       Blossom Point, Md., 307
Bartholemew, C. S., 134                         Blue Book, Project, 112,118,130, 325,326
Bascom, Willard N., 154                         Blue Streak (British rocket), 190
Bassett, Capt. Charles A., I1 (USAF), 14, 72,   BMWF. See German Ministry of Scientific
      76, 85, 110                                 Research.
Bastin, J. A., 316                              BNS. See Broadcasters Nonprofit Satellite
Battelle Memorial Institute, 379                  Service.
                                                                                 437
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

         See British Overseas Airways Corp.   Brewer, L /C Martin H. (USAF), 294
BOAC.
        See Budget, Bureau of.                Brewster, Sen. Daniel B., 20
BOB.
Bochum Observatory (W. Germany), 45,          Brewster Flat, Wash., 179
   104, 109, 126                              Brezhnev, Leonid I., 94, 356
Boeing Co., 134                               Brighton, U. K., 189
  anniversary, 241                            Bristol Siddeley Engines, Ltd., 235
  booster, 223                                British Aircraft Corp., 356
  contract, 3, 85, 115, 194, 244, 249, 332    British Assn. for the Advancement of
   ‘et engine inlet, 199                        Science, 285
  kunar Orbiter, 49                           British Broadcasting Corp. (BBC), 287
  supersonic transport, 85, 215, 225, 264,    British Interplanetary Society (BIS), 45
     286, 296, 299, 307, 323, 334, 341,       British Meteorological Office, 199
     383                                      British National Space Research Commit-
  Vertol Div., 17                               tee, 114, 118
Boeing 707 (jet aircraft), 143, 145           British Overseas Airways Corp. (BOAC),
Boeing 720 (jet aircraft), 143                  143, 145
Boeing 727 (jet aircraft), 64                 British Research Council, 329
Boeing 747 (jet aircraft), 137, 143, 250      Brizendine, John C., 330
Boeing, William F., 383                       Broadcasters Nonprofit Satellite Service
Bogard, Dr. Howard M., 88                       (BNS), 256
Boggs, Rep. Hale, 224                         Bromberg, Jack L., 317
Bogotl, Colombia, 316                         Brookhaven National Laboratory, 10, 116,
Bolivia, 297                                    225, 257
Bollerud, Col. Jsck (USAF), 54                Brooks AFB, Tex., 203
Bolling AFB (D. C.), 123                      Brooks, Col. Allison (WAF), 164
Bomarc (missile), 275                         Brooks, Melvin, 115
Bomber aircraft, 61, 72, 153, 168             Brown, Ed, 111, 183
Bonn, W. Germany, 303                         Brown, Gov. Edmund, 275
Bonney, Walter T., 36                         Brown Engineering Co., 130
Bono, Phil, 318                               Brown, Rep. George E., 246
Boone, Adm. William F., 1, 198                Brown, Dr. Harold, 113, 122, 130, 138,
Boosted Arcas (sounding rocket), 15, 87,        150, 199, 219, 232, 264, 335, 366
  178, 185, 187, 249, 253, 277,               Brownell, Charles, 78
Boosted Dart (sounding rocket), 14,15,253     Brush Instruments Co., 216
Booz-Allen Applied Research, Inc., 376        Buchwald, Dr. Julius, 88
Borman, L/C Frank (USAF), 87, 144, 203        Buckley, Edmond C., 1, 83, 157
      306, 379                                Budget, Bureau of (BOB), 112, 128, 258,
  award, 208, 226, 259, 374                     278, 364
  good-will tour, 54, 61, 66, 69, 72, 95      Buenos Aires, Argentina, 60
  interview, 12, 16, 170                      Buffalo, N. Y.. 330
Boron fiber, 77                               Bulgaria, 214.
Boston Globe, 21                              Bull, Lt. John S. (USN), 127
Boston, Mass., 235, 330, 332                  Bundy, McGeorge, 270, 370
Boulder, Colo., 133                           Bunker, George M., 354
Boushey, Homer A., 259                        Burcham, Dr. Donald P., 198
Bow, Re . Frank T., 84                        Bureau of Ships (USN), 13
Bowers, fack A., 354                          Burke, Walter F., 354
Boy Scouts of America, 169                    Burma. 60
Boyd, Alan S., 362                            Burroughs, Richard Hansford, Test Pilot
Boynton, Melbourne W., Award, 225               Award, 20
Bozajian, John, 250                           Bush, Edgar G., 208
Bradner, Hugh, 52                             Bush, Dr. Vannevar, 155
Bradt, Hale, 229                              Butler, Herbert I., 43
Branch, M /G Irving H. (USAF), 3              Butler, Stuart Thomas, 251
Brand, Vance D., 127                          Bykovsk Valery F., 55
Bratchell, G. E., 354                         Byram, I T., 80
                                                       ?
Brazil, 14,22,154, 161,252,260,265,297,       Byrd, Sen. Harry F., Jr., 12
  310,320, 347, 373
Brazilian Space Commission (CNAE), 14,                          C
  161,252,310, 320, 347, 373
Brenner, Edward J., 319                       C-5A (cargo transport), 35, 58, 37?
Bretign Tracking Center (France), 56          C-124 (cargo aircraft), 7
Brevarl (County) Building and Construc-       C-133 (Cargomaster), 333
  tion Trades Council, 240                    C-141 Starlifter (cargo iet), 66
Brewer, Frank G., Trophy, 210                 CAAGS. See Civil -A&ation Assistance
Brewer, Jack D., 330                            Groups.
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND
 $38




 California Institute of Technology (Cal
  Tech), 2,29,90,96,124,128,152,230,


                                            Catholic Univ., 365
   Los Angeles (UCLA), 32,128,142,320,837   Causse, Jean-Pierre, 188
   San Diego, 7, 27                         Cavanagh, Mayor Jerome P., 366
 Callaghan, Richard L., 2                   CBS. See Columbia Broadcasting System.
 Cal. Tech. See California Institute of     Cedar Crest College, 325
   Technology.                              Celestial mechanics, 83
 Calvin, Melvin, 90                         Centaur (booster) (see also Atlas-Centaur),
 Cambridge Astro hysical Observatory. See     298
   Smithsonian eambridge Astrophysical      Centaure (French sounding rocket), 87,
                 .
   Observator                                 124, 253, 299, 327, 352
Cambridge latalog of Radio Objects,         Center for Nuclear Studies, 370
   Third, 253                               Centre National #Etudes Spatiales (CNES),
Cambridge, Mass., 37, 342                     188,195,323
 Cambridge Research Laboratories. See Air   Centre National #Etudes des T61Bcom-
   Force Cambridge Research Laboratories.     munications, 20
Cambridge Univ., 57                         Centre National de la Recherche Scienti-
Camera (see also Advanced Vidicon             fique, 264
     Camera System; Automatic Picture       CEBN. See European Center for Nuclear
     Transmission System; SURVEYOR I;         Research.
     LUNAR ORBITERS I and 1 )               Cernan, LCdr. Eugene A. (USN),   379
                            1
   COSMOS CXXII, 308                          award, 251
  GEMINI VIII, 107                            GEMINI IX-A (Gemini IX), 110, 180, 206,
   K-24ballistic, 114, 118                       209, 213, 219,236,
  reconnaissance, 289                         training, 14, 178, 198
     lunar, 11,12,252                       Cesium en ine, 336
     miniature, 234                         Cessna 2Of (li ht aircraft), 134
Cameron, Roy E., 202                        Cetus (constelfation), 287
Camm. Sir Svdnev. 94
            -, -,> -                        Chaffee, Dr. R. R., 136
             ~




Camp Roberts, Calif., 361                   Chaffee, LCdr. Roger B. (USN),110, 144,
Canada, 43, 63, 94, 252, 353, 357             00"
                                              331
Canadian Aeronautics and Soace Insti-       Chamberlin, James A., 354
  tute, 94                                  Chamical Rocket Range, Argentina, 154,
Canadian Defence Research Board Tele-         253
  communications Establishment, 313         Cham ine, Robert, 253
Canadian National Research Council, 252,    ChanJasekhar, Subrahmanyan, 380
  348                                       Chaparral (missile), 267
Canadian Overseas Telecommunication         Chapman, Dr. J. H., 353
  Corp., 126                                Charyk, Dr. Joseph V., 131, 172, 221
Canberra, Australia, 64                     Chavanac, Mayor Albert, 191
Cannon, Dr. Robert H., Jr., 298, 362        Chemistry, 1
Canopus (star), 203, 262, 340               Cheng, Dr. Chu-yuan, 30
Cape Canaveral National Seashore, 15        Cheng, Richard, 250
Ca e Kenned , Fla. (see also Eastern Test   Chevalier, Roger, 188
  iange and kennedy Space Center), 244,     Chew, Peter, 13
  303                                       Cheyenne Mountain, Colo., 32
                                            Chicago American, 294
                                                                                     439
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                               Col ate Univ., 117
Chile, 94, 162,202, 297
                                               Colfege of William and Mary, 365
Chimpanzee, 336
                                               College Park, Md., 273
China, 381
                                               Collier, Robert J., Trophy, 324
China, Communist, 325
                                               Collins, Maj. Michael (USAF), 27, 240, 246,
   engineers, 30
                                                 248,249,255,306,379
   missile, 331, 355
                                               Collins, Wayne, 367
   nuclear test, 172, 331, 382
                                               Collision, 263-264, 284, 317-318, 320
   scientist exchange, 77
                                               Colloquium of Law of Outer Space, 317
   scientists, 30
                                               Colombia, 297, 316
Christchurch, New Zealand, 89, 168
                                               Colorado, 341
Christian Science Monitor, 28, 122
                                               Colorado S rings, Colo., 139, 215
Chrysler Corp., 5, 22, 122, 178, 250, 255,
                                               Colorado, 8niv. of, 315
   263,267,353,378
                                               Colorado Women’s College, 107, 138
Chubb, T. A., 80
                                               Columbia, Mo., 350
Churchill Research Range, Canada, 252
   laiinrh                                     Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 256,
   __--_-
                                                 287,327
      Aerobee, 60, 150
                                               Columbia Univ., 10, 57, 150, 163, 258,
      Nike-Apache, 50, 55, 95, 237, 245,
                                                     279, 286, 302, 3%, 343, 377, 378
          260,274,284,292
                                                 Nevis Laboratory, 225
      Nike-Cajun, 23, 39,51, 161,164,216,
                                               Columbus, Christopher, 298
          221.226. 260. 265
                                               Columbus Da , 298
      Nike-Tomahawk; 137, 283, 293
                                               Columbus, Olio, 134
Churchman’s Club, Baltimore, 167
                                               Colwell, Arch T., Merit Award, 213
Cincinnati, Univ. of, 252
    .r                                         Comet, 235, 260,277, 287
“Cit of San Francisco” (balloon), 237
                                               Comisi6n Nacional de Investigaci6n del
6‘ Aeronautics Board (CAB), 159, 180,
  ivi
                                                  Espacio (CONIE) (Spain), 15
   227
                                                Comisi6n Nacional de Investigacibnes
Civil Aviation Assistance Groups (CAAGS),
                                                  Espaciales (CNIE). See Argentine Space
   34
                                                  Commission.
Claggett, C. Thomas, Jr., 314
                                                Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais
Claremont, Calif., 232
                                                  (CNAE). See Brazilian Space Commission.
Clark, Evert, 57, 95, 294, 333, 348, 368,
                                                Command module (Cm), 21, 25, 40, 67,
   376
                                                  93, 156, 272, 274, 313
 Clark, Dr. John F., 44, 166, 264,315
                                                Commerce, Dept. of, 80, 103, 1 1 323, 1,
 Clark, Sen. Joseph, 190
                                                  354, 381
 Clark Univ., 208, 314
 Clear air turbulence (Cat), 23, 38 1
                                   8            Committee on Extension to the Standard
                                                  Atmosphere (COESA), 121
 Clear Lake (Tex.) Chamber of Commerce,
                                                Committee on Space Research (COSPAR),
    325
                                                  173
 Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and
                                                Communications.
    Technical Information, 235
                                                  dee space, 3, 9, 84, 157, 263
 Cleaver, Arthur V., 189
                                                  glolal, 67, 73, 83, 96, 172
 Clemence, Dr. Gerald M., 252
                                                  international, 118, 120, 139, 152, 162,
 Clock, atomic, 353
                                                      198, 210, 221, 235, 281, 386
 Cloud, 267
                                                  laser use in, 51, 126, 209
    noctilucent, 252, 260, 266
                                                  military use, 35, 200, 220, 323, 362
    photographs, 7, 310,365, 369
                                                Communications satellite (see also indivi-
 Cloud, James D., 250
                                                      dual satellites: EARLY BIRD I, MOLMYA
 Cm. See Command module.
                                                      I, INTELSAT 11-A, etc.), 180, 223
 CNAE (Comissao Nacional de Atividades
    Espaciais) . See Brazilian Space Com-          aeronautical, 91, 120
                                                   agreement, 40, 65, 235
    mission.
                                                   contract. 20. 142
           See Centre National #Etudes
 CNES.
                                                   cooperaiion,’65, 331
    Spatiales.
                                                      international, 40, 155, 237, 354
 CNIE (Comisi6n Nacional de Investiga-
                                                   military, 40,52,200,216,220,321, 323,
    ci6nes .Espaciales). See Argentine Space
                                                       362, 376
    Commission.
                                                   system, 20,83
 Cobb, Dr. James C., 116
                                                      domestic, special purpose, 81, 131,
 Cobb, Roland W., 151
                                                          146, 256, 270, 278, 288, 375
 Cocoa Beach, Fla., 89
                                                      foreign, 149; 271, 325, 353
 COESA. See Committee on Extension to the
                                                      global, 67, 172, 287, 331, 376
    Standard Atmosphere.
                                                   transmission via, 46, 152, 154, 162-163,
 Coggan, B. F., 34
                                                       182,287,360
 Colbert, Ralph, 250
                                                   launch
 Coleman Bros. Co        332
                                                      INTELSAT 11-A, 331
 Coleman, Paul J.,%: 151
MO                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    Initial Defense Communications Sat-               127, 143, 232-233, 281, 291, 325,
       ellite Program, 216                            357-358. 359
    MOLNIYA I (3), 149                             Subcommittee on Advanced Research
    MOLNNA I (4), 325                                 and Technology, 62, 66, 81, 83-84
  use of, 98, 118, 162-163, 278, 338                  88-89
Communications Satellite Corp. (ComSat-            Subcommittee on Manned Space
  Corp), 83,118, 125, 165, 199                        Flight, 59,64A5,273
  contract, 20, 142, 179, 232                      Subcommittee on NASA Oversight,
  EARLY BIRD I, 65, 67, 83, 122, 252, 331             180. 272.280
    revenue, 125,252                               Subcommikee on S ace Science and
    transmission, 237, 278, 350                       Applications, 56, 82-64, 65-66, 71,
       Gemini recovery, 86,179,207,290,               75-76, 113, 200, 244, 275, 308
           332                                Congress, Senate, 20, 32, 34, 89, 187, 212,
  grounditation, 122, 131, 152, 199, 314,          227,247,261,266,273
     331,350,368                                bills introduced, 21, 167
  INTELSAT 11-A (((‘LANI BIRD”), 331, 341,      bills passed, 190, 227, 247, 263
     360, 365, 385                              Committee on Aeronautical and Space
  rates, 311, 327                                  Sciences, 12, 70-71, 80-81, 91, 176,
  Research and Development Center, 221,            208, 373
     337                                        Committee on Appropriations, 122, 257,
  sat-eiiite program, 46,67, 73, 114, 136,         263
     146,197,256,278,287,288,375                Committee on Armed Services, 72, 122,
  services, 237, 311, 365                          145
  test, 237, 360                                Commitee on Commerce, Subcommittee
Communications blackout, 88, 330, 367              on Communications, 270
Communist Party Con ress, 125                   Committee on Foreign Relations, 271
Compania Telefhnica 8acionale de Espana         Committee on Finance, 21
  (CTNE), 97                                    Committee on Government Operations,
Compagnie Francaise Thomson-Houston,               Subcommittee on Government Re-
  239                                              search, 179
Comprehensive Designers, Inc., 288              Committee on Judiciary, 268
Computer Sciences Corp., 169, 223             Congressional Record, 12, 119
Computers, 348                                CONIE. See Comisi6n Nacional de Investi-
  foreign use, 372                              gaci6n del Espacio.
                                              Connes, Dr . Pierre, 264, 322
  NASA, 9, 81, 104, 165, 169, 233, 262,
     265, 267, 273, 275, 291-292, 298         Connes, Dr. Janine, 264, 322
                                              Connor, John T., 77, 111
  universities, 220
Concorde (U.K. - France) supersonic           Conrad, LCdr. Charles, Jr. (USN), 7,54, 60,
  transport, 19, 21, 43, 123, 143, 189          110,290,293,294,304,379
  194,226,233,289,354                         Construction Industry Joint Conference,
Condon, Dr. Edward U., 315                      364
Condor (missile), 227                         Contamination, 75
Conference on Biomedical Knowledge,           Contract (see also under agencies, such as
  328                                           NASA, USAF, etc.)
Congress, 80, 83, 119, 131, 138                 cost-plus-award-fee, 223, 235, 257, 315,
  AEC report to, 35                                330
  budget request, President’s 23-24             cost-plus-fixed-fee, 224, 257,262, 383
  NASA budget, 23-24                            cost-plus-incentive-fee, 130, 257, 165-
  State of Union message to, 14                    166, 169, 224, 255, 352, 353
Congress, House of Re resentatives, 12,         fixed-price, 85, 142, 145, 176, 195, 215,
     19, 49, 119, 171, 2f1, 215, 224, 227,         220,223,298,338,375
     244, 274, 359                              fixed-price-incentive-fee, 334, 368, 375
  bills introduced, 84, 288                     fixed-price letter, 375
  bills assed, 163, 171, 172, 228, 244,         incentive-fee, 85, 90, 244, 353
     24$ 247, 279                               sole source, 321
  Committee on Ap ropriations, 54-55,           university, 247, 251, 315, 328
     166, 171, 182, 2f1, 213,                 Control Data Corp., 157, 165, 215, 258
  Committee on Armed Services, 87, 116,       Convair 990 (jet aircraft), 153, 154
                                              Cooke, Richard, 382
     130
  Committee on Civil Service, Subcom-         Cooper, George, 352
                                              Cooper, L/C L. Gordon (USAF), 7, 54, 60,
     mittee on Manpower, 258-259
  Committee on Government Operations,           105,219
                                              Cooper,. B /G Paul T. (USAF), 268,354
     Subcommittee on Military Opera-
     tions, 1 1 323
              1,                              Copernicus (moon crater), 344
  Committee on Science and Astronautics,      Coralie (rocket engine), 356-357
        1 , 28-29, 59, 7 , 90, 91, 92, 116,
                        6
         0                                    Cornell Univ., 10
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                          41
Corona, 241, 272                            Council of Economic Advisers, 350-355
Co s pf Engineers. See Army Corps of        Council on Higher Education (D. C.), 55
   Zggmeers.                                Courant, Dr. Richard, 52
Cortright, Edgar M., 56, 75-76, 120, 315,   Courter, Robert F., 78
   325-326,359                              Cousins, Frank, 51
Cosmic dust, 9, 328                         Covington, Osro H., 354
Cosmic rays, 85, 86, 133, 151, 264, 279,    Crab Nebula, 263
  336                                       Craig, E. B., 361
“Cosmic rubble,” 279                        Crater Lake, Ore., 299
Cosmology, 47                               Crawler-transporter. See Kennedy Space
Cosmonaut, 20, 55,6041, 70, 92,               Center (NASA).
     169-170, 193,306, 323                  Cronkite, Walter, 17
  anniversary, 135-136                      Crowell, Gen. Benedict, Gold Medal, 341
  extravehicular activity, 20, 107, 318     Cryogenics, 55, 77, 114
  interview, 135-136, 214, 237, 330         Crystal fibers, 250
  scientists as, 327                                See Compania Telefdnica
                                            CTNE.
  space coo eration, 10,109-110,248-249       Nacional de Espana.
  space fliglt, effects of, 60, 285         Cuba, 193, 334,376
  VOSKHOD I1 ilight, 12-13, 107             Cuddeback Dry Lake, Calif., 313
Cosmonautics Da 135-136                     Culver City, Calif., 132
                2
C s p s Lxxx (u. S. R. satellite), 2
 oM O                                       Cunningham, R. Walter, 144,306,351
COSMOS LXXXI, 2                             Curtis, Sen. Carl T., 227-228
COSMOS LXXXII, 2                            Curtiss-Wright Corp.. 72. 353
COSMOS LXXXIII, 2                           Cygnus (co&teUatibi), radiation sources,
COSMOS LXXXIV, 2                              79-80. 151
COSMOS C, 2                                 Czechosiovak Academy of Sciences, 231
COSMOS CIV, 8                               Czechoslovakia, 92
COSMOS CP, 22
COSMOS CVI, 27
                                                               D
COSMOS CVII, 51
COSMOS CVIII, 51                            D-1 (French satellite), 361
COSMOS CIX, 59                              D-2 (French satellite), 361
COSMOS cx, 60-61, 69, 84, 91, 102, 138      Daddario, Rep. Emilio Q., 64, 214, 359
COSMOS CXI, 75                              Dade County, Fla., 62, 63, 110
COSMOS CXII, 104                            Dallas, Tex., 14, 113, 297
COSMOS CXIII, 110, 121                      Dana, William H., 47, 242, 258, 271, 292,
COSMOS CXIV, 130                              336
COSMOS CXV, 144                             Daniel, L/C Walter F. (USAF),  251
COSMOS CXVI, 152                            Daniel Guggenheim School of Aeronautics,
COSMOS CXVII, 168                             319
COSMOS CXVIII, 175                          Das. See Data automatic subsystem.
COSMOS CXIX, 190                            Data, 229, 281
COSMOS CXX, 211                             Data automatic subsystem (Das), 337
COSMOS c m , 218                            Davies, M. Helen, 315
COSMOS CXXII, 223, 269, 271, 308            Davies, Merton E., 73
COSMOS CXXIII, 235                          Davies, Richard W., 162, 202
COSMOS CXXIV, 240                           Davis, Richard, 250
COSMOS CXXV,   246                          Day, LeRoy E., 232,354
COSMOS C X I 252
         X V,                               Day, Melvin S., 209, 243
COSMOS CXXVII,  261                         Dayglow, 277
COSMOS CXXVIII, 277                         Dayton, Ohio, 383
COSMOS CXXIX, 321                           Deep Space Facilities, Goldstone, Calif.,
COSMOS cxxx, 325                              226
COSMOS CXXXI, 347                           Debus, Dr. Kurt H., 198, 215, 283
COSMOS CXXXII, 352                          Deep Space Network (DSN)   (NASA),34484,
COSMOS CXXXIII, 356                           157,261, 263,315
COSMOS c x m v , 366                        Defense Atomic Support Agency, 311
COSMOS cxxxv, 372                           Defense Communications Agency (DCA),
COSMOS CXXXVI, 378                            222,232
COSMOS CXXXVII, 378                         Defense, Dept. of (DOD),   22, 57, 90-91,
          See Committee on Space                110, 134, 147-148, 178, 236, 251,
COSPAR.
  Research.                                     291-292, 332, 382
Cotton, Col. Joseph F. (USAF), 136, 158,     Advanced Research Projects Agency,
  264, 338, 354, 378                            322, 376
Coughlin, William J., 25, 112, 162, 214,     aircraft, 131, 253, 288, 323
  272,348, 352                               budget, 23-24, 145, 246
42                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   communications satellite system, 40,       Dragon (French sounding rocket), 322
      200,306,323,361,                        Dra er, Dr. Charles S., 26, 317
   contract, 54                               Drefl, Dr. Sidne D., 1 11
                                              Drinkwater, Freg J., III, 20
   cooperation, 40, 295, 354
      NASA, 7, 29, 43, 110-111, 150, 198,     Drummond. Roscoe. 160
                                              Dr den, Dr: Hugh, L., 20,27,50,148,193,
        303, 334
   missile program, 170                          l19,225, 305, 315,369
   nuclear detection satellite, 322           Dryden, Mrs. Hugh L., 305
                                              Dryden, Dr. H u h L , Memorial Fund. 305
                                                                 .
   R&D, 154, 165, 220,323
   s ace rogram, 153, 384                     DSG. See Dee Space Network.
                                              Dual- urpose ganeuvering Unit (Dmu) ,
Degnse Electronics, Inc., 128
DeFlorez Training Award, 359                     22Q
DeGaulle, President Charles (France), 221,    Duart, Calif., 221
   223, 334, 370                              DuBridge, Dr. Lee A., 29, 329
Delamar Dry Lake, Nev., 168                   Dubrovin, Leonid I., 157
Delorme, Jean, 307                            Dudley, Dr. Seibert, 7
                                                      Observatory (Albany, N. Y.), 267,
Delta (booster) (see also Thor-Delta and      D+
                                               :
                                               y
   Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta),
                                              Duke, Capt. Charles M., Ir. (USAF), 127
   192,374
Delta Scor ii (star), 241                     Duke Univ., 25
Dembling, Saul G., 282,378                    Dulles International Airport. 217
                                                                          .
Denmark, 125                                  Dunning, Dr. John R., $7
Denver, Colo., 107, 177, 315                  Dupree, Prof. A. Hunter, 359
Denver Moonwatch, 284-285                     Durant, Okla., 89
                                              Duthie, J. G. M., 151
Denver Post, 118
Detroit, Mich., 177, 296                      Dynatronics, Inc., 176
Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, 358
Devons, S., 10
Diamant (French booster), 52, 55-56, 261                         E
DIAPASON I (D-IA) (French satellite), 55-56
Dick, John M., 78                             Eaker, L /G Ira C. (USAF, Ret.), 328
Dineen, Col. Richard E. (USAF), 218           Early, Benjamin N., 103
Disarmament, 84-85, 97, 302, 304              EARLY BIRD I (INTELSAT I) (communications
DISCOVERER XVII (satellite), 332                   satellite), 65, 67, 83, 122, 252, 331
Distance Measuring Equi ment-Instru-            revenue, 125-126, 252
   ment Landing System fDme-Ils), 131           transmission, 237, 278, 350
District of Columbia Teachers College, 225         Gemini recovery, 86, 179, 207, 290,
Djerfisherite (mineral), 287                          332
DMS, InC., 172                                Earth, 150, 302, 305
Dmu. See Dual-purpose Maneuvering               infrared data, 176, 178, 251, 257,
   Unit.                                           283-284
Docking, 17, 99-102, 104, 105-106, 108,         magnetic field, 86, 146
   202, 212, 243, 290, 291, 294, 314, 344       magnetic tail, 86, 301, 358
Documentation, Inc., 273-274                    photographs of, 7, 265, 294, 297, 355,
DOD. See Defense, Dept. of.                        369
Dog experiment, 60-61,84,102, 179, 237,       East Central Florida Planning Council, 15
   318                                        East Grand Forks, Minn., 228
Dol 'nov, A. I., 358                          Eastern Air Lines, 144, 194
D01 Ronald, 164
    $                                         Eastern Test Range (ETR) (see also Cape
Doolittle, Gen. James H. (USAFR), 27               Kennedy and Kennedy Space Center),
Doppler effect, 254                                334
Dorman, B. L., 380                              launch
Doty, L. L., 285                                   Apollo /Saturn
Douglas Aircraft Co., 34, 384                         AS-201, 6749, 93
   contract, 2, 5, 145, 167, 224, 263, 306,           AS-202,274
      316,368, 375, 383                               AS-203, 233
   Delta launch vehicle, 375                       Atlas-Centaur
   Msie and Space Systems Div., 318,
    isl                                              AC-7. 296
      353                                            AC-8; 131-132
   s ace equipment, 78, 383                          --- - > 329
                                                      AC-9. ---
   &cramento Test Center, 107, 202                    AC-10, 196
   Saturn V, 107, 202, 224, 252, 261, 306          Augmented Target Docking Adapter
Douglass, Howard W., 258                              (Atda), 202
Dounreay, Scotland, 51                             GEMINI V I . 99-102
                                                            II
Dow Chemical Co., 262                              GEMINI IX, 206
Downey, Calif., 167, 215, 257, 328                 GEMIEPIx, 243, 248
                                                                                   43
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    GEMINl XI, 248,290                         cesium, 336
    GEBSINI XII, 340, 344                      chemical, 258
     Minuteman, 255                            electric, 27-28, 82, 119-120, 336, 343
                  214,301                        ion, 89-90. 312, 339
    PIONEER VI,
                                                                                   1,
     satellite, 69-70, 132, 213, 249, 262,
                                                    89-90, 194, 355
        265, 269, 296, 313, 331, 342, 344,
        365,367                                hydromagnetic, 151-152
     Titan 111-C, 216, 276                     nuclear (see also Nerva), 62, 92, 145,
Eastman Kodak, 284                                251, 336,385
Easton, Pa., 140                               rocket, 27, 34, 39, 110, 114, 168, 241,
Eckert, Dr. Wallace J., 150                      383
Ecli se, solar, 87, 178, 187, 311, 320,        turbo-rocket, 285
  3fl-332, 344, 346                            vernier, 296
                                             Engle, Capt. Joe H. (USAF), 47, 127, 246,
Ecole Normale Supkrieure, 339
                                               --.
                                               2SQ
“Ecological Technology-Space, Earth,
  Sea” (symposium), 54                       Environmental control system (Ecs), 332
                                             Environmental Science Services Admini-
Economic Club of Detroit, 296
Ecs. See Environmental control system.           stration (ESSA), 43, 199, 240, 293,
Ecuador, 297                                     361, 368
Eddington Gold Medal, 82                       budget, 24
Education, 28-29, 32, 35, 53, 238-239          cooperation, 103, 127, 168, 267, 321
Edwards AFB, Calif. (see also Air Force        Institute for Telecommunications
     Flight Test Center)                         Sciences and Aeronomy, 328
                                               Institutes for Environmental Research,
  flight
                                                  11
                                                  1
     C-130B, 119
     F-104, 1 11                               Na&al Disaster Warning System, 77
     F-111A, 116                               Office of Hydrology, 379
     M-2-F2 (lifting body vehicle), 114,       Project Stormfur 267
                                               satellite, 41, 69-& 103, 310, 321, 365,
        152-153, 237-238, 244, 264, 274,
                                                 385
        284, 293, 298, 306, 312, 319, 330,
                                               solar eclipse expedition, 311
        348, 352, 383
                                               sounding rocket, 127, 328
     SR-71, 28
                                             Eole (meteorological forecasting project),
     XB-70,5, 16, 136, 158, 184, 211, 338,
                                               195
        342, 354,372,376,378
                                             Epsilon Canis Majoris (star), 295
  strike, 35
                                             Epstein, L. M., 289
Edwards. John A.. 354., 383 -
                                             EBC. See Electronics Research Center
Eglin AFB,-FI~.,  131
Egy t. See United Arab Republic.
EisJe, Donn F., 351
                                             Eremea, George, 302
ELDO. See European Launcher Develop-
                                             E r k d , Chancellor Ludwig (W. Ger.), 303,
  ment Organization.
Electric rgpulsion. See Engine, electric.      311
                                             Eros (Earth Resources Observation
Electro-8ptical S stems, Inc., 62, 336
                                               Satellite) project, 297
Electron, 237,277,287,292,293,313,328
                                                     (research satellite), 272
  auroral producing, 55, 95                  ERS-xv
                                             ERS XVI, 212
  measurement, 237, 277, 283, 287, 292,
                                             Es See Electrostatic gyroscope.
     293, 313,328, 346-347
                                             Es tleman, Dr. von R., 199
ELECTRON I (U.S.S.R. satellite), 2
ELECTRON 111, 2                              ESRO. See European Space Research
Electronics Research Center (EBC) (NASA),      Organization.
  37, 288, 332, 342                          ESSA. See Environmental Science
Electrostatic gyroscope (Esg), 353             Services Administration.
Elliott-Automation, 239                      ESSA I (meteorological satellite), 41,43,82,
Elms, James C., 288                            308
Emerson Electric Go., 247                           I 70, 79, 103, 365
                                             ESSA I ,
                                     -_
ENEA. See European Nuclear Energy            ESSA III, 310, 321, 365
  Agen                                       ETR. See Eastern Test Range.
Engine T e e also individual engines, such   Euboea (Greek island), 87
     as F-1, M-1,   etc.)
                                             Euratom. See European Atomic Energy
  aircraft, 27, 77, 137, 143
                                               Community.
     gas turbine, 143, 326, 362
                                             Europa (booster), 348, 357
     jet, 77, 137, 143, 199-200, 249, 273,
                                             Europa I (ELDO booster), 190, 214, 236,
       1113
                                               348,357
    su ersonic transport, 85-86,109,123,
                                             Europe (see also European Launcher
      599-200, 226, 250, 273, 286, 296,
                                                  Development Organization; European
      383
444                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

     Space Research Organization; Euro-         F-111B, 21,
    space), 15,41, 239, 257, 275, 307           FAA. See Federal Aviation Agency.
                                                Fabbrica Italiana A arecchi Radio, 239
  cooperation, 73
                                                                    g.,
European Atomic Energy Community                Faget, Dr. Maxime       166
  (Euratom), 133,189,285-286,303,307,           Fairbanks, Alaska, 257, 356
  311                                           Fairchild Hiller Corp., 77, 264
European Broadcasting Union, 287                FAITH 7 (spacecraft), 105
European Center for Nuclear Research            Fairchild, Sherman, Technology Center,
  (CERN), 286                                     322
European Launcher Development Organi-           Falcon (fan-jet aircraft), 302
                                                Falmouth, Mass., 5
     zation (ELDO), 41, 189, 285, 361
                                                Farnsworth, Clyde H., 136
  launch, 190,348,356-357
  policy, 156, 211, 214, 220, 236               Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet (Fdl) pro-
European Satellite Team, 239                      gram, 371
European Space Research Organization            Fad, Dr. Henry, 139, 208
  (ESRO), 11, 87, 124, 133, 208, 299, 307,      FB-111 (su ersonic bomber), 72
                                                FCC. See iederal Communications Com-
  352, 354,356, 383
European Space Symposium, le3                     mission.
Eurospace, 96, 307                              Fdl. See Fast Development Logistic Fleet
                                                                                "
Eva. See Extravehicular activity.
Evans, LCdr. Ronald E. (USN), 127               Fe!z%Ed       Airport Program, 377
EXAMETNET. See Inter-American Experi-           Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), 22, 24, 80,
  mental Meteoroloeical Rocket Network.              143, 227, 261, 340, 343
Exce tional Service"Medal (NASA), 218,            air traffic control, 13, 18, 91, 233
  223, 255                                        airports, 243, 364, 377
Exhibit, 312                                      annual report, 131
Exobiology, 198-199                               contract, 233, 341
Experimental Aircraft Assn., 308                  cooperation, 284, 381
EXPLORER XXVIII (Imp-C) (satellite),              criticism, 64
  150-151                                         landing system, 66
EXPLORER xxx (IQSY Solar Explorer)                noise, aircraft, 133
  (satellite), 174                                statistics, 11, 91, 155, 209, 250
EXPLORER XXXII (AE-B) (aeronomy                   transport, supersonic (see also Super-
  satellite). 192. 276. 385                             sonic Transport), 24,84,112, 122-
EXPLORER 'XXXIII (Imp-D) (satellite), 231,              123, 128, 131, 143, 200-201, 296
  358, 385                                           design and development, 85-86, 286,
Explorer's Club, 383                                    299, 307, 323, 332, 334, 343, 383
Extraterrestrial life, 40, 74, 141, 171, 174,   Federal Communications Commission
  189,241,264,322,366                                (FCC), 81, 179
Extra-terrestrial Research Agency, 154            approvals, 126, 332, 365
Extravehicular activity (Eva), 104, 316,          briefs filed with, 256, 288, 360, 371, 375
      374                                         ComSatCorp, 142, 146, 152, 176, 197,
  eqirment, 12,17,78-79,225,251,301,                 199, 233, 235, 311, 314, 327, 331,
    3 -0,
     &3 5      317, 353-354                          350, 365, 368, 375
  GEMINI VIII, 92, 100                            mound stations. 278. 314
                                                  yequests to, 46; 67,' 73, 90, 122, 152,
  GEMINI IX-A, 202, 207, 218
                                                     176,270,321,331, 341,365
  GEMINI x, 243-244, 248, 255
                                                Federal Council for Science and Technol-
  GEMINI XI, 290,293, 294,301
                                                  ogy, 31, 34
  GEMINI XII, 344, 353-354
                                                Federal Electric Corp., 261
  hydrogen 'tank. conversion experiment,
                                                Federal Executive Board. 238
    167, 272
                                                Federal Woman's Award; 77
  U.S.S.R., 20, 107, 318                        FkdCration ACronautique Internationale
                                                   (FAI), 187, 253
                     F                          F&iorenko, Ambassador Nikolay T., 198
                                                Fels Planetarium, 366
F-1 (rocket engine), 115, 352                   Feoktisov, Konstantin Petrovich, 136
F-4B (Phantom 11) (fighter aircraft), 211       Ferguson, Gen. James (USAF), 283
F-4E, 323                                       Fermi, Erico, Award, 259
F-4J. 195                                       Fermi, Enrico, Institute, 141
F-104 (Starfighter) (aircraft), 111, 211,       Field Enterprises Educational Corp., 161
  263                                           Finger, Harold B., 82, 83, 315
F-l04G, 183, 256, 367, 378                      Fink, Daniel J., 111, 153, 220
F-106 (Delta Dart), 198                         Finland, 174
F-111 (supersonic fighter), 61, 288             Fire
F-111A, 77, 116, 288                              aircraft, 159
                                                                                  445
                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    electrical, 177                           Friedman, Dr. Herbert, 79-80, 109, 174
    escape system, 250                        Friendly, Fred W., 270, 327
 Firebee (tar et missile), 267                FRIENDSHIP 7 ( acecraft), 105
 “First Soft 8tep” (TV rogram), 198           Frutkin, A m 0 8W., 2, 32, 74, 141
 Fisher, Adrian S., 85, 87                    FS-3 (nuclear reactor power system),
 Fitch, John, 198                               27-28
 Flax, Alexander H., 225                      Fuchs, Dr. Louis H., 287
 Fleming, William A., 327                     Fuel, 55
 Flemming, Arthur S., Award, 57                 aircraft, liquid methane, 293, 362
 Flight Dynamics Laboratory (AFSC), 87-88       carbon dioxide-water, 120
 Flight International, 372                      cesium, 336
 Flight Research Center (FRC) (NASA) (see       hydrogen-peroxide, 78
    also Lifting body vehicle; X-15; XB-70)     liquid, 57-58
    14.47. 200                                  liquid hydrogen, 55, 222, 385
 Flight Safety Foundation, 20                   liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen, 114,120,
 Flight Safety Review Board, 180-181               168, 252
 Flight Test Center. See Air Force Flight       liquid oxygen-kerosene, 285
                                       v
    Test Center.                                alutonium. 83. 112
 Florida, 62, 63                                hush hydrogen, 9-10
 Florida, Univ. of, 29-30                       solid, 42, 57-58, 62, 90, 92, 110, 176,
 Flying saucers. See Unidentified flying           190, 219, 226, 241, 297, 385
    objects (Ufo).                              tank, 328
 Forster, Wilhelm, Observatory, 121, 324           liquid hydrogen, 167, 168, 195, 198,
 Fokker, 239                                          210, 272, 283
Ford Foundation, 229, 256, 270, 288, 327,          liquid oxygen, 272, 277
    370                                       Fulbright, Sen. J. William, 32, 190
Ford, Rep. Gerald R., 116                     Fuller, Prof. Buckminster, 311
Ford, Henr , 11, 247                          Fulton County (Georgia) Airport, 251
Foreign Odce (U.K.), 211                      Fulton, Fitzhugh, 338, 372
Forman, Edward S., ’124                       Fulton, Rep. James G., 163, 214
Ft. Campbell, Ky., 131                        Fulton Recovery System, 164
Ft. Eustis, Va., 253                          Funk, M IG Ben I. (USAF), 268
Ft. Greely, Alaska, 119
Ft. Monmouth, N. J., 254                                         G
Foster, Dr. John S., Jr., 29, 43, 90-91,
   200                                        Gabriel, David S., 315
Foster, Leslie D., 288                        Gagarin, Col. Yuri A. (U.S.S.R.), 20,
Foster, Willis B., 61                           60-61, 135, 193, 214
Fourier spectroscopy, 264                     Galaxy, 79-80
France, 20, 43, 264                           Galiko (jet aircraft), 347
   atomic bomb, 232, 246, 312                 Galveston Island, 36
   Concorde (France-U.K. supersonic           Galipeau, George, 308
      transport) 43, 233                      Gamma ray, 136137,263
   cooperation, 63, 73, 125, 133, 190, 195,   GAO. See General Accounting 0 c .5e
         210, 214, 220, 221, 239, 261, 299,   Garbarini, Robert F., 44, 149, 204, 250,
         348, 370                               367
      U.S.S.R., 227, 261, 281, 334, 348,      Gardner, Richard N., 163
         370, 385                             Garmire, Gordon, 229
                                              Garrard, Dr. W. C. J., 296, 314
   launch, 11, 52
      missile, 82, 201                        Garrett Corp., 238
      satellite, 52, 55-56, 94, 384, 385      Gary, Ind., 16
      sounding rocket, 322, 327, 352          Gas turbine. See Engine.
   satellite, 233                             Gatv. See Gemini Agena Target Vehicle.
   space program, 334, 361                    Gaudry, Roger, 229
Franklin Institute, 82                        Gautschi, Theodore F., 250
Franzini, Dr. Juliet Lee-, 225, 286           Gay, Clarence C., Jr., 340
Franzini, Dr. Paolo, 225, 286                 Gazenko, Dr. Ofeg G., 321
Frascati, Italy, 37                           GCA Corp., 19, 214, 239, 274, 292
        See Flight Research Center (NASA).    GE. See General Electric Co.
FRC.
Fredericka, Queen Mother (Greece), 317        GE 4 (turbo’et engine), 273, 332, 3?3
                                                         br.
Freeman, Orville, 117                         Gell-Mann,      Murray, 152, 329
Freeport, Tex., 196                           Gemini (program), 16, 64, 218, 314, 318,
Freitag, Capt. Robert F. (USN, Ret.), 143,         338, 352,372
   177                                          award, 27, 218, 324
French Guiana, 82, 261                          completion, 344, 349, 384-85
Frese, Col. Gregory C., Jr. (WAF), 294          management, 43
446                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Gemini (spacecraft), 7-8, 121, 164, 177,      George Washington Univ., 287
      338                                     Georgetown Univ., 18
   exhibit, 60,312, 340                       Gerdes, Ron, 253
   GEMINI WI, 7, 90, 94

         (&pt
                                              Germantown, Md., 322
GEMINX IV (fli ht), 105                       Germany, East, 174, 355
                    7, 105                    Germany, West, 25, 210, 307
GEMINI V
GEMINI VI-A fli t), 8, 126                      aircraft, 53, 183, 256, 367, 378
G E W M W (flig t), 203                         Bochum Observatory, 45,104, 109, 126,
GEMIMVIII (fli ht), 8,53,86,104,118,145,          2.
                                                  4R
      162, 2 2                                   cooperation, 73, 125, 190, 191,220, 240,
   launch, 99                                       299, 303, 304, 311
   preparations, 7, 90, 94, 96                   Ministry of Scientific Research
GEMINI 1x4 (Gemini I x ) (flight), 210,215,         (BMWF), 301
                                                              299,
      236                                        satellite, 176, 342
   crew, 72, 85, 110, 208,219                    sounding rocket, 240, 299, 342
   Gatv, 180                                     Wilhelm Forster Observator 121, 324
   launch, 206                                Ghost. See Global HorizontaT) Sounding
   preparations, 105, 172, 178, 195              Techni ue.
G E W M x (flight), 27, 226, 240, 247, 248    Giacconi,(kiccardo, 229
   launch. 243                                Giannini Corp., 221
GEMINI xi (flight), 248, 294, 297             Giberson, W. Eu ene, 250
   crew, 110, 293, 301, 304                   Gill, Dr. Jocelyn%., 77, 215
   launch, 290                                Gillespie, Rollin W., 26
GEMINI HII (flight), 327, 355, 361            Gilmore Creek, Alaska, 41, 310
   crew, 219, 340, 347, 349                   Gilruth, Dr. Robert R., 93-94, 104, 117,
   launch. 344                                   321
Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv), 8,        Ginter, Roll D., 315, 327
      53, 86, 126                             Giordmaine, Dr. Joseph A., 51
   GATV VIII, 99-100, 104, 115, 118, 243,     Givens, Maj. Edward G., Jr. (USAF),    127
      248,255                                         See Goddard Institute for Space
                                              GISS.
   GATV 9, 180                                   Studies.
   GATV X, 243-244, 248,255                   Glenn, Col. John H., Jr. (USMC,    Ret.), 54,
   GATV X , 290, 297
          I                                      60, 105, 169, 191, 241, 314, 328
   GATV XII, 344                              Glennan, Dr. T. Keith, 257,315
Gemini Mid-Program Conference, 64             Glider, 124
General Accountin Office (GAO),      202      Global Horizontal Sounding Technique
General Aviation fit Training Standards          (Ghost), 2, 89, 168
   Board, 131                                 Glod, G. D., 318
General Dynamics Corp., 1     1               Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS),
   award, 354
                                                 159, 235, 365, 378
   contract, 30, 268, 284, 315, 371
                                              Goddard, Dr. Robert Hutchings, 103, 209,
   Convair Div., 54
                                                 263, 350, 383
   F-111A, 116
                                              Goddard, Robert H.. Award. 27
   missile system, 119
                                              Goddard; Robert .H., Historical Essay
   trackin communications vessel, 47, 214
                                                 Award, 103
General Aectric Co. (GE), 111, 317, 321
                                              Goddard, Dr. Robert H., Lecture, 97
   award, 103, 353
                                              Goddard, Robert Hutchings, Library, 314
   contract, 72, 77, 90, 222, 343, 380
   Industrial Electronics Div., 157           Goddard, Robert H., Memorial Trophy
   Missile and Space Div., 239                   Award, 102
   Re-Entry Systems Div.. 192                 Goddard Space Center (GSFC),151, 187,
   research, 126, 174, 190                       231, 260, 288, 355, 358, 375
   supersonic transport engine, 86, 249,         aeronomy satellite, 192
      273, 286, 296, 299, 332, 383               award, 57, 315, 354
   XB-70 accident, 211                           contract, 216, 353
General Electric Co., Ltd., 136                  Humphrey, Vice President Hubert H.,
General Electric Forum, 30%                         visit, 79
General Precision Equipment Corp., 337,
                                                 management, 264,289
   361
                                                 personnel, 9, 86, 166, 208, 232
General Telephone & Electronics Corp.,
                                                 satellite monitoring
   361
   __-
                                                    ATS I, 367, 372
Geneva, Switzerland, 135, 199, 221, 237,
                                                    ESSAS I, II,1 1 41, 69-70, 310
   248, 250, 258, 286, 287                                       1,
                                                    NIMBUS 1 , 178, 185,349
Gentry, Capt. Jerauld R., 319, 318, 352                      1
                                                    Observatory class, 63-64, 181, 209,
Geodetic satellite, 162, 212,272, 312
Geological Society of America, 349                    218, 264, 367
                                                                                   447
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

    S t l i e Situation Report, 294, 307,     Guggenheim, Daniel, Medal, 94,321
     aelt
       337. 384                               Guiana Range, Guiana, 361
    Tiros,.145                                Gulf of Mexico, 36, 287
  sounding rocket experiments, 80-81          Gunter, Richard, 250
                                              Gurjian, A. A., 318
    astronomical, 18, 80-81, 185, 190,
       295                                    Gursky, Herbert, 229
    atmosphericdata, 50, 55,95,111, 245,      Guthrie, Sir Giles, 143
       260,276, 277, 284,313, 341
    meteorological, 19, 69, 161, 221, 241,                       H
       265, 276
                                              H-1 (rocket engine), 130, 169, 227
       grenade, 23, 164,216,252
    micrometeorite collection, 328, 351       Haas, Conrad, 231
    radar, 171                                Haeussermann, Dr. Walter, 361
                                              Hagge, Dr. Donald E., 151
Goethert, Dr. Bernhard H., 316
                                              Haggert James J., Jr., 87, 134, 219
Gold, Dr. Thomas, 128
Goldberg, Arthur J., 237, 246, 258, 271,      Haglunz Howard H., 372
  291, 298                                    The Ha ue, Netherlands, 354
                                              Hahn, fir. Otto, 259
Goldstein, Dr. Richard, 175
                                              Haise, Fred W., Jr., 127
Goldstone Tracking Station, 3, 7, 157, 194,
                                              Halaby, Najeeb E., 343
  226. 372
                                              Haley, Andrew G., 281, 289
Golomb, Solomon W., 363
Golovin, Dr. Nicholas E., 57, 358             Hall, Eldon W., 354
                                              Hall, Floyd D., 194
Goodrich, B. F., Co., 87-88
                                              Hall of Aeronautical Propulsion, 236
Goodwin’s Sandbank, U. K., 354
                                              Hallett, Robert L., 383
Goodyear Aeros ace Cor 78, 159
                        8:                    Halpern, Dr. Irwin P., 195
Gordon, LCdr. &chard        Jr. (USN), 110,
                                              Hamma uir Range, Algeria, 52, 55, 94,
    297, 379
                                                327, $44, 356, 361
  award, 304
                                              Hammarsk’old, Knut, 156
  GEMINIXI, 285, 290, 293
                                              Ham ton, ba., 121-122
    Eva, 294,301
                                              Hanier, Prof. Philip, 25
Gordon, T. J., 317
                                              Haney, Paul P., 76
Gorenstein, Paul, 229
                                              Hanscom Field, Mass., 294
Gorkin, Jess, 10, 248
Gorman, Harry H., 315                         Hansen, Grant L., 315
                                              Harmon, Col. Clifford B., 259
Goudas, Dr. C. L., 355
                                              Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy,
Gould, R. Gordon, 258
                                                259, 374
Government Printin Office (GPO), 107
                                              Harper, Charles W., 37, 66
Graduate Research Eenter of the South-
                                              Harr, Dr. Karl G., Jr., 97, 160, 367, 378
  west, 127, 139
                                              Harris, Sen. Fred R., 89
Grand Canary Island, 97
Grand Forks AFB, N. Dak., 165                 Harris poll, 249
                                              Harris, S dne 242
Grants
                                              Harteck, $r. &uI, 377
  research, 28, 55
                                              Hartfard Times,248
  facilities, 128, 147, 287
Great Silver Medal of Paris, 191              Harvard Univ., 22, 131, 260, 382
                                              Harvard Univ. Graduate School of
Greece, 87, 178, 187
                                                Business Administration, 369
Greek National Committee for Space
  Research, 87, 185                           Hasp (meteorological rocket), 173
Green, Re . William, 90                       Haughton, Daniel J., 350, 354
Green, Wiyliam L ,Jr., 202
                   .                          Hausman, William, 322
Green River, Utah, 342                        Haut-Provence Observatory, 322
Greenstein, Dr. Jesse L., 329                 Hawaii, 83, 222, 311, 360
Gregory, Prof. Richard L., 57                 Hawaii Institute of Geophysics, 38
Grigorov, Prof. Naum, 140                     Hawaii, Univ. of, 39, 144
Grissom, L/C Virgil I. (USAF), 105, 110,      Hawker Siddeley Aviation Co., 356
     144, 332                                 Hawker Siddeley Dynamics, Ltd., 191
                                              Haworth, Dr. Leland J., 34
  press conference, 94, 257, 376
Gromyko, Andrey A., 227                       Haworth, Michael, 33
Gross, Courtland S., 170                      Hayes International Cor 130
                                                                                  .
Gross, F. R., 159                             HG130H (cargo aircrafte;’36, 164
           .
Gross, Re H. R., 172                          Heale Denis, 40, 61
Grubbs, Jaydon Y ,Jr., 60,91
                    .                         Healtz, Education, and Welfare (HEW),
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., 145,        De t. of, 177, 284
   167                                        Hechfer, Rep. Ken, 214
GSFC. See Goddard Space Flight Center.        Hedges, Fielding, 250
                                              Heidelberg, W. Germany, 220
Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, 235
448                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Helicopter, 132, 228, 290, 344
  commercial use, 340
  military use, 60, 187, 326
  record, 187, 291
Heliport, 155
Helium, 12, 237, 242, 245, 263
                                              Ho; S ring;, Aik,. 330
Hello, Bastian, 354
Henry, William, 118                           Hotz, gobert, 19, 180, 220, 273, 317, 334
Henty, Denham, 64, 123, 162                   Hough, Richard, 270
                                              House of Commons, U. K., 289
Heos (Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite),
  208                                         Housing and Urban Development, Dept.
Heos A (interplanetary physics satellite),      of, 80
  383                                         Houston, Tex., 165, 213, 216, 332
Hercules (constellation), 260                 Houston Post, 76, 220, 269
Hercules, Inc., 226                           Houston, Univ. of, 365, 379
                                              Houston, M /G Vincent G. (USAF), 354
Herget, Dr. Paul, 252
                                              Hovercraft, 168
Hess, Dr. Harry H., 280, 349, 384
                                              Howick, George J., 12
Hess, Dr. Wilmot N., 57
HEW. See Health, Education, and               Hrir. See High Resolution Infrared Radi-
  Welfare, Dept. of.                            ometer.
Hewlett, William R., 111                      HS-303A (communications satellite), 65
Heydon, Rev. Francis J., 160, 341             Hsinhua (Chinese ress agency), 172
                                                               8..
Hiatt, William E., 379                        Hubbard. Samuel        377
Hibex (High-E Boost Experiment), 15           Huff, Vearl N., 354 ’
                                              Hugh, W. F., 241
High Altitude Background and Signal to
  Noise (Hitab) program, 108, 115-116         Hughes Aircraft Co., 39, 132, 176, 227,
High Resolution Infrared Radiometer             260,297, 320,353
  (Hrir), 178, 284                            Humphrey, Vice President Hubert H., 28,
Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite. See           139
                                                Assistant for Aeronautics and Space
  Heos.
Hiibuin, Earl D., 1, 202, 270                      Matters, 54
Hill, Gladwin, 93                               award by, 215, 324, 374
Hill, Louis W., Award, 359                      NASA visit, 43, 79, 125
Hill. William. 131                              science. 239
Hillsdale. Mich.. 116                           space program, 44, 103, 119, 125, 302,
Himme1,’Dr. Seymour C., 16                         307, 374
                                              Humphrey, Mrs. Hubert H., 247
Hines, William, 7, 154-155, 166, 185
                                              Hunn, Col. Spencer S. (USAF), 294
  boosters, 57-58, 241
                                              Hunter, Willson H., 315
  manned space flight, 145-146, 193, 295,
      305                                     Huntington Beach, Calif., 202
  NASA, 37, 123, 220, 375                     Huntsville, Ala., 373
                                              Hurricane Beulah, 267
  U.S.S.R., 106, 125, 138, 338-339
                                              Hurricane control, 267
Hitab. See High Altitude Background and
                                              Hurricane Esther, 267
  Signal to Noise rogram.
                   E.,                        Hutchingson, Henry P., 254
H’ornevik, Wesle       166
Hk-10 (lifting-bo$ vehicle), 19, 135,379,     Hydrogen (see also Fuel), 335
                                              Hyman, William A., 237
  383, 385
                                              Hynek, Dr. J. Allen, 112-113, 116, 122,
Hodge, John D., 100, 115, 354
Hohmann, Bernhard A., 354                        255,326,351, 376
                                              Hypersonic flight, 66
Holifield, Rep. Chet, 227
                                              Hypersonic transport (Hst), 382
Holland, Sen. Spessard L., 190
Holloman AFB, N. Mex., 40, 175, 185, 283,
                                                                  I
  342, 336
Holmes, D. Brainerd, 53
                                                   See International Astronautical Fed-
                                              IAF.
Honest John-Nike (rocket), 275, 340,352,
                                                eration.
  -.-
  37n
                                              IAM. See International Association of
Honeywell, Inc., 60, 92, 264, 298               Machinists.
Hong Kong, 219                                IATA. See International Air Transport
Honolulu. Hawaii. 77. 106, 134, 366
                          ,.                    Association.
Hooker, Ray W., 315‘                          IAU. See International Astronomical Union.
Hootman, Dr. James A., 317                    IBM. See International Business Machines
Hope, Bob, 129                                  Corp.
Horn, Helmut J., 315                          ICAO. See International Civil Aviation
Horne, Walter B., 213                            Organization.
                                              Icarus (asteroid), 251
Homer, H. M., 308
                                                                                  449
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




   Unions.
       See Institute for Defense Anal ses.
IDA.
      See Inter-American Develo ment iank     International Airline Pilots Association,
IDB.
                                                 165
Idcsp. See Initial Defense 8ommunica-
                                              International Assn. of Machinists (IAM),
   tions Satellite Project.
                                                 144, 236, 242, 254, 257, 259, 272
IEEE. See Institute of Electrical and Elec-
   tronics Engineers.                         International Astronautical Federation
IGY. See International Geophysical Year.            (m),   289
                                                 Congress, 188, 317, 319, 320, 321
Ike a-Seki (comet), 277
                                              International Astronomical Union (IAU) ,
I1-[8 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 256
                                                 171, 324
Illinois, Univ. of, 111, 214
                                              International Business Machines Corp.
Im roved capability missile (Icm.), 219
                                                    (ISM), 61-62, 103, 165, 233, 257
In la, 106, 163
 C!
Indian Atomic Energ Commission, 46               Federal Systems Div., 321, 348
                                              International Civil Aviation Organization
Indian Institute of Tecgnology, 253
                                                 (ICAO), 43
Indian National Commission for Space
                                              International Conference of Social Work,
   Research (INCOSPAR), 234
                                                 288
Indian Radioastronomy Group, 46
                                              International Conference on Selenodesy,
Indiana, 16
                                                 196
Information technology, 31, 370
                                              International conference on outer space
Infrared. See Earth, infrared data; Instru-
                                                 (proposed), 20, 28, 32, 287
   ment, radiometer.
                                              International Congress on Air Technology,
Initial Defense Communications Satellite
                                                xin
   Project (Idcsp), 40, 200, 216, 276, 361      I--



                                              International Congress on Oceanography,
Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA), 214,
                                                Second, 189
   357
                                              International Council of Scientific Unions
Institute for the Study of Science in
   Human Affairs, 343                            (ICSU), 46
                                              International coo eration, 84-85, 291
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
                                                aircraft, 188, 255
   Engineers (IEEE), 112, 238, 327
                                                astronomy, 40, 125, 171, 251, 329, 346
Institute of Geophysics and Planetary
                                                 communications, 40, 162-163, 376, 381
   Physics (UCLA), 17
                                                meteorolog , 8, 14, 15, 21, 89, 96, 133,
 Institute of Navigation, 321
                                                    154, 18z 195, 210, 298, 308, 326,
 Instituto de Investigacihnes de Geolhgicas
                                                    346-347
   de Chile, 94
                                                 militarv, 40, 306
 Instituto Nacional de TCcnica Aeroespacial
                                                 oceanography, 240
    (INTA) (Spain), 15, 137
 Instrument                                      science and technology, 15, 49, 77, 133,
 __
                                                    221, 231, 251, 303, 346-347
    Langmuir probe, 234, 292
                                              International cooperation, space (see also
   magnetometer, 29,56,83, 129, 221, 234
                                                    European Launcher Development Or-
    microscope, 260
                                                     anization; European Space Research
   photometer, 83
                                                    Lganization; space law treaty), 10,
   Pitot-static probe, 260, 263, 276
                                                    96. 111-112. 119
    radiation detector, 83, 129
                                                 confirence (pro osed), 20, 28, 32
    radiometer, 2, 176, 178, 238, 257, 268,
                                                 satellite, 1 , 388
                                                             1
       260
  sei&, 21, 61, 175, 289                            Europe, 237, 239
                                                    NASA-‘ESRO, 383
  spectrometer, 2, 18, 111, 129, 238, 274,
                                                      -France, 195
     277. 347
INTA. See Instituto Nacional de TCcnica               -West Germany, 176,342
   Aeroespacial.                                    U.S.-Canada, 63
Intelsat. See International Telecommuni-            U.S.-U.K., 40
   cations Satellite Consortium.                    U.S.-U.S.S.R., 308
INTELSAT I. See EARLY BIRD I.                       U.S.S.R.-France, 221, 226, 227, 261,
                      BIRD”) (communica-              281. 334. 348., 370., 386
                                                 soundiqg rocket
                     41,350,360,365,385
   launch, 331                                      ESRO, 124,235, 299
                                                    NASA-Ar entina, 154,342, 346-347
Inter-Agency Bird Hazard Committee, 284
                                                      -Brazf, 14, 161, 252, 310,320, 347,
Inter-American Experimental Meteorolog-
                                                         373
   ical Rocket Network (EXAMETNET), 154,
                                                      -Canada, 313
    253
                                                      -France, 327
Znterauia, 335
450                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

       -Greece, 178, 185, 187                       See International Telephone and Tele-
                                              ITT.
       -India, 234                               gra h Corp.
      J a an, 381                             ITT $odd    Communications, Inc., 86, 222,
      -P& stan, 69, 114-115                      332
      -S ain, 15, 138                         ITU. See International Telecommunica-
      -$est Germany, 191, 299                    tions Union.
  space research, 141, 155-156, 152           IUEW. See International Union of Electrical
    Euro e, 37, 73, 189, 210, 214, 220,          Workers.
       2!
        8                                     Iverson, Richard, 250
      NlrsA-Sweden, 51                        Zzvestia, 44, 59,82, 115, 157
         -West Germany, 303
   US.-Australia, 123
                                                                    J
         -New Zealand, 89
         -U.K.,  123
         -U.S.S.R., 74, 90                    J-2 (rocket en ine), 2, 85, 168, 195, 233,
   tracking, 81                                 252, 257, 3 t 4
      NASA-S 137
               ain,                           Jackass Flats, Nev., 52,82, 104, 115, 211,
            -1
      U.S. ustralia, 64                         222
         -ESRO, 356                           Jackson, Mich., 298
         -U.S.S.R., 90, 293, 298, 299         Jackson, Nelson P., Aerospace Award, 103
International Council of Scientific Unions    Jacksonville, Fla., 311
    (ICSU)46, 310, 316                        Jaffe, Leonard, 203, 228, 295
International Council of the Aeronautical     James, Jack N., 149
   Sciences (ICAS),  291, 293                 Japan, 45,222,224,237,311,347,360,365
International Flat Earth Society, 282            astronaut visit to, 54,61,66
International Galabert Astronautical Prize,      booster, 333, 339
   188                                           probe, 3
International Geophysical Year (IGY),251,        satellite, 3, 74, 123, 301, 333, 378
   260                                           Satellite Navigation Research Office, 123
International Institute of Space Law, 289,       sounding rocket, 109, 149, 257
   317                                        Japan-U.S.S.R. outh festival, 237
International Scientific Radio Union, 199     Jastrow, Dr. Rofjcrt, 235
International Telecommunications Sat-         Javelin (sounding rocket) (Argo D-4), 79,
   ellite Consortium (Intelsat), 120, 126,       161,185,237,267,299,313
   139, 159, 165, 197, 386                    Jeffries, John, Award, 323
International Telecommunications Union        Jet-assisted takeoff (Jato), 259
   (mu), 181)                                 Jet engine. See Engine, jet.
International Telecommunications Union        Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( J P L ) (Cal Tech),
   Conference, 135                                 2,45, 177, 261,378
International Telephone and Telegraph            anniversarv. 124
   Corp. (ITT), 126, 145, 179, 210, 236          award, 14f,’166
International Union of Electrical Workers        contract, 227, 239, 261, 327, 337
   (IUEW),   142, 144, 150                       Dee Space Network, 261, 263, 340
International Year of the Quiet Sun              Goljstone Tracking Station, 3,138, 157,
   (IQSY), 80, 251, 260
            64,                                     194. 203. 226. 372
“Internationale” (U.S.S.R. anthem), 157,         Lunar‘Orbiter (see also LUNAR ORBITERS
   171                                              I, 11), 265,340
                                                 Mariner project (see also MARINER 11, IV),
Inventions, 16, 156, 199, 285, 288, 335
                                                    9,175,238
Ion propulsion. See Engine, electric, ion.
                                                 radar, 154, 171
 Ionosphere
                                                 research, 89, 162, 175, 189, 202, 253-
    composition, 1 1 274, 277
                    1,
                                                    254, 322,348,355
   properties of, 79, 127, 234, 301, 328,
                                                 Surveyor project (see also SURVEYORS I,
       341,347
                                                    11), 39, 340, 372
   seasonal changes, 10                          Voya er project, 9, 198, 243, 279, 352,
 Iowa, 341                                         378
IQSY. See International Year of the Quiet     “Jet shoes,” 78
    Sun.                                      Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, 160,
Iranian Poets Association, 49                        209
Irwin, Maj. James B. (USAF),   127              Lunaspacecraft, 41, 47, 115, 126, 278,
 Isaacs, John, 52                                 328, 330
Ise, Reine, 361                                 -U.S.S.R. Venus exDeriment. 9, 47
                                                                            ..
                                                VENUS 1 1 75
Italy, 239                                              1,
                                              Johannesburg, S. Africa, 316,325
   cooperation, 191, 210, 220
                                              Johns Hopkins Univ., 60, 111, 181, 145,
   ground station, 306
   satellite, 133, 174                          162
                                                                                   451
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                             Karo, VIAdm. H. Arnold (USN),
Johnson, Arthur W., 286                                                       293
Johnson, Clarence L., 27, 135                Karolinska Institute, 318
                                                        .
Johnson, David S., 43                        Karth, Re Joseph E., 19, 98, 113, 200,
Johnson, Dr. Gerald W., 49                     214,258,275,308
Johnson, President Lyndon B., 131, 159,      Kastler. Dr. Alfred. 339
                                             Kazakhkan, U.S.S.k., 121, 223
     214, 298
  air pollution, 194                         KC-135 (Stratolifter), 106
  appointment, 111, 293, 340                 Keathley, William, 361
  astronaut, 54, 66, 117, 293, 345, 354      Keldysh, Mstislav V., 20, 50, 82, 140, 224
  awards by, 50, 251, 380                    Keller, K. T., 22
                                             Kelley, Dr. Albert J., 149
  budget, 23-24, 259, 286, 357, 364
  communications satellite system, 83,361    Kemmerer, Dr. Walter, 64
  defense, 343                               Kennedy, Harvey M., Jr., 139
  disarmament, 97, 304                       Kennedy International Air ort, N. Y., 365
  GEMINI VIII, 101                           Kennedy, President John l 193, 365
                                                                        !
                                                                        ,
  GEMINI XII, 344                            Kennedy, John F., Center for Special
  international cooperation, 10, 73, 258,      Warfare. 156
     303, 311, 354                           Kennedy, ‘John F., Memorial Library,
  LUNA ix, 42                                  314-315
  meteorolog 59, 113                         Kenned S ace Center (KSC) (NASA),      125,
                                                      lh,
  oceanograpty, 219, 240                          152        215,258,283
  science and technolog 33, 303, 354           Apollo /Saturn, 69, 134, 193, 383
  space program, 35, 1&, 169, 259, 297,        astronauts at, 112, 213, 247, 249, 293,
     303, 375                                     349
  space treaty, 169-170, 276, 277, 368,        award, 314-315
     386                                       contract, 223, 262, 321, 337
  State of the Union Message, 19               crawler-transporter, 33, 86, 248
  supersonic transport, 112, 281, 334          facilities, 86, 220, 364
  SURVEYOR I, 205,212                          personnel, 258
  Transportation, Dept. of, 80, 321, 340       spacecraft delivery, 49
Johnson, Marshall, 250                         strike, 142, 144, 150, 242, 268, 271, 272
Johnson, Vernon A., 371                      KergnBlen, 227
Johnson, Dr. William G., 235, 315            Kerr, Breene M., 2, 88, 195, 209
Johnston, Richard, 226, 317                  Kerster, Geor e, 250
Joint Chiefs of Staff, 72                    Keyhoe, Maj.%onald E. (USMC, Ret.), 119
Jonash, Edmund R., 315                       Kilston (comet), 260
Jones, M /G David M. (USAP),  229, 360       Kilston, Ste hen, 260
                                             Kincheloe, Ken C., Award, 301
Jones, Robert F., 199
Jones, WilIiam J., 309                       King, Jose h C., 120
Journal of Air Law and Commerce, 282         King, Ludgw, 249
Journal of Geophysical Research, 377         King, Robert E., 6
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, 159       King’s Medal (U.K.), 2
                                             Kin s Point, N. Y.,321
Journal of the Armed Forces, 87, 1343, 219
                                             Kirt?and APB, N. Mex., 119
Joyner, Upshur T., 213                         ?
JPL. See Jet Propulsion Laboratory.          Kitt Peak National Observatory, 9
                                             Kitty Hawk, N. C., 377
JT9D (turbofan engine), 137, 143
                                             mass, Phillip J., 272
JTF-17A (turbofan engine), 109
Junior Academy of Sciences, 382              Klein, Milton, 336
Junkers Flugzeug-und Motorenwerke A.         Klein, Murray, 9
                                             Kleinman, Dr. David A., 51
  G., 208
                                             Kliore, Dr. Arvydas J., 175
Jupiter (planet), 29,74,1S0,210,281,311,
                                             Klump, H. F., 358
  355
                                             Knight, Maj. William J. (USAF),   237, 247,
                                               257,263,278,351,385
                    K
                                             Knowles, Gov. Warren P., 69
Kai-shek, President Chiang, 72               Kock, Dr. Winston E., 288
Kakol, Stanley J., 106                       Koesterer, M. G., 174
Kaminski, Heinz, 45, 104                     Kok, Dr. Bessel, 174
                                             Kolman, Prof. E., 201
Kano, Nigeria, 351
Kansas City, Mo., 327                        Kolomiyets, Nikola 333
                                             Komarov, L /CVlazmir (U.S.S.R.], 237
Kansas C t Star, 303
        iy
Kansas, Univ. of, 200                        Kommunist, 40
Kantrowitz, Arthur, 359                      Komsomolskaya Pravda, 21
                                             Konecci, Dr. Eugene B., 54, 79, 221, 252
Kapitsa, Dr. Pyotr L., 21, 30, 165
Kaplan, Dr. Lewis D., 264, 322               Konstantinov, Boris, 236
                                             Korad Gorp., 135
Kapustin Yar, U.S.S.R., 294,372
452                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Korea, 54                                           contract, 275
Korea, North, 355                                Project Scanner, 92, 268, 369
Korean War, 311                                  Scout Reentry Heating Project, 49. 90
Korff, Dr. Serge A., 333                      Langmuir po e 234, 292
                                                          : b,
Kormanyos, Steven W., 142                                      See INTELSAT 11-A.
                                              “LANI BIRD.
Korolev, Sergey Pavlovich, 16                 Larraga, Gen. Jose Lacalle, 317
Koroni, Greece, 87, 178. 187                  Las Cruces, N. Mex., 235, 351
Kosygh, Premier hlexey N. (U.S.S.R.),         Las Vegas, Nev., 145,366
  94. 356. 370                                Laser, 135
Koteiniko;, Vladimir, 9                          chemical, 221, 289
Koval, Ivan, 46                                  patent, 126, 258
Kraft, Christopher C., Jr., 166, 235             use of, 51, 97, 126, 209,310, 380
Krakatau, Indonesia, 299                      Lasilla, Chile, 125
Kratochvil. L IC C.H. (USAP). 336             Lasswell, Harold D., 190
                                              Launch Complex 14, 243
                                              Launch Complex 17A, 269
                                              Launch Complex 37, 233
  isGh, Dr. Alan D., 142                      Launch Complex 39, 15,268, 315
KSC. See Kennedy Space Center.                Launch Complex 41, 276
Kuiper, Dr. Gerard P., 44, 96                 Launch Escape S stem (Les), 19, 21, 42
Kuo. T. K.. 152                               Launch UmbilicdTower, 86
Ku permadn,l)r. Aron, 128                     Launch vehicle (see also individual launch
Kugrt, Wesley A., 98                               vehicles such as Atlas-Centaur,Saturn,
           Dr. Hermann H., 81                      etc.)
E r F n i v . , 45                               reusable, 99, 221, 358
Kyushu Island, Japan, 149, 301, 333, 378      Lausche, Sen. Frank J., 137
                                              Lawrence Radiation Laboratories, 49
                                              Learned, Dr. Edmund P., 131
                    L                         Lebedinsky, Dr. Alexander I., 50,174,377
                                              Lederberg, Joshua, 260
Labor, Dept. of, 6                            Lederman, Leon, 286
Labor relations (see also strike), 6, 259,    Lee, Ca t Chester M. (USN, Ret.), 267
  271, 364                                    Leiden,%niv. of, Observatory, 324, 377
Lafayette College, 140                        Leighton, Dr. Robert B., 90, 236
Lagerfeld Base, Munich, Germany, 183          Lem (Lunar excursion module). See Lunar
Lagos, Nigeria, 134                            module.
La Jolla, Calif., 159                         Lemke, George A., 268
Lakehurst, N. J., 134                         Leningrad Institute of Cytology, 337
Lam, S. H., 151                               Leningrad Jet Study Group, 10
Lambda (Japanese booster), 74                 Leningradshya Prauda, 10
  4s-1, 301                                   Leonid meteor shower, 220, 267, 350, 351
  4s-2, 378                                   Leonov, L/C Aleksey (U.S.S.R.), 92, 107,
Lambda Scorpii (star), 241                      330, 356
LAMBDA (U.S.S.R. satellite), 374              Le Poole, Rudol h S., 116
Lamont Geological Observatory, 94             Les. See Launci Escape System,
Lancaster, Calif., 214                        Lesher, Dr. Richard L., 12
                                              Levitt, Dr. I. M., 366
Lancaster, Dr. Otis E., 298
Les Landes (missile launching site),          Levy, Lawrence, 275
  France, 82                                  Lewis, David S., 354
Landing gear, aircraft, 158, 296, 314         Lewis, Dr. George W., 23
“Landing on the Moon” (TV program), 198       Lewis Research Center (LRC) (NASA), 258,
Lange, Dr. Oswald H., 192                          281
Langley Research Center ( L ~ R C ) (NASA),     anniversary, 23,312
     309                                        Atlas-Centaur, 197,296,329-330
  award, 213,315                                award, 315
  computer, 165, 215                            contract, 251, 283, 298
  contract, 19, 90, 92, 135, 177, 284, 316      research, 120, 194, 293
  lifting body research (see also HL-lo),       rocket engine
      19,135                                       hydro en-fueled, 125
  Lunar Orbiter program, 262, 265, 281,            sert, $12
     313,340,344                                turbo ump, 114
  PAGEOS I, 222                               Lewis, &chard, 261
    arawing, 156                              Lewis, Roger, 354
  {lanetar y Reentry Parachute Program,       Li-2 (U.S.S.R. aircraft), 256
        153, 242-243, 279, 284, 340, 352,     Libby, Dr. Willard F., 128
        370                                   Library of Congress, 243
                                                                                     453
                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                  award, 69, 226, 259, 354, 374
LIBERTY BELL 7 (spacecraft), 105
                                                              (fight), 219, 327, 340, 345,
Liccardi, Anthony L., 354                         GEMINI XII
Lick Observatory, 260                                349
                                                Low, George M., 235
Life, artificial, 18-19
                                                Lowenfeld, Andreas F., 43
Lije magazine, 125
                                                Lowman, Paul D., Jr., 7, 355
Life science. See Space biology.
                                                LRC. See Lewis Research Center.
Life su port system, 1 , 94, 120, 273
                          1
                                                LTV. See Ling-Temco-Vought Aerospace
Liftingtody vehicle, 99, 383
   HL-10, 19, 135, 379                            Corp.
                                                Luee, Adm. Sir David, 61
   M2-F2, 114, 237, 244, 264, 274, 284,
        293, 297, 298, 306, 312, 319, 330,      Luckey, Dr. T. D., 166
                                                Ludlow Kin Associates, 249
        352
   SV-5D, 378                                   Luedecke, d / G Alvin R. (USAF-Ret.), 9
                                                Luftwaffe, 1 1
                                                             1
   SVdP, 152
                                                LUNA 1 1 (U.S.S.R. lunar probe), 333
Lin, Prof. Shao-Chi, 27                                1
                                                LUNA IX, 41-42, 130, 203
Lind, Dr. Don L., 127
Ling-Temco-Vought (LTV)      Aerospace Corp.,     launch, 35
   194, 264, 267, 309                             photographs, 44,47, 48,49, 50,59, 115,
                                                      116. 213. 228
Lipski, Prof. Yuri, 305
                                                   soft-kinding, 42, 45, 50,146,385
Lisbon, Portugal, 302
                                                LUNA x, 125, 146, 171, 279, 385
Little Joe I1 (booster), 19, 21
                                                   launch, 122
Little Luke (NASA    barge), 74
                                                   lunar orbit, 126-127
Litton Industries, Inc., 337, 361, 371
                                                   results, 129, 133, 136, 159, 181, 356,
Livermore, Calif., 237
                                                      358
Lm. See Lunar Module.
Lockheed Aircraft Corn.. 284                    LUNA XI, 279, 330
   award, 27, 135, 354' '                          launch, 273
   C-5A (cargo transport), 35, 58, 377             lunar orbit, 278
   C-141 (; o
           ,g      jet),-66                        results, 292, 303, 312
   contract, 5, 66, 77, 208, 361                LUNA XI1
   F-104G (Starfighter), 53, 256, 367             launch, 326
   500 (car o aircraft), 358                      lunar orbit, 328, 330, 331
   HC-l30€f, 164                                  results, 333, 355
   Launch Escape System rocket motor, 42        LUNA XIII, 380
                                                  launch, 378
   supersonic transport, 85, 170, 224, 286,
                                                Lunar Excursion Module (Lem). See
      296, 299, 323, 341, 343, 383
                                                  Lunar Module.
Lockheed-California Go., 111, 335, 356
                                                Lunar Module (Lm), 6, 11, 96, 104, 167,
Lockheed-Georgia Co., 58, 314, 365
                                                     198,203, 206, 221, 298,375
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., 179, 195,
                                                  contract, 40
   213, 319, 353, 356, 375
                                                  test, 54, 189
Lockheed Propulsion Co., 16, 90                 Lunar Orbiter ( rogram), 47, 49, 176, 246
                                                               f
Loewy, Dr. Robert G., 298, 362                  Lunar Orbiter (Lunar Orbiter A), 279,
 Loginov, Yevgeni F., 339                            282, 332, 384-385
Logistics Management Symposium, First,            launch, 262
   291                                            lunar orbit, 265
London Times, 251, 260                            results, 275, 313, 355, 382
London, U.K., 41, 77, 170, 262, 293, 354        Lunar Orbiter I1 (Lunar Orbiter B), 333,
Long Tank Thor, 6                                    347, 373, 384
 Look, 323                                        launch, 340
 Loosbrock, John, 36                               lunar orbit, 344, 364, 369
 Lop Nor, Communist China, 382                  Lunar roving vehicle, 6
 LORHO (test facility), 221                        simulated cabin, 60, 91, 138
 Lorsch, H. G., 174                             Lunar Sample Receiving Laboratory (MSC),
 Los Angeles, Calif., 188, 221, 238, 330           163, 171,172,176,255
   meeting in, 166, 241, 271, 273, 275,314,     Lund, Thomas, 250
      366                                       Lurain. See Moon, photographs and
 Los Angeles Times, 82, 142, 248                   surface.
 Louisiana, 341                                  Luster, Project, 326
                                                Luxembourg, 210
 Lousma, Capt. Jack R. (USMC),    127
                                                Lyman-alpha radiation experiment, 267,
 Lovelace, Dr. W. Randolph, 11, 36, 54, 359
 Lovelace, Dr. W. Randolph, 11, Award, 225         274, 347
                                                 Lyons, Dick, 289
 Lovell, Sir Bernard, 16, 44, 75, 115, 126,
                                                 Lytton Systems, 287
    160, 209, 330
                                                 LyVere, Capt. Gerald T. (USAF),164
 Lovell, Capt. James A., Jr. (USN),110
454                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                               M                 Manned Orbital 0 erations Safety Equip-
                                                  ment (Moose), f92
M-1 (rocket engine), 114                         Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), 87,
                                                     121, 150, 153,167, a%, 323,348,369
M2-F2 (lifting-body vehicle), 384, 385
  flights, 114,237,244,264,274,284,293,           appropriations, 23-24, 87, 227
     297,298,301,306,312,319,330,352              contract, 157, 177
                                                  cooperation, 1 1 138, 307
                                                                  1,
M-87 (celestial bod radiation source), 79
MA-25s (silicon abyator), 15                      launch plans, 1 , 243, 381
                                                                   1
MacDonald, Dr. Gordon J. F., 32,128,142,          test, 87, 111, 167, 338, 381
  214,357                                        Manned space flight (see also Apollo ro-
McCall. G. T. H.. 299 _                              gram, Gemini program and fligits;
. _ __ _ _ . _
          _
       I           I   _   .

McCall, Dr. Jerry C., 1                              Astronaut; Cosmonaut; Manned Or-
McCandless, Lt. Bruce, I1 (USN), 127, 382            biting Laboratory; and Space Biology),
                           (USN),
McCarthy, Sen. Eugene J., 288
                            288'                     382
McCarthy, Dr. John, 314                           achievements, 23, 99-100, 100-102,
McCollom, John S., 264                               105-106, 212, 248, 291, 324, 384
                                                  award, 103,259,324
McConnell, Gen. JohnP. (USAF),72,113,282
                                                  cooperation, 10, 73, 1 1 319-320
                                                                         1,
McCormack, James, 146, 199, 270
McCormack, Rep. John W., 112                      criticism, 109
                   .
McCulloch, Re William M., 137                     Eva. See Extravehicular activity.
McDivitt, L /C fames A.(usAF), 54,93,105,         hazards, 105,107,111-12,120,145,182-
  110. 144. 216., 332. 379                           183,255
            >
            ~~




McDi&ttl Mrs. James' A., 216                      long-duration, 120, 351
McDonald, Adm. David L. (USN), 251                lunar landing, manned. See Moon land-
McDonald, Dr. James C , 325
                        .                            ing, manned.
McDonneli Aircraft Cor ., 7, 103, 145,            manpower required, 56, 149
  157, 167,177,272,3351 354, 364                  military potential, 352, 373, 381-382
McDonnell, James S., 354                          policy and plans for
                                                     U.S., 49, 93,229, 238,262,307-308,
McGregor-Werner Co., 272
McInturff, Ra mond M., 199                                323, 334, 338
                 g.,
McKay, John      47,168,252,263,275,288                 schedule, 93,257,269,332,351,375
                                   .
McKee. Gen. William F. (USAF., Ret.). 128.           U.S.S.R. 135-136, 303, 316, 319,
                                    ,,   ,
                                                        321, 338, 348, 356, 368, 373, 379-
  131,296,334
McKenzie, R. I., 354                                    380
McKnew, Dr. Thomas W., 232                        space simulation testing, 130, 203, 273
                                                     lunar-roving vehicle cabin, 60, 91-92,
McNamara, Secretary of Defense Robert
  S., 40, 43, 57, 72, 170, 264, 303, 341,               138
                                                 Manned S ace Flight Policy Committee, 43
  343
McWilliams, William J., 73                       Manned {pacecraft Center (MSC) (NASA),
                                                     146, 293, 334, 349
Madison, Wis. 69
                                                  Apollo Spacecraft Office, 167, 375
Madras, India, 253
Madrid, Spain, 317, 319, 320, 321, 352            astronauts at, 22,27,104,117,218,246,
Magellanic Gold Medal, 147                           249,255
                                                  award, 103, 255, 323, 354
Magnesium, 221
                                                  contract, 40, 104, 270
Magnetic field (see also Earth; Moon)
  earth, 86, 161, 320, 380                        Crew Systems Div., 317
  interplanetary, 86                              Gemini Mid-Program Conference, 64
                                                  Lunar Sam le Receiving Laboratory,
Magnetic hammer, 288
                                                     163, 171, $72, 176,255
Magnetohydrodynamics, 222
                                                  management, 166,235
Magnetometer, 29, 56, 83, 129, 221, 234
Magnuson, Sen. Warren G., 219, 286                manned spacecraft missions. See Gemini
Mahon, Rep. George H., 213                           flights.
                                                  Mission Control Center, 244, 247, 327
Maiman, Dr. Theodore, 135
                                                    ersonnel, 64
Makai, Pro-ect, 366
                                                  bhili Prince, visit, 93
Malaysia, 24, 165
                                                  Real %me Computer Complex, 258
Mali, 139, 174
Malina, Frank J., 124                             spacecraft test. See Apollo (spacecraft).
                                                 Marbarger, Dr. John P., 90
              Rodion Y., 125
                                                 Marble, Prof. Frank E., 235
"Man an Materials" (symposium), 147
                                                 March Field, Calif., 259 *
Management, 77, 172, 291, 294, 331, 350,
                                                 Marcos, President Ferdinand E. (Philip-
  369. 372
                                                  pines), 292, 311
Management Club, 372
                                                 Marine Resources and Engineering Devel-
Management Services, Inc., 130
                                                  opment Act, 219
Manchester, U. K., 196
                                                 Marine Science, Engineering and Re-
Manhattan Pro'ect, 363
                  h.,                             sources Commission, 219
Manley, Oscar      229
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                              455
Mariner (program), 32, 73, 281, 337           May Day (U.S.S.R.), 154, 161
Mariner (spacecraft), 83, 238, 239, 264       Medium Resolution Infrared Radiometer
MARINER 11 (Venus probe), 65, 75, 86, 151        (Mrir), 178,257
MARINER IV (Mars probe), 33, 166              Mayhew, Christopher, 61
   photogra hs, 240, 241, 262, 299, 356       Mbelouson, Yuri, 46
   results, 35-32,86,151,175,199,236,241      Mdta. See Modulation, demodulation,
   signal, 3, 84, 194                            terminal and associated equipment.
Mariner E (Venus probe), 7                    Meitner, Dr. Lise, 259
Marion Power Shovel Co., 33                   Memorandum of understanding, 15,40,43,
Mark 12 (reentry vehicle), 255                   51,138,195
Mark, Dr. Herman F., 52                       Menzel, Dr. Donald H., 382
Mars (planet) (see also MARINER IV; Voy-      Mercury ( lanet), 17
     ager rogram), 86, 157, 173, 212, 239                  jroject, 7, 103, 321
                                                               J., 190
  atmospgere, 80, 199, 236, 264, 314,322      k::ygnest
  craters, 187, 299                           Metal fatigue, 377
  exploration, 23, 73, 290, 334, 348, 368,    “Metalaw,” 289
        380                                   Meteor, 149, 351
     manned, 69, 146-147, 229, 268, 327       Meteorite
     plans for, 26, 65, 281                      crater, 94
     solar-electric ropulsion, 89, 355           origin. 116. 144
                                                         ,- ,-
     spacecraft, 25%-254, 268, 279              lu& im act, 299, 316, 382
     unmanned, recommendation, 17, 198,       Meteoroid jetection satellite, 205,247,337
        281                                   Meteorology, 3, 23
  life on, 53, 65, 189, 241, 366                award, 2 0  1
  surface, 162, 175, 187, 202                   balloon use in, 3, 89, 168, 287, 326
  water on, 236                                  cooperation, 8, 43, 89, 210
Marshall, Gen. George C., 22                        ESSA-USN, 267
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)                 NASA-Argentina, 154
      (NASA), 119, 168, 194, 241                        -Brazil, 154, 161
  Apollo Telescope Mount, 239, 289, 325,               -France, 195
     360                                               -Spain, 15
  Automatic Mathematical Translator, 81             U.S.-U.S.S.R., 96, 156, 269, 271, 308
   award, 315                                   forecasting, 3, 79, 195
  Computation Laboratory 169, 223                National Natural Disaster Warning
  contract, 5,129, 165, 244,247,249, 268,           S stem, 77
        306, 328, 343,383                       satekte. See Meteorological satellite.
     Saturn, 129, 165-166, 255, 378             sounding rocket experiments (see also
  launch vehicle. See Saturn.                          individual sounding rockets), 154,
  management, 1, 125, 235, 360                          173.265.360
  marine transportation, 74                         chaff., ’14- fS
                                                             - ,--
    ersonnel, 1, 235, 284, 360                     grenade, 23, 39, 51, 114, 117, 152,
  gaturn Manufacturing Review meeting,                 161, 164, 216, 226, 260, 307’, 310
     191                                            Japan, 109, 149
  space science exhibit, 312                        m$lar- sDhere, 25. 42
  test (see also Saturn), 55, 60, 91, 138           $ot-st&ic probe; 69, 260, 276
Marshall, Mrs. Jane, 210                               S.S.R., 174
Martin Co., 14,40, 78, 103, 112, 135, 152,         vapor cloud, 19, 69, 152, 239, 242,
  177, 195, 210, 264, 270, 275, 325, 354               292, 299, 301, 347
Martin, Glenn L., 383                           Stormfury, Project, 267
Martin, Dr. James S., Jr., 262                  weather modification. See Weather mod-
Martin, Joseph W., 214                              ification.
Martin Marietta Corp., 5, 177, 220, 251,        World Meteorolo ical Day, 113
  354                                           World Weather b a t c h , 114, 133, 326
Maryland, Univ. of, 241, 252, 293, 365        Meteorological satellite, 43, 70, 79, 173,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology              298, 385
     (MIT),26, 31, 47, 214, 223, 258, 280       cooperation
 experiment, 89, 229                               NASA-France, 195
  research, 323, 384                               U.S.-U.S.S.R., 96, 156, 269, 271, 308
Masursky, Dr. Harold, 313                       Nimbus program, 367
Materials, aerospace, research, 77,250,382         NIMBUS I, 3, 264
Mathews, Charles W., 17,64,86,103, 162,            NIMBUS I1,178,185,240,257,28S, 347,
 342, 354, 360                                         349,365
Mattingly, Lt. Thomas K. (USN),   127           Tiros program, 24,41,69,145,220,310,
Maxwell, BIG Jewel1 C. (USAF,    Ret.), 85,            321, 365
  122,200-201                                      contract, 176
May, T R., 58
       .                                        U.S.S.R., 269,271, 385
456                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                  U.K., 31
Methane
                                                  U.S.S.R., 181, 261
  Martian atmosphere, 322
                                               medium-range, 227
  liquid, 293, 362
                                               nuclear, 355
“Metro Air Support ’66” (air transport
                                               passenger, 34
  exercise), 340
                                               short range attack (Sram), 334, 341, 361
Meudon Observatory, 323
                                               launch, 22, 66, 255, 275, 342, 367
MI-1 (U.S.S.R. helicopter), 291
                                               submarine, missile car ing, 247, 302
Miami, Univ. of, 378
                                             Missiles and Rockets. Seeyechnotogy Week.
Michael, William, 313
                                             Mississippi Test Facility (MTF) (MSFC), 114,
Michigan, 110, 113, 116, 122
                                               147, 181,283,364,380
Michigan Assn. of the Professions, 177
                                             Missouri, Univ. of, 55, 136, 166, 350
Michigan Technological Univ., 22
                                             MIT. See Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
Michigan, Univ. of, 25, 30, 42, 69, 142,
                                               nolo
  237,251,260,276,277
                                             Mitcher’LCdr. Edgar D. (USN), 127
Michoud Assembly Facility (MSFC), 15, 22,
                                             Mitchell. Gen. William E.. 383
  34, 191, 298
Microelectronics, 77, 177                    Mitchell; Gen. William’ E., Memorial
“Microeye” (camera), 234                       Award, 137
                                             Miyamoto, Dr. Shotaro, 45
Microflora, 162
Micrometeorite, 86, 267, 328, 350, 351       Mock, Mrs. Geraldine, 134
Micrometeoroid, 288, 327, 336                Mohole, Project, 150, 155, 182, 247, 359
  collection experiment, 252, 263, 275,      Mol. See Manned Orbiting Laboratory.
                                             Molniya I (U.S.S.R. communications
     292
Micrometeoroid detection experiment            satellite program), 376, 385
  GEMINI x, 243, 248                         MOLNIYA I (3) (U.S.S.R. communications
  LUNAR ORBITER I, 313                         satellite), 149, 152, 154, 182. 224
Microscope, 260                              MOLNIYA I (4), 325
                                             Mombasa, E. Africa, 174
Midas (satellite), 172
Midway Island, 149, 233                      Monkey ex eriment, 187, 322
Midwest Research Institute, 12,200           Montreal, 6niv. of, 229
Midwest Slavic Congress, 117                 Moon
Midwest S ace Exposition, 298                   atlas, 305
MiG-21 ($S.S.R. fighter aircraft), 323          crater, 187, 299, 305,313, 333, 344, 382
Mikhailov, Prof. Alexandr I., 140               exploration of, 1, 29, 56-57, 95, 180,
Mikoyan, Anastas I., 94                               198, 255, 307, 369
Miles, Marvin, 82                                  equipment, 40, 244-245, 252
Miles, Rufus E., Jr., 310                        ravitational field, 265
Milky Way (constellation), 292                  fanding
Miller, Rep. George P., 64, 157, 171, 291,         manned
                                                      US.,95, 96, 134, 219, 352
   297.325.357
                                                        plans for, 23, 229, 327, 334, 350,
                                                           375-376
                                                      U.S.S.R., 50, 125, 157, 285, 319-
                                                        320
Mills Coilege, 332
Milwaukee, Wis., 69, 327, 337
Milwitzky, Benjamin, 250
Minderman, Peter A., 315
Minneapolis, Minn., 138, 287
Minneapolis Tribune, 34                                380-381,385’
                                                magnetic field, 133, 173
Minnesota, Univ. of, 169, 360
Minuteman (ICBM), 22, 66                        photographs
                                                  LUNA rx, 44, 46, 47, 48, 59, 174, 203,
Minuteman 11, 165, 255
                                                    213. 228
Mirny Antarctic station, 157
                                                  LUNA XI, 278,279
Mirovaya Ekonomika i Mezhdunarodnyye
                                                  LUNA XII, 333
  Otnosheniye, 201
                                                  LUNA XIII, 380-381
Missile, 97, 113, 153, 219
                                                  LUNAR ORBITER I, 262-263, 265, 279,
  air-to-surface, 334, 341, 361
                                                    281-282,313,382,384
  antiaircraft, 119, 267
                                                  LUNAR ORBITER 11, 344,*364, 374
  antimissile, 170, 355, 373
                                                  SURVEYOR I, 203-204, 208, 226, 228,
  ballistic, intercontinental (ICBM), 115,
                                                    234, 341
     165, 261, 369
                                                  ZOND 111, 305
  foreign
     Communist China, 331                       probe. See individual probes: LUNAS 111,
     France, 82,201                               IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, LUNAR ORBITERS I, 11,
     India, 106                                   RANGER M, SURVEYORS I, 11, ZOND 111.
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                             457
  radiation, 51,133, 173                                         N
  sha e, 275, 313, 355-356
  surface                                    N*3245 (nuclear particle), 142
     composition, 136, 173, 228, 355         NAC. See National Aviation Club.
     texture, 49, 50, 96, 174, 203, 228      NACA. See National Advisory Committee
     topography, 47, 313, 316, 374             for Aeronautics.
  temperature, 50, 203                       Nadge. See NATO Air Defense Ground
  volcanism, 299, 313, 316, 374                Environment Project.
Moorefield, W. Ya., 122, 176, 314            NAE. See National Academy of Engi-
Moorestown, N. J., 194
Moose. See Manned Orbital Operations
                                             Naples, Italy, 306
  Safety Equipment.
                                             Naples, Univ. of, 319
Moraes, Carlos de, 189
                                             Napolitano, Dr. Luigi, 319
Morehead Planetarium (Univ. of North
                                             Narodna Armiya, 214
  Carolina), 14
                                             NAS. See National Academy of Sciences.
Morozov, Platon D. 218, 237, 248, 258,
                                             NASA. See National Aeronautics and Space
  291, 293
                                               Administration.
Morrison, Dr. Philip, 28, 47
                                             NASA Headquarters
Moscow (U.S.S.R.), 95, 161, 254, 379
                                               Inventions and Contributions Board, 16
  airline service, 339
                                               Natural Resources Program Office, 33
  airport, 58
                                               Office of Advanced Research and Tech-
  comsat transmission to, 152, 154
                                                   nology (OART), 60, 66, 99, 232, 234,
  meeting in, 125, 189, 227
                                                   238,258,327,334
  press conference, 50, 82, 140
                                               Office of Manned Space Flight (OMSF),
  television, 47, 48, 135, 147, 333
                                                   18, 26, 53, 125, 143, 232, 233
  weather data exchange, 156
                                               Office of Space Science and Applications
Moscow State Univ., U.S.S.R., 221
                                                   (OSSA), 3, 18, 32-33, 43-44, 75, 113,
Mosher, Rep. Charles A., 214                       125, 178, 215, 222, 231, 261, 263,
Moskva, 384                                        269, 281, 296, 325, 340, 367, 374
Motor, rocket (solid-propellant), 16, 62,      Office of Technology Utilization, 3
  iio,i77,za3,297,385                          Planetary Quarantine Committee, 308
Motorola, Inc.. 239                            Scientific and Technical Information
Mt. Palomar Observatory, 28, 93, 219 287           Facility, 273
Mt. Wilson Observatory, 219, 287             NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office
Moyers, Bill, 212                              (SNPO), 42, 83, 336
Mrir. See Medium Resolution Infrared         NASA Contributions to Cardiovascular Mon-
  Radiometer.                                  itoring, 309
MSC, See Manned Spacecraft Center.           NASA Pasadena Office (NaPO), 261
                                             NASAS Radiation Effects Laboratory, 19
                                                      ace
MSFC, See Marshall Space Flight Center.
                                             NASC. gee National Aeronautics and Space
MT-135 (Japanese sounding rocket),
                                               Council.
     381
                                             Nasher, Raymond D., 258
MTF. See Mississippi Test Facility.
                                             Natal, Brazil, 14, 161, 164, 252, 260, 265,
Mu-1 Uaoanese booster). 333. 339
                                               307,310, 373
Muellei, br. George E.,’i, 31i
                                             Nathan, Dr. Robert, 262
  Apollo, 69, 275, 291
                                             National Academy of Engineering (NAE),
  Aiollo. A plications, 52
                                               145, 155
  award. 3f4
                                             National Academy of Sciences (NAS), 39,
  Gemini, 108, 207, 318
                                                   53, 85, 123, 133, 150,173,231,302,
  manned spaceflight, 30, 56, 64, 93, 110,
                                                   305, 310, 320,361, 376, 384
     269
                                               Physics Survey Committee, 95
  space program, 56, 93, 162, 191, 196,
                                               Space Science Board (see also National
     329. 337. 366
                                                   Research Council), 17, 53, 95, 198,
  technology ’utilization, 357, 366
                                                   251, 280,314,349
Mulholland, Donald R., 188
                                             National Advisory Committee for Aero-
Mullin, Jerome P., 339
                                               nautics (NACA), 36, 270
Mullins, George C., 128                      National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
“Multiple Sclerosis Woman of the Year,”           tration (NASA) (see also NASA centers,
  215                                             programs, satellites, and related head-
Mundt, Sen. Karl, 179                             ings, such as Ames Research Center,
Murphy, Charles, 180                              Apollo rogram, LUNAR ORBITER I, etc.)
Murphy, Franklin D., 128                       accompliskments, 23-24, 35, 47, 62-63,
Murphy, Dr. Thomas P., 55                         65, 83-84, 88-89, 92, 99-100, 155-
Murray, Dr. Bruce C., 73, 236                     156,203,205,207,246,24%, 265,294,
Mururoa Atoll, 232,246, 312                       349, 384-385
458                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

 agreement. See Agreement.                      failure, 162, 164, 180, 182, 193
 anniversary, 23, 35, 310                       manned
 astronaut. See Astronaut.                         GEMINI VIII, 99
 awards and honors, 20, 22, 30, 43, 50,            GEMINI IX-A, 206
   57, 77, 103, 117, 140, 145, 188, 191,           GEMINI X, 243
   208, 213, 215, 218, 223, 225, 232,              GEMINI XI, 290
   235,236,255,259,301,304,314-315,                GEMINI XII, 344
   321,323,324,331,352,354,359,374              postponed, 61, 67, 96, 121, 180, 202
 ap ro riations, 127, 143, 163, 166, 172,       probe
   ! < 190,214,244,247,257,259,261,
   7                                               PIONEER VII, 269
   263,271,273,286,328                             SURVEYOR r, 196, 232
 budget, 23, 26-27, 28, 59, 64, 70-71,             SURVEYOR 11 296
   75-76,80,91, 93, 113, 138, 143, 149,         satellite
   171, 187, 262, 278, 317, 357, 364               ATS I, 367-8, 371
 conference, 5, 64, 191, 291                       BIOSATELLITE I, 374
 contract                                          ESSAS I, 11, and 111, 41, 69, 310
   administration, 239                             EXPLORERS XXXII and XXXIII, 192,231
   engine, 2, 5, 16, 85, 90, 115, 145,224,         INTELSAT 11-A, 331
      238,255, 257-258, 330, 332, 356,             LUNAR ORBITERS I and 11, 262, 340
      575                                         NIMBUS Ir, 178
    fa%ies, 255, 257, 258, 273                     OAO I. 132
   space e uipment, 54, 92, 104, 117,              OGO I ~ I ,209
       175,1?6,177,179,194,221,234,264,           PAGEOS I, 222
       271, 325, 337, 348, 353, 356             Scanner, Proiect, 268
    spacecraft, 5, 77, 90, 176, 227, 275        test
   space medicine, 64                             Apollo-Saturn, 67, 88, 233, 274
    study, 2, 5, 176, 179, 195, 356               Augmented Target Docking Adap-
    support services, 9, 165-166, 195,               ter, 202
       223, 235, 244, 262, 298, 315, 321,          Launch Escape S stem, 21
       380, 383                                    Scout Reentry d a t i n g Project, 50
    tracking, 261, 315, 361                     sounding rocket
 cooperation, 284                                 Aerobee 150,60,89, 138,156,277,
    AEC, 42,82-83, 211, 336, 360                     364, 373
    American Society for Engineering              Aerobee 150A, 18,79,84, 182,276
       Education, 364-365                          Aerobee 350, 269
                                                   Arcas, 173
    ComSatCorp, 235
                                                   Boosted Arcas, 185, 277
    DOD, 7, 29, 43, 110, 150, 198, 225,

                                                  JH””?
       304-305,334
                                                           173
                                                    ave in, 79, 161, 237, 267, 299
    ESSA, 43, 103
                                                  Nike-Apache, 10, 19, 42, 55, 56, 95,
   FAA, 128
                                                      111,117,127,132,214,234,237,
   NAS-NRC, 302
                                                      239,240,242,245,276,292,307,
   Naval Oceanographic Office, 19
                                                      351
    Small Business Administration, 89
                                                   Nike-Cajun, 39, 42, 51, 161, 307,
   USAF, 90-91, 111, 114, 128-129, 150,
                                                      3 10
       203
                                                   Nike-Tomahawk, 276, 301, 360
    USDA, 3,117
                                                   Orion 11, 342
   USN, 8
                                                  Pacemaker, 333
 cooperation, international. See Inter-
                                                   Wasp, 210
   national cooperation,space and Sound-
                                              management, 9,125,258,268,289-290,
    ing rocket, international programs.
                                                291, 331, 350, 360
 criticism of, 7, 37, 108, 109, 123, 165,
                                              manpower, 93
   202, 220, 232-233, 258, 260, 264,
                                              organization, 1, 16, 43-44, 139, 188,
   266, 273, 280-281, 319, 365, 366
                                                235,261,327
 exhibit, 60, 253, 312
                                               atents, 16, 335
 facilities, 19, 23, 83, 220, 247, 257,258,
                                              gbservatory Class Spacecraft Rt:view
   273-274
                                                Board, 149
   construction, 97, 255, 364
                                              personnel, 9, 32, 34, 36, 105, 106, 127,
 history, 231
                                                128,132,202,203,208,209,214, 232,
 Humphrey, Vice President Hubert H.,
                                                235,249,258,264,267,268,270, 283,
                                                288,289-290,305,316,317,327, 328,
                                                336,340,360,377,383
 Inventions and Contributions Board, 317
                                                ap ointments, 6, 12, 54, 55, 73, 166,
 labor relations, 6, 258, 271, 364
                                                  !73, 195, 243, 246, 249, 275, 279,
 launch, 120, 131
                                                  283, 284, 298, 310, 311, 315, 319,
                                                  380
                                                                                    459
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                              National Center for Atmospheric*Researcb
  programs (see also s ecific programs,
                                               and Information, 89, 133, 168, 263
       such as Apollo, (emini, etc. and
       Space program, national)                                 ee for Clear Air Tur-
    aeronautics, 62, 66, 208
                                              National Conference of Lieutenant Gov-
    astronom 39, 62-63, 65, 150-151,
       278, 2&                                  ernors, 223-224
    international, 62-64, 80-81, 90, 133,     National Council of Marine Resources and
       141, 155, 386                            Engineerin Development, 219
                                              National Cowghoy Hall of Fame, 236
    manned space flight, 52, 64-65, 71,
                                              National Cybernetics Foundation, 54
       93, 167, 238, 261, 269, 318, 324,
       327,332,349,351,375-376                National Dair Council, 25
    meteorology, 3, 381, 384-385              National DeLnse Transportation Assn.
    nuclear propulsion, 42,62, 82-83            Award, 297
    sounding rocket, 65,80-81,310,384.-       National Environmental Satellite Center,
        ---
        285                                     96
                                              National Foundation on the Arts and
     space medicine, 187, 317-318, 361,
       374                                      Humanities, 147, 360
     space science, 59, 62-64, 71, 83, 133,   National Geographic Society, 132, 155,
                                                232
       229, 238, 264, 359, 384-385
    technology utilization, 88-89, 281,       National Investigations Committee on
       328, 334                                 Aerial Phenomena (NICAP), 119
                                              National Labor Relations Board, 271
    tracking and data a isition, 81, 83
  Saturn ManufacturingTeview meeting,         National Lea e of Cities, 366
                                              National Medrof Science, 50, 380
     191
  Science Advisory Committee, 95              National Natural Disaster Warning Sys-
  Space Science Steering Committee, 83          tem, 77
                                              National Observer, 13
  supersonic transport, 92, 128, 224
  test                                        National Oceanography Assn. (NOA), 224
     Agena target vehicle, 67, 86             National Park Service, 15
     booster, 14,22,64, 84, 107, 114, 122,    National Pilots Assn. 308
       147, 181, 185, 195, 210, 227, 233,     National Radio Astronomy Observatory,
                                                257
       252, 350, 357, 364, 382, 383
    motor, solid propellant, 62, 110          National Reactor Testing Station, Ida., 13,
                                                276
     nuclear, 42, 52, 82, 103-104, 115,
       211.222                                National Research Council (NRC), 302,336
                                                Space Science Board, 336, 384
    parachute, 279, 284, 340, 352, 370
                                              National Referral Center, 243
     spacecraft, 19, 35-36, 39, 42, 175,
                                              National Satellite Center, 286
       185, 328
  universities, 53, 71, 238-239, 298, 364,    National Science Board, 10, 243
                                              National Science Foundation (NSF), 10,24,
       378, 379
    grants; 55, 97, 287                            30, 38, 54-55, 59, 96-97, 104, 223,
  X-15. See X-15.                                  243,247, 257, 360
National Aeronautic and Space Engineer-         Special Commission on Weather Mod-
                                                   ification, 21
  ing Meeting, 314
                                                                                   -
                                              “The National Science Foundation Its
National Aeronautic Assn., 210, 237, 324
National Aeronautics and Space Act, 288,        Present and Future” (report), 223
  310                                         National security, 83, 130, 135, 196, 366
National Aeronautics and Space Council        National sonic boom program (see also
  (NASC), 35, 44, 46, 53, 79, 99, 102, 167,     Supersonic transport; X-15), 338, 342,
  180, 212, 252, 319, 324, 357, 372, 373        354,372, 376,378
Nat&al    Aerospace Education Council,        National Space Club (NSC), 19, 53, 102,
                                                153, 221,269,297,323
  LIW
National Air and Space Museum, 49, 169,       National Suace Club Press Award. 103
  227, 324                                    National &ace program. See Space pro-
National Air Museum, 227                        gram, national.
National Assn. of Broadcasters, 118           National Survey of Historic Sites, 263
National Assn. of Educational Broad-
                                              National Youth Science Camp program,
  casters, 327
                                                239
National Assn. of Manufacturers, 256, 319
                                              NATO. See North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-
National Assn. of Science Writers, Inc., 47
                                                tion.
National Aviation Club (NAC), 208, 268,
                                              NATO. Air Defense Ground Environment
  308
                                                (Nadge) Project, 227
National Aviation Hall of Fame, 383
                                              NATO’s 15 Nations, 199,282
National Broadcasting Co. (NBC), 136,256.
  287                                         Nature, 289
National Bureau of Standards, 9               Naugle, Dr. John E., 44, 326
460                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

 Naval Electronics Laboratory, 13                   237, 260, 276, 307
Naval Laboratories, 49                         Nike-Cajun (sounding rocket), 6 5 6 6
Naval Missile Center, 327                        radar test, 25, 42
Naval Research Laboratory, 79, 109, 156,         up er atmosphere data, 23, 114, 328
    174,242,317                                    fall, 307
Naval Reserve Officers Assn., 316                  summer, 161,164,216,221,226,260,
La Nazione, 45                                        265
NBC. See National Broadcasting Co .                winter, 39, 51
Neher, H. Victor, 152                          Nike-Hydac (sounding rocket), 347
Nelson, Clifford H., 313                       Nike-Javelin (sounding rocket), 108, 115
Nero (Near Earth Rescue Operation)             Nike-Tomahawk (sounding rocket), 137,
   spacecraft, 384                               276,277,283,287,293,341
Nema. See Nuclear Engine for Rocket            Nike-X (antimissile missile system), 191,
   Vehicle Application.                          343
Ness, Dr. Norman F., 86, 315, 358              Nikoiayev, L /C Andrian G. (U.S.S.R.), 60
Netherlands, 125, 190-191, 210, 220, 239,      Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Maj. Valentina
   306, 324, 347, 377                             (U.S.S.R.), 90
Nettles, J. Cary, 315                          Nilsson, Carl, 288-289
Nevada, 215, 339                               NIMBUS I (meteorological satellite), 2, 264
New Delhi, India, 34                           NIMBUS II(Nimbus 6)2, 178, 185,240,257,
New Hampshire, Univ. of, 274, 360                   283, 347, 349, 365, 385,
New Mexico, 367                                  launch, 178
New Mexico, Univ. of, 89, 381                  Nimbus B, 2, 322
New Rochelle, N. Y., 353                       Nininger, Dr. Harvey H., 232
New York Board of Trade, 331                   Nippon Electric Co., 179
New York, N. Y., 18, 97, 191, 246, 258,        Nitrogen, 335
   316,319,330,340,367                                See National Oceanography Assn.
                                               NOA.
New York Times, 57, 355, 376                   Nobel Prize, 339
   science and technology, 30, 260, 367,       Noervich, W. Germany, 256
      377                                      Noise, aircraft, 164, 274, 279, 284, 288,
   space law treaty, 250, 277, 299               332
   space program                               No&k, Va., 332
      U.S., 44, 47, 52, 105, 182, 279, 347-    Normyle, William, 149
        348                                    North American Air Defense Command
      U.S.S.R., 20, 82, 95, 130, 157, 279,        (NORAD), 32,43, 194
                                               North American Aviation, Inc. 136, 158,
        294,339
   space technology, 33, 69, 96, 109, 136,          215, 268, 283-284, 302
      339,352,384                                Apollo spacecraft, 93, 313-314, 328
   supersonic transport, 281, 289, 333           Atomics International Div., 320
New York Univ., 52, 97, 293, 319, 333            contract, 2, 5, 115, 130, 264, 268, 284,
New York, Univ. of (Stony Brook), 225               306, 330,335,341,356, 361
New York World Telegram, 110                     labor, 35
New York Zoological Society, 96                  rocket engine
New Zealand, 54, 89, 347                            F-1, 115, 352
New Zealand Weather Service. 168                    H-1, 130
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Univ. of, U. K., 150           J-2,2, 85, 168,233, 252,257
Newell, Dr. Homer E., 1, 26, 44, 95, 110,        Rocketdyne Div., 35,111, 168,233,252
      149,235,251,325,367                        Saturn, 5, 14, 306, 330, 364
                                               North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
   space astronomy, 121, 384
                                                 199, 227, 275, 306,
   space programs, scientific, 59,62,65, 71,
                                               North Carolina. Univ. of., 14
      121, 324                                                            -
                                               North, Warren'J., 359
Newport News, Va., 87
                                               Northrop Corp., 19, 130, 227, 264, 306
News conference. See Press conference.
Ney, Edward P., 241                            Northrop Space Laboratories, 270
                                               Northwestern Univ., 255, 326, 351, 376
Nhatrang, South Vietnam, 361
                                               Norway, 227, 322
NICAP. See National Investigations Commit-
                                               Norwegian Defense Research Establish-
  tee on Aerial Phenomena.
                                                 ment. 11 1
N' eria, 351
                                               NoshirS,japan, 339
Nxe-Apache (sounding rocket), 65, 342
                                               Nottingham, U.K., 285
  electron measurement, 50, 55, 95, 127,
                                               Novae,-339
     214.240.292.293.347
         ,..,
                                               Novosibirsk, U.S.S.R., 117
  ionosphere experiments, 10, 56, 111,
                                               Novosti Press Agency (U.S.S.R.), 224
      127, 234,274
                                               Noyes, Mrs. Blanche W., 22
  micrometeoroid sampling, 267, 351
                                               Noyes, Crosby S., 373
  Polar cap absorption data, 245, 284
                                               NRC. See National Research Council.
  upper atmosphere data, 19,69, 117, 152,
                                                                                       461
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                               Offik, Wolfgang G., 250
         See Nuclear Rocket Development
NRDS.
                                               O’Gallagher, J. J., 151
   Station.
                                               Oglesby Ca t. Charles, 194
NRL. See Naval Research Laboratory.
                                               Ogo. $e &biting Geophysical Observa-
N R X - A ~ (nuclear reactor), 211, 222
                                                 tory.
NSC. See National Space Club.
                                               OGO 11 (Ogo-C, Orbiting Geophysical Obser-
NSF. See National Science Foundation.
                                                 vatory), 289
Nuclear detection satellite (see also Vela),
                                               OGO 1 1 (Ogo-B, Orbiting Geophysical
   24, 35, 322                                        1
                                                 Observatory), 209,213, 218, 248
Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Appli-
      cation (Nerva), 145, 385,
                                                          elicopter), 132, 187
   test, 42, 52, 82-83, 103-104, 115, 145,
                                               Ohio, 142, 367
      211, 222
                                               Okinawa, 106
Nuclear fission, 259
                                               Oklahoma City, Okla., 236, 328
Nuclear power, 177
                                               Old Moore’s Almanack, 281
Nuclear propulsion, 83
                                               Oliver, Dr. Bernard M., 112
Nuclear reactor, 35, 51, 57, 211, 222
                                               OMSF. See NASA Headquarters. Office of
Nuclear Rocket Development Station
                                                 Manned Sqace Flight.
   (NRDS), 42, 52, 82, 104, 115
                                               “On Rockets ’ (manuscript), 321
Nuclear submarine, 87, 125
                                               ONERA. See Office National d’Etudes
Nuclear test, 31, 35, 172, 312, 331, 342,
                                                 Recherches ACros atiales.
   382
                                               ONR. See Office of &aval Research.
Nuclear test ban treaty, 58, 109, 259, 304,
                                               Oort, Dr. Jan H., 324, 377
   342,369
                                               Opik, Dr. Ernst J., 241
                                               Oppenheim, Dr. A. K., 359
                     0
                                               Optical Society of America, 97
                                               Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao)
Oahu, Hawaii, 179
                                                 5, 39, 47, 121, 132, 181, 264, 380
Oakland, Calif., 332
                                               Orbiting Data Relay System (Ords), 179
Oak Ridge National Institute, 243
                                               Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo)
Oao. See Orbiting Astronomical Obser-
                                                  (see also OGOS 11, 111), 5, 25, 63-64, 150-
  vatory.
                                                 151, 248, 264
OAR. See Office of Aerospace Research.
                                               Orbiting Primate Spacecraft, 322
OART. See NASA Headquarters Office of
                                               Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) (see also
  Advanced Research and Technology.
O’Brien, Edward W., 269                          os0 11), 5, 39, 367
                                               Ords. See Orbiting Data Relay System.
Observatoire de Meudon, 264
                                               Oregon, 341
Observatory class satellite. See Orbiting
  Astronomical Observator ; Orbiting           Orenburg region, Ural Mts., U.S.S.R., 291
  Geophysical Observatory; &biting Solar       Organisation for Economic Co-operation
  Observatory.                                    and Develo ment (OECD), 15, 49
Ocean of Storms (Oceanus Procellarum)          Orion (conste5ation), 11
  (moon), 48,203,313,316,325,341,380           Orion (NASA bar e), 74
Ocean Science and Engineering, Inc., 154       Orion I1 (soungng rocket), 342
Oceanic Institute, 367                         Orionid meteor shower, 327
Oceanographer (oceanographic research          Orlando, Fla., 78
  ship), 240, 311                              Orlov, Vladimir, 279
Oceanography, 13, 19, 154, 182, 219, 224,      Ormand Beach, Fla., 132
  240,247,271,302,366-367                      Oso. See Orbitin Solar Observatory.
Oceanus Procellarum (moon). See Ocean          oso 11 (Orbiting jolar Observatory), 212
  of Storms.                                   OSSA. See NASA Headquarters. Office of
Ochao, Dr. Severo, 52                                ace Science and Applications.
                                                  sf
O’Connell, James D., 163                       0us ey, Gilbert W., 232
O’Connor, B /G Edmund F. (WAF), 315            OV-1 Mohawk (surveillance aircraft), 253
Odishaw, Dr. Hugh, 337                         OV1-IV (reseach satellite), 121
                                               ov1-v, 121
OECD. See Organisation for Economic Co-
  o eration and Development.                   OV1-VI, 338
O’dllon, John R., 142                          ov1-VIIIT, 240
Office of Aerospace Research (OAR), 326        OV1-IX, 370
Office National #Etudes et de Recherches       OV1-X, 370
  Akros atiales (ONEBA), 201                   OV3-I, 146
Office o?Aircraft Noise Control and Abate-     OV3-11, 331
  ment ( roposed), 274, 279                    OV3-111, 258
Office of Emergency Planning, 340              OV3-IV, 213
Office of Naval Research (ONR), 13, 166        OV4-IR (communications satellite), 338
Office of Science and Technology (Pres-        OV4-IT9338
  ident’s), 28, 33, 57, 106, 328, 358, 370     OV4-111, 338
462                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Owens-Cornin Fiberglas Corp., 249            Pennsylvania, 141
Oxygen (see $so Fuel), 11, 12 174, 285,      Pennsylvania State Univ., 298
  306, 335                                   Penrose Medal, 349
Ozonide, 11                                  Pensacola, Fla., 234
                                             Pensacola (Ha.) Junior College, 317
                                             Pentagon, 251
                    P
                                             Phpin, Dr. Eugene, 317
P-1127 (U.K. Vtol aircraft), 94, 131         Perkin-Elmer Corp., 175, 353
Pacemaker (booster), 333                     Perm, U.S.S.R., 107
Pacific Ocean, 232, 247, 261, 311, 373       Peroxide, 11
  communications satenite, 235, 287, 311,    Perreault, W. D., 358
      321                                    Pert. See Program Evaluation Review
  U.Sr5.R. rocket test, 149, 193, 233,         Technique.
     275, 287, 302, 352, 373                 Peru, 297, 347
Pacific Science Center. 312                  Peterson, Bruce A., 293, 298, 379
Paffell, Col. Donald W. (USAF), 54           Peterson, L/C Harry W. (USAF, Ret.), 283
Pacific Area Travel Association Confer-      Petit Jean Air Service, 302
  ence, 53                                   Petranek, Jan, 254
                        r,                   Petrocelli, Dr. A. W., 1
Pacific Missile Range see also Western                                1
  Test Ranee). 176. 22                       Petroleum Today, 281
Page Comm%cations, Inc., 139                 Peyrefitte, Alain, 348, 361
PAGEOS I (Pageos A Passive Geodetic          Pezdirtz, George F., 315
  Earth-Orbiting Satellite), 222, 385        Pfund, Edward, 250
Paige, Dr. Hilliard W., 317                  Philadelphia, Pa., 82, 147
Pakachoag Hill, Mass., 263, 350              Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, 18, 282
Pakistan, 69, 114, 117-118, 174, 271         Philadelphia Inquirer, 366
Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere          Philco Corp., 221, 233,244, 247,261 320,
  Research Committee (SUPARCO), 69,114,        382
  152                                        Philip, Prince (U.K.), 93-94, 291
Paksuniemi, Sweden, 352                      Philippines, 54, 222, 292-293, 311
Palaemon (NASA barge), 74                    Phillips, Col. Donald Boyer (USA, Ret.), 124
                                             Phillips, M/G Samuel C. (USAF) 229, 350
Palestine, Tex., 263
Pan American World Airways, Inc. (Pan        Phipps, Clifford, 327
  Am), 137, 143, 297, 302, 339, 343          Phoenix, Ariz., 17, 242
Parachute, 275, 278                          Phoenix (missile), 176
  fatality, 278                              Phoenix Gazette, 96
  test, 40-41, 161                           Photography. See Advanced Vidicon Cam-
  Voyager, 153, 242-243, 340, 352, 370         era System; ATS I; Automatic Picture
Parade, 10, 109-110, 248-249                   Transmission System; Cloud, photo-
Paraguay, 297                                  graphs; Earth, photographs; LUNAR
                                               ORBITERS I, 11; MARINER IV; Moon, photo-
Parawin 156
Parin, $assily V., 232, 318                    graphs; SURVEYOR I.
Paris, France, 1 , 15, 188, 220, 287, 339
                 1                           Photometer, 83
Parks, Robert J., 197, 250, 372              “Photostate I” (radiation measurement
Parry, Albert, 117                             device), 337
                                             Physical Research Laboratory (Ahmed-
Parsons, John W., 124
                                                abad, India), 234
Particles, char ed, 225
                                             Physical Review Letters, 143, 225
Pastore, Sen. fohn O., 270
                                             Physics, 85, 95-96, 229
Patent Law Assn. of Chicago, 154
                                             Piantanida, Nick, 40-41, 161, 278
Patents, 126, 254, 268, 319, 335
                                             Piccard, Don, 237
Patrick AFB, Fla., 113, 372
                                             Piccard, Dr. Jeanette Ridlon, 225
Patuxent Naval Air Station, Md., 106,131
                                             Pickering, Dr. William H., 147, 157, 166,
Paul, Norman S., 213,323
                                               208-209,317
PCS. Pointing-control system.
     See
                                             Pierce, John R., 329
Peach Tree Valley, Calif., 331
                                             Piloted Low Speed Tests (Pilot) project,
Pearl River (NASA barge), 74                    153
Pearson, Drew, 314                           Pioneer (program), 269
Pecora, Dr. William T., 297                  PIONEER VI (interplanetary probe), 32, 269
Peebles, P. J. E., 31                          results, 32,79, 144,183,214-215,301
PEGASUS I (meteoroid detection satellite),   PIONEER vn (Pioneer B), 269,301,385
  205-206, 337                               Pitot-static probe, 260, 263
                                             Pittendri , Colin S., 361-362
PEGASUS 11,205-206, 337
PEGASUS ~ n 205-206, 247,337
              ,                              Pittsburgt Pa., 336
Pelly, Rep. Thomas M., 76                    Pittsburgh, Univ. of, 237
                                             Planetarium, 12, 14
Pendray, G. Edward, Award, 359
                                                                                       463
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Planetary Reentry Parachute Progam,



Pluto (planet), 17
     See Pacific Missile Range.
PUR.
Po, Shu-jen, 339-340                             Propulsion’ Joint Specialist Conference,
Pogo Stick, rocket pro elled, 78-79                Second, 215
                    2                            Propulsion Module. See Service Module.
Pogue, Maj, William       (USAF), 127
                                                 Propulsive wing aircraft (V/Stol), 309
Point Barrow, Alaska, 38-40, 51,161,164,
  216,226,252,260,265,321                        Proton, 287
Point Mugu, Calif., 327                          PROTON III (U.S.S.R. space station), 233,
Pointing-control system (PCS),356                  236, 285, 385
Poland, 231                                      Protostar, 229
                                                 Proxmire, Sen. William F., 261
Polar Cap Absorption, 245, 277, 284
Polaris (ICBM), 31, 247, 343                     Pryor, Harold E., 139
“Policy Planning for Aeronautical Re-            PSAC. See President’s Science Advisory
                                                   Committee. 25, 34, 111,
  search and Development” (report), 208
                                                 Puerto Rico, 90,152, 267,350
The Politics o Research, 165
             f
Polytechnic nstitute of Brooklyn, 52             Pulkovo Observatory (U.S.S.R.), 199,
                                                   224,292
Pomona College, 232
                                                 Punch, 32
Pope, David P., 260
                                                 Pushkov, N. V., 251
Popovich, Pave1 R., 60
Porter, D. C., 134, 173
Porter, Dr. Richard W., 173
                                                                     Q
Poseidon (ICBM), 343
Poseidon (NASA barge), 15, 74, 298               Quark (matter theory), 236
Potrero, Calif., 16                              Quasar (quasi-stellar object), 31, 92-93,
Prather, Victor A., Award, 226                     171,230,253
Pratt & Whitney Div. See United Air-
  craft Corp., Pratt & Whitney Div.
                                                                     R
Pravda, 135-136, 279,353
Presidential Medal of Merit, 2
                                                 Radar, 18,42-43,51,57,95,199,203,210,
President’s Science Advisory Committee
  (PSAC), 25, 34, 111, 248                            337
                                                   planetary soundin technique, 153, 171
Press conference, 80, 106, 131, 194, 319
                                                 Radar signature auafysis (Rsa), 326
  Gemini ilights, 16
                                                 Radcliffe, Capt. Chester R., Jr. (USAF), 291
     GEMINI VIII, 17, 92, 104, 117
                                                 Radistion, 61
     GEMINI IX-A, 207, 208,218
                                                   cosmic, 85, 99, 133-134, 136-137, 151,
     GEMINI x, 255
     GEMINI XI, 301                                   190, 295, 306, 374
                                                   effects, 121,243,337,374
     GEMINI XII, 353-354
                                                   gamma, 129, 136-137, 151
  LUNAIX,~O-~~
                                                   measurement, 51,146, 199,370
  LUNA X, 126-127, 140-141
                                                   resistant cell, 259-260
  LUNAR ORBITER I, 313
                                                   shielding from, 306-307
  NIMBUS 11, 185
  U.S. space program, 14, 162, 196, 258,           solar, 7, 79, 173, 199, 289, 337
                                                   s
                                                   s ace, 12-13, 121, 213
       31
        .4
  U.SIS.R. space activities, 14, 50-51,              an Allen belts, 102, 168,213,260, 332
                                                 Radio Cor oration of America (RCA), 9,
     82, 139, 140-141, 162, 232-233, 285,
     316, 322                                      126, 176: 177, 222, 255, 259, 338, 353
                                                 Radio Liberty, 226
  SURVEYOR I, 203
Press, Har 2-3, 315, 349                         Radio Moscow, 107
Price, Don%., 22                                 Radio Prague, 379
                                                 Radio signal, 9, 118
Princeton Univ., 1 , 40, 295, 349
                   1
Prishchep, A. G , 173-174                        Radioactive fallout, 342




                         x,         XII, XIII;
                              XI,
                                                        See Royal Aeronautical Society. 15,
                                                 ues.
                                                   94
  Mars, 173,380
464                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

RAF. See Ro al Air Force. 61                  benefits, 97, 119, 154
Raman, Dr. C V., 253
                !                             Federal support, 22,30,34,55,104,165
Ramo, Dr. Simon, 329                          funds for, 33, 179, 257, 323
Ramse Dr. Norman F., 132                          geographic distribution, 104
Rand &p., 73, 273                             information, distribution of, 370
Randolph, Sen. Jennings, 227                  management, 154
Ranger (pro ram), 262,373                   Research Institute for Advanced Studies,
RANGER VI1 (funar probe), 333                  174
RANGER VIII, 333                            Research Review, 229
RANGER IX, 333                              Research satellite, DOD, 212,213, 331-332,
Rangoon, Burma, 60                             370
Ratner, Lazarus G., 142                     Research Societ of America, 123-124
Ray, Dr. Carleton, 96-97                    Restrepo, PresiKent Carlos LIeras (Colom-
Raytheon Cor 53                                bia). 316
Razumov, Vla%nir Vasilyevich, 10            Review o Popular Astronomy, 224
                                                     f
RCA. See Radio Corporationof America. 9,    Reynolds, Dr. Orr E., 90
  126                                       Rice Univ., 56, 139
RCA Service Co., 130                        Rickover, VIA Hyman G. (USN), 206
Rcs. See Reentry Control System. 100        Rieke, William B., 188, 364, 380
Reaction Motors, Inc., 377                  Rigel (star), 18
Reader's D est, 37
            i                               Rio Grande. Brazil. 347
Real Time [omputer Complex (RTCC), 258      Rio Grande; N. J.,'289
                                            Risso, William P., 139
Reconnaissance satellite, 22, 61-62, 369,
     372                                    Ritchie, Donald W., 89
Record                                      RL.10 (rocket engine), 125, 132, 169
  aircraft, 134, 250, 253, 302, 351         Rmu. See Remote Maneuvering Unit.
  balloon. 319                              Roberts, W. Cameron, Jr., 117
  helicopter, 187, 291                      Roberts, Dr. Leonard, 258
  spacecraft, 207, 251, 294, 349            Roberts, Walter Orr, 133
  speed, 201, 302, 351, 385                 Robillard, Geoffrey, 9
  women's, 134                              Robledo de Chavela (Spain) Space Track-
Redeye (missile), 119                          ing Station, 265,320
Reflector satellite, 249, 384               Rochester Conference, 286
Redlands, Calif., 42                        Rochester, Univ. of, 151
                                            Rock, Dr. Vincent P., 163
Redstone (rocket), 123, 267
Redstone Arsenal, Ala., 192                 Rocketdyne Division. See North American
                                               Aviation, Inc.
Reentry
  control, 105, 180,207, 290-291            Rocket engine. See Engine, chemical,
  Gemini, 99-100,207,244,290-291,344           electric, nuclear, rocket, etc., and indi-
                                               vidual rocket engines such as F-1, M-1,
  heating, 88, 258
  Scout Reentry Heating Project, 49-50         J-2, etc.
  test, 238, 367                            Rodana Research Corp., 40
                                            Roderick, R. L., 250
  vehicle, 267, 271, 330, 378
                                            Rogallo, Francis M., 156, 235
Reentr Control System (Rcs), 100
Rees, Jberhard F. M., 315                   Rogallo, Gertrude S., 156
Reeves, Dr. Robert R., Jr., 377             Rogers Dry Lake, Calif., 135
         .                                  Ro ers, Dr. Thomas F.. 219
Reid, Re Ogden, 288
                                            R o f1s-Ro ce, Ltd. 189, 285
Reid, S hanus Albert, Award, 27
                                                     6
                                            Roman, r. James A., 200
Reiff, d e n n , 32-33
Reinartz, Stanley R., 1                     Roman, Dr. Nancy G., 107, 121
Reistrup, J. V., 294                        Romania, 165, 174, 231
Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu), 225          Roney, Robert, 250
                                            Roosa, Ca t. Stuart A. (USAF), 127
Rendezvous, 34,212,314
                                            Root, L. gugene, 354
  GEMINI VI-A (Gemini VI), 226, 259, 374
                                            Rose, V/Adm. Rufus E. (USN, Ret.), 214
  GEMINI VIII, 17, 99-102, 107-108
                                                            .
                                            Rosenthal, Re Ben'amin J., 274, 279
  GEMINI IX-A (Gemini Ix), 202, 206-207
                                                                 i.,
  GEMINI X, 243-244,255                     Rosholt, Dr. feobert      331
                                            Rosman, N. C. 257, 361, 372
  GEMINI XI, 290,291, 294
                                            Ross, Stanle , 26
  GEMXNI XII, 344
                                                                          .
                                            Rostow, Wai: W.,
Rendezvous Docking Simulator, 130-131                            258
                                            Rota, Spain, 135
Rensselaer Pol echnic Institute, 147, 377
Republic S u p p c Co., 73                  Rotary Club, 77
                                            Roth, Herbert E., 285
Research, Inc., Barrier Arresting Compo-
                                            Roth, J. Reece, 120
  nent, 180
Research and development                    Rover (program), 24, 211
                                            Row, Dr. Ronald, 88
  aeronautics, 291
                                                                                   465
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAU'FICS, 1966

                                              Satellite unidentified
                                                1
                                                                                   143,
                                                                                   293,

                                                  Thor-Agena D, 40, 50, 91, 121, 132,
Royal National Foundation, 206                        188, 221, 262, 297, 341, 382
Royal Society of Great Britain, 77                 Thor-Altair. 9
                                                   Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena B,
Rsa. See Radar signature analysis.
RU Camelo ardalis (star), 230                         178, 222
Ruby, Charyes H., 165                              Titan 111-B-Agena D, 252, 305, 373
Ruddick, Keith, 142                           Satellite, weather. See Meteorological
Ruderman, M. A., 152                            satellite.
Ruina, Dr. J. P., 214                         Sato, Premier Eisaku, 66
Rumsfeld, Re Donald, 12                       Satterthwaite, Jose h C., 53
Runcorn, S. I: 150
             !,                               Saturday Evening &st, 376, 377
                                              Saturday Review, 1
Runyan, Thorne L., 78
Rushworth, L/Col. Robert A. (USAF), 47,       Saturn I, U rated (Saturn IB) (booster),
  182,223, 231, 315                                144, 158, 177, 178, 194, 261, 328
Rusk, Secretary of State Dean, 137-138          capability, 25,58,241
Russell, Sen. Richard B., 145                   contract, 2, 19, 255, 378
Rust Engineering Co., 130
                                                enh?{ 2, 85,169 195, 233, 252, 257,
                                                       130,
                                                  J-2,       168,
                                                     364
                    S
                                                 launch, 51, 60-61, 67, 88, 385
                                                   AS-201,67
 Sabha, Ebrahim, 49
                                                   AS-202, 274
Sabreliner (twin-jet), 302
                                                   AS-203, 233
Sacramento, Calif., 252
                                                 program, 72, 92
SADL. See Sterilization Assembly Devel-
   opment Laboratory.
                                               BS
                                               :-t
                                               ,!
                                                ?         88, 255, 263, 378
sAE. See Societyof Automotive Engineers.
                                                   test, 227
 Sagan, Dr. Carl, 98
                                                   S-IVB, 88, 224, 263, 272
 Saigon, Vietnam, 302
                                                   test, 233
 St. Albans School, 313
                                                test, 122, 350, 357
 St. Croix, V. I., 152
                                              Saturn V (booster), 72, 86, 125, 193, 261,
 St. John's Newfoundland, 302                      '."*
 St. Louis, Mo., 95                                  LIL
                                                 capability, 18,25,58,119-120,241,317
 St. Thomas, V. I., 152
                                                 contract, 8, 9, 85, 115, 145, 224, 330,
 Salinas, Dr. Luis Tapis, 317
                                                     ---
                                                     333
 Salto di Quirra Test Range, Sardinia, 235
                                                crawler-transporter, 33, 86, 248
 Samos (satellite), 289
                                                en ine, 2
Sun Antonio Express, 328
                                                   f-1, 115, 210, 352
 San Diego, Calif., 7,61, 160, 289
                                                   J-2,2,85, 168, 192,233,252,257,364
 San Fernando State College, 302
San Francisco, Calif., 150, 322, 330, 349       equipment, 9
                                                facilities, 272, 277
 San Francisco Examiner und Chronicle, 242                .     .
                                                stage
 San Jose, Calif., 260
 San Marco (Italian satellite), 174                1st (S-IC), 85, 115, 213, 292, 332
                                                      test. 210
 Sanchez, Joa in, 94
                                                   2nd-(S-I1), 2, 213, 292, 306, 330
 Sandri, G., 1%
                                                      explosion, 195, 198, 283
 Santa Susana, Calif., 85
                                                      test, 85, 147, 181, 185, 364, 383
 Santiago, Chile, 125, 334
                                                   3rd (S-IVB), 2, 8, 145, 178, 202, 213,
 Saros (French communications satellite),
                                                        224, 292, 306
   233
                                                      test, 107, 252
 Satellite. See individual satellites, sat-
                                                transport, marine, 74
                                              Saturn Manufacturing Review meeting,
                                                191
                                              Scanner, Project, 92,
                                              Schawlow, Dr. Arthu
                                              Scheer, Julian W., 1, 213
                                              Scherer, Lee R., 176
Satellite Educational and Informational
                                              Schirra, Capt. Walter M., Jr. (USN), 8, 95,
                                                   140
466                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                            Sealab 1 , 13
                                                     1
   Apollo, 144,306,381
                                            Sealab 1 1 13
                                                     1.
   award, 30,225-226,374
                                            Seamans, ’Dr. Ro
    ood-will tour, 54, 61, 66, 69
Scbichter, Dr. Louis B., 128                      157, 331, 354, SOY
                                              Apollo Applications, 59, 171, 229, 278
Schmeck, Harold M., Jr., 33, 52
Schneider, William C., 195                    appointment, 1, 32,43
                                              award given b , 117, 218, 255
Schneiderman, Dan, 9
Schreiber. Dr. Carl. 270                      budget, 24, 2 4 71
Schriever; Gen. Bernard A. (USAF, R et.),     space program, significance, 238-239,
     111, 148, 211, 215, 295, 355                241,335
   award, 129, 137, 168, 315                  U.S.S.R., 44-45
  military technology, 77, 191, 357         “Search” (deep-sea retrieval system),
  retirement, 146, 153,283,285                154-155
                                            “The Search for Extraterrestrial Life”
Schurmeier, Harris M., 9
Schwartz, Murray L., 163                       (sym osium), 189-190
                                            Sears, € E. 250
                                                    .
                                                    !
Schweickart, Russell L , 110, 144,332,379
                       .
Schwinghamer, Robert J., 288                Seattle Times,176
                                            Seattle, Wash., 238
Science, 98, 312, 343
  benefits, 167-168,206, 308                SECOR VI (geodetic satellite), 212
                                            SECOR VII, 378
  human needs, 74, 113, 147, 159, 223,
     329                                    SECOR VII, 378
           287, 328                         SECOR VIIJ, 312
                                            Sedov, Prof. Leonid I., 319-320
Science, 1,33-34,51,85,133,370
                                            See, Elliot M.. Jr. Kdr.. USNRL 14.72.76
  astronomy, 46, 92-93, 339-340
  geology, 150, 208
  interplanetary physics, 86, 133-134,      Segr;, Emilio, 85
                                            Sehlstedt, Albert, Jr.,
     241, 288
  Mars, 187, 241-242, 264                   SEIT. See Satellite Educational and Infor-
  moon, 115, 187                               mational Television.
  Ufo’s, 255, 326                           Seitz, Dr. Frederick, 8, 85, 123-124, 305
Science Advisory Committee (President’s).   Sekkujokki, Sweden, 299
                                            Sell, Ted, 311
  See President’s Science Advisory Com-
                                            Sellman, Mrs. John, 57
  mittee.
                                            Sells, Dr. S. B., 120
“Science Frontiers” (seminar), 221
                                            Senghor, President Leopold Sedar (Scne-
“Science ReDorter” (Tv series). 198
                                               gal), 131
“Scientific and Enbeering Manpower in
                                            Sensor, 3, 21, 61, 153, 175,200
  Communist China, 1949-1963,” 31-32
                                            SEREB. See Soci6tk pour 1’Etude et la
“Scientific Progress and Human Values”
                                               Rkalisation d’Engins Balistiques.
   (Cal Tech convocation), 329
                                            Service Module (Sm), 25, 272, 274, 328
Scientist-astronaut, 302 ’
                                            SETP. See Society of Experimental Test
Scientist-cosmonaut, 327
                                               Pilots.
Scientists, 21, 34, 50-51, 327
                                            Shanghai, China, 339
Scorpius, 89, 188, 241
                                            Shapiro, Prof. Aschcr H., 235
Scott, L/Col. David R. (USAF), 8, 144
                                            Shapiro, Irving I., 376
  Apollo (mission), 110, 332, 379
                                            Shapley, Willis H., 1
  award. 117
                                            Sharp, Dr. Robert P., 329
  GEMINI vIII (flight), 99-102, 104-106,
                                            Shastak, Dr. Arnold, 166
        107-108, 112, 117, 130-131
                                            Shea, Dr. Joseph F., 17, 72, 93, 375
     plans for, 17, 78-79, 92, 94
                                            Sheely, Horace, 263
  trahin 90, 130-131
                                            Sheldon, Dr. Charles S., 11, 99
Scott, Cof: James G. (USAF), 264
                                            Shelton, Dr. Russel D., 120
Sco X-1 (x-ray source), 219, 229
                                            Shen, C. S., 152
Scout (booster), 174, 176, 195, 223, 261
  launch                                    Shenton, Sam, 282
  . __ .
    __
                                            Shepanek, Capt. Raymond A. (IJSNR), 133
     Reentry E, 49-50
                                            Shepard, Capt. Alan B., Jr. (USN), 76, 248-
     USAF satellite, 183,213,258,271,331-
                                               249
        *-”
         .I
        JJd
                                            Shepard, Van H., 354,376, 378
  Reentry Heating Project, 50, 90
                                            Shepherd, Dr. L. E., 45
Scri ps Institute of Oceanography, 52,247
                                            Sherwin, Dr. Chalmers W.,. 154
       Wilfred E., 315
SCUH,
                                            Shoemaker, Dr. Eugene M., 228, 305, 382
    Data Systems, 175
SDS
Seaborg, Dr. Glenn T., 18-19, 56-57, 147,   Short Range Attack Missile (Sram), 334,
                                              341
  273. 365
                                            Shultze, Charles, 258
Seal, 96-97
                                            Sikorsky, Igor I., 60
Seal Beach, Calif., 86
                                            Silverstein, Dr. Abe, 293-294, 362
Sealab Project, 316
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966                           467
                                             Solar T
                          n, 230
                              348
Simpson, J. Wesley, 279
Simpson, Dr. John A., 151
Simpson, Wyatt C., 309                         XB-70,338, 342, 354, 372, 376, 378
Sinkiang Province, Communist China, 382      Sonmiani, Pakistan, 69, 114, 117, 152
Sioux Falls, S. Dak., 40                     Sonnichsen, Dede, 319
Sirius (star), 18, 203                       Sophia, Princess (Spain), 317
Sisakian, Dr. Norair M., 94                  Sorlie, L/C Donald (USAF),  297, 306, 312
Er   and Telescope, 230                      Sounding rocket (see also individual
   kyhook,” 52                                    sounding rockets: Aerobee 150, Aer-
Skylark (U.K. sounding rocket), 235, 299          obee 150A, Aerobee 350, Arcas,
SL-1 (solid rocket motor), 62                     Boosted Arcas, Hasp, Javelin, Nike-
SL-2 (solid rocket motor), 62, 110                A ache, Nike-Cajun, Nike-Tomahawk,
Sla. See S acecraft Lem Adapter.                  dke-Hydac, Orion 11, Wasp), 39-40,
Slattery, -tpart J., Jr., 322                     65-66
Sla ton, Maj. Donald K. (USAF, Ret.), 22,      foreign
  &,   116, 376                                   Fr&ce, 322, 327
Sloan, Alfred P., ,pundation, 343                 Japan, 109, 123, 149,257
“Slush h drogen, 9-10                             Spain, 322, 325
Sm. See gervice module. 25                     international programs, 155-156
Small Business Administration, 89                 ESRO. 124. 235. 299
Smart, Gen. Jacob E. (USAF, Ret), 336, 380        NASAIAr entina, 154, 342, 347
Smirnov, Leonid, 20                                  -Brad, 14, 161, 252,310,320,347,
Smith, Dr. Alexander G., 29-30                         373
Smith, Francis B., 149                              -Fiance, 327
Smith, Lawrence A., 354                             -Greece, 178, 185, 187
Smith, Sen. Margaret Chase, 187                     -India, 235
Smith, Walter D., 354                               -Ja an, 381
Smith’s Ranch, Nev., 288                            -Pa%istan,69, 114-115, 152
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory               -S ain, 15-16, 138
      (Cambridge, Mass.), 251, 260, 287             -$est Germany, 191, 299
  catalog, 107                               South Africa, 7
  research, 22, 144, 284-285                 South America, 7, 139, 152
                                             Southeastern State College, Okla., 89
Smithsonian Institution, 49, 104, 169,
  236, 253, 284, 324                         “Southern Cross” (USN   program), 13
Smull, Dr. Thomas L. K., 128,264             Southern Illinois Univ., 311
Snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary          SOVCOMSAT, 149
  Power) program, 83, 273                    Soviet Civil Aircraft Research Institute,
Snap-8 (nuclear reactor), 24, 244              255
Snap-1OA (nuclear reactor), 13, 28           Soviet Academy of Sciences, 21, 50, 82,
Snap27 (thermoelectric generator), 83             140, 174,201, 224,236
Snap-29 (radioisotope generator), 112, 325     cooperation, 90, 171, 231
SNAF’TRAN-2 (AEC test), 13                     new members, 52-53
Snow, Lord Charles (C. P.), 28-29            Soviet Commission for Exploration and
SNPO. See NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propul-       Use of Outer Space, 46
  sion Office.                               Space biology
Sociktk pour 1’Etude et la Rkalisation         animal experiments, 232, 374
                                  188            dog, 60-61, 84, 102, 179, 237, 318
  d’Engins Balistiques (SEREB),
                                                 mouse, 71
Society of American Scientists, 170
                                                 primate, 187, 322, 336
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE),
                                               atmospheres, artificial, 11,273,285,335
  213, 296,314,
                                                 helium in. 12. 13
Society of Experimental Test Pilots
                                               award, 226,323.
  (SETP),299
                                               biotelemetry, 91, 102, 254
                                               drugs, use of, 318
                                               environment, effects of, 60, 179, 187,
                                                                                 318,



                                               hibernation state, 96-97, 136
468                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

  life support s stem, 1 , 94, 120, 285
                        1                      objectives, 26-27, 70-71, 167, 196, 372
  nutrition, 20$, 335                             scientific and technological, 39, 53,
  physiological monitoring, 60, 254, 433-            187-188. 359
     434                                         social, 12,25, 160,280,362-363
                                               policy, 25, 95, 143, 179, 193, 199, 220
                                               PO~t-A~ollo, 74, 248. 261, 269. 350
                                                              54,
                                               - bu&et decision, 70, '108,. 2101211,
                                                     267, 272-273, 317, 364
                                                  suggested rograms, 17, 92, 99, 103,
                                                     281, 3 3 f
                                               significance, 32, 160, 167-168, 177-178,
  weightlessness                                     187-188, 238-239, 297, 335, 343,
     effects of, 102, 179, 226, 294-295,            367
        318, 322, 361, 374                        international, 141, 148-149,162, 241,
     work during, 61, 170, 294-295, 317-             332
        318                                    U.S. vs. U.S.S.R. See Space race.
S ace Business Daily, 278                      Vietnam war, effect of, 24, 138, 275,
$ace debris, 194, 225                             317, 323, 325
S ace Digest, 280                            Space race, 109-110, 209, 212, 279, 286,
$ace Electric Rocket Test (Sert), 312             303, 373
Space General Cor 177                          booster, 380
Space law, 289, 3 8 '                          criticism, 301, 328, 365
S ace Law and Government, 289                  manned space flight, 79, 316, 334, 356,
$ace law treaty, 330                              373
  U.N. consideration, 246, 248, 250, 276,      moon, 44, 314
     291, 368-369, 370, 377, 386               post-Apollo, 70, 138, 162, 307
  U.S. draft proposal, 169, 171, 205, 216,   Space rescue, 262,269
     218                                       need for, 111-112, 145-146, 273
  U.S.S.R. draft, 312                          proposal, 78, 297
Space medicine. See S ace biology.             test, 164-165, 192, 336
Space, military use of, H35-136, 147-148,    Space results (see also Earth; Moon; Mars;
     221, 248                                     Venus; individual probes satellites,
  communications, 306                             sounding rockets, and Apollo and
  manned space flight, 357, 381-382               Gemini flights)
  nuclear detection, 24, 35, 322               astronomy, 92, 151-152, 174, 188, 219,
  potential uses, 200, 216, 220, 335, 370         229, 230, 348
  reconnaissance, 289                          communications, 20, 88, 163, 372-373
  space station, 368                           earth science, 144, 228, 236, 313
Space Nuclear Propulsion Office. See           medicine, 177, 309
  NASA-AEC S ace Pro ulsion Office.            meteoroid detection, 205-206
Space, eace&l use oE 23, 60-61, 291-           meteorolog 185, 257, 271
  292, %7-358.                                 oceanograpty, 33
Space rogram, national (see also indi-         ph sics, 133-134, 140-141, 144,
                                               radiation,
     vilual programs, such as Apollo                       51, 136-137, 173
     program, etc.)                            social science, 297, 329, 343, 366
  accomplishments, 35, 53, 70, 125, 319,       technology, 25, 88-89, 92, 209, 238-
        324                                       239,329, 351-360
     international, 141, 304                 Space Research: Directions for the Future,
     management, 249                           17, 39, 53
     manned s ace flight, 95,246,314,344,    Space station (see also Manned Orbiting
        357.3ip2                               Laboratory), 180,352,357,368,373-374
  budget, 23-24,26-27,41, 70, 224            Space suit, 203, 226, 301, 317-318, 336
  cost Of, 338-339, 362                      Space tools, 17-18, 40, 78-79, 270
  criticism, 7, 32, 109-110, 131, 210-211,   Space Tracking and Data Acquisition
     220,232-234,266267,366                    Network (STADAN), 70, 257, 307
  education, benefits to, 20, 35, 53, 54,    Spacecraft (see also individual spacecraft,
     238-239                                      such as Apollo, Gemini, Lunar Or-
  employment, 13,56,93,295                        biter, Luna, Mariner, Surveyor, etc.),
  international cooperation. See Inter-           78, 170,
     national coo eiation.                     braking, 279, 339
  Johnson, Presignt Lyndon B., 35, 162,        design, 46,127, 132, 167, 176, 192, 197,
     169, 258, 297. 303, 375                      204, 368
  lunar landing. See Moon, landing.            development testing, 30, 39, 42, 132,
  manned space flight. See Manned space           175, 185, 328
     fight.                                    electrical systems, 27, 82, 119-120, 134
  military, 35, 111, 135, 153, 196, 200        emergency equipment, 40,78
                                                                                  469
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966




  equipment, 6, 11, 12, 57,
     149, 178, 234,
  extravehicular equipment, 29, 78, 246
  heatina. 112. 307                         “Stepping Stones to Mars” meeting, 119-
                                              ---
  instruGentation, 117, 213, 236              170
  landing system, 35-36, 39, 86, 88, 279,   Sterilizatio              Development Lab-
     284. 380
           ---                                 oratory
     --->
  life support system, 11, 120              Sternberg,
  propulsion. See Engine; Motor, rock-                              D. (USAF, Ret.) 311
                                            Stevenson,
     et; and individual launch vehicles,    Stewart, D              e, 355
     such as Saturn, etc.                   Stewart, Joseph, 151
  reentry control system (see also reen-    Stoddard, Dr. David H., 254
     try), 100, 105, 207, 290               Stoltenberg, Minister of Science (W.
  reusable, 5, 313-314, 374                   Gennany), 303
  space tool, 17-18, 40, 78-79              Stoner, George H., 338
  window, 236                               Stoolman, Leo, 250
                                            Stormfur , Project, 267
Spacecraft Lem Adapter (Sla), 177
                                                    f.
Spacetrack, 225                                          J., 189
                                            Strang,
Spaco, Inc., 41, 130                        Strap. See Star Tracking Rocket Attitude
Spain, 15-16, 58-59, 137-138, 265, 322,       Positioning.
  325                                       Strassman, Dr. Fritz, 259
Spanish Astronautical Assn., 317            Strategic Air Command (SAC), 9, 165
Spanish S ace Commission. See Comisi6n      Strelka (dog), 154
  Nacioni de Investigaci6n del Espacio      Strike 236, 257, 259
            .                                 Edwards AFB, 35
  (CONIE)
Sparkman, Sen. John J., 212                   Kennedy Space Center, 142, 144, 150,
Sparta (reentry measurement program),            239-240, 242, 268, 271
  267                                         United Technology Center, 145, 150
Spectrometer, 18, 111, 129, 274, 277, 347   Strom, Robert G., 116
Sperry, Lawrence, Award, 359                Strong, Dr. John, 141
Sperry Rand Corp., 130                      Stru hold, Dr. Hubertus, 295
   Univac Div., 157, 223                    Stuhfinger, Dr. Ernst, 73, 120, 361
Spica (star). See Alpha Virginis.           Submarine, missile-carr ing, 247, 302
Spilhaus, Dr. Athelstan F., 169             Sub-Aviation (France), i 8 9
Spirit of St. Louis Medal, 166              Sudden Ranch, Calif., 1   1
Spohn, Dr. Clifford A., 286                 Suitland, Md., 268
SPUTNIK i (U.S.S.R. satellite), 17, 312     Sullivan, Walter, 82, 109, 168, 355-356,
SPUTNIK v, 154                                377
SR-71 (long-range reconnaissance air-       Sumi, Ukraine, U.S.S.R., 291
  craft), 129                               Summer Conference on Lunar Exploration
SR-71B (training aircraft), 9                 and Science, 5-6
Sram. See Short Range Attack Missile.       Summerfelt, William A., 354
Sreekantan, B. V., 229                      Sun (see also Ecli se, solar; Solar cell;
SSRC. See Swedish Space Research Com-            Solar wind), 2f6, 239, 287
  mittee.                                     IQSY, 251
Sst. See Supersonic transport.                radiation, 79, 173, 199, 289, 337
STADAN. See S ace Tracking and Data           research, 109, 278, 336, 355
  Acquisition dtwork. 70                      satellite data, 79, 269
                                            Sun, K. H., 289
Stafford, Ma’ Thomas P. (USAF), 72
  Gemini I k A , 206-207, 209, 213, 218,    Sunspots, 129,174, 199,347
        236                                 Suomi, Prof. Verner, 361
     preparation for, 178, 180-181, 198,
      757
  honors,. 225-226, 236, 374-375




                                              contract, 249, 286, 296, 383
                                              cost, 122-123, 289
 470                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

   criticism, 142, 185, 267, 281                   233,236,287,302,306-307,352,373,
   desi and development, 14,16,80,85-              376
      8 9 7 , 122-123, 184, 215, 224-225,        U.S.S.R. wea ons, 270
      226,273,297-298,299,307,332,334,           VENUS n, 8&7
      343, 350, 385                               ZOND III. 81
   foreign, 19, 20-21, 43, 118, 143, 189,      Tata Institute, Bombay, 46, 85
      194, 196,226,233,289,370                 Taub, William P., 103
   funds, for, 19, 24, 80,84, 112, 167, 348    Taylor, Hal, 225
  reservations, 118, 144,272                   Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D. (USAF), 214
   sonic boom, 57, 203, 333, 341, 350.         TD-1 (research satellite), 1 , 239
                                                                            1
Supersonic Transport Authority (pro-           TD-2 (research satellite), 11, 239
                                               Teague, Rep. Olin E., 180, 211, 214, 273,
    osed), 84, 167
“&re-Fire,” Project, 126                          364
Surveyor (program), 5, 39, 75-76, 196-         Technology, 28, 98, 187, 233, 329
   197, 202, 232-233, 340, 372, 373               benefits, 66, 74, 113-114, 159, 191, 215,
Surveyor (spacecraft), 39,4445,131-132,              253,334
   175,185,330                                    g a p 15
SURVEYOR I (lunar probe), 209, 212, 215,          mi itary, 77
     246,262,313,333, 373                         misuse of, 206
  instrumentation, 202, 296                       sharing of, 355
  launch, 197-198                              Technoltgy utilization, space, 61-62, 88-
  lunar landing, 203-204, 38&385                  89, 167, 238-239, 281, 286, 287, 308,
  photograph enhancement, 263                     328. 329
  reactivation, 226, 316, 325, 341             Technolog- Week (formerly Msie and
                                                                               isls
  results, 228, 235,249                           Rocketsf
“Surveyor I-A Preliminary Report,” 235            Mol, 348
SURVEYOR II (Surveyor B), 2%                      Pert, 268
SV-SD (lifting-body vehicle), 378                 space medicine, 335
SV-SP (manned lifting-body vehicle), 152-            France, 361
    Cn
   1
                                                     Japan, 3
   133
Sweden, 125, 174, 210, 239, 299, 318                 US., 11, 24, 72, 76, 112, 214, 272-
Swedish Space Research Committee (SSRC),                273. 307-308. 334. 352
  51                                                 U.S.S:R., 232, 285 ‘
Swetnick, Dr. Martin J., 344                      Webb, James E., 249
Swigert, John L., Jr., 127                    Tektite, 139, 208, 324
Sydney, Australia, 96                         Teledyne Systems Co., 234
Sydney (Australia) Univ., 251                 Telescope, 28, 39, 46, 47, 239, 241, 263,
Sylvania Electronic Systems, 254                 268, 289-290, 303, 329
Symington, Sen. Stuart, 288                   Television
SYNCOM I1 (communications satellite), 133-       educational, 256, 270, 370-371
  134,362                                        laser beam use in, 310
SYNCOM 1 1 362                                   space probe, use of, 11, 59-60, 86-87
         1,
Syracuse Univ., 237                              via satellite, 12, 69, 86, 96, 162-163,
System Development Corp., 370                        179, 287
Systems engineering, approach to social       Teller, Dr. Edward, 334
  problems, 252                               Tempel-Tuttle Comet, 220
Syvertson, Clarence A., 258                   Temperature, 61-62, 141
                                              II Tempo, 205
                                              Tennessee, Univ. of, Space Institute, 316
                    T                         Teplinskiy, M /G B. (U.S.S.R.), 147
                                              Tepper, Dr. Morris, 43
T-38 (jet trainer), 211                       Tereshkova, Valentina. See Nikolayeva-
Tabanera, T e 6 l o M., 253                      Tereshkova, Valentina.
                    -
Tad. See Thrust-Augmented Delta.              Test ban treaty. See Nuclear test ban
Taipei, 72                                       treaty.
Taiwan, 54                                    Texas, 297
Talyzin, Nikolay, 376                         Texas A&M Univ., 365
Tass                                          Texas Atomic Energy Commission, 196
  cosmonaut, 307-308, 330                     Texas Christian Univ., 120
  Cosmos launchings, 60-61,75,110,152,        Texas Instruments. Inc.. 239.
     223                                      Texas Technical College; 334
  LUNAS IX, X, XI, ~ n and XIII, 41-42, 47,
                         ,                    Texas, Univ. of, 56
     48-49, 122, 127, 129, 312, 326-327,      Teweles, Sidney, 199
     355, 381                                 Thailand, 54, 72, 165,222
  US. s ace program, 104                      Thiokol Chemical CorD.. 112. 177,265.328
                                                                                ,    I


  u.S.S!k. space program, 16-17, 139,           Reaction Motors Dh:, 377
                                                                                      471
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Thomas, Rep. Albert D., 54-55                   stations
Thomas, David F., 78
Thome, P. G., 190
Thompson, Dr. Barbara A., 377
Thompson, Col. John M. (USAF), 333
Thompson, Llewellyn E., 339                          2$1$::299,       307,361
Thompson, Milton O., 47, 237-238, 244,               U.S.S.R., 299, 334
                                              Transit (nav' ational satellite), 302
  264,274,284, 301
Thompson, R. P., 253                          TRANSIT IV-A ?navigation satellite), 227
Thom son, Robert F., 354                      Transportation, Dept. of, 80, 227, 274,
T h t booster) (see also Long Tank Thor),
  or )                                           279,321, 340,348, 362
  ".-                                         Trendex oll, 265,362
  17s
                                              Trimethy!-alurninum (m), 152, 292,
                                                                            117,
Thor-Agena (booster), 61
   B. 178                                        347
                                              Trip e, Juan T,, 137, 297
   D 50, 91, 121, 132, 188, 221,262, 297,
      ;
                                              T r u j 196,285,294,374
        341, 382
                                                         ski, Gerald M., 81
Thor-Altair (booster), 9
                                              Ti:rc.,        235, 375
Thor-Burner I1 (booster), 292
Thor-Delta (booster), 11, 41, 70, 310         TRW Systems, Inc., 24-25, 142, 267, 306
                                              Tsara kin, Sem on K., 85,97
Thrust-AugmentedImproved Delta (Tad),
                                              Tu-& (U.S.S.6. airliner), 256
   269, 331
Tiros (meteorological satellite), 24          Tu-114 (U.S.S.R. transport aircraft), 58
TIROS VII (meteorological satellite), 220     Tu-144 (U.S.S.R. supersonic transport),
Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos), 41, 70,        196, 226
                                              Tu-154 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 256
   176, 310
Titan I1 (booster), 99, 164, 202, 206, 248,   Tulsa, Okla., 177
                                              Tupolev, Andrei N., 196
   318. 353
T i t a n - h (booster), 24, 220, 305, 368    Turkey, 227
                                              Twiss, Robert L., 176
Titan 111-B-Agena,252, 373
Titan 111-C (booster), 113, 216, 219, 276,    Tydings, Sen. Joseph D., 12
                                              Tyler, Gordon H., 283
   338. 359, 385
Titanium, 224, 308                            Tyura Tam, U.S.S.R., 294
Titov, L/C Gherman S. (U.S.S.R.),135
Tokyo, Japan, 179, 340                                            U
Tokyo Observatory, 219
                                              U-2 (reconnaissance aircraft), 27
Tokyo Univ., 109, 149, 257, 301, 339
Tonkin, Leo S., 55                            Uchinoura Range, Kyushu, Japan, 109,
Toowoomba, Australia, 361                       149, 301, 333, 378
Toronto, Canada, 194                          UCLA. See California, Univ. of, at Los
Toronto, Univ. of, 229                          Angeles.
                                              Udall, Secretary of the Interior Stewart L.,
Torrance, Calif., 156
Tos. See Tiros Operational Satellite.           297, 350
                                              Ufo. See Unidentified fl . g objects.
Toth, Robert, 343
Towers, Adm. John H. (USN), 383               Ugolyek (dog), 6061, g 8 4 , 9 1 , 102,141,
Townes, Dr. Charles H., 31, 97                  147, 179, 318
                                              U.K. See United Kingdom.
Townes-Schawlow patent, 258
                                              U.N. See United Nations.
Trac Calif., 319
                                              Unidentified flying objects (Ufo), 160,176-
Tra Z control, 247
         c
                                                   177, 299, 333, 341, 377
Trailblazer (booster), 330, 369
                                                Georgia, 251
Trans World Airlines (TWA), 159,223,236,
                                                Michigan, 112-113, 116, 122
    242
                                                Ohio, 142
Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
                                                Pennsylvania, 200
    Station (India), 234
                                                USAF, 130,255, 272, 325,326,
Thursday Island, 162
                                                   contract, 172, 315
Tidbinbilla, Australia, 234
Time measurement, 166
                                                                      , 16,   27, 286, 296,

                                                                      ort engine, 109,123,
                                                                      273, 286, 296, 299,
                                              United Aircraft Research Laboratories, 98
                                              United Arab Republic (U.A.R.), 139
                                              United Auto Workers (UAW), 35
472                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

United Kingdom (U.K.), 42, 43, 44, 46,                bases, centers, and commands, such
      115, 136, 330, 347                              as Air Force Systems Command, Arnold
  aircraft, 61, 356                                   Engineering Development Center,
     Concorde, 20-21, 43, 285, 289                     Edwards AFB, etc.)
  cooperation, defense, 40                         aircraft (see also individual aircraft,
  cooperation, space, 73, 133, 155-156,                  such as C-5A, F-111A, X-15, XB-
        239, 267, 287, 299, 322, 329, 377                70, etc.), 9, 113, 166169,253,282,
     ELDO, 156, 189, 190, 211, 214, 220,                 309, 323, 341, 365
        236, 285                                      accident, 28, 211, 214
  House of Commons, 31                             anniversary, 302
  Ministry of Aviation, 356                        award, 113, 129, 137, 168, 232,251
  Ministry of Technology, 28, 356                  booster, 6, 94, 216, 218, 385
  nuclear reactor, 51                              contract, 88, 122, 138-139, 195, 255,
  nuclear test, 31                                       268, 315, 328, 334, 335, 377
  science and technology, 25-26, 28-29                V/Stol and Vtol aircraft, 194, 365
United Nations (U.N.), 135, 169, 171, 216,         coo eration, 128-129, 203, 281, 385
     218,221, 277, 299, 312                        Fligit Safety Review Board, 180, 193
                                                                 .
  Commission to Study the Organization             launch
     of Peace, 181                                    booster, 213, 276, 329-330, 338
  Committee on the Peaceful Uses of                    Hitab test. 108. 115
     Outer Space, 20,28, 32, 94, 258, 282,            missile, 255, 241, 342-343, 367
        287, 291, 386                              lifting-body vehicle, 152-153, 378
     Legal Subcommittee, 237, 246, 248,            missile program, 22, 108, 113, 165, 261,
        250                                           275, 355
  General Assembly, 298, 355, 369, 377             Mol. See Manned Orbiting Laboratory.
  World Meteorological Organization, 89,               177
     113-114                                       motor. solid urouellant. 90. 177
United Press International (UPI), 76, 134,         Office'of AerbGce Research, 326
  233                                              personnel, 54, 57, 127, 146, 199, 259,
United States (see also appropriate Govern-           283, 298, 311, 336, 345
     ment agencies).                               research, 113, 209, 263
  Asian summit conference, 311                   satellite (see also Satellite, unidentified),
  budget, 19,23-24, 33                             121, 146, 216, 331-332, 338, 370
  communications, 83                             sounding rocket, 342
  contract policy, 128                           Scientific Advisory Board, 172
  criticism, 85-86, 131, 288                     spac;lFgram, 90-91, 283, 320-321, 335,
  defense, 40,170,191-192,341,342,343,
                                                   s acecraft recovery, 100
     355
                                                   J f o , 116, 119, 130, 142, 172, 255, 272,
  disarmament, 304
                                                      315, 325, 376-377
  international cooperation, 15-16, 113-
                                                   Vietnam war, 311
     114, 133, 226, 231, 240, 303
                                                 USAF. See U.S. Air Force.
  nuclear weapons, 58,84-85, 342
                                                 USAF Aero Propulsion Laboratory, 78
  research and development, 15, 55, 119,
                                                 USAF Aerospace Medical Div., 295
     154, 179                                    USAF Air Rescue Service, 78
  science and technology, 1,13,22,28-29,         USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, 12,
     33-34,70-71,97-98,99,133,150,                 273, 335
     182, 219, 240, 348-349, 370 *               U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
  space law treaty. See Space law treaty.          Agency, 339
  space program. See Space program,              U.S. Army (USA), 156, 284
     national.                                     aircraft, 106, 131, 187, 253, 281, 309
  transportation (see also Supersonic              missile, 119, 267
     transport), 80, 340, 348                      satellite, 212, 272, 312
United Technology Center, 150                      training, 150
Univac Div. See Sperry Rand Corp.,               U.S. Coast Guard, 114, 278
  Univac Div., 223                               U.S. Comptroller General, 236
Universal Match Corp., 361                       U.S. Congress. See Congress.
Universe, origin, 31, 4 6 4 7
                                                 US. Court of Customs and Patent Appeals,
UPI. See United Press International.
                                                   258
Uprated Saturn I. See Saturn I, Uprated.
                                                 U.S. Geological Survey, 297; 313, 382
Ural Mountains, U.S.S.R., 107
                                                 U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 304
Urban Renewal Administration, 37
                                                 U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce, 9
                                                 U.S. Marine Corps (USMC), 150, 195
                                                 U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, 321
             e            (see also individual   US. Military Academy, 203
                 (USAF)
                                                                                      473
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

U.S. Naval Aerospace Medical Institute,          meteorolo y, 96, 174, 269, 271, 385
  234                                            missile a n i rocket program, 10,181,270,
U.S: Naval Oceanographic Office, 14                 302, 341,355
U.S. Navy (USN), 206, 207, 228                   planet     exploration 2, 40, 75, 81-82,
  agreement, 8, 179                                 86-% 126, 173, i 3 6
                                                 rocket test, 147-148,193,233,275,287,
  aircraft, 106, 131, 195
  contract. 30. 77. 338                             302, 352, 373
                                                 science, 21, 25-26, 117, 146, 337, 377
                                                 space law treaty. See Space law treaty.
                                                 space program. (see also individual robe
                                                                                    SUCK
  macecraft recoven, 207, 244,                         and satellite pro rams,          as
                                                       Cosmos, Luna, dolniya, Proton,
     291, 332, 344
U.S. News & World Report, 372                          Venus, Voskhod, etc.), 16-17, 20,
USNS Croatan, 80-81                                    70, 130, 173, 201, 212, 237, 303,
USNS Kingsport, 134-135                                312, 318, 320-321, 368, 373, 385
USNS Point Barrow, 74, 86                           manned s ace flight, 79, 92, 135-136,
USNS Ran e Recoverer, 87, 178, 185, 187                138, 1&,303, 314, 338-339, 356,
        f
U.S. Pub IC Health Service, 64                         379-380
U.S.S. Benjamin Franklin, 87                     spacecraft, 17, 254, 285, 306, 321
                                                 submarines, 125
U.S.S. Bennington, 185
                                                 supersonic transport, 118,196, 226
U.S.S. Boxer, 86
U.S.S. Guadalcanal, 244, 247                     tracking station, 9, 16, 48, 139, 334
U.S.S. Guam, 290, 293                            weapons, 84-85,97, 161, 181, 191-192,
U.S.S. La Solle, 338                                198, 270, 341, 355,373
U.S.S. Leonard F. Mason, 100, 106              U.S.S. Redstone, 214
                                               U.S.S. Silas Bent, 189
U.S.S.R. (Union of Soviet Socialist Re-
                                               U.S.S. Wasp, 179, 207, 209, 332, 334
     publics) (see also Soviet Academy
                                               US. Weather Bureau, 5, 41
     of Sciences, etc.) 219-220, 289, 294
                                               U Thant, U.N. Secretary Gen., 198
  aircraft, 50, 58, 226, 251, 255-256,291,
     323, 333
  antiaircraft defense. 125. 161
                                                                   V
               171, 17&175, 305, 377
  i%;tZ;Ji, i3a,212,29o, 316
                                               Vaccaro, Michael J., 60, 91
  communications satellite, 149, 152,154,
                                               Vacuum Technology and Space Simulation,
     324, 353, 376
  coo eration, 10, 251, 269, 330, 376            334
                                               Van Allen, Dr. James A., 134
     gance, 221, 226, 227, 261, 334, 348,
        370. 386                               Van Allen radiation belts, 102, 120, 213,
     U.S.,-bO, 96, 109-110, 155-156, 271,        260
                                               Van Dusen Aircraft Sup lies, 308
       303, 308, 339
                                               Vandenberg AFB, Calif. t e e also Western
  cosmonaut. See Cosmonaut.
                                                   Test Range), 11, 195, 294
  Cosmonaut’s Day, 135-136
                                                 launch, 108, 115
  disarmament, 58-59, 84-85, 97
                                                   missile, 275
  launch
                                                   rocket, Arcas, 342
     aerostat, 336
                                                   satellite launch vehicle
     Luna spacecraft, 35, 122, 273, 326-
                                                     Atlas-Agena, 213
        327, 378-379
                                                     Atlas-Agena D, 54, 92, 121, 272,
     satellite                                          Q-V
        Cosmos, 8, 22, 27, 51, 59, 60-61,               53 I
                                                      Atlas D, 240, 370
          75, 104, 110, 130, 144, 152, 175,
                                                      Scout, 146, 183
          190,218,223,235,240,246,252,
                                                      Thor-A ena D, 40, 341
          261,277,294,321,325,337,347,
                                                      Thor-Atair, 9
          352, 356, 366, 372, 378-379
                                                      Titan 111-B-Agena D, 252, 306
        Molniya, 149, 325
                                                 Missile, 22, 66, 115-116
        Proton, 233
     Yantar I (ion propulsion system test),    VANGUARD I (satellite), 106
                                               Varo, Inc., 61
       3.19
                                               Vashkov, V. I., 173
  launchsite, 372
  life science, 11,12-13,60-61,69,84,90,
     91, 94, 102, 136-137, 154, 179, 232,
     285, 306-307, 318, 374
  lunar exploration (see also LUNA IX,etc.),
                                               Veis, Dr. George, 22
     manned, 55, 125, 130, 131, 162, 214,
                                               Vela (nuclear detection satellite), 35, 322
        285, 286, 319-320                                                       I

                                               V e m (research ship), 302
     unmanned, 41-42, 44-45, 46, 47, 48,
                                               Venezuela, 297
        157, 204-205,380-381
474                  ASTRONAUTICS ANID AERONAUTICS, 1966

                                                                 w
Venus (planet), 142,145,157
  atmosphere, 251, 377
  ex loration, 17, 26, 73, 75, 82,            WA-50 (light aircraft), 118
                                        95,
     !47, 159, 268,281, 351, 368              Walker AFB, N. Mex., 279, 284
  life on, 26, 141                            Walker, Cliff W., 58
  rotation, 175                               Walker, Dr. Eric A., 155
                                              Walker, Jose h A., 47, 211, 214, 351
  surface, 16,175
  temperature, 26, 159                        Wall Street $urnal, 28, 219, 250, 350, 380
VENUS 1 (U.S.S.R. interplanetary probe),      Wallops Station (NASA), 41, 312, 315, 383
         1
  51, 75, 86-87, 95                            launch
VENUS 1 1 51, 75, 82, 86-87, 95,                  Pacemaker, 333
         1,
Vershinin, Air Marshal Konstantin                 satellite
  (U.S.S.R.), 136-137                                OV3-IV, 213
Vertical and short takeoff and landing air-       Scanner, Project, 268, 369
  craft. See V/Stol and Vtol aircraft.            Scout (Reentry E), 49
Veterok (dog), 60, 69, 84, 91, 102, 141,          sounding rocket, 252
  147, 179, 318                                      Aerobee 150A, 79, 84, 182, 276
Vetlesen Award, 324, 377                             Aerobee 350,269
Vetlesen, G. Unger, Foundation, 324                  Boosted-Dart. 14
Vienna, Austria, 171, 287                            Javelin, 79, 185, 237,267,299, 313
Vietnam, 216                                         Nike-Apache, 10, 19,56, 127, 132-
Vietnam, North, 355                                    133,214,239,240,274,276,293,
                                                       207
Vietnam, South, 361
Vietnam war, 228, 311, 325                          Nse-Cajun, 25, 39-40, 42-43, 51,
  aircraft, 326                                        161,260,265,307,310
  effects on space budget, 24, 138, 275,            Nike-Tomahawk, 276, 277, 301,
      317, 323, 325, 328                               341. 360
  effects on space law treaty, 237, 277              Orjon'I1,- 342
  opposition to, 246, 366                           Wasp, 210
Vine, Allyn C., 52                                Trailblazer, 330
                                               personnel, 382
Vinogradov, Aleksandr, 50, 140
                                              Wang, Dr. Chiao Jen, 376
Virgin Islands, 152
                                              Wapakoneta, 137
Virginia Associated Research Center, 19,
                                              Warrior Constructors, Inc., 255
  365
                                              Warsaw Convention, 43, 157
Virginia Polytechnic Institute, 365
                                              Washington Board of Trade, 319
Virus control, 64
                                              Washington, D.C., 140,172,271,289,293,
Vitro Gorp. of America, 130
                                                  311, 313, 330, 334
Vivian, Rep. Weston E., 110
                                               awards presented at, 208, 215,232, 294,
Vladivostok, U.S.S.R., 154                        314-315
Vocational Rehabilitation Administration,      meetings, 19, 56, 136, 140, 143, 144,
  222,328                                         150,162-163,172,199,212,214-215,
Vogel, Col. Lawrence W. (USA), 1                  221, 269, 271, 288, 297, 338, 382
Vogeley, Arthur W., 354                        museum, 49,236
Volcano, 299, 313, 316, 374                    news conference, 80, 119
Volunteer Flight Officers Network, 284        Washington, D.C. Business Council, 56
Von Braun, Dr. Wernher, 1,241,298,322,        Washington D i y News, 370
                                                            al
  372                                         Washin ton Evening Star (see also Hines,
Von Eckardt, Wolf, 311                            Wiiiam), 373
                                               editorial,76,106,109,170,183,210-211
Von K h m h , Dr. Theodore, 124,259
                                              Washington (D.C.) National Airport, 13,
Von Markatz, Dr. Hans-Joachim, 210
                                                149, 217
Von Ohain, Hans J. P., 27
                                              Washington Post, 82, 143, 225, 260-261,
VOSKHOD I (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 285, 356
                                                  289. 343
                                                       ._ _
VOSKHOD 11, 92, 107, 321,339, 356                 ~_.
                                               editork, 105, 183, 246, 320-321, 351,
VOSTOK VI, 90
                                                  365, 370
Voyager (program), 113, 171, 198, 244,
                                               interview, 294-295, 311, 341
      279,281, 308, 352, 362                  Washington Society of Investment Ana-
   Planetary Reentry Parachute Program,        lysts, 199
            , 242-243, 279, 340, 352          Washington Sunah Star, 26"; 294, 301
      contract, 275                           Washington (state{ 83
Voyager (spacecraft), 327                     Washin on, Univ. of, 287
                                                     i
                                                     ?
Vreeland, Thad, Jr., 260                      wasp. ee Weightless Analysis Sounding
V/Stol aircraft, 106, 131, 185, 194, 253,      Probe.
   364                                        Wassmer Aviation, 118
Vtol aircraft, 94, 284, 309, 323, 365         Water, 105, 274
                                                                                  475
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Waters, John R., 229                          Westinghouse Electric Corp., 103, 222,
Watertown (N.Y.)                               249, 361, 376
                  Dail Times, 248
                                              Westinghouse Research Laborafories, 289,
Watson, James Craig, Gedal, 150
                                                309
Watson Laboratory, 150
                                              Weston, Ill., 376
Weapon systems, 72, 125, 147-148, 161
                                              Westphal, James A., 277
Wa5her modification, 8, 59, 62, 99, 261,
                                              Whitaker, Ewen A., 116
  Js
   1U
                                              White, Alvin S., 36, 158, 211
Webb, Alvin B., 178
                                              White, L /C Edward H., I1 (USAF), 92, 144
Webb, James E., 1, 60, 73, 79, 132, 140,
                                               Apollo flight, 110,332
    147,381-382
                                               European visit, 54
 A?
  !
  p
  :     applications, 70, 138, 196, 210-
                                               GEMINIIV flight, 17, 104,216-217
    ALL
                                               honors, 9, 208, 232
  appointments by, 166-167,173,275,319,
                                              White, George C., Jr., 336
    336
                                              White House, 50, 77, 101-102, 146, 212,
  award by, 304, 315
                                               293, 301, 303, 328, 354, 356
  award to, 314, 341
                                              White House Committee on Meteorology, 3
  labor a reement, 33
                                              White House Conference on International
  mannet space flight, 43
                                               Cooperation, 258
  nuclear propulsion, 145
                                              White, John Michael, 128
  space cooperation, 133, 138, 289, 303,
                                              White, L/C Robert M. (USAF), 47
    304
                                              White Sands Missile Range (WSMR), N. Mex.
  spac;iFgram, 95, 108, 147, 297, 332,
                                               launch
    U.S.S.R., 70, 301, 316, 323                   Aerobee 150
                                                     atmospheric data, 360, 364
 tribute to, 102,249
Weaner. Herman K.. 315                               booster test, 297
                                                     dayglow measurement, 138
Wei htlek -Anal si; Sounding Probe
                                                     micrometeoroid sampling, 326-327,
 (#as ), 210, 2T4
                                                        350
We' htgssness
                                                     radar test, 171
 ezects of, 102, 179, 210, 226, 295, 318,
                                                     solar astronomy, 187, 331
    322. 361. 374
                                                     ultraviolet astronomy, 40,145, 190,
                                                        241, 242, 295, 352
                                                     x-ray astronomy, 89, 188, 219, 319
                                                  Air-Launched,Air-RecoverableRocket
                                                     (Alarr), 118-119
                                                   Boosted Arcas, 249, 277
                                                  Nike-Apache, 267, 351
West Ford, Project, 35, 376
                                                test
West Palm Beach Facility, Fla., 123, 226
                                                   Athena, 342-343, 367
West Virginia, 341
Westbury, N.Y., 108                                Chaparral, 267
                                                   Voyager parachute, 279, 284, 340,
Western Air Lines, 159
                                                     352, 370
Western Operations Office (WOO) (NASA),
                                              White, Gen. Thomas D., Space Trophy,
 215
                                                 ___
                                                 2.12
Western Support Office (WSO) (NASA), 215
                                              Whitten, James R., 126
Western Test Range (WTR) (see also
                                              Wildt, Ru ert, 82
    Vandenberg AFB, Calif.)
                                              Wilford, 6 h n Noble, 45
                                                                     -
 launch
                                              Will Rogers (missile-carrymng submarine),
    lifting body, SV-5D, 378
                                               247
    missile, 66
                                              Williams, Clifton C., Jr., 379
    satellite, 153, 178,222, 284, 310, 321,
                                              Williams, G. P., 348
          349
                                              Williams, George K., 296, 314
       launch vehicle
                                              Williams, John J., 354
          Atlas-Agena D, 20, 54, 106, 143,
                                              Williams, B /G Robert R. (USA), 281
             178, 208, 212, 238, 268, 293,    Williams. William W... 296.314
                                                                          .
            312,319, 367                      Wilson, Andrew, 143
          Scout, 33, 116, 258, 271
                                       132,
                                        382
                                       gena

         Titan 111-B-Agena D, 373
 Western Union International, Inc., 176,
  321
 Western Union Telegraph Co., 341
476                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Wing, aircraft                                   No. 2, 182, 231, 247, 257, 263, 278,
 delta, 225                                         351
                                                 No. 3, 242, 258, 271, 292, 351, 357
 flexible, 156
 variable-swe 116, 215, 307, 383              pilots, 47, 211, 246, 359
Wingert, L o w ~ ~ T . ,
                    114                       record, 62, 211, 351,385
Wings Club, 137                               test, 182
Winston, Donald C , 356
                  .                              accelerometer, 279, 336
Winter, Frank H., 103                            base dra ,247, 278-279
Wisconsin, 69                                    electricaf loads, 237, 275
Wisconsin State Chamber of Commerce,              lass, nonglare, 237, 252
  227                                            feat, 278
W&yonsin, Univ. of, 132,182,328,361              horizon scanner, 252, 263, 275
WMO. See World Meteorological Organiza-          micrometeoroid, 252, 263, 275, 292
  tion.                                          pilot checkout, 258, 313, 357
Wolff, Rep. Lester L., 165                       radiometer, 292, 336
Women as astronauts, 7, 107, 324-325             stability, 182, 279, 357
WOO. See NASA Western Operations Office.         star tracker, 247, 263
Wood, Clotaire, 232, 322                    X-22A (V/Stol aircraft), 106
Wood, David S., 260                         XB-70 (supersonic aircraft), 114, 385
Woodcock, Gordon R., 22                       accident, 211, 263-264
                                              flight, 5,16,136,158-159,183-184,338,
Woodland, Ga., 176
Woods Hole, Mass., 39, 53                        342, 354, 372, 376, 378
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, 52      XB-7OA, 183
                                            XC-142A (V/Stol aircraft), 182
Woodward and Lothrop, Inc., 77
Wooldridge, Dean E., 235                    XE (nuclear rocket engine), 336
Woollard, Dr. George P., 38, 39             Xi, Ze-zong, 339
Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, 123,       X-ray (see also Astronomy, x-ray), 79, 174,
  190, 348                                       187, 219, 373, 385
Worden, Capt. Alfred M. (USAF), 127           flux, 87
                                              sources, 89, 188, 229
World Affairs Council, 241
World Federation of Democratic Youth
  congress, 214                                                 Y
World Journal Tribune, 311
World Magnetic Surve 64                     Yak-40(U.S.S.R. airliner), 256
World Meteorological Zay, 89, 113, 133      Yale Club, 314
World Meteorological Organization (WMO),    Yale Univ.. 190. 252
  113-114, 210, 326                         Yale Univ.'Observatory, 220
World War 11, 311                           Yangel, Mikhail K., a 4
                                            Yantar I (U.S.S.R. automatic ionospheric
World Weather Watch, 114, 133, 326
Worthin ton, Minn., 161                       laboratory), 339, 385
Wright Ifrothers Lecture, 26                Yardley, John F., 354
                                            Yarymovich, Dr. Michael, 150
Wright Brothers Medal, 296, 314
Wright, Orville, 377                        Yegorov, Dr. Boris B., 84, 147, 249, 285
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, 27, 203, 284,   Yegorov, Pyotr, 327
                                            Yegorychev, Nikola 20
  294, 309, 326, 353
                                            Yeremin, A. V., 3 1 g
Wright, Robert, 371
                                            Yeshiva Univ., 365
Wright, Wilbur, 377
                                            YF-12A (reconnaissance aircraft), 28, 251
WSMR. See White Sands Missile Range.
                                            Yomiuri Shimbun. 45
wso. See NASA Western Support Office.
                                            Young, Dr. C. Gilbert, 209
Wyatt, DeMarquis D., 1, 351
                                            Young, Cdr. John W. (USN), 240, 246, 249,
Wydler, Rep. John W., 108, 164, 279
                                              255, 299, 379
Wyld, James H., 377                         Young, John D., 27, 188
Wyndham, Dr. John D., 230,253               Young Men's Business Club of Greater
                                              New Orleans. 247
                                            Young, Sen. Milton R., 167
                   x                        Young, Robert B., 235
                                            Yttrium-aluminum-gaet crystal (Yag),
                                              -".
XV-4A hummingbird") (Vtol aircraft),          9no
  365                                       Yugoslavia, 165, 231
XV-SA (V/Stol aircraft), 253                Yurovsky, Vladimir, 46
XV-6A (V/Stol aircraft), 131
X-15 (rocket research aircraft), 15, 129                        Z
  fiight, 47, 62,282,385
     No. 1, 168, 238, 252, 263, 275, 288,   Zabelin, Igor, 384
       313                                  Zahner, Donald, 224
                                                                                 477
                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1966

Zemlya i Vseknmya, 377                      Zia Corp., 235
Zenith Radio Corp., 310                     Zimmerman, Fred L., 350
Zero Defects Achievement Award, 131         Zimmet, Donald, 250
                                            Zond (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 73
Zero Defects Program, 353
                                            ZOND 111 (U.S.S.R. space probe), 8142,305,
Zero (zero gravity) (see also Weightless-
                                              333
  ness), 121, 179, 210, 299
                                            Zuckert, Eugene M., Trophy, 129
Zero Length Launch (Zell) platform, 111
                                            Zwayer, James T ,28
                                                             .
Zeta Ophiuchi (star), 190, 241
        NASA HISTORICAL PUBLICATIONS

    HISTORIES:
Robert L. Rosholt, An Administrative History of NASA, 1958-1963, with
    Foreword by James E. Webb, NASA SP-4101, 1966; for sale by Supt.
    of Documents ($4.00).
Loyd S. Swenson, James M. Grimwood, and Charles C. Alexander, This New
    Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, NASA SP.4201, 1966; for sale
    by Supt. of Documents ($5.50).
    CKRONOLOGIES SPECIAL STUDIES :
                   AND

Aeronautics and Astronautics: An American Chronology of Science and
    Technology in the Exploration of Space, 1915-1960, compiled by Eugene
    M. Emme with Foreword by Hugh L. Dryden, Washington: NASA, 1961
     (out of print).
Aeronautical and Astronautical Events of 1961, with Foreword by James E.
     Webb, published by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics,
     1962 (out of print).
Astronautical and Aeronautical Events of 1962, with Foreword by George L.
     Simpson, Jr., published by the House Committee on Science and Astro-
     nautics, 1963; for sale by Supt. of Documents ($1.00).
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1963, with Foreword by Hugh L. Dryden, NASA
     SP-4004,1964; for sale by Supt. of Documents ($1.75).
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1964, with Foreword by Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,
     SP-4005, 1965; for sale by Supt. of Documents ($1.75).
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1965, with Foreword by James E. Webb, NASA
     SP-4006, 1966; for sale by Supt. of Documents ($2.25).
Project Mercury: A Chronology, by James M.Grimwood with Foreword by Hugh
     L. Dryden, NASA SP-4001, 1963; for sale by Supt. of Documents
     ($1.50).
Mae Mills Link, Space Medicine in Project Mercury, with Foreword by
     Hugh L. Dryden and Introduction by W. Randolph Lovelace 11, NASA
     SP-4003, 1965; for sale by Supt. of Documents ($1.00).
Historical Sketch of NASA, NASA EP-29, 1965; for sale by Supt. of Docu-
     ments ($.25).
                                           GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: l967--0   261-497
                                    *US.



                                                                                       479
       "The aeronautical and space activities of the United States shall be
                                       .
     conducted so a to contribute . . to the expansion of human Knowl-
     edge of phenomena in the atmosphere and spare. The Administration
     shall provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination
     of information concerning its actiuifies and the results thereof!'
                                           AERONAUTUS SPACE A T
                                                             C     OF 1958
                           -NATIONAL                AND




TECHNICAL REPORTS: Scientific and technical information considered
important, complete, and a lasting contribution to existing knowledge.
TECHNICAL NOTES: Information less broad in scope but nevertheless of
importance as a contribution to existing knowledge.
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS: Information receiving limited distribu-
tion because of preliminary data, security classification, or other reasons.
CONTRACTOR REPORTS: Scientific and technical information generated
under a NASA contract or grant and considered an important contribution to
existing knowledge.
TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS: Information published in a foreign
language considered to merit NASA distribution in English.
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS: Information derived from or of value to NASA
activities. Publications include conference proceedings, monographs, data
compilations, handbooks, sourcebooks, and special bibliographies.
TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION PUBLICATIONS: Information on tech-
nology used by NASA that may be of particular interest in commercial and other
non-aerospace applications. Publications include Tech Briefs, Technology
Utilization Reports and Notes, and Technology Surveys.




   Details on the availability of these publications may be obtained from:



       SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INF
                                                                    I NISTR AT! 0N
                  ONAUTICS AND
                                           D.C. 20546
                          Washinsion,