                                                   NASA SP-4016




ASTRONAUTICS AND
AERONAUTICS, 1971
  Chronology on Science, Technology, and Policy




                        Text by
            Science and Technology Division
                  Library of Congress




                     Sponsored by
                 NASA Historical Office




      Scientific and Technical Information Ofice1972
      NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
For sale by the Superintendentof Documents
U S Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402
 ..
Price (paper cover) $3.80
Stock Number 3300-00483
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 6S-60308
                              Foreword
     This volume is the eleventh in NASA’s   series of annual chronologies of
 astronautics and aeronautics. The intent is to provide a preliminary his-
 torical reference which at least identifies, orders, and offers partial docu-
 mentation for key events of the year.
     One of the curious aspects of these chronology volumes is that the very
 process of documenting NASA’s portion of them reveals not only continuities
 but also distinctive patterns in the unfolding events. Each year has seemed
 to emerge with characteristics of its own. The year 1971 was no exception.
 As NASA’s   record unfolds in these pages, it can clearly be seen as a transi-
 tional or bridging year. On the one hand many on-going programs demon-
 strated their value in solid accomplishments: Apollo 14 and Apollo 15
 brought manned lunar scientific exploration to dramatic maturity ;Mariner 9
 went into orbit around Mars after its 400-million-kilometer journey and
 began its extensive photography of that fascinating nearby planet; O S 0 7
 discovered “polar caps” on the sun; in aeronautics jet aircraft equipped
 with the experimental supercritical wing made 27 successful research flights
 and the quiet jet engine program was successful in its initial tests.
    On the other hand, the shape of the next decade of the space program
 took much firmer shape. It became clear that after a decade in which the
 moon was the major focus of the U.S. space program, the next ten years
 would emphasize earth-orbital programs geared to intensive study of our
homeland in the cosmos, the planet Earth. In manned spaceflight, even as
the final preparations were underway for the final two Apollo lunar mis-
sions, all flight systems for Skylab were in final manufacturing stages or in
checkout; another year’s intensive study by NASA and industry had refined
and hardened the design of the space shuttle to the point that we could ask
Administration approval to proceed, confident that a reusable, cost-effective
space transportation system could be built.
    In unmanned space programs, the first Earth Resources Technology
Satellite was readied for its launch in 1972, while aircraft flights were test-
ing its remote sensing devices. In aeronautics, the joint Department of
Transportation-NASA study of national civil aviation R&D requirements led
to the contract for design of the experimental STOL transport aircraft.
Administratively, the quintupling of funds for space technology transfer to
the civilian economy and the establishment of the NASA Office of Applica-
tions were other indications of the increased priority for practical benefits
from space research. While all of the foregoing was accomplished within
the constraints of the lowest space budget since 1962, congressional ap-
proval of an F 1972 budget that was slightly larger ended the trend of
                 Y
progressively smaller space budgets that had begun in 1967. This was taken
in NASA as endorsement for the new stable realignment of the space program
toward the needs of man on earth for the decade ahead.
    I commend to you, in the pages that follow, 1971, the year of transition.
                                                         James C. Fletcher
                                                             Administrator
                             National Aeronautics and Space Administration
October 31, 1972

                                     iii
                           Contents
                                                                   PAGE

Foreword ...............................................             iii
   NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher
            .............................................            vii
Illustrations
Preface .................................................            ix
January ................................................              1
February ................................................            35
March ..................................................             59
April ...................................................            93
     ....................................................           119
May
June ....................................................           151
July ....................................................           185
August ..................................................           215
September ...............................................           245
October .................................................           275
November ...............................................            305
December ...............................................            337
Summary ...............................................             365
Appendix A: Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights,
 a Chronicle for 1971 ....................................          371
                                                        ........    407
Appendix B: Chronology of Major NASA Launches, 1971
Appendix C: Chronology of Manned Space Flight, 1971 .........       411
Appendix D : Abbreviations of References ....................       415
Index and List of Abbreviations and Acronyms ................       419




                                   V
                                                M NOT FIL
                                 AGE

                            Illustrations
                                                                         PAGE

Dr. George M. Low and Dr. Wernher von Braun watch Apollo 14
 launch activities in Firing Room 2 ........................              26
                                                 .................
Saturn V propels Apollo 14 toward the moon                                26
The modularized equipment transporter leaves tracks across the
  lunar surface ...........................................                28
Scientists examine a seismic reading of the S-IVB impact on the
  moon .................................................                   28
Apolb 14 astronauts relax in the recovery raft after splashdown. ..        31
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb congratulates test pilot Thomas McMurtry
  after the first flight of the supercritical wing on the TF-8A ......    66
Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin and U.S.S.R. Premier Nikita
 Khrushchev respond to crowds celebrating the first manned space
  flight-10 years ago ....................................                100
Dr. James C. Fletcher is sworn in as
                                 NASA Administrator by Judge
  James A. Belson as President Nixon, Mrs. Fletcher, and Dr.
  George M. Low watch ...................................                 114
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space, stands
  by the plaque marking Launch Complex 5/6 in ceremonies 10
 years after the Freedom 7 flight ..........................              123
President Kennedy-May 25, 1961-urges Congress to commit the
  United States to landing a man on the moon .................            143
                                                       ............       149
The Mariner 9 spacecraft and its flight path to Mars
                                      ............................
Interior of the U.S.S.R.’s SaZyut 1                                       155
Lee Scherer, Director of NASA’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office,
  exchanges lunar samples with Soviet Academy of Sciences Presi-
  dent Aleksander P. Vinogradov ............................              159
President Nixon and Secretary of Agriculture Clifford M. Hardin
  are briefed on the Corn Blight Watch Experiment ............            169
Apollo 15 prelaunch activities : NASA Administrator James C.
  Fletcher talks with NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders,
 L/G Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), and NASA Deputy Associate Ad-
 ministrator for Planning Wernher von Braun .................             202
The lunar roving vehicle Rover on the moon near Hadley Rille, with
  Astronaut David R. Scott .................................              204
Astronaut James 3 Irwin scoops a trench in the lunar sur€ace ....         205
                 .
The Apolb 15 command and service modules with the SIM bay orbit
 the moon ..............................................                  206

                                         vii
                                                                               PAGE
                                                      ...............
Apollo 15 CM splashes down on two parachutes                                   208
NASA’s experimental, quieter jet aircraft engine is checked out just
                       .. . .. ... .. ... . ... ..
 before noise tests . .. . ..        . . . . . .. . . . . . . .                24J
The “Genesis rock” collected on the moon by the Ap0110 15 mission              258
A white light coronagraph of solar streamers with inset of the Os0 7
                                ..... . .... .......... . .....,...            270
  Orbiting Solar Observatory
                                                                           .
Interior of the 1-g training model of Skylab’s Orbital Workshop.               285
                                                          . . . . . . ..
Mariner 9 photo of a sinuous rille on the surface of Mars                      316
One of man’s first closeup photos of the Martian moon Phobos .. . .            317
Nix Olympica, gigantic volcanic mountain on Mars . . . .. .. . . .. ..         317
The descent apparatus of the U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, which landed a
                                    .. .          .                 .. .
  capsule on the surface of Mars . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . ..       338

                                                        . .. ...... .. . ..
                        Space Activity, 1957-1971                              366
Graph-US.-U.S.S.R.
Table-Summary of Soviet and United States Payloads by Mission
             . . .. . . .. . . . .                    . . . . . . . .. .
            . . . . . . ... . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .
  Category                                                                     367




                                      viii
                              Preface
   A chronicle is not a history explaining “whys” and “wherefores” in
refined literary form. But a reference of immediate usefulness is provided
by a chronology attempting to be comprehensive, with documentation to
available sources. Astronautics and Aeronautics for 1971, the eleventh
annual volume so compiled, also helps give future historians a running
start on events in aerospace science and technology gleaned from the vast
contemporary literature. More detailed chronology will be derived from
historical research in the primary document sources as well as from oral
interviews concerning pivotal events not necessarily committed to paper
form. This volume is thus but a first step in the historical process.
   One of the intrinsic features of this annual chronology is the inclusion
of policy statements, some commentary on the impact of technology and
social concerns, and biographical notes which amplify the central story of
hardware, programs, and science activities. It covers worldwide aerospace
events. As with earlier volumes the reader is advised to make use of the
detailed index for subjects of particular interest. It has been somewhat
surprising that a few readers find it of value to read through the entire
volume. A concise chronology does not seek high literary marks other
than brevity, accuracy, and source citation to assist additional research.
   General editor of this volume was the Deputy NASA Historian, Frank W.
Anderson, Jr., and the technical editor was Mrs. Carrie E. Karegeannes.
The entire NASA Historical Office participated in source selection, review,
and publication. Archivist Lee D. Saegesser collects current documentation.
The Science and Technology Division of the Library of Congress, under
an exchange of funds agreement, drafts monthly segments in comment
edition form, which are circulated for corrections and use. At the Library
Mrs. Patricia D. Davis, Mrs. Carmen B. Brock-Smith, and Mrs. Shirley M.
Singleton carry principal responsibility. At the end of the year, the entire
manuscript is reworked to include comments received and recent additional
information. Arthur G. Renstrom of the Library of Congress prepared the
extensive index, which is indispensable to the usefulness of a chronology.
The index serves also as a glossary of abbreviations and acronyms used
in the chronology.
   Appendix A, “Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights, 1971,”
Appendix B, “Chronology of Major NASA Launches, 1971,” and Appendix C,
“Chronology of Manned Space Flight, 1971,” were prepared by Leonard
C. Bruno of the Library staff. Appendix D, “Abbreviations of References,”
was prepared by Mrs. Brock-Smith.
   Without the validation throughout NASA and other Federal agencies, the
content of this volume would be less reliable and less nearly complete.
Comments, additions, and criticisms are always welcomed by the NASA
Historical 05ce.

                                                          Eugene M. Emme
                                                           NASA Historian

                                     ix
                             January 1971


January I : Discovery of galaxies Maffei 1 and Maffei 2 about 3 million
    light years from earth was reported in Astrophysical Journal by team
    of Univ. of California at Berkeley, Cal Tech, and Carnegie Institution
    astronomers headed by Robert Landau of Univ. of California at
    Berkeley. Galaxies previously had been obscured by interstellar dust
    in Milky Way. Team had begun study after Landau read 1968 report
    of Italian astronomer Paolo Maffei that two strange objects had been
    observed on infrared photo Maffei made of region between constella-
    tions Perseus and Cassiopeia. Using Mount Palomar and Lick Observa-
    tory telescopes and advanced astronomical tools and research tech-
    niques, team had located galaxies twice as far from earth as Andromeda,
    nearest galaxy to Milky Way. Team believed brighter of new galaxies
    might be larger than either Milky Way or Andromeda and thus pos-
    sibly largest member of local group of galaxies, measuring 50000 to
    100 000 light years in diameter. (Astrophysical Journal, 1/1/71,
    L25-31)
  Washington Post editorial commented on “verbal violence” at Dec. 26-31,
9

    1970, AAAS convention in Chicago: “It should not be beyond the power
    of scientists to restore reason to its normal throne at their conventions.
    They had better set about doing so without further paltering or delay-
    by calling in the police if necessary to eject disrupters and impose
    order. It is a scientific fact, we beIieve, that only a single speaker can
    be heard at a particular time in a particular place. Those who want
    to hear him should be free to do so; those who do not should be free
    to go away. This is not alone the basis of science; it is also the
    essence of freedom.” (W Post, 1/1/71, A18)
January 2: GAO sent report to Congress that North American Rockwell
    Corp. stood to receive extra $1.5 million for beating target costs on
    NASA contract to develop F-1 rocket while, actually, target cost had
    been overstated originally by $5 million. NR had not used most cur-
    rent cost data available. GAO recommended that NASA seek adjustment
    in lees to NR and ensure that cost estimates in existing and future
    contracts were based on accurate, complete data. Report included NR
    statement of disagreement with findings and recommendations. (Beck-
    ler, W Post, 1/3/71, A8)
  USAF long-range planners were advocating DOD development of pilotIess
    combat aircraft, Business Week reported. DOD had consulted USAF,
    USN, and NASA about operational robots and had talked with RAND
    Corp., Aerospace Corp., and Mitre Corp. Ryan Aeronautical Div. of
    Teledyne, Inc., Boeing Co., Northrop Corp., and Cessna Aircraft Co.
    also had given DOD their views. Experts felt existing technology used
    in unmanned spy aircraft made pilotless combat aircraft possible. DOD
    had approved experimental hardware and flight tests. (Bus Wk,1/2/71)

                                      1
January 4                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

January 4 : NASA was looking at air bases in the Carolinas, south Florida,
    and the Bahamas as possible landing site for space shuttle rocket
    launched from KSC, UPI said in Philadelphia Inquirer. NASA engineers
    also were considering refueling shuttle booster’s 1st stage in flight
    so that it could return to launch site for landing, like aircraft. ( P Znq,
    1/4/71 )
* Discovery of cloud of hydrogen gas 80 billion km (50 billion mi) long
    and traveling through space at 210 000 km per hr (130 000 mph) in
    different direction and at 60” angle from solar system was reported
    in Washington Post. In interview Dr. Gary Thomas, head of Univ. of
    Colorado team of astronomers that discovered cloud, had said it would
    take cloud at least 50 yrs to pass by solar system and could take
    forever. “For all we know . . . it’s been there forever.” Cloud was
    discovered first by Ogo 5 in September 1969 and later confirmed by
    same satellite three times. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/4/71, A l l )
  New York Assemblyman Andrew J. Stein told Washington, D.C., press
    conference he had 76 cosponsors for bill which would ban supersonic
    transports from operating at New York‘s John F. Kennedy Interna-
    tional Airport. Bill, if passed, would make it illegal to operate any
    aircraft producing noise at levels above that of existing subsonic jets.
     (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/5/71, A6)
January 5: Mayor Carl B. Stokes of Cleveland, Ohio, and LeRC Director
    Bruce T. Lundin announced that LeRC would assist Cleveland’s Div.
    of Air Pollution Control by identifying and cataloging trace elements
    and compounds in air, determining their concentrations, and finding
    trends or patterns related to weather, season, and geographical area.
     (LeRC Release 71-1)
  Oklahoma Governor Dewey H. Bartlett told state legislature in Oklahoma
    City there was good possibility that Oklahoma could become launch
    site for NASA space shuttle. “Based on the launch azimuth and the
    orbital inclinations . . . Oklahoma provides both a desirable launch
    and recovery location.” (Daily Oklahoman, 1/6/71, 1)
January 6: NASA announced award of $$-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee con-
    tract modification to Ball Brothers Research Corp., Inc., for changes
    in OSO-H Orbiting Solar Observatory to increase experiment capacity.
    Change orders definitized by contract included larger physical volume
    to handle larger experiment packages, improved command system
    security, and increased power for instruments. OSO-H would be
    launched in mid-1971. (NASA Release 71-2)
* Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had rejected Dec. 30, 1970, DOD proposal that
    firm accept $200-million loss on disputed C-SA contract, Lockheed
    Board Chairman Daniel J. Haughton announced at New York press
    conference. Lockheed had chosen to take matter to court. Haughton
    estimated litigation would take two to five years. (Getler, W Post,
    1/7/71, A l )
  Permanent appointment of Gustav E. Lundquist as Associate Adminis-
    trator for Engineering and Development was announced by John H.
    Shaffer, FAA Administrator. Lundquist had been in acting capacity
    since January 1970. David R. Israel, former Deputy Director of
    Defense Communications Planning Group in DOD, had been named
    Director of newly created Office of Systems Engineering Management


                                      2
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 January 6

    and Spencer S. Hunn had been named Director of National Airspace
    System Program Office in FAA. (FAA Release 71-2)
  NOAA said scientific team that studied 23 310 000-hectare (90 000-sq-mi)
    region east of Barbados in summer of 1969 had reached preliminary
    conclusion that dust blown off North African deserts into upper air
    ended in atmosphere over South Atlantic and influenced North Amer-
    ican weather. Scientists, who had hoped to find atmosphere relatively
    free of particulate matter, had discovered instead African dust in
    Barbados air at levels to 5000 m (16000 ft). (O’Toole, W Post,
    1/7/71, A15)
JWUUTY 7: NASA launched series of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets
    carrying GSFC experiments to obtain temperature, .pressure, density,
    and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and
    recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Point
    Barrow, Alaska, reached 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude, with all 19
    grenades exploding as planned. Rocket launched from Wallops Station
    reached 130.9-km (81.3-mi) altitude, with 16 of 19 explosions con-
    firmed by ground. Third rocket was launched from Churchill Research
    Range. (NASA Rpt SRL)
  Release of “Statement of Government Policy on Satellite Telecommunica-
    tions for International Civil Aviation Operations’’ was announced by
    Clay T. Whitehead, Director of Telecommunications Policy for Execu-
    tive Office of the President. Statement said U.S. would promote pre-
    operational deployment of satellite communications in Pacific in 1973
    and in Atlantic in 1975. DOT and FAA would assume program manage-
    ment responsibility for preoperational and operational systems and
    services. Dept. of State, with DOT, would seek international use of
    preoperational system and initiate cooperative efforts with other nations
    to establish operational system by 1980. U.S. would use commercial
    communications facilities to maximum. U.S. Government would use
    UHF frequency band near 1600 mhz in both preoperational and opera-
    tional satellite air-traffic-control communications. Experimental evalua-
    tion of independent surveillance by satellite should begin with system
    deployment in Pacific and be followed by preoperational evaluation
    in air-traffic-control environment after 1975. Unified program to satisfy
    Government and airline requirements should be adopted to provide
    economic benefits of single program. (EOP Release)
January 8 : Three aerospace teams, including seven European firms inter-
    ested in support roles, submitted proposals to MSFC on preliminary
    design of research and applications module (RAM) proposed for space
    shuttle and space station. Proposals were submitted by McDonnell
    Douglas Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and General Electric Co.
    Team headed by General Dynamics would include MATRA of France,
    ERNO of Germany, SAAB of Sweden, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Fiat
    of Italy. General Electric team would include Messerschmitt-Boelkow-
    Blohm of Germany and Thompson-csF of France. (MSFC Release 71-10)
* HUD had evolved $4-million pilot project to put 1500 unemployed space
    industry technicians and former servicemen to work in model cities
    projects, Washington Post reported. Plan, developed by HUD Assistant
    Secretary Floyd Hyde, would recruit unemployed and give them fast
    orientation courses on urban problems on assumption that aerospace


                                     3
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 8

     skills could be transferred to urban improvement. Hyde proposed to
     start project in March with up to 350 participants and estimated cost
     to Government of about $2000 per person placed in new job. (W Post,
     1/8/71 )
  St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial commented on Dec. 23, 1970, DOD an-
     nouncement that Sprint ABM had successfully intercepted ICBM nose-
     cone over Pacific: Announcement “proved only two things : the military
     establishment recognizes that the wrir in Congress over full deployment
     of the ABM system is far from over; consequently the real target of
     the test firing was not a nose cone but Congressional critics whose
     arguments the Pentagon has yet to refute.” Paper wondered “why the
     secondary Sprints are needed in the allegedly foolproof Safeguard
     system if the Spartan is as successful as the military claims it to be.”
     More puzzling was “how the Pentagon can call the Sprint a success
     when the crew that fired it from a South Pacific atoll was told in
     advance exactly when the nose cone target would be fired.” (St Louis
     P-D, 1/8/71)
January 9: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell,
     and Stuart A. Roosa held press conference at MSC. Astronauts described
     plans for Jan. 31 lunar landing mission and said they were eager to
     ‘fly on what Mitchell called “a more mature spacecraftn in which
     “residual risks go down.” (Lannan, W Star, 1/11/71, A4)
  Economist editorial discussed lunar science investigations : “The growing
     importance of all this peering at, prodding, pounding, baking and
     growing plants upon moon soil is that the results are contradicting
     most of the moon theories of the past 15 years. It is not often that
     scientific concepts are set by the ears, and the piquancy this time lies
     in the way that the bulk of serious scientists originally believed that
     putting men on the moon was an unnecessary extravagance; instru-
     ments and unmanned probes could do the job, they felt, for a frac-
     tion of the cost and none of the risk. But, as it turns out, they could
     not. The instruments that were sent to the moon ahead of the astro-
     nauts did not produce the same results that the actual collection of
     rock samples has done, and it will be interesting to see if the Russians
     have done any better out of the robot shovelling of Luna 16.” (Econo-
     mist, 1/9/71)
January 10: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, energized by solar cells
     after surviving second lunar night on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed
     third exploration operation, moving about 128 m (140 yds) during
     435-hr period. Vehicle had been inoperative since beginning of lunar
     night Dec. 23, 1970, and had been opened to receive solar energy
     Jan. 8. It had been released on surface by Lum 17, which had soft-
     landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 1/11/71, 28; 1/12/71, 35)
  Newspapers reviewed Of a Fire on the Moon by Norman Mailer. In
0

     New York Times Book Review Morris Dickstein said book aimed at
     confrontation with “brave new world of science and technology.”
     Mailer found himself “frustrated at every turn. The event seems pack-
     aged, distant, unapproachable. . . .” Mailer gave “rather depressed
     personal account of his attempt . . . to make an approach to the
     mission, especially to the astronauts and their machines.” Mailer felt
      “betrayed by the gap between his romantic expectations and the gray
     but immense realities. Seeking to understand, he turns the book into

                                     4
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 January 10

    an account of the other America, the Wasp hinterland.” In end
    Dickstein concluded, “This is not perhaps the book on the impact of
    technoIogy that we needed, but it is important nonetheless, and offers
    much to ponder and prey on.” (NYT Book Review, 1/10/71, 1,
    42-45)
        In Washington Sunday Star, Day Thorpe said: “Mailer wasn’t a
     passenger on Apollo 11, but in his motel rooms in Houston and
     Canaveral, and in his home in Provincetown . . . he has put together
     a long and excellent book about the flight, the story not only of what
     the adventure meant to the three astronauts who lived it but, no less
     interesting, what it meant to Mailer himself. The bureaucrats Mailer
    encountered first in hermetic Houston and then in hermetic Canaveral
     were unlike all other bureaucrats. They were infallibly courteous,
    considerate and helpful, and they invariably told the truth.” Mailer
     showed ApoWo 11 astronauts as “three human beings, as similar as
     necessary for their mission, but as unlike one another as experimental
    prototypes should be.” (W Star, 1/10/71, D 6)
* M/G John B. Medaris (USA, Ret.)-first Commanding General of Army
     Ballistics Missile Agency (ABMA) at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville,
    Ala., in 1955 and head of team that launched Explorer 1 Jan. 31, 1958
    -had become an Episcopal priest, National Enquirer reported. He was
     curate of Church of Good Shepherd in Maitland, FIa. (Nut1 Enq,
    1/10/71)
January 11.-Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell,
    and Stuart A. Roosa began preflight semiquarantine at KSC to mini-
    mize their exposure to disease or illness that could delay Jan. 31 liftoff
    toward moon. Astronauts would be restricted to three buildings and
     contacts would be limited to 160 persons, all of whom had undergone
    comprehensive medical examinations. (UPI, W Star, 1/11/71, A9)
  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow,
    Alaska, carried GSFC payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain
    temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by
    detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground.
    Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades
    exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of simi-
    lar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 71. (NASA Rpt SRL)
January 11-14: Second annual Lunar Science Conference in Houston at-
    tracted 750 scientists who had been studying 55.8 kg (123 lbs) of
    lunar material gathered by Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 missions.
       ARC team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced
    that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basalt-
    like mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of pri-
    mordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer
    was melted during first biIlion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history.
    Measurements had been made with ARC magnetometer placed on moon
    by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting
    satellite launched July 19, 1967. (ARC Release 71-2)
       Cornel1 Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications
    found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in
    same process that made near side of moon different from far side.
    Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days
    during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy

                                     5
January 11-14                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers
    had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by
    bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar
    soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold‘s theory of
    “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California
    physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, A l )
       NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned
    robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would
    cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi)
    across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would ren-
    dezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth.
    NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the
    Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon
    with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be
    the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post,
    1/14/71, A l )
       Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, MSC scientist, described laboratory experiment
    in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within
    10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters
    below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in pro-
    tein soup had been exposed to lunar soil.
       Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
    in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on
    moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of
    fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previopsly discov-
    ered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly
    extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9 )
       Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during
    interview that ApoZZo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evi-
    dence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to mag-
    netism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be
    confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electro-
    dynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two
    fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have
    been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71,
    A3 )
       Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of
    Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in MOSCOW,           told con-
    ference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned space-
    craft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R.
    would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of
    Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for
    Lunokhod 1 , Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how
    eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could
    best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move
    in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20
    degrees. The mechanical qualities o€ this car are very good.” Dr.
    Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but
    device had not done so thus far. He described Luna 16 samples as
    bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig sam-
    ples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because
    it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov

                                      6
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                           January 11-14

    described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cos-
    mic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by
    Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples
    returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility
    had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned
    by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, A l )
       Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of MSC Earth and Lunar Sciences Div.,
    reported discovery by MSC scientists of “exotic components” in lunar
    soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon
    4.5 billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar sam-
    ples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by
    impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Dis-
    covery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once
    had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cool-
    ing off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one
    billion years older than lunar rocks.
       Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory de-
    scribed norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite
    was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to
    be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “near-
    surface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative
    of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon-
    perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go
    back in age to beginnings of solar system.
       Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg-Cal        Tech physicist who had dated
    Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other
                                                               Sample 13’s
    Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)-said
    oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and
    could be some of original crustal material and some of “magic com-
    ponent” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil.
    Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing in-
    gredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and
    other materials originating elsewhere on moon.
       Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator,
    reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-
    quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be
    “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring.
    (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71,4:7; Gast, MSC)
Janzmry 12: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 390 from Baykonur into orbit with
    270-km (167.8-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.2-min
    period, and 65.0’ inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 25. (GSFC SSR,
    1/31/71; SBD, 1/13/71, a)
  Library of Congress published Uded States and Soviet Progress in Space:
    Some New Contrasts, report by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon 11, Chief of
    Congressional Research Service Science Policy Research Div. Report
    summarized “how far these two major space powers have come in the
    last 13 years,” gave “answers to frequently raised questions about the
    comparative aspects of the two programs,” and looked at possible
    future developments.
       Since U.S.S.R. did not disclose information on its space budget and
    manpower, exact comparison with U S . could not be made. Dr. Sheldon
    specuIated, however, that Soviet budget was about 2% of Giw-more

                                    7
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 12-

    than twice as much as U S . percentage-and that Soviet space work
    force was close to 600000 persons. Greatest number of successful
    launches from a single site to earth orbit and beyond between 1957
    and 1970 had been 311 from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. U.S.S.R.’s Bay-
    konur was second with 282, followed by KSC with 189 and Plesetsk,
    U.S.S.R., with 147. There seemed to be little difference between US. and
    U.S.S.R. space programs in general purpose and direction. Both were
    broadly based with elements of scientific exploration, technology de-
    velopment, national image building, practical applications, and mili-
    tary support services. Although military missions made up about t w o
    thirds of launches by both countries, number of presumptively spe-
    cialized U.S. military missions had declined from 34 missions in 1966
    to 16 in 1970, while U.S.S.R. total had increased from 28 missions in
    1966 to 57 in 1970.
        Although US. and U.S.S.R. were competing in space they were also
    cooperating. Cooperation already under way included exchange of in-
    formation at scientific meetings, negotiation of treaties, trading of
    space-collected weather pictures, joint efforts to write textbook on
    space biology, coordination of efforts on geomagnetism, and negotia-
    tion on possible common designs for docking attachments to facilitate
    space rescue or joint projects. (Text)
  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station
    carried GSFC experiment to 132.5-km (82.3-mi) altitude to obtain
    temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by
     detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground.
     Rocket and inslruments functioned satisfactorily with 14 of 19 gre-
     nades confirmed by sound. Launch was part of series of similar experi-
    ments from three sites [see Jan. 71. (NASA Rpt SRL)
  MSFC announced it was checking out extreme uv coronal spectrohelio-
     graph, first flight instrument to be delivered for ATM solar observatory.
     Instrument was one of two designed by Ball Brothers Research Corp.
     from NRL concepts. Second NRL flight instrument-extreme uv spec-
     trograph-would be shipped to MSFC in March 1971. (MSFC Release
    71-7)
  AFSC announced plans to launch 1500-w FRUSA (flexible rolled-up solar
     array) in fall 1971. Two panels would roll into cylinder 25 cm (10
     in) in diameter for launch and would unroll in space to overall length
     of 10 m (32 ft), oriented to sun and held rigid by parallel extension
     arms. FRUSA would be placed in 740-km (460-mi) polar orbit by Thor-
     Agena booster for six-month flight to test electrical and dynamic
     characteristics. (AFSC Release 309.70)
  DOD announced award of $148 399 036 to Boeing Co. for full production
     of SUM (short-range attack missile). Award brought total obligated
     to date under fixed-price-incentive-fee USAF contract to $183 599 036.
      (DOD Release 30-71)
January 13 : U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 unmanned lunar rover explored lunar
     surface for six hours, testing navigation and steering techniques.
     Vehicle covered 553 m (1814 ft), bringing total distance traveled since
     landing Nov. 17, 1971, to 2930 m (9610 ft). Lunokhod I would be
     parked until Jan. 15 because high angle of sun during lunar noon
     made contrast range for TV pictures unacceptably low. (SBD, 1/14/71,
     47)

                                      8
                                                                   January 13
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  Calibration had been completed at MSFC on new tube wind tunnel capable
    of test speeds up to twice speed of sound, Marshall Star reported. Tube
    was 130 cm (52 in) in diameter and was 119 m (390 ft) long. It
    would be used in wind-tunnel test program for space shuttle. (Illarshall
    Star, 1/13/71, 1)
  NASA launched two Nike-Gajun sounding rockets. Rocket launched from
    WSMR carried MSC experiment to study atmospheric composition. Mis-
    sion was partial success. Rocket launched from Churchill Research
    Range carried GSFC grenade experiment and functioned satisfactorily.
     (SR list)
* Delivery of first operational automated radar terminal system (ARTS III)
    to new control tower at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport was
    announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Computer-
    based system would be operational by mid-1971. Components, when
    added to existing airport surveillance radars, would permit display of
    vital flight information on radar scopes used by air traffic controllers.
    Alpha-numeric data tags would be attached to related aircraft target or
    “blip.” (FAA Release 71-5)
January 14: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 391 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    796-km (494.6-mi) apogee, 266-km ( 165.3-mi) perigee, 95.2-min
    period, and 70.9’ inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 21, 1972.
     (GSFC SSR, 1/31/71; 2/29/72; SBD, 1/15/71,56)
January 16: Tokyo Univ. Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science
    launched two rockets from Uchinoura to collect data on oxygen density,
    electron density, and temperature in preparation for launch of Japa-
    nese satellite Feb. 12. S-210 observation rocket launched at 11:OO am
    local time reached 115-km (72-mi) altitude; Kappa 9-M launched at
    4:45 pm local time reached 357-km (222-mi) altitude in 303 sec.
     (SBD, 1/20/71,73)
* Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov said in broadcast that
    Soviet lunar vehicle Lunokhod’s safety margin and “perfect design”
    had “surpassed all expectations.” He said at this stage of space tech-
     nology man could not have stayed on moon for as long a time as
    Lunokhod had. In future it would be possible to assign to automatic
    devices such tasks as studying meteorites, exploring volcanoes, and
    studying radiation in near-moon space. What was more important “is
     that we now have an almost ideal means of conveyance on the moon, a
    means independent of super-rigorous conditions of vacuum and sharp
     changes of temperature. We can load such a selenomobile with dif-
     ferent scientific apparatus.” (AF Mag, 6/71,59-9)
* Richard Hirsch, author and retired White House and NASC staff member,
     died of heart attack at age 58. Hirsch had been writing book on NASA
     in Praeger Press U.S. Government Departments and Agencies series.
     (W Star, 1/17/71, E19)
January 17: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover returned to Luna 17 land-
     ing stage, completing one of planned experiments for Luna 17. Tass
     said vehicle “turned in its tracks about half a kilometer [about one
     third mile] from the landing area. For some time the old track showed
                                                               .
     clearly on the television screen and the controllers . . used it for
     guidance. For the first time in the history of cosmonautics there was
     a solution to a practical navigation problem: The return of the self-
     propelled apparatus to a preplanned point at a preplanned time on the

                                     9
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 17

    surface of a different celestial body.” Vehicle had traveled 3173 m
     (10 410 ft) since it landed on moon’s Sea of Rains Nov. 17, 1970.
    (SBD, 1/19/71, 68)
  Ornithologists working with FAA had attached midget radios to migra-
    tory whistling swans to trace migration patterns and help avoid colli-
    sions with aircraft, New York Times reported. In joint project of
    Johns Hopkins Univ. and Queens Univ. in Kingston, Ontario, small
    aircraft pursued migrating flock between US. and Canada to monitor
    radios. FAA spokesman had said aircraft collisions with birds occurred
                                                               (Devlin, NYT,
    C L fairly frequently” though fatalities were “very rare.”

    1/17/71,41)
January 18: Widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, one of three astro-
    nauts killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, filed $10-million
    suit in Brevard County Circuit Court against North American Rock-
    well Corp. and subsidiaries North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell
    Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. Mrs. Betty Grissom charged
    negligence in fire which killed her husband and Astronauts Roger B.
    Chaffee and Edward H. White 11. Suit asserted spacecraft did not
    have proper fire extinguisher system, had no emergency egress, and
    was “defective” because electrical wiring permitted electrical arc to
    flash in cabin. (AP, W Star, 1/19/71, B10)
January 18-21: Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and
    Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, met
    in Moscow with representatives of other agencies to exchange views
    for increased US-U.S.S.R. cooperation in exploration and use of
     outer space for peaceful purposes. At close of meetings, joint com-
    munique was released by Soviet Academy and US. Embassy in
    Moscow. Academy and NASA officials had found discussions “useful”
     and had agreed to exchange lunar surface samples. Procedures were
    established to produce recommendations for joint consideration of
    results of space research, improvement of existing weather data ex-
    changes, research with meteorological rockets, techniques for studying
     natural environment, expanded exchange of data on space biology and
     medicine, and work in other fields. Preliminary document was ini-
    tialed on Jan. 21. (NASA Release 71-9)
January 19: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell,
     and Stuart A. Roosa completed final dress rehearsal for scheduled
     Jan. 31 launch toward moon. Countdown began at 9:23 am EST, with
     simulated liftoff on time at 3:23 pm EST. (P Znq, 1/20/71, 3)
  NASA announced it was requesting proposals from potential US. and
     foreign experimenters for investigations of data to be acquired from
     earth resources experiment package (EREP) to fly on manned Skylab
     spacecraft in late 1972. Data would be used to appraise value and
     direct applications of space observations in agriculture, geography,
     forestry, geology, hydrology, oceanography, and cartography. Objec-
     tives of EREP were to extend use of sensors; use man to observe, dis-
     criminate, and select study areas; and provide early source of unique
     research data for analysis. Three-man experimental space station
     would be manned by three different crews for total five months during
     eight-month mission in circular orbit of 435 km (270 mi) with 50’
     inclination. Astronauts would investigate solar astronomy, space medi-
     cine, space physics, bioscience, and material processing in addition to

                                     10
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   January 19

     operating EREP sensors, including six high-precision, 70-mm cameras,
     infrared spectrometer, multispectral scanner, microwave radiometer/
     scatterometer and altimeter, and passive radiometer. (NASA Release
     71-5)
  Return of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to active service
     with USAF in July 1971 was announced by Gen. John D. Ryan, USAF
     Chief of Staff. Col. Aldrin would assume command of AFSC’S Aerospace
     Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif. He had joined NASA in
     January 1964 as astronaut trainee after serving with USAF in Germany
     and Korea. He held B.S. degree from US. Military Academy and Sc.D.
     degree from MIT. (NASA Special Release; DOD Release 45-71)
January 20: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 7 meteorological satellite from
     Plesetsk into orbit with 655-km (407.0-mi) apogee, 629-km (390.8-mi)
     perigee, 97.5-min period, and 81.2’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 1/31/71 ;
     SBD, 1/26/71,96)
   President Nixon announced intention to nominate James H. Wakelin, Jr.,
0

      as Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology suc-
     ceeding Myron Tribus, who had resigned in November. Nomination
     was submitted to Senate Jan. 25. (PD,      1/25/71,84; 2/1/71,141)
   U.S. Geological Survey published The National Atlas of the United States
     of Ameriea, first official national atlas produced in US. Preface noted
      that revised editions might be “greatly expedited’’ by “repetitive cover-
      age at short time-lapse intervals, possibly from orbiting satellite sys-
      tems.” Systems might “expedite the production of more up-to-date and
      less costly regional and state as well as national atlases or even make it
      possible to obtain directly from storage data banks and electronic
      computers the type of information now gained in part from maps and
      atlases.” (DOI PIO; Text)
January 21 : USAF launched unidentified satellite by Titan IIIB-Agena
      booster from Vandenberg AFB into orbit with 244-mi (392.7-km)
      apogee, 130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 110.8’ incli-
      nation. Satellite reentered Feb. 9. (Pres Rpt 72)
   Cosmos 392 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 276-km (171.5-mi)
      apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 64.9’ inclina-
      tion. Satellite reentered Feb. 2. (GSFC SSR, 1/31/71; 2/28/71)
   USAF X-24A liftingbody vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke
      in joint program, completed 21st flight from FRC. Objectives of powered
      flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.5, determine lateral-
      directional derivatives, and obtain longitudinal trim and, lift-to-drag
      data with 40’ upper flap at 0’ rudder bias. Two of four engines were
      shut down because of sticky angle-of-attack indicator ; alternate two-
      engine flight plan was followed and completed successfully. (NASA
      Proj O f
             f)
 * ATM acceptance checkout at MSFC was nearing completion and ATM
      would be ready for prototype acceptance testing in early March, MSFC
       announced. ATM would fly on Skylab cluster in 1972. (MSFC Release
      71-11)
   Grumman Aerospace Corp. confirmed that investigators of Dec. 30, 1970,
       crash of first prototype F-14A Tomcat fighter aircraft had found prob-
       able cause to be crack in titanium hydraulic lines caused by vibra-
       tions in hydraulic pumps. Grumman and USN investigators had recom-

                                       11
January 21                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     mended replacing titanium hydraulic lines with heavier stainless steel
     and installing mufflers on hydraulic pumps. (Newsday, 1/22/71, 15)
  AFSC announced award of $8.2-million contract to Bendix Corp. Instru-
     ment and Life Support Div. for 7053 improved aircraft altimeters.
     Improved altimeters-to be delivered to USAF and USN beginning in
     early 1972-had two operating modes and plus-minus accuracy factor
     of no greater than 76 m (250 ft). Some previously used systems had
     errors in excess of 305 m (1000 ft). (AFSC Release 5.71)
* President Nixon nominated R/A Don A. Jones as Director of National
     Ocean Survey of NOAA and R/A Harley D. Nygren as Director of the
     Commissioned Officer Corps of NOAA. Both had held these positions
     in acting capacity since October 1970. (PD,     1/25/70, 85)
January 21-22: Mockup of 12-man space station concept being studied by
     McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for NASA was inspected by 100
     Government and industry representatives attending quarterly review
     at MSFC. Mockup was 10 m (33 ft) in diameter and 15 m (50 ft)
     tall, with four decks and large simulated power section. Concept called
     for tunnel section in center with 3-m (lo-ft) diameter. (MSFC
     Release 71-13; MSFC PIO)
January 22: NASA announced reorganization of Office of Manned Space
     Flight to reflect new management requirements for future manned
     flight programs. Reorganization established two new technical support
     offices, Engineering and Operations Office and Quality and Safety
     Office ; established two functional offices, Administration Office and
     Program Analysis Office ; and abolished Mission Operations, Field
     Center Development, Institutional Operations, and Space Medicine
     organizations.
        M/G John D. Stevenson (USAF, Ret.), Director of Mission Opera-
     tions, became Deputy Director of Engineering and Operations. Capt.
     Robert F. Freitag (USN, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development,
     became Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Manned Space
     Flight. Space Medicine Office had been combined with other life
     science activities under Dr. James W. Humplireys, Director of Life
     Sciences, as announced Dec. 3, 1970. (NASA Release 71-10)
  New world distance record in heavyweight turboprop class was claimed
     by USN for P-3C Orion aircraft piloted 1 280 km (7010 mi) by
                                                    1
     Cmdr. Donald H. Lilienthal in nonstop flight from Atsugi Naval Air
     Station, Japan, to Patuxent Naval Air Station, Md., in 15 hrs 21 min.
     Previous record of 7662 km (4761 mi) had been set by Soviet 11-18
     aircraft in 1967. (DOD Newsfilm Release 60-71)
* Plastic-coated solar cells were being developed by LeRC and Lockheed
     Missiles & Space Co. scientists to reduce cost of solar cell power sys-
     tems. Cells, which produced abundant power when formed into panels
     or arrays, were lightweight, flexible, insulated, completely sealed, and
     resistant to breakage. (LeRC Release 71-5)
  Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoeya,
    Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment for auroral studies. Rocket
     and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Apollo 11 and ApoUo 12 lunar rock groups differed in potassium-
    uranium abundance systematics, JPL scientists Dr. Fraser P. Fanale
     and Douglas B. Nash reported in Science. Difference indicated “that
     relatively little exchange of regolith material has occurred between

                                     12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                January 22

    Mare Tranquillitatis [Sea of Tranquility] and Oceanus Procellarum
     [Ocean of Storms]. Two suites appear to have been derived from mate-
    rials of identical potassium and uranium content.” It appeared unlikely
    “that bulk lunar material has the ratio of potassium to uranium found in
    chondrites. However, systematic differences in the potassium-uranium
    ratio between Apollo samples and crustal rocks of the earth do not
    preclude a common potassium-uranium ratio for bulk earth and lunar
    material.” (Science, 1/22/71, 282-4)
  NSF released report on industrial R&D spending in 1969. Funds had
    totaled $18.4 billion, 6% above 1968 level and about 50% more than
    $12.6 billion in 1963. Growth was 1% from 1968 to 1969. Deflated
     1969 ievel was 22% above that of 1963. Industrial firms accounted
    for about 70% of R&D in US. Federal financing of R&D in industry
    amounted to $8.6 billion in 1969, same as in 1968. Although Federal
    support was primarily responsible for increases in industrial R&D
    between 1953 and 1966, funds had leveled off, rising less than 3%
    between 1966 and 1969. In real dollars, Federal support showed a
    decline. (NSF Highlights, 1/22/71,1)
* President Nixon announced intention to nominate Thomas E. Carroll to
    be Assistant Administrator for Planning and Management of Environ-
    mental Protection Agency. Nomination was submitted to Senate Jan. 25.
     (PD, 1/25/70,88)
* Harry F. Guggenheim-financier,       philanthropist, sportsman, and pub-
    lisher-died in Sands Point, N.Y., at age 80. His enthusiasm for avia-
    tion as pilot in World War I had led him to persuade his father,
    Daniel Guggenheim, to establish Guggenheim School of Aeronautics at
    New York Univ., first university school of aeronautics in US.
       Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, Inc.,
    of which Harry Guggenheim was president, helped establish aero-
    nautical engineering schools at MIT, Georgia Institute of Technology,
    Gal Tech, Univ. of Washington, Stanford Univ., and Univ. of Michi-
    gan. Fund aided Charles A. Lindberg after first transatlantic crossing.
    Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation, established in 1924,
    sponsored much of pioneer rocket research by Dr. Robert H. Goddard.
     (NYT, 1/23/71,1)
January 23: Apollo 14 backup pilot Eugene A. Cernan narrowly escaped
     death when helicopter in which he was practicing lunar landing
     maneuvers crashed and burned in Indian River near KSC. After leap-
     ing from helicopter and swimming toward shore Cernan was rescued
     and taken to Patrick AFB for treatment of minor cuts and bruises and
    singed eyelids and eyebrows. (UPI, W Post, 1/24/71, A5)
* Baltimore Sun editorial praised US.-U.S.S.R. agreement to exchange
    lunar samples : “The scientists and engineers are unmistakably pointing
     the way which soon or late must be taken if men are to make the most
     of opportunities offered them by the opening of vast new extrater-
     restrial horizons of inquiry and adventure.” (B Sun, 1/23/71)
January 24: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from
     WSMR carrying GSFC experiment to study stellar spectra. Rocket and
    instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
* Love11 Lawrence, Jr., chief research engineer for Chrysler COT. since
     1964, died at age 55. Lawrence had been President of American
    Rocket Society, recipient of 1950 Goddard Memorial Lecture Award,

                                    13
January 24                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     President of Reaction Motors, Inc., and key figure in development of
     of USA Kedstone ballistic missile. (NYT, 1/25/71, 39)
January 25-26: Intelsat-IV F-2 comsat was launched by NASA for Com-
     SatCorp on behalf of INTELSAT. Satellite, launched from ETR at 7:36 pm
     EST by Atlas-Centaur booster, entered elliptical transfer orbit. Primary
     objective was to place satellite into transfer orbit accurate enough for
     onboard propulsion systems to place spacecraft in planned synchro-
     nous orbit.
        Apogee kick motor was fired at 1O:U pm EST, Jan. 26, about
      11 hrs earlier than planned because of slight temperature fluctuations
     in apogee motor shaft. Intelsat-IV F-2 entered orbit with 36410.4 km
      (22 624.4 mi) apogee, 35 740.0 km (22 207.8 mi) perigee, 1450-min
     period, and 0.59” inclination. Satellite would drift from position at
      124” east longitude over Pacific to permanent station over Atlantic
     at 25.5” west longitude by about March 19.
        Intelsat-IV F-2 was first in Intelsat IV series of advanced comsats.
     Satellite-largest commercial comsat launched-was 5.4 m (17.6 ft )
     high with 237.5-cm (93.5-in) diameter and weighed 1397 kg (3080
     lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels
     and 3000-9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access
     and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years-
     two years more than Intelsat I11 comsats and over five years more
     than Intelsat I. (NASA Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release 71-4; Com-
     SatCorp PIO)
January 25: Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and
     Operations at MSC, directed four-hour physical examination of Apollo
     14 astronauts and declared them “certified and ready to fly.”
        Countdown for launch began on schedule at 9:00 am EST in prep-
     aration for liftoff toward moon at 3:23 pm EST Jan. 31. (AP, B Sun,
     1/26/71, A5)
  NASA launched four sounding rockets. Two Nike-Apaches, launched from
     Churchill Research Range, carried GSFC experiments to study ener-
     getic particles and fields. Aerobee 150, launched from WSMR, carried
     Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study Venus W. Aerobee 170,
     launched from WSMR, carried Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study
     dawn airglow. All rockets and experiments functioned satisfactorily.
     (SR list)
  Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, named to five-man board chaired
     by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to investigate Jan. 23 crash of
     NASA helicopter piloted by Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan. (MSC Release
     71-03 )
  Newsweck commented on “shrinking space shuttle.” US. space program
     had been “hit with another budgetary broadside.” Space shuttle to
     service planned space station “will get no more than a third of the
     money its designers insist they need to build it.” Original request
     for $300 million had been cut by NASA to $225 million. “Now White
     House budgeteers have shrunk it to $105 million-and it has yet to
     face the anti-technology faction in Congress.” (Newsweek, 1/25/71)
  Steel stress plate 2.5 cm ( 1 in) thick and 61 crn (2 ft) wide on F-111A
     fighter cracked during ground testing at McClellan AFB, Calif. Later
     USAF reported crack came at subzero temperatures under loads equal

                                    14
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 January 25

     to 60% of maximum load aircraft was designed to withstand. (W Post,
     1/30/71, A4,)
January 25-27: Ninth annual AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting was held
     in New York. Dr. Coleman duP. Donaldson, President of Aeronautical
     Research Associates, delivered Hugh Dryden Research Lecture, “Cal-
     culation of Turbulent Shear Flows for Atmospheric and Vortex
     Motions.”
        Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Ira G. Hedrick, Vice
     President of Engineering for Grumman Aerospace Corp., for tech-
     nical excellence, design innovation and leadership in the structural
     development of several generations of aerospace vehicles.”
        Space Science Award was presented to Univ. of California physicist
     William I. Axford for “outstanding contributions to the fluid dynamics
     of the sun-earth environment and to the theory of cosmic ray inter-
     action with the solar wind.”
        Robert M. Losey Award went to Verner E. Suomi of Univ. of
     Wisconsin for “creativity and ingenuity in designing advanced meteor-
     ological sensors for satellite applications as exemplified by the Spin-
     Scan camera which has made i t possible to view the earth’s atmosphere
     as an entity.”
        G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Dr. Nicholas J. Hoff
     of Stanford Univ. for “outstanding contributions in the fields of struc-
     tures and structural mechanics through his many books and publica-
     tions, as well as direct consultation for government agencies and
     industry.”
        Martin Goland, President of Southwest Research Institute, was named
     new President of AIAA. (AIAA Release, 1/8/71, 1/27/71)
January 26: U.S.S.R.’s Venus 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1970) had landed intact
     on planet Venus Dec. 15 and “relayed scientific information from the
     surface of another planet for the first time,” Tass announced. Space-
     craft, equipped with “highly stable frequency generators,” transmitted
     signals for 23 min, recording surface temperature at 748 K t- 20”
     (475°C f 20”) and pressure, at 90 t- 15 atmospheres. Tass said
     continuous measurements of the atmospheric parameters were made all
     the way to surface and it was established “that Venus possesses an
     unusually hot atmosphere the density of which, at the surface, is
     about 60 times greater than the density of the atmosphere on the
    earth’s surface.” (Sou Rpt, 3/2/71, 4; Gwertzman, NYT, 1/27/71, 1 )
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 393 into orbit with 417-km (259.1-mi) apogee,
     281-km (174.6-mi) perigee, 91.3-min period, and 70.9” inclination.
     Satellite reentered June 16. (GSFC SSR, 1/31/71; 6/30/71)
e International aspects of US. space program were discussed by Dr. George

     M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in luncheon speech before National
     Space Club in Washington, D.C.: Cooperation with Western nations in
     past decade had included 70 countries, 250 specific agreements, and
     more than 24 joint satellite projects at run-out cost in excess of $400
     million. More than 50% of total had been funded by other nations. In
     1970s, “opportunities exist for cooperation on a significantly larger
     scale.” US. wished “to build a foundation for important benefit- and
     cost-sharing in the major space programs of the future.” Canada,
     Japan, and Australia-“countries      having the most obvious potential
     for post-Apollo work-sharing”-had        been given “every chance to

                                     15
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 26

    become fully acquainted with our plans and studies” to enable them
    to decide whether they wished to commit their own resources.
       European Space Conference had put several million dollars into
    studies of post-Apollo program possibilities and some member countries
    had invested still larger amounts. British, French, and West German
    firms were working with NASA prime contractors on space shuttle
    design studies. Europe would have to choose between significant
    participation in shuttle funding and funding independent European
    rocket program. Decision would be necessary “even if Europe funds
    only 10 per cent of the shuttle’s price tab.” US. had said it would
    “sell launch services for projects consistent with peaceful purposes and
                                          ..
    existing international agreements .          [and] that general technical
    access to the entire program would be available, but that technology at
    the level of commercial know-how would be transferred in either
    direction only where one side required it to complete its commitments
    to the other.” Since Europe was talking of only 10% share of shuttle
    program, “we said that we would retain decision-making responsibility
    except where European costs were directly affected, in which case
    decisions would be joint.”
       In US.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space, “it is particularly important
    that we give clear recognition to both . . . competition and cooperation.”
    US. was competing with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space
    represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s
    world, the level o our technology is of first importance, strategically,
                      f
    economically, and politically.” U S . was cooperating with U.S.S.R.
    “because we both live in a vast universe that must be explored, where
    important new knowledge is to he gained, for the benefit of all men,
    everywhere.”
       While US. retained demonstrated lead over U.S.S.R., “it will not
    be an enduring lead without major new initiatives on our part-
    initiatives like the space shuttle and the exploration of the outer
             ..  .”
    planets.
       In Jan. 18-21 Moscow talks with Soviet Academy of Sciences, “we
    specifically agreed, initially, to exchange three grams [ O . l l oz] of
    sample obtained from Luna 16, for three grams each from Apollo 1         1
    and 12. These relatively small amounts are sufficient for detailed
    scientific examination of a comparative nature.”
       Additional meetings on compatible docking arrangements had not
     been held because “docking discussions are well underway, and the
    planned exchange of information is taking place.”
       On visit to Soviet cosmonaut training area at Star City, “we
    were welcomed by Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov,
    and Valentina Tereshkova. We were shown the Soyuz mission trainer,
     and were invited to attempt to dock two Soyuz spacecraft in their
     docking trainer. While there, I also presented a plaque in memory of
    Yuri Gagarin [first man in space] from the US. astronauts.” (Text)
  President Nixon announced appointments of members of President’s
     Science Advisory Committee for terms expiring Dec. 31, 1974: Dr. Lee
     A. DuBridge, former Presidential Science Adviser; Dr. Herbert Fried-
     man of NRL; Dr. Daniel P. hloynahan, former Counsellor to the
     President ; Kenneth H. Olsen, President of Digital Equipment Corp. ;

                                     16
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                January 26

    and Dr. John G. Truxal of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. (PD, 2/1/71,
    120)
  Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 302 to authorize
    National Park Service acquisition of historic site in Auburn, Mass.,
    where first liquid-fuel rocket Right was launched by Robert H. God-
    dard in 1926. Bill was referred to Committee on Interior and Insular
    AiTairs. (CR, 1/26/71, S222)
* Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Apollo 14: “With $ 0      a
    million of taxpayers’ money behind it and the dubious future of manned
                                                                     ..  . is
    spaceflight depending on it, the Apollo 14 mission to the moon
    grimly earnest business.” If mission was successful there would be
    “another Apollo shot in midsummer, two more next year.” If it was
    not, there would be “a whale of a battle in Congress and elsewhere about
    appropriations and the wisdom of the whole idea.” (P Inq, 1/26/71)
  Sylvia Porter analyzed Federal budget in Washington Evening Star to
    show part individual taxpayers played in financing Federal projects.
    Only small segment of tax dollars was taken by “controversial” pro-
    grams. If L‘youeliminated space entirely, you’d have only 2c more left;
    if you cut out foreign aid entirely, this would give you only another
    2c extra.” (W Star, 1/26/71, A l l )
January 26-28: House Committee on Science and Astronautics held 12th
    annual seminar with Panel on Science and Technology to discuss inter-
    national science policy. In keynote address Secretary of State William
    P. Rogers said: “Our basic goal is to put science and technology at
                                     humane-ends.” US. was increasing
    the service of human-and
    LC
       emphasis on science and technology in our aid to developing countries.
    We are encouraging an international effort to preserve the quality of
    the world‘s environment. And we are seeking greater international
    cooperation to enhance the benefits of technology and to curb its
              ...                    .
                    We now want to . . make the exploration of space a
    dangers.
    truly international endeavor. Space should not be the exclusive pre-
    serve of a small number of countries. Our post-Apollo program aims
     at the development on a multilateral basis of a new generation of
     reusable space vehicles designed to make the exploration and use of
    space easier, and more economical.” (Text; Transcript)
January 27: Apollo 14 astronauts completed test of ability to react to in-
     Right emergencies in KSC simulators. During four-hour session, engi-
     neers simulated malfunctions that could occur during flight and
     monitored astronaut reactions. (AP, B Sun, 1/28/71, A10)
* USN P-3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft established world
    record for nonrefueled, long-distance Right for heavyweight turboprop
     aircraft. P-3C Orion, piloted by Cdr. Donald H. Lilienthal (USN),
     attained speed of 808 km per hr (502 mph). Previous record of 727
     km per hr (452 mph) had been established by Soviet 11-18 in May
     1968. (AF Mag, 4/71, 15)
  President Nixon announced recipients of 1970 National Medal of Science,
     Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in
     science, mathematics, and engineering. Recipients included Dr. George
     E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and
     former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight.
     Dr. Mueller received award for “his many individual contributions
     to the design of the Apollo System, including the planning and

                                     17
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 27

    interpretation of a large array of advanced experiments necessary to
    insure the success of this venture into a new and little known
                   .”
    environment
        Other recipients were: Dr. Richard D. Brauer, professor of mathe-
    matics, Harvard Univ.; Dr. Robert H. Dicke, professor of physics,
    Princeton Univ. ; Barbara McClintock, Carnegie Institution of Wash-
    ington geneticist; Dr. Albert B. Sabin, president of Weizmann
    Institute of Science in Rehovoth, Israel; Dr. Allan R. Sandage, Cal
    Tech astronomer; John C. Slater, professor of physics and chemistry,
    Univ. of Florida; Dr. John A. Wheeler, professor of physics, Princeton
    Univ.; and Dr. Saul Winstein, deceased, formerly professor of
    chemistry at UCLA. (PD, 2/1/71,124)
  Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., OST Director and President’s Science Adviser,
    addressed AIAA luncheon held in conjunction with House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics’ 19‘71 international science panel : “One of
    the key challenges facing this nation, and other nations as well, is
    finding means by which technology can be advanced, shared, and
    applied to common problems without restricting our individual
    national ability to compete for markets with the products of this
    technology.” This could be done by application of comsats for global
    point-to-point communication. “Here we have seen the initial research
    blossom into a demonstrated capability and then into an international
    cooperative venture.” Intelsat story “indicates that we should have no
    illusion about the readiness of nations to give up competitive advantages
    without compensating return. At the same time it is fair to say that we
    have seen there a willingness to accept indirect as well as direct benefits
     ...    such things as enhanced international security resulting from
    international stability, an enriched quality of life, and better under-
    standing of man as a biological entity. This is a hopeful sign and it is
    a point of view which I think needs to be emphasized and cultivated.”
     (CR, 2/1/71, E320-3)
  National Religious Broadcasters, at annual convention in Washington,
    D.C., celebrated 50th anniversary of first religious broadcast on com-
    mercially licensed station by beaming their closing program around
    world in first international religious broadcast transmitted by satellite.
     (Janson, NYT, 1/28/71,1)
* USN plans to maintain offensive capability without exorbitant investment
     were described by Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt, Jr., Chief of Naval Opera-
     tions, in speech before Cleveland, Ohio, chapter of American Ordnance
     Assn.: “We intend to develop small, high speed platforms. These will
     include escorts having a hard punch but which do not individually
     constitute a high percentage of our total capability. These will prob-
              ..
     ably be. hydrofoils, air cushion platforms and surface effect ships.
    We have placed a very high priority on the surface effect ship on
     the premise that this offers the potential for destroyer-size ships to
     conduct anti-submarine warfare on top of the water at speeds 2 or
     3 times greater than the fastest submarines.” With addition of V/STOL
     aircraft, “one can envision a fleet of highly mobile craft which would
     be a potent striking force when concentrated, or a number of unique
     and flexible weapons systems when operating as individual units. By
     supplementing this force with small high speed craft as missile-launch-

                                      18
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 January 27

    ing platforms we will add a new dimension to our present powerful
    aircraft carriers, frigates, destroyers, and guided missile ships.” (Text)
January 28: NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from TERLS
    carrying Indian experiments to study ionosphere. Rockets and instru-
    ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
       NASA announced award to Lockheed Electronics Co. of $800 000,
    cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for scientific and technical support services
    for MTF Earth Resources Laboratory. Contract covered one year with
    provision for two one-year extensions. Company would support labora-
    tory in research on application of remote-sensing data to Mississippi-
    Louisiana-Gulf area. Data would be obtained from aircraft, ERTS,
    Skylab, Gemini, and Apollo experiments. (NASA       Release 71-13)
* ESRO awarded six-month study contracts for European regional comsat to
    three European consortiums-MESH (S.A. Engins M.A.T.R.A. of
    France, ERNo-Raumfahrttechnik GmbH of West Germany, SAAB Aktie-
    bolag of Sweden, and Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd. of U.K.), STAR
     (Satellites for Telecommunications, Applications, and Research), and
    COSMOS, led by Marconi Space and Defence Systems in U.K. (SF,
    4/71,121)
  Senate adopted S.R. 15, modifying Senate rules on total number of
0

    Senators assigned to certain standing committees. Committee on Aero-
    nautical and Space Sciences was set at 1 members.
                                                 1
       Senate also adopted S.R. 16, electing majority members of Senate
    Committees. Members elected to Committee on Aeronautical and Space
    Sciences were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman;
    Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) ;Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) ;
    Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.); and Sen. Howard W. Cannon
     (D-Nev.). (CR, 1/28/71, S406)
  President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of Robert M. White
0

    as Administrator of NOAA, Howard W. Pollock as Deputy Adminis-
    trator, and John W. Townsend, Jr., as Associate Administrator. White
    had served as Acting Administrator of NOAA since his appointment
    as Acting Deputy Administrator Oct. 9, 1970. Before establishment of
    NOAA, he was Administrator of ESSA. (PD,      2/1/71, 127, 141)
  Award of $23 800 contract to American Airlines to determine feasibility
0

    of using STOL aircraft for short-haul runs was announced by Secre-
    tary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Six-month study would cover
    certification and safety, avionics, STOL service categories, system devel-
    opment requirements, user and community acceptance criteria, metro-
    flight feasibility demonstration, New York area STOLport sites, and
    STOLport acceptance. (DOT    Release 1771)
  European Organization for Nuclear Research announced in Geneva that
    it had effected first head-on collision between intense beams of high-
    energy protons. Beams of protons were injected into intersecting
    storage rings by 28-bev particle accelerator at nearly speed of light.
    Collisions occurred at intersection points of two rings in which very
    high vacuum was maintained. Experiment would enable scientists to
    study fundamental reactions that took place in interior of stars or
     in upper atmosphere. (NYT, 1/29/71,7)
  New York Times editorial commented: “The important steps recently
     taken toward great Soviet-American space cooperation are still small,
     but they provide a beginning for a much wider and mutually advan-

                                     19
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 28

     tageous effort. This recent progress also suggests that there is now a
    political interest in cooperation in Moscow as well as in Washington,
    a welcome change from the situation in earlier years.” (NYT,
    1/28/71)
  Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Soviet Yen, 7 softlanding
    on Venus, “another major first in the conquest of space.” Apollo 14
    would be “bigger attention-getter” because there was “more glamour
     and excitement in manned space flight.” But U.S.S.R. had achieved
    4G
       remarkable technological performances.” U.S.S.R. could point “with
    justifiable pride” to fact that, while Venus 7 was transmitting signals
     from Venus to earth, moonrover Lunokhod 1 was also sending infor-
    mation from moon. (CSM, 1/28/71)
January 29: President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1972 budget to
    Congress said: “Science and technology can make major contribu-
    tions to the public by developing creative solutions to a wide range
    of national problems.. . . I am proposing in this budget a substantial
    expansion in outlays for federally supported research and develop-
    ment.’, President recommended increased funding to “make greater use
    of our scientific and engineering capabilities and resources to cope
    with. . .pollution, crime, health, transportation, and other environ-
    mental and social problems ; strengthen research essential to the
    advancement of our technology and economic productivity; and
    increase our investment in fundamental science which leads to the
    long-term progress of our society.” President recommended increase
    in NSF budget from $506 million in 1971 to $622 million in 1972.
        In 1972, defense spending would increase but, even with increase,
    would “drop from 36% of total spending in 1971 to 34% in 1972.”
    Human resources programs’ share would be 42% of total. Budget
    proposed “sharing Federal revenues with States and communities,”
    <<
       national strategies to improve health care” and to ensure “an income
    floor for every iamily,” and efforts toward “full-employment in peace-
    time with relative price stability.” (PD, 2/1/71, 130-9)
* President Nixon sent $229.2-billion FY 1972 budget request to Congress,
    including total science R&D budget of $16.7 billion. Total request for
    NASA new obligational authority (NOA) of $3.271 billion (1.4% of
    total U.S. budget) was $27 million less than FY 1971 NOA of $3.298
    billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $216.5 million
    against decline of $486.4 million in FY 1971. Reduction to $3.152
    billion placed proposed NASA FY 1972 funding at lowest level since
     1962. Of budget request, $2.518 billion would go for R&D, $56.3
    million for construction of facilities, and $697.4 million for research
    and program management.
        Apollo funding decrease of $302.2 million, to $612.2 million-
    reflecting cancellation of Apollo 18 and 19-wodd be partially offset
    by increase from $515.2 million in FY 1971 to $672.8 million in
    FY 1972 for manned space flight operations. Manned space flight
    operations would include $535.4 million for Skylab, $100.0 million
    for space shuttle, and $37.4 million for orbital systems and experi-
    ments. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total
    for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1.286 billion, down
    $144.6 million from FY 1971.
        Funding for space science and applications programs would in-

                                    20
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                                January 29

    crease $184.7 million, from $565.7 million in FY 1971 to $740.4
    million in FY 1972. Increases would go to physics and astronomy
    program for solar observatory ($19 million in FY 1972), High
    Energy Astronomical Observatory ($13.4 million) , and space tele-
    scope study ($500 000). Funding for lunar and planetary exploration
    would increase $166.6 million, to $311.5 million, with $38.3 million
    going toward Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, $180.4 million toward
    Viking project, and $18.8 million toward supporting research and
    technology advanced studies. Funding for Pioneer program of plan-
    etary exploration would decrease from $35.5 million in FY 1971 to
    $17.6 million. Funding for bioscience program, including Biosatellites,
    was eliminated from NASA budget for FY 1972. Increase of $15.5
    million in space applications programs, to $182.5 million in FY 1972,
    included $48.5 million for Earth Resources Survey, $13 million for
    Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, and $60.3 million for ATS.
       Total for advanced research and technology programs decreased
    from $264.2 million in FY 1971 to $212.8 million. STOL technology
    program would receive $15 million, against $1.9 million in FY 1971.
    NERVA rocket funding would decrease from $32 million in FY 1971 to
    $9.9 million.
       Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $26 million, to
    $264 million.
       DOD’s FY 1972 budget of $76 billion for outlays included $1.55-
    billion space funding, $500 000 less than previous year [see April 21.
    Budget also included $370 million for B-1 intercontinental bomber,
    up from $75 million in FY 1971; $39 million for LAMPS antisub-
    marine-warfare helicopter, up from $4 million, $145 million for air
    defense aircraft system (AWACS), up from $87 million, $47 million
    for USAF AX close-support aircraft, up from $28 million, $409 million
    for Poseidon missile system, and $926 million for Minuteman I11
    program, up from $720 million in FY 1971.
       AEC funding for NERVA and space electric power would decrease
    from $84 million in FY 1971 to $39.7 million.
       Increase of $437 million in total DOT FY 1972 budget of $7.8
    billion would go mostly to expanded aviation and urban mass transit
    spending. DOT funding for reduction of aircraft noise and study of
    environmental effects of SST would increase from $27 million in FY
    1971 to $54 million. These funds also would be used for pollution
    reduction from Coast Guard installations. NOA of $235 million was
    requested for SST prototype program, up from $210 million in FY
    1971. (US Budget for FY 1972; BOB Special Analysis; NASA budget
    briefing transcript ; DOD budget briefing transcript; AIAA release 71-2;
    CR, 1/29/71, H265; DDR&E Dir Foster Testimony, 4/2/71)
  NASA released Jan. 28 briefing on FY 1972 budget request, in which
    Dr. George M. Low, NASA Acting Administrator, said: “For the past
    several years we have reported.. . a further decrease in budget author-
    ity. This year we can report a clear halt in this trend: the budget
    authority for FY 1972 is at the same level as the funds appropriated
    for FY 1971. The exact figure for FY 1972 is $3.271 billion.
       NASA would compIete Apollo program with four previously planned
    missions but would delay Apollo 17 five months to ensure that mission
    carried experiments originally scheduled for canceled Apollo 18 and

                                    21
January 29                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     19. Skylab missions would be delayed about four months, to follow
    as soon as practical after last Apollo flight. Plans for unmanned
    planetary exploration included two Mars orbiters in 1971, Jupiter
    flybys in 1972 and 1973, launch in 1973 for Venus-Mercury ,flyby in
     1974, and two Viking launches in 1975 to land on Mars in 1976.
       Dr. Low said NASA had asked for $190 million for space shuttle
    in FY 1972. “We have included in our budget $100 million. This
    reduction means essentially that we will move out with the engine
    development exactly as we had planned; that we are still in a position
    to make a decision after we have completed the studies on the air
    frame development, whether to continue with additional design or
    whether to proceed with the development of the air frames.”
       Near-earth science programs included Orbiting Solar Observatories
    in 1971, 1973, 1974, and 1975 and last orbiting Astronomical Ob-
    servatory in 1972.
       Space applications program would progress as planned, including
    two ERTS, two Nimbus experimental weather satellites, two Synchro-
    nous Weather Satellites, and two advanced communications experi-
    ments with ATS-F and ATS-G.
       New FY 1972 projects would include start of work on High Energy
    Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) and program for exploration of outer
    planets. “To do this we will develop a versatile new spacecraft, and
    we will plan Grand Tour missions to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto in
    1976-1977; and to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune, in 1979.” NASA
    also would study mission to orbit Jupiter as alternative to first Grand
    Tour.
       Major new initiative in aeronautics in FY 1972 would be develop-
    ment of experimental STOL aircraft.
       Downward trend in aerospace industry employment on NASA pro-
    grams would be halted during FY 1972. “Although aerospace jobs will
    continue to decline in FY 1971, we expect employment to start
    increasing by the middle of FY 1972, with the end-of-year level being
    about equal to that at the beginning of the year.”
       NASA would reduce civil service work force by 1500 positions by
    end of FY 1972, bringing total decrease to 6800 since July 1967.
       Work on NERVA nuclear rocket engine would be limited to “essen-
    tially long-lead time items,” preserving ability “to move forward. . .
    when the need arises,” without large expenditures in FY 1972.
       Program included “no plans at this time for a manned Mars land-
    ing mission.” (Transcript)
* NASA launched two sounding rockets to obtain data on ionosphere. Nike-
    Apache, launched from Univ. of Michigan’s Keweenaw Rocket Launch
    Site (KRLS), carried GSFC payload to 121.9-km (76.2-mi) altitude to
    obtain data during magnetic activity in ionosphere while radiofre-
    quency absorption in 2- and 10-mhz region of spectrum was high.
    Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily.
       Boosted Arcas 11, launched from Wallops Station, carried GSFC
    experiment to 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude to study enhanced ionization
    of lower ionosphere and its relationship to precipitation of energetic
    electrons. One telemetry channel with one RF probe was lost; all
    other instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL)
  Lunar landing trainer crashed and exploded at Ellington AFB, Tex. NASA
0




                                    22
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               January 29

    pilot Stuart M. Present parachuted to safety. Trainer was one of two
    $1.9-million craft used by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr.,
    in training. Preliminary investigation indicated cause of crash was
    loss of electrical power. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft,
    Jr., later said accident should not affect Apollo 14 mission since LLTV
    electrical system was “totally different from the one in the lunar
    module.” (MSC Release 71-05)
  Selected fire departments across U.S. would be testing new fire-resistant
    outfits developed by MSC for use by NASA rescue crews, NASA announced.
    Prototype outfit had been displayed at symposium of International
    Assn. of Fire Fighters. Clothing included thermal underwear, coverall,
    chaps, two kinds of trousers, two jackets, and two proximity suits
    that permitted fire fighters to move close to fire or even enter flames.
    Nonflammable materials in garments had been develoDed to ensure
                                 ‘
                                 2

    maximum safety of Apollo crews in oxygen-rich atmosphere. (NASA
    Release 71-12)
  Micrometer-sized silicate grains from all depths in Apollo 1 and    1
    Apollo 12 lunar core samples showed unusually high density of
    nuclear tracks, Univ. of California physicists reported in Science.
    Densities exceeding 100 billion per sq cm in several percent of grains
    indicated possibility that grains had been irradiated in space as
    extralunar dust orbiting sun before being caught by moon to build
    lunar soil-a possible extralunar origin of part of lunar soil. (Barber,
    Hutcheon, Price, Science, 1/29/71,3724)
* Evidence obtained from uv photometers aboard two NRL Aerobee 150
    sounding rockets-one launched from White Sands into night sky in
    August 1967 and one Oct. 13, 1969-had indicated earth was im-
    mersed in magnetoglow, NRL scientists reported in Science. Glow, from
    large volume of glowing helium ions, at 304 A, was similar to geo-
    coronal hydrogen glow “in that it extends to very high altitudes,
     but it is unique in that it is largely confined to the closed field line
    portion of the magnetosphere.” Because of magnetic containment,
    radiation had been termed “magnetoglow.” Observations. of magneto-
     glow from inside and outside magnetosphere cavity promised to pro-
    vide “valuable means of studying the structural dynamics of the
    magnetosphere.” (Johnson, Young, Holmes, Science, 1/29/71, 379-81 ;
    NRL PAO)
* European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that it would provide live
    TV coverage of Apollo 14 for 21 countries in Western Europe and
    North Africa and coverage for TV stations in U.S.S.R. and Eastern
    Europe. Fourteen multilateral broadcasts would be transmitted via
    Zntelsat-ZZZ F-6 to earth station at Raisting, West Germany. (NYT,
    1/31/71)
  NASA and ARPA announced selection of ARC as site for ILLIAC IV computer.
    ILLIAC IV program was ARPA-sponsored R&D effort to develop, test, and
    evaluate parallel array processing concept by constructing and operat-
    ing large-capacity computer. ARC would perform final system inte-
    gration and testing, operate computer for DOD, and perform NASA
    research in aeronautic fluid mechanics. Program had started at Univ.
    of Illinois in 1966 and was approaching manufacturing phase. ILLIAC
    IV computer was being built by Burroughs Corp. and would be moved
    to ARC after completion in summer of 1971. (NASA  Release 71-14)

                                     23
January 29                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   Senate adopted S.R. 20, electing minority members to Senate Committees
       for 92nd Congress. Elected to Committee on Aeronautical and Space
       Sciences were Sen. Carl T. Curtis (R-Neb.), Sen. Margaret C. Smith
       (R-Me.), Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.), Sen. Lowell P. Weicker
       (R-Conn.), and Sen. James L. Buckley (R.N.Y.). (CR, 1/29/71, S505)
 lanzcary 30: President Nixon sent individual messages from Caneel Bay,
       Virgin Islands, wishing success to Apollo 14 astronauts Alan B. Shep-
      ard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa on eve of launch.
      Message to Shepard said: “The courage and determination you have
      displayed in coming back against such great odds to fly again have
      earned our unanimous admiration at home and abroad. That this
       important mission should be entrusted to our Nation’s first man in
      space makes us especially proud and confident in its success.” (PD,
      2/8/71,151)
   LRV had run into development difficulties that had boosted estimated
      cost more than 60%, Thomas O’Toole said in IVashington Post. Cost
      was now estimated at $41 million, $12 million more than $19 million
      stipulated in October 1969 contract let to Boeing Co. and General
      Motors Corp. Overrun was due “almost entirely to overtime paid to
      the two companies to make sure the Rover will be ready to fly with
     Apollo 15 when it takes off for the moon July 25.” Trouble with
      electronic controls and independent harmonic drive and other prob-
      lems had delayed testing of LRV until Dec. 14, 1970, almost three
      months late. ( W Post, 1/30/71, A3)
* Threat of military superiority was “inherent” in Soviet space program,
     New York Daily News said. “For it was the the development of a
      Russian rocket for intercontinental bombardment that led the way to
     the technological race in space in the first place. We certainly had
     nothing like it on Oct. 4, 1957, when the Russians startled the world
     with the orbiting Sputnik and came along a month later to launch
     Sputnik 11, a 1200-pound [500-kg] vehicle carrying a live dog.. . .”
     U S . Saturn rocket had no military usefulness; “one doubts that the
     Russians can say the same about their spacecraft launching vehicles.”
      (Greene, N Y News, 1/31/71)
   Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the Johnson-
     Sea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in
     water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft)
     vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star,
     1/30/71, A9)
January 31-February 9: NASA’S Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man
     crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on
     moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and
     explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting
     CSM-110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM
     Kitty Hawk.
        January 31-February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B.
     Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (CM pilot), and Edgar
     D. Mitchell (LM pilot), was launched from KSC Launch Complex 39,
     Pad A, at 4:03 pm EST Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was
     40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and
     rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72’ to 75.6”.
     Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice

                                    24
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                     January 31-February 9

    President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia
    of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr.
       Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with
    188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Mid-
    course correction (MCC-1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival
    time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM
    separated from LM/S-IVB/IU at 3 :02 GET. Onboard TV was initiated
    to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encoun-
    tered. First five docking attempts by CM pilot Roosa were unsuc-
    cessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem
   that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible.
    Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches
   seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was
    successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 GET, 1 hr 54 min later than
   planned.
      Separated S-IVB/IU impacted lunar surface at 83:18 GET (2:41 am
   EST Feb. 4) at 7O49’ south latitude and 26” west longitude 174 km
    (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer
   detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs.
      Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was
   initiated at 1O:OO GET to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking
   mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign
   material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated
   and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable
   to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they
   found no indication that systems would not work normally again.
   Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. I].
      Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-see SPS burn at 30:36 GET,
   increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver,
   crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth‘s
   dark side and continued to check out systems. GET update was per-
   formed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay.
   MCC-3, scheduled for 60:38 GET, was not necessary. Third TV trans-
   mission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 GET, showed Shepard and
   Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC4, at
   77:38 GET with 0.6-sec SPS burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec
   (3.5 fps).
      February 4-6: Apollo 14 entered lunar orbit with 314.1-km (195.2-
   mi) apolune and 108.2-km (67.2-mi) perilune after LOI burn at 82:37
   GET, including 40-min update ( 1 :55 am EST Feb. 4). Roosa called to
                          .
   Mission Control: “. . you’re not going to believe this-it looks just
   like the map.” Shepard described the moon and near-moon space as
   “really quite a sight. No atmosphere at all. Everything is clear up here.
   Really fantastic.” Mitchell said moon looked like “a plaster mold that
   somebody has dusted with grays and browns.” Region where daylight
   stopped and darkness began had “some fairly high crater walls and
   high country, with those long shadows, it really looks rugged. It looks
   like you could walk along that surface into the darkness and fall into
   nothing.’’
      Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before
   firing RCS thrusters at 104:28 GET to separate CSM and LM. spurious
   bit in LM guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent

                                   25
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 31-February 9




January 31-February 9: Propelled into
space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart
A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the
moon on the third successful United
States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5
touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored
the Fra Mauro area for 9 hours 24
minutes in two extravehicular periods
before the LIVI Antares lifted them off to
rejoin Roosa in the orbiting CM Kitty
Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch
activities were monitored by Dr. George
M. Low (at left below), Acting NASA
Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von
Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator
for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at KSC.




                                             26
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                         January 31-February 9

   abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manu-
   ally.
       LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 10854 GET (4:17 am
   EST Feb. 5) on 8’ slope 9-18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing
   point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy,
   undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of
   us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling
   hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.”
       First EVA began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent
   PUS communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed MESA
   containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar sur-
   face at 114:30 GET (9:53 am EST Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six
   minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard
   as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the
   surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the
                                               ...
   forward footpad landed is extremely soft.       it’s in a small depression.
   The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads,
                                                       .  . , we can see the
   it even folded over the sides to some degree.
    boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route
   up to the top of the Cone.”
       Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb ) contingency sample; deployed TV,
   S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experi-
   ment; and photographed LM, lunar surface, and experiments. ALSEP
   was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of LM and laser-ranging
   retroreflector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of ALSEP. Mitchell
   conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into
   lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to
    earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibra-
   tions 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min exten-
   sion on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min.
       After resting inside LM and checking plans for second EVA period,
   astronauts left LM at 131:48 GET ( 3 : l l am EST Feb. 6)-2 hrs 27 min
   earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded MET with photographic equip-
   ment and lunar portable magnetometer (LPM) and proceeded toward
   Cone Crater. MET bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable.
   Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space
   suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Every-
   thing’s going to be covered with dust before long.” LPM site measure-
   ment was made at first stop and LPM traverse measurement was later
   made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and mate-
   rials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because
   slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required
   running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in
   blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m
    ( 1.5-ft ) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube
   attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected.
   Alignment adjustment was made to ALSEP central station’s antenna to
   improve signal strength being received at MSFN ground stations. Crew
   was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of time-
   line and minor problems.
       Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement:
    “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the

                                    27
January 31-February 9   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                           28
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              January 31-February 9




February 4-6: Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first
time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed (at top left) leading across the lunar
surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-hand antenna was posi-
tioned by the astronauts to the left of the LM. Lunar dust clung to the legs of
Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extra-
vehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a
seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB
stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia
University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student
David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to 11 tons of TNT.


     contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine
     six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball OR lunar
     surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds).
     Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing
     total EVA time to 9 hrs 24 min.
        While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in CSM, completed
     bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic pho-
     tography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for short-
     ened rendezvous technique.
        Shepard and Mitchell depressurized LM, discarded excess equip-
     ment, repressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg
     (94.8 Ibs) of samples at 142:25 GET-33 hrs 31 min after landing on
     moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that
     abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals
     were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 GET (3:36
     pm Feb. 6 ) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to

                                         29
January 31-February 9               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     earth for postflight analysis. Excellent T V during rendezvous and
     docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM
     to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jetti-
     soned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET
      (7:05 pm EST Feb. 6 ) at 3 O 35' south latitude and 19" 40' west longi-
     tude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 ALSEPS. Trans-
     earth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 GET, injected CSM
     into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar
     orbit.
        February 7-9: MCC-5 at 166:14 GET increased velocity by 152 mm
     per sec (0.5 fps). MCC-6 and MCC-7 were not required. Inflight
     demonstrations of composite casting, liquid transfer, and heatflow
     connection were televised beginning at 172:30 GET. Press briefing at
     195:09 GET (6:32 pm EST Feb. 8) was of good quality.
        CM Kitty Hawk separated from SM at 216:12 GET. Parachute deploy-
     ment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk
     splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship
     U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 GET (4.05 pm EST Feb. 9). Astronauts,
     wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM
     to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with
     recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician
     would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then
     be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston.
     CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery
     ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer re-
     moved lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and
     CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film,
     and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for LRL.
        Primary Apollo 14 objectives-to make selenological inspection, sur-
     vey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro;
     deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man's capability to work in lunar
     environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites-were
     achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near
     nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occa-
     sional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent.
     Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSM/LM docking attempts
     and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first
     use of MET, largest payload-32 500 kg (71 650 1bs)-placed in lunar
     orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload
     returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest
     total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic
     experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations.
        Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo
     mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July
     16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capabil-
     ity to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on
     earth. Apollo 13 (April 11-17, 1970), aborted by SM tank explosion,
     had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation
     and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program
     was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was respon-
     sible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch
     vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition

                                       30
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                         January 31-February 9

    was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Track-
    ing and Data Acquisition. (NASA Proj O f NASA Release 71-245; NYT,
                                           f;
    2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; AV Wk, 2/15/71,19)
January 31: President Nixon in Caneel Bay, Virgin Islands, issued state-
    ment following successful ApoZZo 14 launch: “Today, we take the most
    amazing things almost for granted. It is difficult to imagine, but some
    day the discovery of the New World will seem almost inconsequential
    alongside the explorations of our own time. In a way we are like the
    people who must have stood on the dock at Palos, Spain, and watched
    Columbus’ ships disappear, believing they were watching the end of
    a great event, when they were watching the beginning. But where they
    watched the world being opened, and did not know it, we are watch-
    ing the heavens being opened and we do know it. While those men
    went under the patronage of individual monarchs, our men go for the
    American people and, in a larger sense, for all mankind.” (PD, 2/8/71,
    151-2)
  Vice President Spiro T. Agnew told workers at KSC after ApoZZo 14 launch
    that days of declining space budget were past and “we’re going for-
    ward together not just to the moon but I’m certain that the American
    program will continue and press forward into the reaches of inter-
    planetary space.” (AP, W Star, 2/11/71, A7)
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Univ. of Michigan’s
    Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site (KRLS) , carried GSFC payload to 184.8-
    km (114.8-mi) altitude to obtain data during magnetic activity in
    ionosphere while radiofrequency absorption in 2- and 10-mhz region

February 9: Safely back on earth after a nine-day journey to explore the surface
of the moon, the Apollo 14 astronauts watched a pararescueman close their command
module hatch following splashdown in the planned Pacific Ocean landing zone.




                                       31
                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
January 31

    of spectrum was high. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily.
    Data would be compared with data from similar launch Jan. 29. (NASA
    Rpt SRL; NASA Release 71-1)
  Tenth anniversary of Mercury-Redstone mission that carried chimpanzee
    Ham up to 253-km (157-mi) altitude on suborbital flight. Ham was
    recovered in good health. He was now ward of National Zoo in Wash-
    ington, D.C. (AP, W Post, 1/31/71> A4; Natl Zoo PIO)
  Capabilities of NASA’s   largest computer were described by Dr. Robert
    Jastrow, Director of GSFC Institute for Space Studies, in New York
    Times Magazine article: “The ‘thinking’ of this machine is carried
    out in a computing unit, containing 100,000 transistors, which per-
    forms 10 million elementary actions per second, such as addition and
    subtraction, comparisons of numbers, logical choices between alterna-
    tives. . . .” Numbers and words employed “are stored in its memory,
    which has a capacity for holding one million separate items of infor-
                                .
    mation and can produce . . items, or ingest new ones, in less than
                                .
    one-millionth of a second. . . In normal use, 5 per cent of this memory
    is filled up with the programing instructions which furnish the instinc-
    tive reactions of the machine.’’ Machine also received “specialized
    training” from GSFC staff, “a set of instructions also placed in the
                                           ...10 per cent or 15 per cent of
    machine’s memory, and taking up
    the total memory capacity.” Remainder of computer’s memory con-
    tained facts pertinent to problem at hand. Computer executed 24-hr
    global weather forecast in two hours. Process required “one trillion
    additions and subtractions, which would take a person working at a
    desk calculator 10,000 years to complete.” (NYT Mag, 1/31/71, 14ff)
  Author Norman Mailer said in San Francisco that Americans were as
    interested in Apollo 14 as they would be in “border war in Bolivia.”
    He criticized images of astronauts projected by NASA. They were
    cc
       tough men-daredevils” but NASA presented them as “priests.” NASA
    was “asking this country to love saints and Americans are not noted
    for that.” (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A24)
* Los Angeles Times editorial commented on space funding: “If Congress
    wants to be truly responsible about our national priorities, it will
    avoid making further cuts which would damage the space program out
    of proportion to the savings involved.” In addition to “advancing the
    frontiers of knowledge about the origins of the earth and the nature
    of the universe,” space program promised “to pay off in much more
    concrete ways.”
         LC
            We are already reaping huge benefits from weather and commu-
    nications satellites, as well as from the development of compact, high-
    speed computers, new metals and fabrics, microminiature circuits and
    many other technological advances.” Space program also promised
    more efficient use of earth’s resources, help in global attack on envi-
    ronmental pollution, possible prediction of earthquakes, and hope for
    more productive agriculture by use of lunar soil ingredients.
         “The line between true and false economy is hard to draw. But the
    space program is one area where the time has come to draw it.” (LA
    Times. 1/31/71),
             ,   I   I


During January: Creation of global resources management system was dis-
    cussed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Adminis-
    trator for Planning, in guest editorial in Astronuzltics & Aeronautics:

                                      32
                                                              During January
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

        Can we afford to create a global resources management system? I
      Gb


      think we cannot afford not to develop it. As the richest nation in the
      world we have a moral obligation to bring our new technology to bear
      to help the helpless. But let us talk about our national security. On
      both well-fed sides of the Iron Curtain, an uncomfortable amount of
      raw thermonuclear power has been piled up in the name of ‘deterring
      the other side.’ In the meantime, the under-fed, over-populated part
      of the world, too poor to build thermonuclear bombs, has quietly
      developed a far more terrifying threat to the thermonuclear powers:
      the Population Bomb. Is is not just common sense to spend at least
      a small part of our tax money set aside for national security on the
      task of defusing that bomb? It is gratifying indeed to know that, by
      establishing a global Earth-resources survey and management system,
      we can combine a project bound to vastly enhance our national secu-
      rity with a noble contribution to the welfare of the world, a charity
      quite likely to save the lives of millions.” (A&A, 1/71, 2 6 5 )
    NSF released Research and Development in Local Governments, Fiscal
e

       Years 1968 & 1969 (NSF 71-6): Local government R R ~ Dexpenditures
      doubled between 1966 and 1969, from $20 million to $40 million.
      Approximately 50% of funds spent by local governments for R&D
      came from Federal Government. Life, social, and engineering sciences
      were largest fields in local government RR~D.(Text)




                                      33
              PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILldD



                            February 1971

February 1: Capt. Chester M. Lee (USN), Apollo Mission Director, dis-
    cussed Apollo 14’s docking problems with press at MSC and assured
                                                                  .
    press mission would continue toward moon as planned: “. . first of
    all we did have a successful docking and every indication is that it
    was a normal docking.” Engineers “have been making extensive analy-
    sis here and we can find nothing wrong with the probe. So far as we’re
    concerned it’s all operating. We do not fully understand why it did
    not operate or why the first attempts at docking were not successful.
                                                       .
    However, we are confident that the drogue . . is good. As to the
                                                       .
    cause, it could have been a foreign particle. . . we did ask the crew
                                                                           . ..
    to look diligently for any foreign particles and they didn’t find any.
                                                                      ..
    We did ask them to inspect the probe head very carefully .          to see
    if there were any foreign particles. We found none. If that were the
    problem, it apparently dislodged and is no longer there and is no
    longer causing a problem . . . and the probe certainly works now.”
     (Transcript)
  Newspaper editorials commented on ApoZZo 1 4 difficulties in docking CSM
    with LM [see Jan. 31-Feb. 91.
        New York Times said that “as the world waited tensely for the out-
    come of the struggle to solve the problem, there was a deep sense of
    disappointment at the possibility that all the effort, training and plan-
    ning that went into this mission have been imperiled.” (NYT, 2/1/71,
    30 1
        Washington Evening Star editorial caIIed Apollo I4 “pressure mission.”
     It had “already qualified for several entries in the record book. It is
    the first Apollo mission to be crewed entirely by men who have never
    before flown in earth orbit and commanded by a veteran whose total
    previous time in space was 15 minutes. The mission is led by the oldest
    man to go into space, the first American to ride a rocket, the only
    astronaut to return to active duty after a medically enforced period of
    idleness. It is the first Apollo shot to be delayed because of weather.
     It is the first to run into a major problem on its first day out. It is a
    mission that, in the opinion of many in the top ranks of the space
     agency, will decide the future of manned space flight.” (W Star,
    2/1/71)
* Zzvestia published ApoZZo 1 4 story filed by its New York correspondent
     claiming that cane presented as joke to Alan B. Shepard, Jr., before
     launch had become “symbolic” of entire mission. Report emphasized
     mission’s technical difficulties. (AP, It” Post, 2/2/71, A6)
  NASA issued memorandum change to solicit proposals for participation in
     analysis of space flight data from photography and auxiliary records
     acquired on Apollo lunar exploration missions. Apollo 15, 16, and 17
     would carry three orbital scientific instruments designed to provide pho-
     tos and supporting data, panoramic camera, mapping camera system,
     and laser altimeter. Proposals also were solicited for analysis of lunar

                                      35
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 1

    photography from ApoZZo 14 and for photos of astronomical objects
    from Apollo missions 14 through 17. (NASA Memo Change 36)
* Lockheed Aircraft Corp. announced it would accept $200-million loss on
    C-5A transport imposed by DOD as price of resolving contract disputes
     [see Jan. 271. Lockheed Board Chairman Daniel J. Haughton said in
    statement released to press that acceptance meant Lockheed would for-
    feit $100 million it had already provided toward G 5 A costs and would
     repay second $100 million by securing lien on its investment in
    Lockheed-Georgia plant. Lockheed said it expected to conclude re-
    structured credit arrangement successfully within a few weeks, pro-
    viding additional financing for G l O l l TriStar transport and other
    programs. (Lockheed Release, 2/1/71)
  President Nixon resubmitted to 92nd Congress proposals previously sub-
    mitted to 91st Congress, including proposed legislation to increase air-
    line passenger ticket tax and departure tax on international flights to
     cover cost of civil air and ground security program, particularly sky
    marshals established by Federal Government to combat aerial hijack-
     ing. President noted “number of airline hijackings that seemed to be
     taking place almost daily months ago has been reduced.” ( P D , 2/1/71,
     109-20)
* Interpretation of Gum Nebula as fossil of super nova, or exploded star,
     was reported in Astrophysical Journal by CSFC astronomers Dr. John C.
     Brandt, Theodore P. Stecher, and Dr. Stephen P. Maran and Kitt Peak
    National Observatory astronomer David L. Crawford. Gum Nebula,
    largest known object within Milky Way Galaxy, extended 60’ across
     southern sky. Light took some 3000 yrs to cross it at speed of 299 000
     km (186000 mi) per sec. Previous theory had been that nebula
     glowed visibly because it contained “hot” stars that ionized surround-
     ing hydrogen gas cloud. New interpretation, based on more accurate
     information on nebula’s distance from earth, indicated Gum Nebula
     was produced with pulsar during supernova explosion some 1 000 yrs
                                                                    1
     ago when burst of radiation ionized surrounding hydrogen. (Astro-
    physical Journal, 2/1/71, L99-104)
* Discovery of rarest nuclear particle anti-omega-minus baryon in photo of
     nuclear interaction was reported by physicist Dr. .Gerson Goldhaber of
     Univ. of California at Berkeley at American Physical Society meeting
     in New York. Particle’s track had been found in search of more than
     500 000 photos and further confirmed that baryon particles had anti-
     particles. Photos of particle collisions were taken in heavy-hydrogen-
      filled bubble chamber of particle accelerator at Stanford Linear Accel-
     erator Center (AP, NYT, 2/2/71, 19)
* Promotion of Thomas W. Morgan, Manager of KSC Apollo-Skylab Pro-
      grams, to rank of permanent brigadier general in USAF was noted in
     Armed Forces Journal. (AFJ, 2/1/71,45)
February 1-3 : Joint US.-U.S.S.R. editorial board for preparation and
     publication of review of space biology and medicine held second meet-
      ing in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Professor Melvin Calvin of
      Univ. of California and Professor Oleg 6. Gazenko, Director of Insti-
      tute of Medical Biological Problems of Soviet Ministry of Health.
      (NASA Release 71-16)
February 2-4: North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s Natosat 2 (Nato 2 ;
      NATO-B) military comsat was launched from ETR at 8:41 am EST by


                                     36
                                                               February 2-4
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

            for USAF and NATO by thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster.
    NASA
    Spacecraft entered transfer orbit with 37 712.2-km (23 433.3-mi)
    apogee, 272.9-km (169.6-mi) perigee, 673.9-min period, and 25.9’
    inclination. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into trans-
    fer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to place
    spacecraft in acceptable synchronous orbit.
        Apogee motor was fired at 11:56 pm EST Feb. 4, placing Natosat 2
    into circular orbit with 37 053.0-km (23 023.7-mi) apogee, 34 493.6-km
    (21 433.3-mi) perigee, and 0 inclination. Spacecraft would drift
                                     ’
    about 1 per day from 135’ east longitude until it reached permanent
             ’
    station over Atlantic at 26’ west longitude in late March.
        Natosat 2 was second of two NATO comsats launched under DOD-
    NATO agreement. USAF managed project €or DOD and would reimburse
    NASA for launch services. NATO would reimburse USAF. Initial operation
    of satellite telemetry and command functions were performed from
    USAF satellite control facility. Control of orbital operations would be
    transferred to NATO after spacecraft reached station. (NASA Proj Off)
February 2: President Nixon sent message to Congress transmitting Aero-
    nautics and Space Report of the President, Transmitted to the Con-
    gress January 2971: “The activities of our space program during the
    year are consistent with the recommendations I made in March for a
    balanced space program. Our goals are continued exploration, scientific
    knowledge and practical applications. The technology acquired through
    our space programs has many practical applications on earth ranging
    from communications, meteorology and navigation to agriculture, edu-
    cation and transportation.” Specific objectives were continued lunar
    exploration to increase scientific return on Apollo program investment,
    exploration of solar system and universe, reduction of space operation
     costs, expansion of knowledge of “man’s ability to perform produc-
    tively in the hostile environment of space and to relate this knowl-
    edge to uses here on earth” and application of space technology to envi-
    ronmental problems. “We should also promote international coopera-
     tion in our space program by pursuing joint space ventures, exchang-
     ing scientific and technical knowledge, and assisting in the practical
     application of this knowledge. We are greatly encouraged by Euro-
    pean interest in joining us in cooperative post-Apollo planning.”
        Year 1970 had produced “substantial contributions to continued
     U S . pre-eminence in civil aviation, major improvements in aero-
     nautical services, and impressive developments in a sound SST pro-
     gram.” New military aeronautics programs initiated in 1970 would
     “enhance our national security.’’ (Pres Rpt 71; PD, 2/8/Tl., 158)
  White House Office of Management spokesman said FY 1972 spending
     for public relations would be cut $45 million, or nearly 30%, under
     Nov. 6 Presidential order to curtail “self-serving and wasteful public
     relations activities.” NASA PR spending would be cut from $13.7 mil-
     lion to $9.7 million, one of three largest cuts. Other agencies most
     effected were HEW and DOD. ( h a p , W News, 2/2/71)
  U.K. government agreed to finance half of BAC’S contribution to NR’s
     Phase B space shuttle study for NASA. Total financing was about
     $550 000. (SF,   4/71, 121)
  Sen. David H. Gambrel1 (D-Ga.) was assigned to Senate Committee on
     Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (NASA LAR X/7)

                                     37
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 2

        York Times editorial on         decision to continue Apollo 14 mis-
* New                             NASA
    sion: “Space officials know that they have taken on an extra degree of
    responsibility with the ‘go’ decision, and have opened the way for
    massive recrimination should their judgment be proved wrong by later
    developments. Nevertheless there is some reassurance in the fact that
    the original docking problem-which for a time seemed certain to
    abort the flight-was successfully overcome by the astronauts thou-
    sands of miles from earth. The nation and the world will be watching
    this flight with renewed hope-and admiration for the brave men em-
    barked upon it.,, (NYT, 2/2/71,34)
February 3 : Total new obligational authority for U.S. space program in-
    cluding all pertinent agencies in President Nixon’s proposed FY 1972
                                          $73.6 million, or l.l%, from FY
    budget was $4.707 billion-down
     1971 space NOA of $4780 billion-Space Business Daily estimated.
    Total FY 1972 space expenditures would be $4.633 billion, down 5.2%
    from $4.888 billion in FY 1971. (SBD, 2/3/71, 148)
February 4: Rolls-Royce Ltd. declared bankruptcy. Prestigious British auto-
    motive and aircraft engine company blamed collapse on losses incurred
     in developing RB-211 engine for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. TriStar
     airbus. Rolls-Royce said it could not proceed with engine under cur-
     rent fixed-price contract. (Lee, NYT, 2/5/71, l )
* USN P-3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft achieved world’s rec-
     ord for altitude in horizontal flight of 13 686 m (44 900 ft). Previous
     record of 12990 m (42618 f t ) had been set by Soviet 11-18 in June
     1969. (AF Mug, 4/71,15)
  Training model of French-made uv panorama (S-138) experiment-
     only foreign-made experiment for first Skylab flight-was delivered to
     McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. at Huntington Beach, Calif.
     Experiment would gather photographic data on massive hot stars.
     Training model, which weighed 68 kg (150 lbs) and was 1.2 m
      (3.8 ft) high, would be incorporated with other training equipment
      at McDonnell Douglas. Flight model would be delivered in May.
      ( MSFC Release 71-19)
  House adopted resolution setting number of members of Committee on
      Science and Astronautics at 30 and resolution providing for assign-
      ment of majority and minority members of Committee. Majority
      (Democratic) members were: George P. Miller, Calif., Chairman;
      Olin E. Teague, Tex.; Joseph E. Karth, Minn.; Ken Hechler, W. Va.;
      John W. Davis, Ga.; Thomas N. Downing, Va.; Don Fuqua, Fla.;
      Earle Cabell, Tex.; James W. Symington, Mo.; Richard T. Hanna,
      Calif.; Walter Flowers, Ala.; Robert A. Roe, N.J.; John F. Seiberling,
      Jr., Ohio; William R. Cotter, Conn.; Charles B. Rangel, N.Y.; Morgan
      F. Murphy, Ill.; Mike McCormack, Wash. Minority (Republican)
      members were: James G. Fulton, Pa.; Charles A. Mosher, Ohio;
      Alphonzo Bell, Calif.; Thomas M. Pelly, Wash.; John W. Wydler, N.Y.;
      Larry Wynn, Jr., Kans.; Robert D. Price, Tex.; Louis Frey, Jr., Fla.;
      Barry M. Goldwater, Jr., Cali€.; Marvin L. Esch, Mich.; R. Lawrence
      Coughlin, Pa.; John N. Happy Camp, Okla. (CR, 2/4/71, H428, H434)
  Winners of 11th annual Federal Women’s Award were announced by
      Patricia R. Hi& Assistant Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare.
      They included Rita M. Rapp, Subsystems Manager of Apollo Food and
      Personal Hygiene Items and Head of Tests and Integration Activities

                                     38
                                                                    February 4
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    for Skylab Food System at MSC. Winners, selected from 119 upper-
    grade Federal career women nominated, would be honored at Feb. 25
    dinner in Washington, D.C. (Federal Times, 2/17/71,3; Dean, W Star,
    2/4/71, C3)
* U.S.S.R. would spring “Sputnik-like surprises” on U.S. this decade that
     could make major U.S. military weapon systems technically obsolete,
     Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, DOD Principal Deputy Director of Defense
     Research and Engineering, told Univ. of Southern California audience.
     U.S. response would have to be doubling of current $7-billion-per-year
     defense budget. (Text)
February 5.-President Nixon telephoned MSC Director of Flight Crew Opera-
     tions Donald K. Slayton and asked him to send President’s congratula-
     tions to Apollo 14 astronauts and ground crew. Later President issued
     statement: “Apollo 14’s successful landing on the moon was a thrilling
     event for humanity. I congratulate the astronauts and also the thou-
     sands of other dedicated people who helped make this awesome achieve-
     ment possible.” (PD, 2/8/71, 173)
  USAF’S X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil Powell (USAF),
     successfully completed 22nd flight at FRC. Purpose of glide flight was
     to check out new pilot. (NASA Proj Off)
* Government-industry program for development of experimental jet STOL
     aircraft was proposed by NASA and DOT at meeting of NAE Aeronautics
     and Space Engineering Board in Washington, D.C. Program would
     pool Government and industry funds in partnership to develop low-
     noise-level jet STOL technology. Development of prototype and opera-
     tional aircraft for commercial use would be left to competitive industry
      decision and financing. NASA later said development of experimental
      aircraft was necessary to complete technology and proof-of-concept
      work for production of economically and environmentally acceptable
      STOL air transport system. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Adminis-
      trator for Advanced Research and Technology, estimated that research
      aircraft could be flight-tested in approximately two years from incep-
      tion of cooperative program. (NASA Release 71-20; NAE PIO)
   Collapsed craters formed in terrestrial basalt flows near Grants, N. Mex.,
      exhibited size-frequency distributions similar to those for craters in
      terraces on inner walls of lunar crater Copernicus, ARC scientists Ron-
      ald Greeley and Donald E. Gault reported in Science. Similarities sug-
      gested Copernicus craters had origin similar to basalt collapse craters.
      Scientists suggested that interior terraces of Copernicus were lava flows
      through fractures during postimpact adjustments after formation of
      Copernicus. (Science, 2/5/71,477-9)
   Acid hydrolysis, vacuum crushing, and vacuum pyrolysis experiments
      to investigate amount: nature, and isotopic composition of carbon in
       Apollo 12 sample 12023 were described in Science by ARC exobiolo-
       gists Sherwood Chang, Keith A. Kvenvolden, James G. Lawless, and
       Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and UCLA geologist I. R. Kaplan. Results
       indicated that sample contained indigenous carbide and methane in
       amounts comparable to those found in Apollo 1 fines. Hydrolyzable
                                                         1
       carbide in Apollo 12 sample was heavier, isotopically, than any known
       carbide phase in meteorites. Large difference between isotope values
       for lunar and meteorite carbide suggested “that the former was either
       native to the moon or deposited by meteorites and subsequently sub-

                                      39
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 5

    jected to isotope fractionation processes on the lunar surface.” If meteor-
    ites were not source of lunar carbide, “then we are left with the pos-
    sibilities that the carbides represent primordial indigenous lunar car-
    bon, however formed, or the product of interaction between solar wind
    carbon and metals or metal oxides or minerals on the lunar surface.”
    Evidence existed for presence of carbides in Apollo 11 rocks but
    amounts were too low for isotopic measurements. “If the carbon was
    indeed indigenous to the lunar rocks, the observed range of isotopic
    composition would be more representative of primordial lunar carbon.”
     (Science, 2/5/71,474&)
 President Nixon’s FY 1972 science budget was analyzed in Science:
    Budget proposed selective increases for R&D which would “start the
    federal science budget upward again after several years of virtually
    static financing.” Impact in FY 1972 spending would not be dramatic
     “since there is a lag of as much as 2 or 3 years between the obligation
    and actual spending” but budget served as “declaration of intentions.”
    Nixon Administration showed “inclination to maintain high-quality
    capabilities for research but to restrain expansion of research and,
    particularly, of manpower training except in areas judged to contribute
    to the solution of major nation problems.” Priorities were indicated
    by choices of agencies and programs for major increases: NSF budget
    would exceed $600 million for first time, with major portion of in-
    creases going to additional support of research grants. New cancer
    research program would receive $100 million. Substantial increases
    would provide funds for research on environmental problems, highway
    safety, air traffic control, and crime reduction. DOD R&D spending would
    be increased with additional funds split between work on strategic and
    tactical weapons.
        Obligational authority for total Federal science budget would rise
    to $16.7 billion from $15.6 billion in FY 1971, but estimated expendi-
    tures would rise only from $15.3 to $15.6 billion. NSF would get new
    obligational authority of $622 million in FY 1972 but would spend esti-
    mated $546 million. (Science, 2/5/71,459-60)
  Astronomers had asked Tucson, Ariz., to modify its outdoor lighting so
    their view of heavens would not be obstructed by nighttime glare,
    Science reported. Astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory,
     National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Steward Observatory, Lunar
     and Planetary Laboratory, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-
     tory had complained. (Bazell, Science, 2/5/71, 561) )
February 6 : New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 14 lunar land-
     ing: ‘ L . . . no one who sat entranced before the picture of yesterday’s
    historic events can have doubted that Antares has scored a major
     triumph in the effort to advance lunar exploration. Today Shepard and
    Mitchell will face new problems and grasp new opportunities as they
    lope their way toward Cone Crater and its geological riches. These two
     brave and highly skilled men-along         with their partner, astronaut
     Roosa, in lunar-orbiting Kitty Hawk-are         writing another brilliant
     and memorable chapter in man$ still-infant probing of earth‘s nearest
     neighbor in the vast reaches of space.” (NYT, 2/6/71, 28)
February 7 : RM Radiation/Meteoroid satellite launched pickaback with
     Of0 satellite Nov. 9, 1970, reentered atmosphere and disintegrated.
     Satellite had demonstrated that advanced radiation system was feasible

                                      40
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 February 7

     and accurate and had verified improved instrumentation for measuring
     meteoroid impact, flux, direction, and speed. (NASA Release 7 1 4 0 )
February 7-8: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, which landed on moon
     on board Luna 17 Nov. 18, 1970, traveled 597 m (653 yds) across
     moon during first two traverses since end of third lunar night. (SBD,
    2/10/71,182)
February 8: ApoZZo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell,
     and Stuart A. Roosa held 25-min press conference, televised from
    spacecraft during transearth coast. Mitchell called mission “quite a
    success” in spite of failure to reach Cone crater during second EVA:
     “I think the majority of the type rocks we would find at the rim were
    in the boulder field that we were working, although it was a disap-
    pointment, just as a matter of challenge, not to get up there. I think
    we accomplished the scientific objectives that we went for.”
       Shepard explained major problem was “the undulating terrain where
    you simply couldn’t see more than 100 to 150 yards [90 to 140 meters]
    away from you. Consequently, you were never quite sure what land-
    mark would appear when you topped the next ridge. We were very
    surprised when we . . . approached the ridge which we thought to be
    the rim of Cone Crater, to find there was another one behind it. And
    that was the beginning of the real problem. As far as we were con-
    cerned, our only problem was the amount of time allotted for the
    excursion. To us it was just a matter of working against the clock.
    I don’t believe that we were disoriented or lost any time. I think if
    we had wanted to reach the top of the crater and did nothing else,
    that we could have done that within the time period allotted. But I
                                              ..
    think the method to which we reverted . of collecting rocks from
     a point not quite near the top of the crater provided a lot more geo-
                                                                          .
    logically and gave us a better cross-section of the rocks in the area . .
    than had we gone to the crater and back and not collected as many
    rocks.” (NYT, 2/9/71, 26)
* Nutosat 2 military comsat, launched by NASA for USAF and NATO Feb. 2,
    was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft was in satisfactory orbit
    and was functioning normally. (NASA Proj Off)
* Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
    Univ. of Michigan experiment to observe airglow. Rocket and instru-
    ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  USN P-3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft, piloted by Cdr. Donald
        Lilienthal (USN) , broke four “time-to-climb” records by climbing
    €.   I
    from brake release to 3000 m (9843 ft) in 2 min 59 sec, to 6000 m
     (19 685 f t ) in 5 min 48 sec; to 9000 m (29 528 ft) in 10 min 31 sec,
    and to 12000 m (39 370 ft) in 19 min 53 sec. Aircraft also posted
    new maximum altitude record for its cIass of 14 050 m (46 100 ft).
     (AI:Mug, 7/71,15)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee
    on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Washington, D.C., that
    cutback in funding for NERVA development in NASA FY 1972 budget
    was gross error reflecting on management capability of NASA. Cutting
    program funding to $30 million would mean virtual halt in work on
    NERVA. (AP, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 2/9/71)
* NASA announced it had awarded Bellcomm, Inc., 17-mo, $11.5-million
    extension to contract for systems analysis, study, planning, and tech-

                                    41
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 8

    nical support to manned space flight program. Extension, which would
    continue through May 1972, brought total value of contract since
    March 1962 to $91 million. (NASA Release 71-17)
  President Nixon sent message to Congress outlining 1971 environmental
    program. Program included measures to strengthen pollution control,
    control emerging problems including noise pollution, promote environ-
    mental quality in land use decisions, further institutional improve-
    ment, expand international cooperation, and establish “World Heritage
    Trust to preserve parks and areas of unique cultural value throughout
    the world.” (PD,  2/15/71,187-204)
February 8-9: NASA Aerospace Advisory Panel met at MSFC to discuss
    safety aspects of LRV, Skylab spacecraft, and proposed space shuttle.
     (MSFC Release 71-23)
February 9 : Following Apollo 14 splashdown, President Nixon telephoned
    Apollo 14 astronauts aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans to
    express personal congratulations on successful completion of mission.
     He released statement comparing Apollo 14 with May 5, 1961, Free-
     dom 7 mission flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.: “The differ-
     ence between that first flight and this latest is a measure of how far
     we have progressed in space in the short span of 10 years. But two
    things have not changed: the courage and determination of the men
    who fly these missions, and the skill and dedication of the thousands
    here on earth who make their flights possible.” (PD, 2/15/71, 205)
  Cosmos 394 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 613-km (380.9-mi)
0

     apogee, 572-km (355.4-mi) perigee, 96.5-min period, and 65.8O inclina-
    tion. (GSFC SSR, 2/28/71)
           M2-F3 lifting body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry
  NASA’s
     (USAF) , successfully completed fifth flight after air-launch from B-52
    aircraft at FRC. Purpose of flight was to compare flight characteristics
     of M2-F3 with those of M2-F2. Maj. Gentry was only active pilot who
     had flown both vehicles. Mission was his last before leaving for duty
     in Southeast Asia. (NASA Proj O f
                                    f)
  Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on
0

     Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 3981, $3.271-billion FY
     1972 NASA authorization bill. Bill authorized appropriations of $2.518
     billion for R&D, $56.3 million for construction of facilities, and $697.4
     million for research and program management. (CR, 2/9/71, H588;
     NASA LAR x/11)
  Christian Science Monitor editorial commented : “Technically, the feats
     of Apollo 14 . . . are invaluable. The scientific data obtained have
     opened many new paths to broader knowledge. But far more note-
     worthy should be the effect which these can have upon man’s view
     of his place and role in the universal scheme. It is already historical
     fact that America’s space program has helped focus sharper attention
     on challenges at home. This is bound, in the long run, to be one of
     the program’s greatest contributions.” (CSM, 2/9/71)
  Former New Mexico Governor David F. Cargo presented Apollo I1 moon
     fragments to Museum of New Mexico at ceremony in Santa Fe. Later,
     AP said incumbent Governor Bruce King had claimed lunar samples
     for people of New Mexico, while Cargo said they had been presented
     to him, personally, by President Nixon. AP said White House records

                                     42
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                February 9

    showed plaque presented with moon fragments was inscribed “to the
    people of the State of New Mexico.” (AP, I’ Post, 2/11/71)
                                                   T
  DOD said USA had been directed to continue development of Hardsite
    Defense, supplementary ABM system that included modified Sprint
    interceptor missiles and smaller, less expensive radars than those used
    in Safeguard ABM system. (AP, B Sun, 2/10/71, A l )
February 10: Soviet President Nikolay Podgorny sent message to President
                               .
    Nixon: “Please accept . . our congratulations on the successful con-
    clusion of the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 14 and on the safe return
    of the American astronauts.” Tass said he also asked President Nixon
    to forward best wishes to “courageous crew.” (Reuters, C Trib,
    2/11/71)
  European interest in US. space program had “with notable exceptions”
    dwindled since Apollo 11’s first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught”
    Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV
    coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some coun-
    tries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in
    West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation
    of manned space flights. Frankfurter R d s c h a u editorial had said,
    “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by
    a Lunokhod.”
       Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and
    Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle.
       Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest supe-
    riority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with
    space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to
    ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya
    Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable
    bravery.”
       In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern
    Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14
    had been less than of previous Apollo missions.
       Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front
    page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York
    had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage
    had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous
    Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all man-
    kind.
       In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers
    and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years
    ago” had vanished.
       Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public
    interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student
    leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would
    cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon,
    maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the
    smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead
    of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
  Apollo 14 technical problems were discussed by Dr. George M. Low,
    Acting NASA Administrator, in interview published by New York Times:
    “I feel that what we’ve seen on Apollo 14 is about the number of
    problems one must expect on any given flight with such a complicated

                                    43
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 10

    piece of hardware. Yet the spacecraft design is such that it is forgiving
    of failures. And we hope we’ll always be able to work around them
    and press on with the mission.” (Witkin, NYT, 2/10/71)
e MSC scientists reported instruments left on moon by Apollo astronauts had
    apparently survived sudden drop in temperature during lunar eclipse.
    Instruments registered no unusual seismic events or radiation fluxes
    during eclipse. Temperature at Apollo 12 site dropped from 348.9 K
     (168.3’F) to 170.4 K (-153’F), a 178.5 K (321.3OF) change. Tem-
    perature at Apollo 14 site dropped from 341 K (154.1’F) to 170.4 K
     (-153’F). (NYT, 2/11/71,40)
* Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations,
    announced at MSC that Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had
    become first man to gain weight while in space. Other two crew
    members had lost weight: Edgar D. Mitchell had lost 0.5 kg ( 1 lb)
    and Stuart A. Roosa had lost 4.5 kg (10 lbs). Shepard had gained
    0.5 kg ( 1 Ib). NASA physicians were making fluid tests on astronauts
    to determine reason for weight loss during space flight. (Altman,
    NYT, 2/11/71,40)
  Milwaukee Journal editorial on Apollo 14 commented: “The real return
0

    on Apollo lies in the future-beyond the more difficult missions of
    flights 15, 16 and 17. It is in Skylab, reusable space shuttles and
    sophisticated space stations to come. It is in the complex monitoring
    of the earth and its resources from space. It is in the co-operation
    and internationalization of space programs that appear to be develop-
    ing-hopefully to replace competition. Here is the payoff. To this
    Apollo 14 and its crew have made their extraordinary contribution.”
    ( M J , 2/10/71)
  NASA announced renaming of five recently reorganized units of Office of
0

    Advanced Research and Technology (OART ) . Aeronautical Research
    Div. became Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div. ; Environmental
    Systems and Effects Div. became Aeronautical Life Sciences Div. ;
    STOL Program Office became STOL Technology Office; ATET Program
    Office became Supercritical Technology Office; and Lifting Body
    Program Office became Entry Technology O5ce.
       Dr. Leo Fox, Deputy Director of Biotechnology and Human Re-
    sources Div., was named Director of Aeronautical Life Sciences Div.
    (NASA Special Release)
* NASA announced appointment of Harry W. Johnson, Vice President for
    Engineering in Gates Learjet Corp.’s Aircraft Div., as Director of
    OART’S Aeronautical Propulsion Div. (NASA Release 71-19)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee
    on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, introduced S. 720, $3.271-billion
    FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, identical to House bill introduced
    Feb. 9 (CR, 2/10/71, S1193)
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. President Charles S. Wagner announced that
    Lockheed would lay off up to 6500 employees as result of financial
    collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. British concern was unable to make
    scheduled deliveries of engines for Lockheed L-1011 TriStar airbus.
    Lockheed had orders for 178 TriStars from seven airlines and three
    holding companies at approximately $16 million each. (Witkin, NYT,
    2/11/71,67)
  Long Beach, Calif., Harbor Commission refused to renew Howard Hughes’

                                    44
ASTRONAUTiCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                February 10

    lease on 3-hectare (7.2-acre) site where eight-engine wooden flying
    boat Spruce Goose had been in hangar for more than 23 yrs. Lease
    would be terminated on Sept. 1 expiration because property could be
    more profitably developed as marine terminal. Hughes had designed
    and built aircraft at estimated $24-million cost. Aircraft, 67 m (219 ft)
    long with 97.5-m (320-ft) wingspan, had been flown once, by Hughes
    Nov. 3, 1947. It had not been seen by public since. (UPI, Y Post,
    2/12/71, A8)
* President Nixon submitted nomination to Senate of Herbert F. DeSimone
    to be Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and
    Urban Systems. (PD,     2/15/71, 209, 217)
February 11: President Nixon signed Seabed Arms Control Treaty in State
    Dept. ceremony held simultaneously with ceremonies in Moscow and
    London. He said: “It has been very properly pointed out that the
    seabed is man’s last frontier on earth, and that frontier can either be
    a source of peril or promise. By the signing of this treaty, we have
    pledged to seek its promise and to remove its peril.” Treaty was “indi-
    cation of progress that has been made and continues to be made
    toward the goal that we all seek: the control of instruments of mass
    destruction, so that we can reduce the danger of war.” (PD, 2/15/71,
    211-2)
  Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of GSFC Institute for Space Studies, was
    quoted as saying in London that people often forgot intelligence factor
    in debate over manned versus unmanned space missions. Dr. Jastrow
    had pointed out that by time unmanned space exploration technology
    reached level of achievement already exhibited in manned exploration,
    lunar exploration-or even Martian exploration-might haTe advanced
    to stage of extended expeditions or space station. Then human per-
    formance would again have jumped ahead of machines. (Cowen, CSM,
    2/11/71)
February 11-12: Delegation from 11-nation European Space Conference
    met at Dept. of State with State Dept., NASC, and NASA officials to
    continue discussion of possible cooperation in post-Apollo space pro-
    gram, particularly space shuttle and space station. Conference Presi-
    dent The0 Lefevre, Belgian Minister for Scientific Policy and Plan-
    ning, in address raised question of availability to European nations
    of U.S. launchers if European collaboration in post-Apollo projects
    failed to materialize, or materialized to smaller degree than US.
    requested. U.S. condition that its launch vehicles be made available
    only for uses compatible with international agreements raised diffi-
    culties for Europeans, especially since Intelsat agreement had not been
    completed. ESC was proposing that each party supply its partner “with
    any element of the space system which it is asked to supply, while
    leaving to its partner the final responsibility for complying with the
                                                    ..
    international agreements it has undertaken. .       these agreements are
    identical for the US. and the European countries.” (Text; Joint
    Communiqu6
February 12: LRL scientists opened first box of lunar samples returned by
    A p l l o 14. Samples included one rock almost pure white with some
    grey flecks and one with 10 times more potassium, thorium, and
    uranium than was found in A p Z b 11 and 12 samples. Dr. Paul Gast,
    Director of Planetary and Earth Sciences at MSC, said preliminary

                                     45
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 12

    studies of samples were “not inconsistent” with idea that lunar high-
    lands might represent lunar crust. “If this additional evidence that
    the (highlands) materials on the moon contain abundant rocks with
                                                           ..  . it means the
    high potassium and high uranium and high thorium
    highlands are almost as old as the moon itself. What we’re saying is
                                                    ..
    that there is a layer of unknown thickness .       on the surface of the
    moon which is of very different composition than the average moon.”
    (AP, W Star, 2/13/71, A l )
  Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell had tried personal experiment in
    mental telepathy during flight to moon and back, AP reported. Mitchell,
    who had life-long interest in psychic phenomena, had concentrated at
    prearranged times on symbols. Psychic in Chicago had concentrated at
    same time in attempt to receive signals. Mitchell confirmed that he had
    conducted experiment, but declined to reveal details. (AP, B Sun,
    2/13/71, A l )
  Analysis of low-frequency sound from Apollo 14 spacecraft passing 188
    km (117 mi) over Bermuda, obtained from infrasonic sensors in Ber-
    muda, was presented in Science by Columbia Univ. geologists. Signals,
    reminiscent of N-waves from sonic booms, were horizontally coherent,
    had nearly identical appearances and frequencies, and had supersonic
    trace velocities across tripartite sensor arrays. They had identical ar-
    rival times after spacecraft launch from ICSC and were only coherent
    signals recorded over many hours. Observations “seem to establish that
    the recorded sound comes from the rockets at high elevation” but values
    of surface pressure appeared explainable by combination of “kinetic
    theory approach to shock formation in rarefied atmospheres with estab-
    lished gas-dynamics shock theory.” (Cotten, Donn, Science, 2/12/71,
    565-7)’
  Age and composition effects on alteration of lunar optical properties were
    described in Science. Evidence from Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 samples
    and telescopic spectral reflectivity measurements indicated that lunar
    seas “are similar in mineralogy on a regional scale and that the high-
    lands are consistent with an anorthositic-gabbro composition. Bright
    craters and rays in both regions expose materials that are relatively
     crystalline compared with their backgrounds, which are richer in dark
     glass. With age, bright craters and rays in the maria darken in place by
     meteorite impact-induced vitrification and mixing with the surrounding
     material. Highland bright craters and rays may, however, darken pri-
    marily through regional contamination by iron and titanium rich m r e
     material.” (Adams, McCord, Science, 2/12/71,567-71)
* MSFC announced appointment of Dr. William R. Lucas, Director of
     MSFC’s Program Development Directorate, as MSFC Deputy Director,
     Technical, effective Feb. 15. Dr. Lucas’ position would be assumed by
     James T. Murphy in acting capacity. (MSFC Release 71-25)
* NASA announced publication of second annual Research and Technology
     Operating Plan (RTOP) Summary. FY 1971 edition identified and de-
     scribed hundreds of NASA research and technology efforts. (NASA Re-
    lease 71-18)
  USN announced cause of Dec. 30, 1970, crash of F-14 Tomcat fighter air-
     craft on second test flight was two pencil-thin hydraulic lines that rup-
     tured after severe vibration. Findings confirmed those of aircraft man-

                                     46
                                                                   February 12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    ufacturer, Grumman Aerospace Corp. USN said problem could be cor-
    rected without major redesign or changes. (AP, NYT, 2/15/71, 44)
  Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on signing of seabed
    treaty: “A quarter century of fear and mistrust has left both the U.S.
    and U.S.S.R. with vast nuclear power, but little real security. The Sea-
    bed Treaty is not going to reverse this, but it is one more slim strand
    across the chasm of nationalistic rivalry upon which mankind may
    eventually suspend a bridge.” ( P Bull, 2/12/71)
February 13: President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 14
    Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell for promotion to grade of captain in USN.
    Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had been promoted by USAF to grade of
    lieutenant colonel. (PD, 2/22/71,266)
  NASA released 9 color photos, 14 black-and-white photos, and segment of
    16-mm film taken during Apollo 14 mission. Pictures showed LM, foot-
    prints, tire tracks, Astronauts Shepard and Mitchell during EVA, Ameri-
    can flag on surface, and large boulders. (AP, W Star, 2/14/71, A3)
February 14: Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from
    Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. experiment to conduct auroral
     studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
* Historical value of Apollo 14 was appraised by Thomas O’Toole in Wash-
     ington Post article. Mission “may well be remembered as a turning
     point in the sense that it taught man what his role could be in the
     exploration of space.” Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 landings had been
     “feats of technology that showed the world what its richest nation
     could do when it set its mind to something. Apollo 14 went a giant
     step further, to a place where man might appreciate what he had done
     and what he could do in the future on the surface of the moon or an-
     other planet.” ( W Post, 2/14/71, C1)
  JPL announced selection of Howard H. Haglund, former Surveyor project
     manager, to be project manager for DOT’S People Mover transit sys-
     tem at Morgantown, W. Va. Dr. Albert R. Hibbs would be deputy
     project manager. JPL was initiating research and design of automated,
     computer-controlled system under $1353 000 DOT contract. ( JPL
     Release 570)
February 15: Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s second G l O l l TriStar, piloted by
     Lockheed test pilot Ralph C. Cokeley, made maiden flight from Lock-
     heed facility at Palmdale, Calif. Aircraft was flown at speeds well un-
     der 966-km-per-hr (600-mph) capacity to test control surfaces and
     hydraulics systems. First TriStar had been flown Nov. 16, 1970. (AP,
      B Sun, 2/16/71, A6)
                                                                           ..
   Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented: “Apollo 14 .
      demonstrated that man still has much to learn about the moon. Even
      with the ability to land in relatively rough areas and to extend useful
      working time on the moon, the experience of the Apollo 14 duo in the
      Fra Mauro area indicates that better new equipment is needed to ex-
      tend the range and accuracy of their explorations. And once the various
      typical areas of the lunar surface are reached it is obvious that vehicles
      with payloads much larger than Apollo will be required to haul the
      equipment needed to establish permanent scientific working stations on
      the lunar surface. For not until that is accomplished will man really
      begin to reap the full harvest of knowledge from his lunar capabilities.”
       (Hotz, Av Wk, 2/15/71,9)

                                       47
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
Februaq- 15

  British Aircraft Corp. said in London that Concorde test flights had “met
     with success unique in the annals of commercial aircraft flight devel-
     opment.” BAC chief test pilot Brian Trubshaw told press conference he
     was optimistic since British and French prototypes had flown total 393
     hrs 56 min, including 92 hrs 35 min at supersonic speeds. Aircraft
     had maintained directional stability at twice speed of sound and on
     stalling two of its four engines at same speed. Modifications would
     be made on nacelles before next phase of test flights because of Jan. 22
     incident to French prototype 001 at mach 2 over Atlantic. Air pressure
     had broken off forward intake ramp of No. 4 engine and engine had
     fallen off into sea. (Berger, B Sun, 2/16/71, C6)
February 16: Univ. of Tokyo’s Space and Aeronautics Institute successfully
     launched Japan’s second satellite, 63-kg (139-lb) Tansei (MST-1) ,
     from Uchinoura Space Center with four-stage Mu-4S booster. Orbital
     parameters: apogee, 1110 km (689.7 m i ) ; perigee, 990 km (615.2
     mi) ; period, 106 min; and inclination, 29.7O. Puvpose of mission was
     to conduct “engineering test for the launching of scientific satellites.”
      Tansei, “Light Blue,” was named for Univ. of Tokyo colors. First
      satellite, Ohsumi-named      for district from which it was launched-
      had been launched Feb. 11, 1970. (UN General Assembly Release 71-
      03697; SBD, 2/17/71, 211; NASA Off Int Aff; W Star, 2/16/71, A7)
   Scientists at MSC, after studying Apollo 14 photos and questioning crew,
      reported Astronauts Mitchell and Shepard had turned back within
      25-50 m (80-165 ft) of Cone Crater during second EVA period. Crew
      was apparently misled by slight downhill slope around top of Cone
      Crater which led them to believe it was not part of crater. Ridge astro-
      nauts were struggling to reach appeared to have been southeast of
      Cone. (AP, B Sun, 2/17/71, A l )
   European Space Conference President The0 Lefevre, Belgian Minister for
 0

      Scientific Policy and Planning, told Brussels press conference that U S .
      had refused at Feb. 11-12 conference in Washington, D.C., to sell US.
      launch vehicles for European comsats. Lefevre said State Dept. had
      told him, however, that if two thirds of Intelsat’s 72 members agreed
      that launch vehicles should be so1cPU.S. would sell. ( N Y T , 2/17/71,
       14; W Post, 2/17/71, A13)
 * NASA announced publication of This Island Earth (NASA SP-250). Book,
                        Deputy Director Oran W. Nicks, contained color pho-
       edited by L ~ R C
       tos of earth taken on US. space flights. In foreword Dr. George M.
       Low, NASA Acting Administrator, said: “Photographs such as this book
       contains increase our understanding of the relationships between our
       activities and our environment. It is somewhat paradoxical that man’s
       new ability to voyage in space has provided him with a valuable way
       to appreciate his Earth.” (NASA Special Release, 2/16/71)
 February 17: USAF launched four satellites from Vandenberg AFB by one
       Thor-Burner I1 booster. Unidentified satellite entered orbit with 832.0-
       km (517-mi) apogee, 767.7-km (4i77-mi) perigee, 100.8-min period,
        and 98.8’ inclination. Calisphere 3, 4, and 5-launched to provide
       targets for radar calibration and evaluate surface material erosion and
        drag effects vis-a-vis their inert gold or aluminum surfaces-entered
        orbits with 833.6-km (518-mi) apogee, 762.8- to 772.5-km (474- to
        480-mi) perigee, 100.8-min period, and 98.8’ inclination. (Pres Rpt
        72; SBD, 2/18/71,224)

                                       48
                                                                    February 17
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   Unidentified satellite launched by USAF from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-
     Agena booster exploded about 40 sec after liftoff. (UPI, W Star,
     2/ 18/7 1  )
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 395 from Plesetsk into orbit with 545-km
      (338.7-mi) apogee, 529-km (328.7-mi) perigee, 95.3-min period, and
     74.0’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 2/28/71; SBD, 2/19/71, 224)
* Presidential Management Improvement Certificate was presented to
     NASA Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms (IMP) Management Team in
     NASA Hq. ceremony. Award was for “efficient program management and
     design improvements which permitted deferment of a launch for a year
     while maintaining the achievement of program objectives.” (NASA Org
     & Mgmt Off)
   NAS and NAE released Jamaica Bay and Kennedy Airport: A Multidisci-
     plinary Environmental Study. Report, prepared at request of Port of
      New York Authority, recommended against expansion of John F.
      Kennedy International Airport. “Any runway construction will damage
      the natural environment of the Bay and reduce its potential use for
      conservation, recreation, and housing.” (NAS-NAE Release 2/17/71)
* US. Dept. of Justice asked Supreme Court to deny atheist Mrs. Madalyn
      Murray O’Hair’s request that US. astronauts be prohibited from under-
      taking religious activities during lunar missions. Solicitor Gen. Erwin
      Griswold said astronauts carried only personal religious items which
      improved their morale and contributed “to the success of the flight.”
       (UPI, H Post, 2/17/71)
 * MSC announced award of $800 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Lockheed
      Electronics Co. for first year performance of scientific and technical
      support services for Earth Resources Laboratory at MTF. (MSC Release
      71-07)
February 18: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 396 from Plesetsk into orbit
      with 268-km (166.5-mi) apogee, 189-km (117.4-mi) perigee, 89.0-min
      period, and 65.4’ inclination. Satellite reentered March 3. (GSFC SSR,
      2/28/71; 3/31/71; SRD, 2/19/71,224)
   USAF’S X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A.
       Manke, successfully completed 23rd flight at FRC. Objectives of pow-
       ered flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.5, determine lateral-
       directional derivatives, and determine longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag
       ratio with 40° upper flap setting and 0’ rudder bias. Pilot performed
       pushovers, pullups, and aileron doublets at a number of angles of
       attack. (NASA Proj Off)
 * NASA Contractor Equal Employment Opportunity Program activities were
       transferred from Procurement Office to Industrial Relations Office.
       Joseph M. Hogan would continue to direct group and would report to
       Robert E. King, Director of Industrial Relations. Personnel and func-
       tions concerned with participation of minority-owned business in NASA
       procurements would remain in Procurement Office. (NASA Special Ann)
    NASA selected Wyle Laboratories to receive cost-plus-award-fee contract for
       instrument repair, maintenance, and calibration services at L ~ R C . Con-
       tract was for one year with two one-year renewal options at $7.5 mil-
       lion for three years. (NASA Release 71-22)
  February 19: President Nixon was expected to name Univ. of Utah Presi-
        dent, Dr. James C. Fletcher, as NASA Administrator, Washington Post
        reported. Dr. Fletcher, a physicist, had been an aerospace executive and

                                       49
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 19

     consultant to NACA, DOD, and President’s Science Advisory Committee.
      (O’Toole, J Post, 2/19/71, A l )
                  V
* Evidence of nature of clouds of Venus derived from comparing polariza-
     tion observations with theoretical calculations was reported in Science
     by James E. Hansen and Dr. Albert Arking of Goddard Institute for
     Space Studies. Linear polarization of sunlight multiply scattered by
     atmosphere and Venus cloud particles had been computed and com-
     pared with observations over wavelength range from uv to infrared
     region. Refractive index of cloud particles was 1 . 4 5 t 0.02 at 0.55,~
     wavelength. There was indication of slight decrease in value from uv
     to near-infrared region; mean particle radius was very near l p and
     most of particles were spherical. Cloud layer occurred high in atmos-
     phere where pressure was about 50 millibars or equivalent to approxi-
     mately 20-km (12.4-mi) altitude on earth. Results for index of refrac-
     tion eliminated possibility that visible clouds were composed of pure
     water or ice. Aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid and carbon sub-
     oxide “are not absolutely excluded, but the liklihood for either is not
     high. A new look at the question of the Venus cloud composition seems
     in order.” (Science, 2/19/71,669-72)
   Boosted Arcas I sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill
      Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to measure low-
      altitude x-ray spectrum and electron flux above 30 500 m (100 000 ft).
      Rocket reached 59.1-km (36.7-mi) altitude and mission was 100%
      successful. (NASA Rpt SRL)
 * ComSatCorp reported net income for 1970 was $17 501 000 ($1.75 per
      share), up from $7 129 000 (71 cents per share) for 1969. Operating
                                                                of $22 564 000
      revenues for 1970 reached $69 598 000-increase
       (48% ) over $47 034 000 received in 1969. ( ComSatCorp Release
      71-10)
   Ten Western European nations agreed to cooperate in building 300-bev
      particle accelerator on frontier between France and Switzerland. Accel-
      erator would fit into tunnel forming 2-km (11/4-mi) ring. Decision to
      proceed with $260-million project had been awaited since 1964.
       (NYT, 2/20/71,28)
 * The Decision To Go to the Moon, book by John M. Logsdon, was reviewed
      in Technology Review: “Logsdon has done a considerable service in
      pulling together the elements of the histories of official U.S. space pol-
       icy, of .GermamAmerican rocket engineering and the obsessive aiming-
      for-the-stars that went with it, of congressional enthusiasm for extra-
       terrestrial responsibilities, and finally of the months of Kennedy’s
       greatest vulnerability. The factual part of the book leaves one ready
       to draw one’s own conclusions.” Review had concluded “that we can-
      not hope for any useful Apollo-sized program in the absence of any
       counteEpart of the von Braun team, tirelessly bringing to perfection a
       thing that had not been asked for.’’ (Wheeler, Tech Rev, 2/19/71,22)
 February 20: National Urban Coalition released CozmterbudgetA Blue-
       print for Changing National Priorities, 1971-1976. Report noted di-
       minishing public support for science and technology and recommended
       4% increase in R&D funding to prevent deterioration of Government’s
       role in science and technology in national affairs. Space program should
       be kept at funding level just over $3 billion, rather than Qg5.9-billion
       level reached in 1966. Space shuttle and station programs should be

                                      50
                                                                   February 20
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     continued but on stretched schedule. Mars mission should be under-
     taken only when it could be done internationally. Value of space pro-
     gram as whole lay in its scientific yield, practical results, and national
     leadership. (CR, 5/21/71, ELE836-98; NUC PIO)
  Award of contracts up to $100 000 each to LTV Aerospace Corp. and Rohr
     Corp. for preparation of proposals for installation of tracked air cush-
     ion vehicle (TACV) system along access road to Dulles Airport in Chan-
     tilly, Va., was announced by DOT. Negotiations for similar contract with
     Grumman Aerospace Corp. were continuing. (DOT Release 3071)
February 21 : Aerobee 350 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wal-
     lops Station at 7:43 pm EST, carried 440.4-kg (971-lb) Columbia Univ.
     payload to 196.3-km (122-mi) altitude to search for x-ray polarization
     of Crab Nebula. Rocket and instruments-including two polarimeters
     sensitive to x-rays at 2.6 kev and 5.25 kev-functioned satisfactorily.
     Payload recovery would be attempted after daybreak Feb. 22. (WS
      Release 71-1 )
  Text of Dr. Wernher von Braun interview by West German magazine
      Der Spiegel was released to U.S. press. NASA Associate Administrator
      for Planning was convinced that in 20 yrs “we shall have reached the
      point where space travel will earn more than it is costing.” Earnings
      from “bread and butter programs”--comsats, weather-monitoring space-
      craft, and ERS satellites-could pay for permanent lunar bases and
      manned exploration of Mars. “Most important product of the seven-
      ties” would be application of “all that the space program has taught us.”
      (Wilford, NYT, 2/21/71,75)
* L a R c engineers were using automobile fitted with diagonal braking system
      to measure slipperiness of wet runways and predict aircraft stopping
      distance to prevent accidents, NASA announced. Technique could pro-
      vide data for realistic calculations of crosswind limitations. Stopping
      distances of car were measured from 97-km-per-hr (60-mph) speed for
      skidding locked wheels on wet and dry runways. Tests showed ratio of
      wet-to-dry stopping distances for auto correlated well with those of
      representative aircraft. (NASA Release 71-21)
February 22: Portable magnetometer carried during Apollo 14 EVA had
       detected unexpected bulge in moon’s magnetic profile, ARC announced.
       Data indicated lunar magnetic field at point 297 m (325 yds) north-
       east of Apollo 14 landing site was about 100 gammaethree times
       higher than measurements at Apollo 12 site. Another reading, 457 m
       (500 yds) away near edge of Cone crater, measured about 40 gammas.
       (ARC Release, 7 1 4 )
  First flight model LRV had begun six-week acceptance testing by Boeing
       Co. preliminary to scheduled delivery to NASA on April 1, NASA an-
       nounced. Model would transport two astronauts on three extravehicu-
       lar traverses during Apollo 15 mission in July. Second LRV flight model,
       being built at Boeing, was scheduled for testing in last week of March
       and for April delivery. Third model was scheduled for May delivery.
       (NASA Release 71-25)
   Julian Scheer resigned position as NASA Assistant Administrator for Pub-
       lic Affairs. He had joined NASA as consultant in November 1962 and
       directed NASA public affairs activities since November 1963. Announc-
       ing %beer's resignation Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administra-
       tor, said, “Under Julian Scheer’s leadership, the story of our achieve-

                                      51
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 22

    ments in space has been told well, and the public was fully and openly
    informed.” Under Scheer’s direction, NASA had handled press require-
    ments for Apollo flights, including worldwide communications network
    for disseminating live TV photos from moon; developed worldwide
    exhibit program; begun regular TV and radio network services ; started
    publications program; produced more than 100 major films on NASA
    programs ; and developed education program. (NASA Release 71-26)
  President Nixon accepted resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael
    Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs effective
    April 11. Collins would become Director of Smithsonian Institution’s
    National Air and Space Museum. (PD, 3/1/71, 384)
  Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Sta-
    tion carrying Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory payload to study x-ray
    polarization. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
  Reuters quoted sources as saying DOD would pay Lockheed Aircraft Corp.
    $10 million incentive award to 1969 $1-billion contract for develop-
    ment and first year production for superior work on Poseidon missile.
    Award increased contract price from $70 million to $80 million.
    Lockheed had bettered contract’s specifications for delivery schedule,
    reliability, and range. (NYT, 2/23/71,41)
February 23: Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified
    before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and
    Joint Committee on Atomic Energy on NERVA space nuclear propul-
    sion program: “AS we prepared our FY 1972 budget request, we were
    faced with one of three choices for NERVA”-to         continue with full
    scale development of flight engine; proceed at reduced rate, empha-
    sizing technology and long-lead time development; or cancel NERVA
    program. “Because there is simply no need to proceed with full scale
    development now, and in view of fiscal constraints, we decided to . . .
    continue with the development of long lead items and technology, but
    to not proceed with the full development effort. This will preserve the
    technology that has already been gained, and the hard core capability
    that now exists, without requiring a major expenditure of funds.”
       NASA and AEC support of NERVA project was “clear example of sus-
    tained support over many years of an advanced development even
    though we have not yet come to the point of proposing the specific
    missions on which it would be used.” While best chemical propulsion
    systems operated at specific impulse of 450 sec, “with nuclear pro-
    pulsion we have demonstrated . . . equivalent specific impulse of 825
    seconds and have every confidence that the technology we are develop-
    ing . . . can raise this to at least 900 seconds. Thus, our justification
    for the large and continuing investment in the NERVA program is that
    we have a way of breaking one of the principal limiting constraints
    on space flight by doubling our propulsion efficiencies for many impor-
    tant classes of large space missions.”
       Dr. Low, in response to questions, testified that NASA plan to stretch
    out NERVA development program would necessitate immediate employ-
    ment cutback from 2500 persons to 800. US. had invested $1.4 billion
    in NERVA since 1955. (Transcript; W Post, 2/24/71; B Sun, 2/24/71,
    A7 1
       Milton Klein, Manager, NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Systems Office,
    testified on NERVA program status: “Eighteen rocket reactors have been

                                     52
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 February 23

     tested, each adding importantly to our knowledge. Two experimental
     engines, which couple the reactor with the other principal components
     necessary to form a complete nuclear rocket engine, have been oper-
     ated. The last of these engines, XE, was started up 28 times and tested
     over a wide variety of conditions. We have accumulated over 14 hours
     of system operating experience, including more than four hours at or
     near design power.’’ Specific impulse “of 825 seconds has been dem-
     onstrated for extended durations in a flight size reactor. A range of
     thrust levels, including 75,000 pounds [34,000 kg], has been demon-
     strated over a wide range of conditions, including the ability to
     throttle down to about one-half design thrust at full specific impulse.
     The ability to stop and start at will has been demonstrated. Finally,
     this system has proved to be quite predictable, an important feature
     from a development and operational standpoint. All of the technology
     goals of the program have been met and the potential for perform-
     ance growth shown.” (Transcript)
  Activity at Shuang-ch‘eng spaceport-from       which Chinese Communists
     launched Chicom I on April 24, 1970-indicated imminent launch of
     another satellite, according to sources quoted in Washington Post. US.
     space specialists had said second Communist Chinese launch would be
    further proof of steady scientific progress regardless of internal politi-
     cal turmoil in Red China. (Wilson, W Post, 2/23/71, A16)
  Citizens Bank and Trust Co. of Maryland would submit requests for
    space-derived technical information to NASA’s     Regional Dissemination
     Centers, NASA announced. NASA centers would advise bank’s patrons
     as to available data and outline charges to cover service cost. (NASA
    Release 71-23)
February 24: NASA development of short-haul jet transportation system was
     discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, at Coun-
     cil for Advancement of Science Writing Seminar on Science and
     Public Policy in Washington, D.C.: “We estimate that the market for
    short-haul transportation will approach 40 billion passenger miles by
     1980, and may well be between 100 and 300 billion passenger miles
     by 1995. The problems of developing such a system are exceedingly
     complex. Involved are aircraft, airways, airports, avionics, ground
     transportation, and appropriate regulations. To be acceptable, the sys-
     tem must be low in noise, low in pollution, and low in its contribution
    to the congestion of local transportation. The service must be easily
     accessible, dependable, and comfortable. And the fare must be reason-
     able.” If development were to take normal course, “it would move
     ahead very slowly. And in the meantime, a domestic need would go
    wanting.” Foreign competition, with funding by foreign governments,
    “would step in to fill the gap.”
        “Here we have a good case where the government should help.
    The need exists; an integrated approach involving government and
    industry is required; and the initial development risk is high.” DOT
    was responsible for overall short-haul transportation system ; NASA had
    responsibility for developing experimental research aircraft. “But NASA
    will not do this alone; we intend to approach this development in
    partnership-a joint enterprise-with industry. NASA and industry will
                                            .
    share the development responsibility . . and costs. The production
                .
    airplanes . . will be built by industry on a purely commercial, com-

                                     53
February 24                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     petitive basis. But the government will have served the industry in
     speeding the commercial availability of the aircraft, and will have
     served the people by speeding the availability of a needed service.”
     (Text)
  NASA launched three sounding rockets. Arcas launched from Barking
     Sands, Kauai, Hawaii, carried GSFC experiment to 56.7-km (35.2-mi)
     altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IV
     overpass. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and pay-
    load was recovered successfully.
        Black Brant VB, launched from Wallops Station at 8:14 pm EST,
     carried 216.8-kg (478-lb) NRL instrumented telescope to 281.6-km
      (175-mi) altitude for infrared astronomy studies. Telescope was double-
     walled with unique helium cooling system that maintained unit’s tem-
     perature at 5.4 K (-450’F) to prevent telescope’s own radiation from
     interfering with measurements. Rocket and instruments functioned
     satisfactorily; payload would be recovered after daylight Feb. 25.
        Aerobee 150, launched from WSMR, carried ARC experiment to study
     micrometeorites. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily.
     (NASA Rpt SRL; WS Release 71-2; SR list)
* ComSatCorp announced election of John L. Martin, Jr., as Assistant Vice
     President for Domestic and Aeronautical Satellite Systems. (ComSat
    Corp Release 71-11)
* Crises facing airlines in early 1960s and 1970s were contrasted by Floyd
    D. Hall, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Eastern Airlines,
     Inc., in speech before northeast region of Aviation/Space Writers
     Assn. in New York. Jet aircraft had offered “radically improved seat-
     mile factor” in 1960s. There were no appreciable unit-cost savings in
     wide-bodied equipment of 1970’s. “In sharp contrast with a decade
     ago, technology promises little help.” Economists were predicting no
     general economic boom of mid-1960 proportions for at least five years
     and there was “no traffic surge in sight so great as to mask or counter-
     balance our other problems.” There was “new and ominous militancy”
     in labor outlook which had “sent costs soaring . . . at rate greater than
     normal even in our inflation-ridden economy.” In 1959, US. trunkline
     aviation industry had been committed to $1.7 billion in new aircraft.
     “Ten years later, in 1969, we were committed to $4.7 billion-$6 bil-
    lion when the cost of spares and associated ground equipment is added
    - - o r more than three times as much. The value of flight equipment on
     order at the end of 1969 . . . equals nearly 87 percent of the net book
     value of existing flight equipment. The total commitment amounts to
    more than the debt and equity capital of all eleven trunklines combined
    as of year-end 1969.” In 1960s “when airlines sought new capital to
     finance their new jet fleets,” capital had been more readily available
     CI
       and airlines were able to compete for it against other industries on
     fairly favorable terms. Today we, a high-risk industry, are competing
     for it against low-risk industries, and at a time when the availability
    of capital is limited.” (Text)
February 25: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 397 into orbit with 2241-km
     (1392.5-mi) apogee, 584-km (362.9-mi) perigee, 113.8-min period,
    and 65.8” inclination. (GSFC SSR, 2/28/71 )
  President Nixon addressed Nation by radio upon transmitting foreign
    policy report for 1970s to Congress: “Over the past two years in

                                     54
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                February 25

    some fields the Soviet Union and the United States have moved ahead
    together. We have taken the first step toward cooperation in outer
    space. We have both ratified the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear
    weapons. Just 2 weeks ago, we signed a treaty to prohibit nuclear
    weapons from the seabeds.” Most significant result of negotiations
    between US. and U.S.S.R. in past year “could be in the field of
    arms control.” SALT had produced “most searching examination of
    the nature of strategic competition ever conducted between our na-
    tions.,’ If talks continued in cooperative vein there was “reason to
    hope that specific agreements will be reached to curb the arms race.”
     (PD, 3/1/71,298-304)
* President Nixon transmitted to Congress second annual report on foreign
    policy, United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Building for
    Peace: Space was “clearest example of the necessity for international
    scientific cooperation and the benefits that accrue from it. The world
    community has already determined and agreed that space is open to
    all and can be made the special province of none. Space is the new
                                                                      .
    frontier of man, both a physical and an intellectual frontier. . . As
    mutual help and cooperation were essential to life on the American
    frontier, so it is on the frontier of space. It is with that sense that
    we approach the sharing of both the burdens and the fruits of our
    space activity. . . . We have some 250 agreements with 74 countries
    covering space cooperation.” Space was “the only area of which it can
                                                                    ..
    be literally said that the potential for cooperation is infinite. . We
    have opened virtually all of our NASA space projects to international
    participation.”
        President said he would submit to Senate shortly ICAO treaty which
                                                   ..  . and ensures that
    L<
       recognizes aircraft hijacking as a crime
    hijackers will be subject to prosecution or extradition if apprehended
    on the territory of contracting states.” U.S. intended “to exert every
    effort to ensure the widest possible international acceptance of this
    convention.”
        President’s report said it was “settled U.S. policy to encourage
    international cooperation in basic science.” Closely allied was national
    policy on technology exchange. U S . preeminence in both fields posed
    question as to extent of its sharing scientific and technological knowl-
    edge. “There are obvious security implications in many technological
    developments, for example in the nuclear and space fields.” U.S. policy,
    however, “is to keep those areas as circumscribed as possible, and to
    take the leadership in encouraging the exchange of scientific and tech-
    nological information.” (PD,   3/1/71,305-77)
  Appointment of Dr. Marshall E. Alper, Manager of JPL’S Applied
0

    Mechanics Section since 1964, to succeed Howard H. Haglund as
    Manager of JPL’S Civil Systems Project Office was announced by Dr.
    William H. Pickering, JPL Director. Haglund had been appointed
    Project Manager of DOT’S automated transit system, JPL’S principal
    civil systems project. (JPL Release 571)
February 25-26: Crew station review, during which stowed equipment was
    fitted to first flight model LRV for first time, was held at Boeing plant
    in Kent, Wash. Review concentrated on manual tasks of astronauts in
    setting up and operating LRV. Activities included fitness checks of
    hardware to be installed on LRV after deployment from LM, walk-

                                     55
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
February 25-26

    through rehearsal of manual loading and preparation of LRV equip-
    ment, and reverification of relationships between stowed components
    and LRV. (MSFC Release 71-33)
February 26: Cosmos 398 was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 232-km
     (144.2-mi) apogee, 191-km (118.7-mi) perigee, 89.0-min period, and
    5 1 . 6 O inclination. (GSFC SSR, 2/28/71)
             M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana,
  NASA’s
    completed sixth flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft over FRC.
    Objectives were to obtain M2-F3 and B-52 adapter compatibility by
    captive flight at 9000-m (30000-ft) altitude and mach 0.46 to 0.67,
    expand flight envelope to mach 0.85 by climbing to 13 700 m (45 000
    ft) and releasing M2-F3, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8,
    investigate lateral phugoid, and obtain performance data at mach 0 8    ..
    Alternate flight plan was flown after one of three engine chambers
    malfunctioned, but vehicle reached mach 0.8 and most objectives were
    achieved. (NASA Proj Off)
O e C announced it was accurately producing and measuring surface con-
 LR
    tamination to spacecraft by harsh elements in outer space under simu-
    lated space vacuum conditions in liquid-helium-cooled space tank linked
    to computer. Facility could achieve and maintain very high vacuum.
    LeRC Aerospace Environment Branch also would study effect of exhaust
    from small reactor control thruster-like those used for Apollo attitude
    control-on        optical properties of nearby surfaces in space, such as
    Skylab surface. (LeRC Release 71-6)
  UPI released rare photo of sun in which silhouette of jet aircraft created
0

    optical illusion that sun was only five times wider than aircraft. Photo,
    showing sun spots as black patches and large white areas described
    as possible incipient solar flares, was taken by Pennsylvania State
    Univ. astronomers using special filters on automatic camera. (UPI
    Photo Ed)
  NASA announced availability to general-aviation manufacturers of A
    Study o NACA and NASA Pablished Information of Pertinence in
                f
     the Design of Light Aircraft, Volumes I, 11, and 111. Information on
    structural design, propulsion subsystems, landing-gear loads, flutter,
    refined performance calculation procedures, and high-horsepower pro-
    pellers was obtained from 10 000 aeronautical documents that NASA
    had organized, cataloged, and evaluated. (NASA Release 71-27)
  The Supersonic Transport, study by George N. Chatham and Franklin P.
     Huddle, was released by Science Policy Research Div. of Library of
     Congress Congressional Research Service. Study found many uncer-
     tainties concerning SST: “as to the verity of the competition from for-
     eign SST developments; as to whether the Boeing SST will produce the
     economic gains claimed for it; as to the extent of engineering risk
    this vehicle represents; and as to whether it can stand alone, without
    other supporting elements of a complete system of air transportation.”
     SST’S environmental aspects had received bulk of critical attention but
     u
       most of postulated effects are found to be non-existent or of a scale
     making detection difficult.’’ Most uncertainties were in field of eco-
     nomics. “It is likely that these can be resolved only by actual expe-
    rience with the product in use.” (Text)
Februury 27: President Nixon announced intention to nominate Dr. James
     C. Fletcher to be NASA Administrator succeeding Dr. Thomas 0. Paine,

                                      56
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             February 27

    whose resignation was effective Sept. 15, 1970. Dr. Fletcher had been
     President of Univ. of Utah and College of Eastern Utah since 1964.
    He had organized Space General Corp., subsidiary of Aerojet-General
    Corp. in 1960 and served as President 1960-1962 and Chairman of
    Board 1962-1964. From 1960 to 1962 he was President of Space
    Electronics Corp., which he founded. Dr. Fletcher had been Associate
     Director of guided missile laboratory at Ramo-Woolridge Corp. He
    was member of Air Force Science Advisory Board and Naval War-
    fare Panel.
        Nomination was submitted to Senate March 1. (PD, 3/1/71, 3 8 3 4 ;
    3/8/71,437)
  Dr. James C. Fletcher, President Nixon’s nominee for NASA Adminis-
     trator, told Salt Lake City press conference he favored grand tour of
    solar system’s larger planets by unmanned spacecraft. “It would be
     very exciting for man to go beyond the moon, but I suspect that’s
     beyond the country’s budget.” Dr. Fletcher did not think it would be
    necessary to curtail space exploration sharply in coming years despite
    budget cuts. “We’ll have to do better for the same amount of
    money.. . . And we may tend to reduce manned flights in favor of
    unmanned flights.” (AP, W Star, 2/28/71; UPI, LA Times, 2/28/71)
* Special Apollo Awards Ceremony was held at MSC to recognize indi-
    viduals and support groups for their contributions to Apdlo 13 and
    ApoZZo 14 missions. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator,
    presented NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Walter J. Kapryan,
    ICSC Launch Operations Director; Eugene F. Kranz, ApoZZo 14 Flight
    Director; Glynn S. Lunney, ApdZo 13 Flight Director; former astro-
    naut James A. McDivitt, Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager; Dale
    D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and
    Sigurd A. Sjoberg, ApoZZo 23 Flight Operations Director.
        NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to James J.
    Gavin, Jr., of Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s LM team and Public
    Service Medal to Donald E. Eyles of MIT. NASA Exceptional Service
    Medals were presented to 23 employees of MSC and KSC. Group
    Achievement Awards were presented to DOD Recovery Forces and
    Manned Spaceflight Support Network. (NASA Special Ann, 2/26/71 ;
    NASA Release 71-28)
February 28: Analysis of discolorations on camera that had landed on
    moon with Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, was reported in Science by
    JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe. Camera had been retrieved from
    lunar surface by ApoZZo 12 astronauts Nov. 20, 1969. Discoloration
    pattern indicated that camera had been whitened by impact of par-
    ticles blown from lunar surface by exhaust of LM as it landed and
    also that many particles had moved at very low angles to the hori-
    zontal. (Science, 2/28/71, 798-9)
* George H. Stoner, Senior Vice President of Boeing Co., died in Seattle
    at age 53. Stoner had previously worked on pilotless aircraft and
    Saturn programs and was to have received NASA’s       highest industry
    award for his role in development of Saturn V booster. (AP, NYT,
    3/2/71,39)
During February : Opportunity for participating in post-Apollo program
    had resulted in deep division of opinion among European countries,
                                                       “. . . never has SO
    Dr. Peter Stubbs reported in Technology Review:

                                   57
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
During February

    much furore been generated on the basis of so little hard fact. But
    politics have taken over the scene to the almost entire exclusion of
    rational procedures.” France and West Germany had not forgiven
    U.K. for “welshing on them over the-by US. standards archaic!-
    Europa launcher.” There was fear that without independent launch
    vehicle for commercial satellites, Europe could not compete on fair
    terms with U.S. “Beneath the European tussle of threat and counter-
    threat . . . run deeper waters: France’s desire for her own telecorn-
    munications satellite system to propagandize former African colonies ;
    West Germany’s urge to become a fully fledged space power; the
    British Government’s intense anxiety to enter the Common Market-
    even possibly, in part, by blackmailing its way in over the space
    program.” ESRO had built competency “which should not be allowed
    to go by the board simply because a bunch of politicians can’t decide
    to what proper purpose it should be put.” (Tech Rev, 2/71, 14)
  Future of US. space program was subject of articles in America Illus-
    trated, USA publication distributed in U.S.S.R. Jay Holmes described
    plans for next two decades in space including planetary exploration
    and Grand Tours of outer space, practical applications of space tech-
    nology, and international cooperation in space. Technical advance-
    ments directly traceable to U.S. space program were described by
    James J. Haggerty, who forecast additional space benefits in future.
    Reusable space shuttle and earth-orbiting stations, continued lunar
    exploration, and manned voyages to Mars were discussed in article on
    earth, moon, and Mars. ( A m ZZZ,2/71)
  U.S.S.R. issued 1971-1975 five-year plan with new emphasis on prac-
    tical benefits from space. Main attention was focused on spaceborne
    communications, meteorology, earth-resources survey, geographical re-
    search, and solution of other economic tasks. (AF Mag, 6/71, 54-9)
  NSF issued Scientific Activities of Independent Nonprofit Institutions
    1970 (NSF 71-9). Independent nonprofit institutions employed 23 700
    scientists and engineers in January 1970, down from 25 600 employed
    in 1967. Decrease resulted from shift of several large research insti-
    tutes from nonprofit sector to other sectors of economy and from
    slackened rate of increase in R&D activities by nonprofit institutions
    during 1966-1969.
       Life scientists composed largest occupational group-331/3 % of
    total. Engineers followed with 22%. R&D expenditures amounted to
    $845 million in 1969, actual increase of 676, but in terms of constant
    dollars only 1.3% over 1966 total. Research institutes and nonprofit-
    administered Federally funded R&D centers together accounted for
    more than 6634% of scientists and engineers and about 75% of
    intramural R&D expenditures. (Text)
* NSF released Federal Funds for Academic Science, Fiscal Year 1969
     (NSF 71-7). Ten Federal agencies reported total $2.314 million for
    academic science activities during FY 1969-same level of funding
    reported for FY 1968. HEW was primary source, accounting for
    $1.245 million, or more than SO%, of all obligations from Federal
    Government. NSF was second with $362 million, DOD was third with
    $272 million. Dept. of Agriculture accounted for $155 million, NASA
    for $125 million, and AEC far $121 million. (Text)

                                   58
                              March 1971

March 1 : President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Dr. James
    C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator [see Feb. 271. (PD, 3/8/71, 437)
 President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14
    Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A.
    Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President
    Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a
                                                                           ..
    very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. .
                                                              ...
    But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion          the one who
                                .. .  turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President,
    was briefing the President
    members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most
    important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on
    this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the
    American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.”
       In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may
    find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge.
    . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the
    unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are
    going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space,
    but because there is something there, something there that we must
                                .. .
    explore. It’s there to find.     this Nation with all of its capability and
    with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great
    nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the
    way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set
    for ourselves.
       “NOW, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the
     ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engi-
    neering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on
    these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we
     saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their
     children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407-11)
* Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D Mitchell, and Stuart
                                                        .
     A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film
     and slides and described mission and preliminary results.
        To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The
     relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the un-
     manned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we
                                                              ...  and with 14,
     feel that man has his point, has his place in space
     certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judg-
     ment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would
     not have been successful otherwise.
        “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod
     has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point
     is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our
     money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is,
                                                          .
     manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . that manned space

                                       59
                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 1

     flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently
     when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
* NASA announced selection of Mississippi Test Facility near New Orleans,
     La., as site for sea-level testing of space shuttle rocket engines. Testing
     under simulated altitude conditions would be done at USAF’S Arnold
     Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn. Test program
     would include some 1200 development and acceptance tests from 1973
     through 1979, with 45 to 50 sustaining engineering tests per year after-
     ward, and some 100 development tests under simulated altitude con-
     ditions from 1974 through 1976. Site Evaluation Board had selected
     sites after surveying existing Government-owned or controlled proper-
     ties. Space shuttle engine would be reusable, high-performance, high-
     chamber-pressure engine using liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen.
     First stage would be larger than J-2 engine in Saturn V, with 249 500-
     kg (550 000-lb) thrust. Orbiter stage engine would have extendable
     nozzle skirt for use in space. (NASA Release 71-30)
   MSFC issued RFPS to Aerojet-General Liquid Rocket Co., United Aircraft
      Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and NR Rocketdyne Div. on development
     of main engines for two-stage reusable launch vehicle (space shuttle).
      Companies had been performing preliminary design and definition
      studies of shuttle under independent, $Qrnillion, parallel contracts
      since June 1970. In June 1971 one company would be chosen to develop
     engine. (MSFC Release 71-37)
   National Civil Service League announced selection of 10 Federal officials
      to receive annual Career Service Awards. Recipients included NASA
      Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley, cited for “his
      administrative expertise which enables him to help design major policy
      directions at NASA and interpret them to the Congress and the public.”
      Honorees would receive $1000, watches, and citations at banquet April
      23 in Washington, D.C. (W Star, 3/2/71, A2)
   Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
      Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to study stellar UV. Rocket and instru-
      ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
 * Multipurpose system of three large in-orbit satellites and network of 132
      earth stations to provide nationwide communication services to vari-
       ous customers was proposed by ComSatCorp President Joseph V.
       Charyk in letter to FCC Chairman Dean Burch. Proposal would require
      initial investment of $250 million. (Text)
   AIAA published The Supersonic Transport: A Factual Basis for Decision.
       Report by ad hoc committee concluded that DOT plans for SST proto-
       type program were “reasonable and proper and in the best interests of
       this nation.” Committee found SST performance objectives could be met
       “with as high a confidence level as on any previous developmental
       program prior to flight test.” Technically, successful production SST
       could be built following prototype phase, which was estimated to require
       additional Federal funding of $250 million over two years. Stretchout
       in prototype funding would cause “extensive immediate cost increases”;
       resulting delay in production aircraft market penetration would “cur-
       tail total revenues, reduce new job opportunities and impair favorable
       impact on international balance of trade.” Abandonment of U.S. SST
       Program could lead to “takeover of U.S.’s traditional civil aircraft sales
       dominance by foreign interests.” SST would meet demands for inter-

                                       60
                                                                    March 1
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    continental air travel during 1980s while providing productivity gain.
    SST would “meet or better all engine-noise specifications” and two
    prototype SST’S would “not produce any equilibrium environmental
    changes.” (Text)
March 2: Apolb 14 astronauts and families visited both houses of Con-
    gress. Astronauts reported to Senate and House on mission. Com-
    mander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., told Senate they had “a totally success-
    ful mission, not only from the areas of scientific and technical en-
    deavors achieved, but also in the areas of international prestige and
    the tremendous posture of this country.” (CR, 3/2/71, 52306-7)
* Appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Admhistrator
    for Policy, as Assistant Director for Research Applications, NSF, was
    announced by Dr. William D. McElroy, NSF Director. Dr. Eggers would
    head major new organizational unit of NSF designed to support re-
    search applied to environmental and societal problems. (NSF Release
    71-118)
March 3: Communist China launched her second satellite, from Shuang-
    ch‘eng at 8:15 pm local time. Satellite entered orbit with 1815-km
     (1127.8-mi) apogee, 266-km (165.3-mi) perigee, 105.9-min period, and
    69.9’ inclination. Launch was unannounced, but it was monitored by
    NORAD and accidently observed by BSN pilot returning to carrier off
    Vietnam coast after mission over Southeast Asia. First satellite, Chicom
    1, had been launched April 24, 1970. (GSFC SSR, 3/31/71; Finney,
    NYT, 3/4/71,1)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 399 from Baykonur into orbit with 438-km
0

     (272.2-mi) apogee, 196-km ( 121.8-mi) perigee, 90.8-min period, and
    64.9O inclination. Satellite reentered March 17. (GSFC SSR, 3/31/71;
    SBD, 3/8/71,40)
  NASA announced prime and backup crews for Apollo 16 mission, scheduled
     for launch in March 1972. Prime crewmen were John W. Young (com-
     mander), Thomas K. Mattingly I1 (CM pilot), and Charles M. Duke,
  .
     Jr. (LM pilot). Backup crewmen were Fred W. Haise, Jr., Stuart A.
     Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Mission would last about 12 days, with
     lunar surface stay time of about 67 hrs-including three EVA periods
     totaling about 20 hrs. Site for lunar landing had not yet been selected.
      (NASA Release 71-31)
  Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, presented NASA FY 1972
     budget request to House Committee on Science and Astronautics: FY
     1972 projects-including Apollo 15 and 16, two Mariner spacecraft,
     first ERTS satellite, and continuing work toward future flights of
     Apollo 17, Skylab, earth resources and ATS satellites, and Viking probes
     -represented “the fulfillment of enterprises of the 1960’s, the tailing
     off to completion of work in progress for many years. By 1974 the
     number of NASA space launches per year will have declined from 26 in
      1966 to eight. After the Skylab missions in 1973, we face at least 4
     years in which there will be no United States manned space flight.
        “Five years ago there were over 390000 people in industry em-
     ployed on NASA work. By the end of fiscal year 1971 that figure will
     be about 108000. The decline will continue €or a few more months,
     but we expect it to start increasing by the middle of fiscal year 1972,
     with the end-of-the-year total being about equal to that at the begin-
      ning.” U.S. was “running a serious risk of losing too much of the

                                     61
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 3

    aerospace capability that is an essential ingredient of our long term
    national strength and security.”
        There was every indication U S . would lose leadership in space
    “unless we move forward now with our space programs for the 1970’s.
                                                                          .
    In 1970 the Soviets launched 88 payloads into space compared to . .
    36 for the United States. Their R&D budget is continuing to increase.
    They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus
    and Mars while we have many gaps in our planetary program. We
    would expect them to use automated vehicles and sample return space-
    craft from the planets, while we have no such program. Finally the
    Soviets have a systematic continuing manned space flight program and
    have stated that they expect to fly a space station before we do.” U.S.
    should continue to compete with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments
    in space represent a measure o€ the state of our technology; and in
    today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, stra-
    tegically, economically, and politically.” Dr. Low believed U.S. could
    cooperate with U.S.S.R. “in the areas we have under discussion with-
    out prejudicing any of our vital national interests.”
        NASA was reexamining procurement policies and practices and “be-
    ginning a serious critical appraisal of the proper size, composition, and
     organization of NASA’s  institutional base.” Position reduction of 1500
     in FY 1972 budget was in anticipation that “reduction of this m a p i -
    tude would be found possible without unduly impairing our ability to
    carry out the program. Our budget justifications show this reduction
    as a flat percentage cut-about 5.10/,-in      all of our major activities.
                               .
     The actual adjustments . . will be refined as our study of the NASA
    institutional base proceeds.”
        NASA program was 1.4% of US. budget, contrasting with 53% for
     domestic programs related to human and physical resources, yet U.S.
     stood to gain “tremendous benefits now and in the future” from explo-
     ration and applications of space science and technology. And whole
     future “as a nation and as mankind” depended on space science. “For
     in order to survive in the changing environment on our planet Earth,
     we must understand the processes that govern our universe.”
        Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Plan-
     ning, said purpose of NASA Meteorology Program was to “develop and
     demonstrate sensors and spacecraft for making those meteorological
     measurements that will enable a continued improvement in weather
     forecasting throughout the world with an ultimate view to a limited
     degree of weather modification and control of severe weather systems.
     Projections indicate that by about 1980 it should be possible to reach
     a global capability to acquire information throughout the atmosphere
     and to develop comprehensive weather models. Once developed, these
     models can be used to make 14day weather forecasts and long-range
      climate estimates.” Ability to develop weather models would permit
     basic experimenting in weather control.
         Space shuttle was key NASA development believed essential in 1970s,
      Dr. von Braun said, presenting U.S. with its greatest technology chal-
     lenge for space in this decade. “Preliminary analysis indicates that if
      the shuttle is used in lieu of current expendable systems, the trans-
                                                                     ..
      portation costs will be reduced by at least a factor of ten. .     Only
      by an investment now will we be able to have operational an economi-

                                     62
                                                                        March 3
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

       cal transportation system by the end of the 1970’s to support a vigorous

-      and balanced space flight program.” (Transcript)
     Findings that l i k e d light flashes experienced by astronauts in periods of
       otherwise total darkness to high-speed cosmic rays passing through
       eye retina were reported at NASA and American Nuclear Society Con-
       ference in Las Vegas, Nev. Findings were from studies by scientists of
       Univ. of Washington at Seattle and Univ. of California at Berkeley.
        Dr. Cornelius A. Tobias and Dr. Thomas F. Budinger of Univ. of
        California at Berkeley had twice exposed themselves to low doses of
        cyclotron-accelerated cosmic rays aimed at their eyes in effort to repro-
        duce flashes described by Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,
        and Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Scientists said they saw
        flashes that differed from visual phenomena associated with x-rays or
        electrical and magnetic exposures. They concluded that flashes came
        from ionization and excitation of atoms in retina as it was bombarded
        by cosmic rays, Evidence indicated flashes were detected by retinal
        rods, structures in eyes that allowed night vision. Radiations were not
        believed to be hazardous to astronauts on short flights, but long-
        duration effects had not yet been evaluated. (Wilford, NYT, 3/4/71,
        181
     NASA launched two Arcas sounding rockets. Boosted Arcas I, launched
        from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of Houston experiment
        to 64.9-km (40.3-mi) to measure low-altitude x-ray spectrum and
        electron flux above 30 500 m (100 000 ft). Rocket and instruments
        functioned satisfactorily. Data would be correlated with high-altitude
        data from Black Brant launched 30 sec earlier by Canadian National
        Research Council.
            Arcas launched from Barking Sands, Kauai, Hawaii, carried GSFC
        experiment to 58.6-km (36.4-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measure-
        ments in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus ZV satellite. Rocket
        and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in series
         of two; first had been launched Feb. 24. (NASA Rpts SRL)
      White House announced that Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., President’s Sci-
         ence Adviser, had chaired working conference with industry, educa-
         tion, and Government representatives on employment problems of
         scientists and engineers in aerospace and defense industries. Meeting
         had been called at President Nixon’s request. (PD,     3/8/71, 436)
      Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) introduced H.R. 5529 “to authorize the
         coinage of 5O-cent pieces to commemorate the Apollo 1 lunar landing
                                                                   1
         and to establish the Apollo Lunar Landing Commemorative Trust
         Fund.” Measure was referred to House Committee on Banking and
         Currency. (CR, 3/3/71, H1254)
    March 4: Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
         Flight, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics
         during hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization bill: “With the
         Apollo 14 scientific instruments operating properly, we now have be-
         gun to develop the networks of instrumentation at different locations
          on the lunar surface which will allow us to use normal triangulation
         procedures to establish the details of the moon’s structure. We have
          two passive seismometers and two suprathermal ion detectors in opera-
          tion, one each at the Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 sites, about 115 miles
                                                                            .
          [I85 km] apart. Last week several moonquakes were reported . .

                                         63
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 4

   when the moon reached its perigee. Our instruments pinpointed the
                             ..
   location of these events .      close to the Fra Mauro crater area.
       “We also have a laser ranging retroflector at the Apollo 1 Tran-
                                                                    1
   quility Base and another at Fra Mauro-750 miles [1200 km] apart.
   The laser ranging team at the MacDonald Observatory in Texas has
   reported high-quality returns from the Apollo 14 reflector. As the
   world’s observatories refine their ability to use these instruments, we
   hope that they will be able to detect random wobbles of the earth’s
    rotational axis. If so, this may contribute to the ability to predict
   major earthquakes.”
       During past year, design and essentially all phases of development
   testing had been completed for Skylab and flight hardware was in
   fabrication. Definition of space shuttle was nearing completion. To
    develop limited capability to rescue Skylab astronauts from space,
    NASA had initiated design action on modification kit to give Skylab CM
    capacity to carry two men up to orbit and five men back to earth.
    Stranded astronauts could use Skylab cluster as shelter while modifi-
    cation kit was installed and Apollo-Saturn IB launch vehicle assigned
    to next revisit was made ready for launch. (Transcript)
 New York Times editorial commented on nomination of Dr. James C.
0

    Fletcher as NASA Administrator: “Mr. Fletcher’s highest priority at
    NASA will undoubtedly be to try to restore morale, insofar as possible,
    in a program whose ranks have been decimated by the budget cuts of
    recent years. NASA’s new chief apparently takes the job with few illu-
    sions. This is suggested by his recent comments that budgetary problems
    will probably force a shift from manned to unmanned space explo-
    ration, especially beyond the moon.” Such realism should “serve Mr.
     Fletcher well in the difficult days ahead as he tries to lead NASA to-
     ward a new equilibrium with a Congress largely disillusioned about
    the worth of showy and ultra-expensive ventures in space.” ( N Y T ,
     3/4/71)
March 5: Cold-cathode ion gauge left on moon by Apollo 14 astronauts had
     discovered first hard evidence of gas escaping from lunar surface, Dr.
     Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said at
     MSC. At same time, seismometer left at Apollo 14 mission landing site
     had detected moonquake, suggesting quake might have released gas
     from moon or that sudden venting of gas trapped in cavern beneath
     lunar surface initiated quake. (O’Toole, W Post, 3/6/71, A l )
 Analysis of magnetometer data from Ezplorer 35 (IMP-E) (launched
     July 19, 1967) was described in Science by ARC scientists J. D. Mina-
     lov and Charles P. Sonett, MIT scientist J. H. Binsack, and Univ. of
     Manchester, England, scientist M. D. Moutsoulas. Magnetization of
     selected nonmare areas on moon’s far side was inferred from positive
     disturbances in magnitude of magnetic field exterior to magnetic sig-
     nature of lunar cavity. (Science, 3/5/71,892-5)
 NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Cajun, launched from Kourou,
     French Guiana, carried GSFC experiment to 23.1-km (14.4-mi) altitude
     to verify rocket vehicle and launch facility compatibility and rocket
     vehicle and radar tracking system compatibility in preparation for
     future launches. Rocket performed satisfactorily; no instrumentation
      was carried on flight. Launch was first in series of four.
        Arcas, launched from Barking Sands, Kauai, Hawaii, carried GSFC

                                    64!
                                                                    March 5
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    experiment to 58-km (36-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements
    in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus Z satellite and to study
                                                    V
    anomalous absorption detected by Arcas launched Feb. 24. Rocket and
    instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were acquired.
     (NASA Rpts SRL)
* FAA plan to create V/STOL Special Projects Office to formulate and main-
    tain development plan for V/STOL program, provide executive man-
    agement of FAA V/STOL R&D, and make economic studies and market
    analyses of V/STOL sales and service potential was announced by John
    H. Shaffer, FAA Administrator. Jerold M. Chavkin, Special Assistant
    to Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development, would
    be acting Director (FAARelease 71-2%)
* Election of Dr. ,Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, as honorary member
     of Soviet Academy of Sciences was reported in Washington Post.
     ( W Post, 3/5/71, A18)
March 5-6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell,
     and Stuart A. Roosa spent 26 hrs in Chicago, during which they were
     honored at City Council meeting, attended civic luncheon, and pre-
     sided at press conference with 3000 high school students. (Chicago
     Today, 3/7/71)
March 6-8: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa,
     and Edgar D. Mitchell, and wives on three-day visit to New York taped
     TV programs, visited U.N., and rode in motorcade from hotel to City
     Hall for official reception. (Montgomery, NYT, 3/9/71, 1 )
March 8: USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil Powell
      (usAF), reached mach 1 and 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude during
     24th flight from FRC in joint NASA-USAF research program. Purpose
     of powered flight was to determine lateral-directional derivatives with
     power on and to determine longitudinal derivatives at mach 0.6
      (NASA Proj Off)
  US. Supreme Court refused to grant hearing to atheist Mrs. Madalyn
     Murray O’Hair on appeal of suit charging NASA had knowingly used
     taxpayers’ money for religious activities by permitting astronauts to
     conduct Bible readings and prayer services while orbiting moon.
      (Reuters, B Sun, 3/9/71, A3)
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Microwave Communications, Inc., would
     petition FCC for authorization to construct and operate $169.4-million
      domestic comsat system under name MCI Lockheed Satellite Corp.,
      Washington Evening Star reported. Firms said system could be opera-
      tional by 1975 and produce $70 million per year revenues. (W Star,
      3/8/71, A12)
   Economic slump that hit Cape Kennedy and Brevard County, Fla., after
      space program cuts appeared to be bottoming out, New York Times
      reported. Three Chambers of Commerce and county economic devel-
      opment council were spending $260 000 annually, “compared with
      next to nothing three years ago,” to promote KSC tours and area’s
      natural assets. Decline in jobs since 1968 had leveled off and panic
      sale of homes at bargain prices had ended. (Janson, NYT, 3/8/71, 25)
 March 9: NASA supercritical wing was flown successfully from FRC during
      first flight on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted by NASA test pilot Thomas C.
      McMurtry. Purposes of flight were to conduct functional check of air-
      craft and stability-augmentation system and evaluate low-speed han-

                                     65
                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 9




March 9: Dr. Richard T . Whitcomb ( l e f t ) , developer of NASA’s
                                                                  supercritical wing,
congratulated test pilot Thomas C . McMurtry after the successful first flight of the
wing on the TF-8A jet aircraft. Program Manager John G. McTigue looked on. The
new airfoil shape, undergoing tests at the Flight Research Center, was designed to
reduce bufleting at high subsonic speeds ana! permit increased aircraft performance.


    dling qualities. Aircraft reached 3000-m (10 000-ft) altitude at 220
    and 300 knots. (NASA Proj Off)
  U.S.S.R.’s Lunolchod 1 lunar rover was activated on moon’s Sea of Rains
    after surviving fourth lunar night since landing on moon on board
    Luna 17 Nov. 17,1970. (SBD, 3/10/71,55)
  U.S.S.R. had again tested “hunter” satellites, designed to locate and
     destroy other satellites, George C. Wilson reported in the Washington
    Post. Cosmos 394 (launched Feb. 9) had entered circular orbit and
    had been intercepted by Cosmos 397 (launched Feb. 2 5 ) , he said.
     Satellites’ inclination suggested launches were from Plesetsk rather
    than Tyuratum [Baykonur] and “probably means that the Soviet
     Union considers its satellite inspection system in the operational rather
     than experimental category.” ( W Post, 3/9/71, A3)
  Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science
     and Applications, testified in FY 1972 authorization hearings before
                                                            “. . .
     House Committee on Science and Astronautics:             true boundaries
     of our ecological system have not been determined, but they certainly
     extend to the known dimensions of the universe. The forces and laws
    which affect the most distant star are directly relevant to the problems
     of energy generation and control on Earth. Mankind is just beginning
     to grasp the fact that all natural systems are intimately related and
     interdependent” and man must learn “to manage wisely what he can,
     and to live in equilibrium with what is beyond his control. It is to

                                         66
                                                                       March 9
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                   ..
      these ends .       that we have structured the nation’s continuing space
      activities in science and applications.”
          Most significant new astronomy program element was HEAO, “de-
      signed to unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of
      modern physics.” There was evidence that in pulsars and quasars “a
      whole new regime of power generation exists and operates at levels
      that cannot be explained by modern nuclear physics.” Understanding
      these energy processes might lead to harnessing of powers “heretofore
      unimaginable.”
          Both planetary and lunar exploration should provide clues to earth‘s
      past and future, to factors that caused long-period environmental
      changes and how to control them. Earth observations program also was
      addressed to fundamental problems of environmental and ecological
      management. Satellites could see, record, and transmit information on
      causes and effects in global air-ocean-earth interactions.
          Trend in US. space science and applications had been decreasing
      budget and launch rates; OSSA had had to “cut back ongoing projects,
      dispense with backup payloads, stretch launch schedules and mission
       intervals, and defer promising new projects,” but had “preserved a
      steady momentum and a balanced program thrust wherever possible.”
      High level of productivity in science, exploration, and applications had
       been possible “because of the background in technology, in engineer-
       ing, in conceptual thinking that was built up earlier.” But many
      valuable and important missions had been deferred into future, “a
       future we expect will permit us to revolutionize the way space is
       explored and used.” Key feature of this revolution would be reusable
       space shuttle “that makes access to space for man and machines an
       economical, routine excursion rather than the difficult task it presents
       now.” (Transcript)
    NAS released Priorities for Space Research, 1971-1980. Report of study
0

       group of NAS-NRC Space Science Board recommended priorities for
       NASA OSSA programs at three funding levels for space missions in
       1970s. Study was made at NASA’srequest. Highest priorities were
       recommended for probes of Venus and Jupiter beginning in 1975;
       completion of three remaining Apollo manned lunar missions and
       unmanned landers and rovers for lunar and planetary studies; series
       of HEAO satellites for x-ray, gamma-ray, and cosmic-ray exploration;
       Small Astronomy Satellites (SAS) ; increased astronomy rockets, bal-
       loons, and aircraft; development of mirror for Large Space Telescope
        (UT) ; continued study of earth-orbiting gyroscope and ESRO sun-
       orbiting satellite for studies of gravitational physics in mid-1970’s;
       pair of satellites to study interaction between earth’s magnetosphere
        and solar wind and doubling of funds for solar-terrestrial physics;
        three satellite programs and increased data analysis for meteorology
        and earth resources surveys ; and ground-based research to support
        Viking softlander and future exobiology missions. Report recom-
        mended next larger level of NASA funding provide for 1.5-m (60-in)
        space telescope, OSO, and additional Atmospheric Explorers and Earth
        Resources Satellites. Grand Tour of planets between 1975 and 1980
        was recommended only if NASA’s       budget was increased still further.
        (NAS--NRC-NAE News, 3/9/71)

                                       67
March 9                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 Astronaut,
     and Astronauts John L. Swigert, Jr., William R. Pogue, and Jack R.
     Lousma met with President Nixon at White House to report on their
     visits to 17 college campuses from October to December 1970. At
     White House press conference later, Anders said meetings with stu-
      dents had been “very positive.” Students had been “very curious about
     the Space Program.” (PD, 3/15/71, 475; Transcript)
  Communist China possibly had made limited-range 3200-km (2000-mi)
     shot of prototype ICBM in late 1970, Secretary of Defense Melvin R.
     Laird said in posture statement before House Armed Services Com-
     mittee. Range probably had been limited to keep test within Chinese
     national borders. “Estimated earliest possible [Communist Chinese]
     ICBM capability is 1973, with the more likely time being the mid-
     1970s.” (Testimony)
March 10: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences unani-
     mously approved nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Admin-
     istrator, following one-hour hearing. Dr. Fletcher told Committee US.
     had made “some small steps” toward cooperation with U.S.S.R. in
     space. “I think we can make these even larger steps.” Asked if he
     thought NASA needed any change in direction Dr. Fletcher said, “No
     organization is perfect, and a new administration will always look
     at the program to see if it can make any changes and I intend to do
     that.” In response to question from Sen. Margaret Chase Smith
      (R-Me.), Dr. Fletcher said it was “not NASA’s  mission” to act as tech-
     nological WPA in aiding depressed areas through the channel of space
     contracts. (CR, 3/10/71, D144; O’Toole, W Post, 3/11/71)
* NASA launched series of five sounding rockets from Wallops Station to
     collect data for comparison with data collected during March 7, 1970,
     solar eclipse. Two Nike-Cajuns each carried 31-grenade payload to
     113-km (70.2-mi) altitude. All but one grenade ejected and exploded
     as planned. Three Nike-Apaches carried Pitot-static probe payloads to
     179-km (111.2-mi) , 178-km (110.6-mi), and 171-km (106.3-mi) alti-
     tudes. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data
     were obtained. (NASA Rpts SRL)
  First flight model LRV was formally’ delivered to NASA in ceremony at
     Boeing Co.’s Space Center at Kent, Wash. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rem,
     MSFC Director, accepted first of three flight models from Boeing Co.
     Group Vice President for Aerospace 0. C. Boileau. Model would be
     shipped to arrive at KSC March 15 for final checks and installation
    aboard Apollo 15 LM. Delivery would be two weeks before April 1
     contract delivery date. (NASA Release 71-38; Boeing Release 3/10/71)
  NASA plans to develop first space rescue capability during 1972 Skylab
     program were described by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate
     Administrator for Planning, before AAS meeting in Washington, D.C. :
     Studies indicated NASA could have rescue spacecraft standiag by on
     launch pad 20 days before scheduled Skylab launch in spring 1973.
     Rescue technique would be facilitated by equipping Apollo spacecraft
    with two extra seats beneath three regular crew seats. In space emer-
     gency, modified spacecraft would be launched with two-man crew
     rather than three. It would rendezvous with distressed Skylab vehicle
     to recover three-man Skylab team. Rescue vehicle would have im-

                                     68
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   March 10

     proved hydraulic telescoping landing legs to absorb impact on land
     if water landing was not practical. (AP, Huntsville Times, 3/11/71)
  NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald
     M. Truszynski testified on FY 1972 budget request during House
     Committee on Science and Astronautics authorization hearings. During
     1970 OTDA supported some 50 ongoing scientific, applications, planetary,
     and lunar experiment missions as well as some 14 new flight projects
     launched in year by NASA and DOD. During Apollo 13 mission, with safe
     return after inflight explosion, MSFN “demonstrated that it is, in fact,
     the astronauts’ life-line to earth.” Valuable clues to origin of explosion
     were found in analysis of recorded telemetry data. MSFN was still
     supporting experiments left on moon by Apolb 12 and 14 missions.
     After FY 1972’s Apollo 15 and 16 missions, network would be continu-
     ously monitoring 16 ALSEP experiments. Satellite network provided
     tracking and data acquisition for average monthly workload of some
     40 earth-orbital satellites, including NASA’s  scientific and applications
     satellites and projects of other Government agencies and foreign coun-
     tries. DSN supported Mariner 6 and 7 probes in extended mission
     phase and Apollo 13, as well as four ongoing Pioneer missions
      (6 through 9). Data acquired by Goldstone antenna on effect of solar
     gravitation on Mariner spacecraft signals had verified Einstein theory
     of delay of 200 microseconds in return of signals from gravitational
     field of sun. Construction continued on second 64-m (210-ft) antenna
     at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and ground was broken for third near
     Madrid, Spain. (Transcript)
  ComSatCorp released 1970 annual report. Highlights of 1970 included:
     declaration of corporation’s first dividend; increase in net income
     from 70 cents per share to $1.75; submission to FCC of proposal for
     domestic comsat system for lease to AT&T; completion of Bartlett earth
     station at Talkeetna, Alaska, and nine new foreign earth station an-
     tennas, bringing total antennas to 51 ; beginning of construction of new
     antenna at Andover, Me.; launch of the last three Intelsat I11 satellites;
     and election of Joseph H. McConnell as ComSatCorp Chairman. (Text)
* Informatics Tisco announced it had received one-year, $4.8-million, incen-
     tive contract extension from NASA for operation of NASA Scientific and
     Technical Information Facility at College Park, Md. (Informatics
     Release)
* Sen. Joseph M. Montoya (D-PI. Mex.) introduced S. 1184, “to establish
     a Department of Science and Technology, and to transfer certain
     agencies and functions to such Department.” Bill provided that NASA,
     NSF, and AEC be transferred to new department. Sen. Montoya had
     introduced similar legislation on Oct. 12, 1970. (CRY 3/10/71,
     s2800-12; NASA LAR, x/22)
  Sen. Winston L. Prouty (R-Vt.) introduced S. 1168, $619-million NSF
     FY 1972 authorization bill. (CRY3/10/71, S2783-4)
Murch 1 .- Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA
          1
     Administrator. (CRY    3/11/71, 53088)
  Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1971 was presented by Mrs. Esther
     Goddard to James E. Webb, NASA Administrator from 1961 to 1968,
     at 14th annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C.
     National Space Club award-named for late Dr. Robert H. Goddard,
     “father of American rocketry”-was         given to Webb for “unprece-

                                      69
March 11                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, l!Xl

    dented accomplishments.” Citation said his management of Apollo
    program leading to manned lunar landing “was matched only by the
    accomplishments in international scientific cooperation, the technology
    utilization program, the sustaining university program and the greatest
    industrial team ever assembled.’’
       Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Dr. Rocco A. Petrone,
    Apollo Program Director, “for his outstanding personal leadership of
    the Apollo mission to the Moon.”
       Wallace H. Deckert of ARC Advanced Aircraft Programs Office was
    awarded Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship “in recognition of the
    need for the continued scientific and intellectual growth of the indi-
    vidual, who is already pursuing the challenges of research, exploration
    and administration in astronautics, so that he may continue to seek
    and maintain a pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.”
       Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to NASA-NOAA
    Space Meteorology Team “for opening a revolutionary dimension in
    observing earth‘s weather, and for significant help in mankind’s per-
    petual battle with the elements.’’ National Space Club Press Award
    was presented to Kenneth F. Weaver of National Geographic magazine
    “for his illuminating and imaginative editorial contributions to astro-
    nautics and his excellence in conveying to the public at large man’s
    expanding concept of his cosmos.”
       Dinner, which honored “decade and more of international coopera-
    tion in space,” was attended by Apollo 14 astronauts, Soviet Ambassa-
    dor Anatoly F. Dobrynin, Indian Ambassador Lakshmi Kant Jha,
    comedian Bob Hope, and US. Ambassador to U.N. George Bush.
     (Program; Dean, W Star, 3/13/71, C1)
  NASA OART officials testified before House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics during hearings on FY 1972 NASA authorization. Roy P. Jack-
    son, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology,
    said aeronautics was largest part of OART program for first time. In
    military aviation, “work is under way at the Centers in support of the
                                                                           .
    F-14 for the Navy. , . . Over a dozen wind tunnels and simulators . .
                                                              ..  . the F-15,
    are used in this support. We are helping the USAF with
    their new B-1 bomber and we plan to assist” with the A-X. One ARC
    facility was on indefinite loan to USA. “In all, we use over a third of
    our available facility time to support military needs. Research on
    transonic aerodynamics, the NASA supercritical airfoil, fly-by-wire flight
    controls, spin stabilization, and advanced structures using beryllium or
    composites are some of the areas where NASA is making research con-
    tributions to meet military requirements in the future.”
       In civil aviation effort, OART was providing DOT with assistance on
    SST. ARC was assisting FAA in certification studies of Concorde and SST.
    ARC flight simulator for advanced aircraft was “proving to be the most
    useful facility available in the free world for studying airworthiness
    standards for supersonic transports.’’ NASA and DOT were completing
    joint study of “relationships between the benefits that accrue to the
    Nation from aviation and the level of R&D effort. The study displays
    the ways in which civil aviation can affect regional development,
    population distribution, [and] land use, and contribute to many other
    social and economic goals of the Nation.’’ Problems under study in-
    cluded aircraft noise, air pollution from aircraft engine emissions, and

                                     70
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  March 11

   aeronautical operating problems “such as approach and landing safety,
   delays, congestion, and community noise caused by operation of air-
   craft.” OART Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. had established joint
   STOL operating problems experiments program with DOT and FAA, and
   Aeronautical Life Sciences Div. “to study man’s role in advanced aero-
                         ..
   nautical systems .      as an operator, as a passenger, and as a member
   of the community exposed to air operations.”
      Apollo 1 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Adminis-
               1
   trator (Aeronautics), described improvements in aircraft materials and
   structural design: “I have been particularly impressed with the progress
   of the composite materials. The potential of boron and carbon fibers
   imbedded in an epoxy resin matrix to provide high strength, low
   weight structures has been discussed with you for several years. This
   year the testing of special glass fibers has revealed the possibility that
   low cost, stiff composites may be fabricated with much greater strengths
   than previously thought possible. Composites are finding application
   both as a replacement for metallic components and by augmenting
   metal strengths using selective reinforcement. In the forthcoming year
   we propose to construct several airplane components of primary struc-
   ture for installation and flight demonstration. We believe that these
   new materials will find widespread use in the industry when the
   technical risk has been demonstrated to be acceptable.”
      Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Systems Office, reported on
   progress of NERVA program: “Through the systematic engineering de-
                     .
   sign process . . design concepts to be incorporated in NERVA were
   formulated, requirements were specified, and a baseline engine design
   has been established. The design provides a thrust level of 75000 lbs
    E334 000 newtons], and a specific impulse of 825 seconds. High relia-
   bility and safety in operation are provided through the use of redun-
   dancy in critical areas and conservative design approaches. The en-
   durance goal for the reusable system is 3.0 hours, coupled with the
   ability to undergo 60 start-and-stop cycles, and the key fuel element
   technology continued to make good progress toward that goal.”
    (Transcript)
 RCA Corp. announced it had filed application with FCC for construction
   and operation of $l98-million domestic satellite system for 50 states
   and Puerto Rico. System would consist of three satellites and 13 major
   earth stations. At Washington, D C , news conference, Howard R.
                                        ..
   Hawkins-President       of RCA Global Communications, Inc., and RCA
   Alaska Communications, Inc.--said system could begin first phase in
   1974. System would include distribution of motion pictures by closed
   circuit telecasts instead of film. (AP, NYT, 3/12/71, 62)
 NASA announced award of $18 704 300 cost-plus-award-fee contract to
   Boeing Co. for installation and technical support services at KSC. Con-
   tract was for 1 mos with four one-year options. New contract com-
                     1
   bined work previously performed under three separate contracts.
   TWA, which had been performing support services, had been denied
   preliminary injunction to halt contract award, in Federal court
   March 10. (NASA Release 71-39; WSJ, 3/12/71)
 Sen. George McGovern (D3.D.) introduced, for himself and cosponsors,
   S. 1191 “to assist workers whose jobs may be terminated by reduction
   in defense and space spending, to establish a system of benefits to ease

                                    71
March 11                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     the transition of such workers to civilian occupations, to minimize the
     hardships encountered by communities which are dependent upon
     defense industry and employment, to encourage cooperation between
     the United States and defense contractors in meeting the challenge of
    economic conversion and diversification brought on by changing de-
     fense needs, . . . and to facilitate the transfer of public and private
     resources to new national priorities.” Bill would require that portion of
     profits from military, space, and atomic energy contracts be deposited
    in reserve to be administered by National Commission on Peacetime
    Transition. Funds would be available to benefit workers who lost income
    as a result of cutbacks. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on
    Government Operations. (CRY3/11/71, S2926-35)
* Kansas City Times editorial commented on appointment of Dr. James C.
    Fletcher as NASA Administrator: Dr. Fletcher had “earned respect at
    Utah as a master of administrative analysis and detail, a man able to
    wring the last measure of usefulness out of every available dollar and,
    at the same time, to command intense loyalty from those who work
    with him. No qualities are likely to prove of more service to a man
    responsible for leading the American space program out of its nadir
    of tight money and flagging morale.” (KC Times, 3/11/71)
* New York Times commented on orbiting of second Communist Chinese
    satellite: It had provided “impressive evidence of the advance of Com-
    munist China in war-related technology. It hardly needs underlining
    that a rocket capable of orbiting a sputnik could also deliver a
    hydrogen -bomb to a distant target on ear$.” It was evident that
    “Ma0 Tse-tung has been trying to insulate a small group of scientists
    and their activity in weapons development from the general turmoil of
    the cultural revolution as well as from the inadequate supply of prac-
    tically everything in normal Chinese economic life. That effott has
    apparently been successful.” (NYT, 3/11/71, 38)
March 12: Apollo 14 astronauts were presented Distinguished Service
    Medals at DOD ceremonies. Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee
    presented USN DSM to Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D.
    Mitchell. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., pre-
    sented USAF DSM and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge to Astronaut
    Stuart A. Roosa. (NASA Activities 4/15/71, 61; DOD Release 218-71;
    MSC Hist Off)
  New photographic process that produced nickel image by exposing ammo-
    nium, lithium, lead, and nickel hypophosphite to electrons or x-radi-
    ation had been developed by LeRC scientists Dr. Warren H. Philipp,
    Dr. Charles E. May, and Stanley J. Marsik, Lewis News reported.
    Advantages were that nickel compound was cheaper and more abun-
    dant than silver used in standard photographic process and, because
    nickel compound was not sensitive to visible light, process eliminated
    need ’for darkroom or cassette containers for undeveloped film. (Lewis
    News, 3/12/71,1)
March 13-17: ExpZorer 43 (IMP-I) Interplanetary Monitoring Platform
    was launched by NASA from ETR by three-stage, thrust-augmented
    Thor-Delta M-6 booster at 1 :15 am EST. Spacecraft entered highly
                                   1
    elliptical orbit with 206 049-km (128 032-mi) apogee, 241-km
    (149.8-mi) perigee, 6012-min period ( 4 days 12 hrs 12 min), and
    28.6’ inclination. Primary objective was to investigate during pe-

                                     72
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             March 13-17

     riod of decreasing solar activity and through several solar rotations,
    the nature of the interplanetary medium and interplanetary-magneto-
    spheric interaction, including characteristic features of solar wind,
    interplanetary fields and sector structure, and modulation effects on
    cosmic rays. By March 17 onboard computer and 9 of 12 science
    experiments were operating satisfactorily.
        Explorer 43 was first of series of second-generation spacecraft de-
    signed to study solar-lunar-terrestrial relationships. It was eighth of
     10 IMPS and at 288 kg (635 lbs) was largest as well as most advanced
    spacecraft in Explorer series. Seventh IMP, Explorer 41, had been
    launched June 21, 1969, and was still operating. IMP program was
    managed by GSFC under OSSA direction. (NASA Proj O f NASA Release
                                                           f;
    71-35; SSR, 3/31/71)
March 13: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 unmanned lunar rover explored 457-m
     (500-yd) crater on moon, made chemical analysis of soil, photographed
    area around crater, and “engaged in Cosmo-physical measurements,”
    Tass announced. (UPI, W Star, 3/14/71, A15)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carry-
0

    ing Univ. of Colorado airglow experiment. Mission was unsuccessful.
     (SR list)
 In cable to Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), Jean-Jacques Servan-
    Schreiber, member of French National Assembly, said Anglo-French
    Concorde supersonic transport “looks to us . . .like an industrial
    Vietnam.” Every Concorde cost analysis had proved to be wrong. Cost
    had “multiplied here, as it will everywhere, four times the initial
    evaluations.” Facts had not been available until recent months. “Now
    the public eye is on the project and what it sees is bankruptcy.”
    (Kenworthy, NYT, 3/14/71,21)
March 14: FRC and MSC scientists and engineers would begin research in
    adapting Apollo hardware to “fly-by-wire” electronic control system
    for future aircraft, NASA announced. System substituted lightweight
    wires for push-rods and added redundant wire paths at different loca-
    tions in aircraft, to make overall system less vulnerable to damage.
    Electronic system could soften bumps, sways, and lurches of aircraft
    in rough weather and ease pilot’s load. (NASA Release 71-36)
 Moscow newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Zndwtriya quoted unidentified
    “Chief Designer of Spaceships’’ as saying U.S.S.R. was preparing
    further manned orbital flight of long duration as prelude to creation
    of permanent space laboratory. Soyuz spacecraft had “undergone
    necessary modifications to insure fulfillment of a long and extensive
    program.” Later New York Times said designer was believed to be
    Mikhail K. Yangel, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (NYT,
   3/15/71 )
March 15: Detection of “possible spinar”-celestial      object which could
    be link between galaxies and quasars in outer space-was described
    by NRL team headed by Dr. Herbert Friedman in Astrophysical Jour-
    nal. Spinar, 200 million light years from earth, could be entire galaxy
    of collapsed and rotating neutron stars or single, massive pulsar.
    Object had been found by x-ray detector aboard Aerobee sounding
   rocket.
       In interview with Washington Evening Star later, Dr. Friedman
   said new source, classified as a Seyfert Galaxy, emitted “soft x-rays.”

                                   73
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 15

     Spinar would radiate 1000 times less visible light than quasar and
     12 000 times more infrared than visible light energy-approximately
     what had been found in Seyfert Galaxy. But x-ray emissions perhaps
     as much as 10 trillion suns indicated it might be powered by same
     mechanism as pulsar. Dr. Friedman speculated that pulsar such as
     spinar could be missing link between conventional galaxy like Milky
     Way and quasars and that spacecraft-mounted x-ray detectors would
     find “tens of thousands” of such sources. (Astrophysical J o u r d ,
     3/15/71, G81-5; Lannan, W Star, 3/19/71, B5)
* NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets-one            from Fox
     Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, and one from Pin Main-to          study
     electric fields. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily.
     (SR List)
   House Committee on Appropriations by vote of 26 to 15 approved full
     $290 million requested by DOT for continued SST development. (CR,
     3/15/71, D164; AP, N Y T , 3/16/71,62)
* FCC deadline for filing proposals to build domestic comsat systems. Eight
     proposals had been filed, calling for launch of 19 satellites and ex-
     penditure of more than $1 billion.
         Fairchild Hiller Corp. and Tele-Communications, Inc., had said
     they would petition FCC for permission to orbit domestic comsat sys-
     tems, WaZl Street Journal reported. Fairchild Hiller proposal called
     for two satellites in equatorial orbit with third reserve satellite on
     ground. Tele-Communications envisioned $66-million comsat system of
     two satellites and six ground stations to start. (WSJ, 3/15/71, 13;
     3/16/71,7)
   Feasibility of comsats for helicopter communications had been demon-
     strated by tests conducted with DOD’S Tacsat 1 comsat over Pacific
     Ocean, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Tests at UHF
     and super-high (X-band) frequencies used different antennas for
     each, mounted on Army/Bell UH-ID helicopter atop rotor mast to
     avoid signal modulation by rotating blades. ( A v Wk, 3/15/71, 39)
   US. and U.S.S.R. opened fourth round of Strategic Arms Limitation
     Talks (SALT) in Vienna. (AP, W Star, 3/15/71, A3)
   President Nixon, in Key Biscayne, Fla., sent message to Congress trans-
     mitting 10th annual report of US. Arms Control and Disarmament
     Agency: “For the first time a realistic dialogue is taking place be-
     tween the Soviet Union and ourselves about the management of our
     strategic relations. The mutuality of interests which brought us to the
     table encourages our hope that the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
     will succeed.” (PD,    3/22/71, 492)
   New York Times editorial commented on Pioneer F: “The mission of
     Pioneer F-the spacecraft that will be launched next year to visit
     giant Jupiter and send back photographs and scientific data-opens
     some of the most exciting vistas yet in the entire space program.
     If accomplished. . .this mission would mark a major advance in man’s
     understanding of a hitherto unpenetrated section of the solar system.”
      ( N Y T , 3/15/71,38)
illurch 15-16: NASA launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Kou-
      rou, French Guiana, carrying GSFC experiments to measure ozone
      distribution at low latitudes near equinox from 70- to 15-km (44- to
     9-mi) altitude. Rockets reached 75.5- and 72.5-km (46.9- and 45.1-mi)

                                     74
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               March 15-16

     altitudes with rockets and instruments functioning satisfactorily.
     Launches were second and third in four-launch series; first had been
    conducted March 5. (NASA      Rpts SRL)
March 15-18: AIAA Space Shuttle Development, Testing, and Operations
    Conference/NASA Space Shuttle Technology Conference was held in
     Phoenix, Ariz. Charles J. Donlan, Deputy Associate Administrator
     (Technical), OMSF, said NASA plans called for unmanned testing of
     reusable space shuttle beginning in 1976 and manned tests in 1977.
     Fully operational vehicle would be ready in 1979.
        Col. John G. Albert, USAF Director of Space Operations, said DOD
    was “putting its faith in the shuttle and as a result we are not develop-
    ing any other space rocket beyond the present Titan 3. We intend to
    use the shuttle for all military space operations.” Use would include
    communications, navigation, weather-watching, and surveillance.
    Shuttle would place military satellites in orbit and perform special-
     ized missions in orbit for periods up to seven days. Col. Albert told
    news conference later that DOD would “certainly make a sizable fund-
    ing contribution at the proper time” to assist NASA in shuttle develop-
    ment. To be useful to the military, shuttle must be able to operate
    like jet transport with quick turnaround on runway after conventional
    landing. (AP, B Sun, 3/16/71)
        Jean Bernard LaGarde, liaison officer for European Space Conference
    and French representative to ESC, said Europe would contribute $1 bil-
    lion to US. manned space programs in future if U.S. lifted ban on
    launching comsats for European nations. LaGarde said U S . would
    have to give positive answer by late April or early May. (LA Times,
    3/17/71)
        AIAA President Martin Goland at banquet March 16 presented Haley
    Astronautical Award of $500, medal, and certificate, to Apollo 13
    Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L.
    Swigert for “exceptional manner in which the Apollo 13 crew con-
    ducted themselves and their spacecraft under extraordinary circum-
    stances of extreme stress.”
        Octave Chanute Award of $500 and certificate was presented to
    William M. Magruder, Director of SST Development for DOT, for “out-
    standing contributions by a pilot to the development of safer, more
    efficient air transportation.”
        AIAA History Manuscript Award for “best historical manuscript
    dealing with the science, technology, and impact of aeronautics and
    astronautics on society” went to Constance McLaughlin Green and
    Milton Lomask for “A History of Project Vanguard” [published in
    NASA Historical Series in March as Vanguard-A History, SP42021.
     (AIAA Release; AZAA Bull, 3/71; NASA Hist O f  f)
March 16: Peking Radio announced that Communist China’s second satel-
    lite, launched March 3, was transmitting scientific data in “whistles,
    pips, bleeps, and blurrs.” Announcement broke two-week silence on
    launching of satellite. New China News Agency said satellite weighed
    220.5 kg (486 Ibs) and was in elliptical orbit. (Reuters, W Post,
    3/17/71, A12)
 NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard
    C. McCurdy testified on research and program management (R&PM)
    budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics

                                    75
March 1                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 197l
       6

    hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization: FY 1972 request was $21
     million less than in FY 1971, primarily because of continuing reduc-
     tion in permanent positions. Request of $697.4 million was based on
     further reduction of Government personnel of 1500 positions, lowering
     employment to 28 350-total      reduction of 6971 positions from 1967
    peak and lowest level since 1963. Cut of “some 20 percent in the
     1967-72 period is by a considerable margin the greatest, proportion-
     ately, to be made by any Government agency in the period.” Of total
     NASA force, scientists and engineers made up 44~8%~ technicians 26.7%,
     administrative personnel 13.9%, and clerical 14.6%. Hiring restric-
     tions had reduced number of new college graduates added to work
     force and raised average age to 41.3, with rate of 8/10 a year each
     year, endangering health and vigor of NASA.
        “In the past decade, the aerospace industry, overall as well as that
    portion serving NASA, has passed through a substantial perturbation.
     Contractor employment climbed to a high peak, then dropped drasti-
     cally. The current estimate for industry employment on NASA work at
     the end of this year and next is about 108,000-less than one-third
     of what it was at the peak of the space program. But with the major
     reductions in the space program over the last several years, this is
    how it must be.”
        Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and
     Technology Utilization, testified on NASA management of its new tech-
     nology as “a repository of national resources”: Some 20000 technical
     contributions had been disclosed by NASA contractors, 3500 in past
     year. Another 4000 had been reported by NASA employees from
     inhouse projects. Contributions reported were evaluated, defined, and
    published for use by others. Allocations for FY 1972 were increased
    over previous year as NASA began to work with innovative events of
     early stages of 1970s R&D programs. (Transcript)
  President Nixon transmitted NASA’s    22nd Semiannual Report to Congress
0

    covering July 1 to Dec. 31, 1969.
        In letter accompanying report, Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA
    Administrator, wrote, “The two successful Moon missions [ApoUo 11
    and 121 fulfilled the national goal of a manned lunar landing and
    safe return within the decade of the sixties and convincingly demon-
    strated the technological competence of the Apollo program.” Flights
    had shown “value of the space program as a unifying force in inter-
    national relations, for interest in the Moon landings and in the astro-
    nauts transcended national boundaries. This Nation, in turn, took the
    view that the achievement was a triumph for all mankind even though
    the deed itself was performed by American astronauts.” (Text; CR,
    3/17/71, H1631)
* President Nixon transmitted to Congress NSF annual report for FY 1970.
    He said: “Science has entered an era of unprecedented fruitfulness.
    The investment we have made in the last three decades offers us an
    array of scientific talent and a heritage of scientific achievement un-
    precedented in human history.” (PD, 3/22/71, 495-6)
* NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Fairbanks, Alaska,
    carrying Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Mis-
    sion was unsuccessful. (SR list)
  Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 1261, to authorize
0




                                    76
                                                                    March 16
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    NSF “to undertake a loan guarantee and interest assistance program to
    aid unemployed scientists and engineers in the conversion from
    defense-related to civilian, socially-oriented research, development, and
    engineering activities.” (CR, S3225-31)
  Senate passed S.R. 17, establishing Joint Committee on the Environ-
    ment. (CR, 3/16/71, S3317-25)
March 17: NASA supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted by
    test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed second flight
    from FRC. Aircraft reached 7600-m (25 000-ft) altitude and 300 knots
     (mach 0.75). Purpose of flight was io continue evaluation of aircraft’s
    handling qualities at higher altitudes and speeds. (NASA Proj Off)
  Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before Senate
    Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during hearing on
    US.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation: Recent agreements had been di-
    rected toward “achieving common objectives,” not “exchange of tech-
    nology.” Review of relations between NASA and U.S.S.R. “suggests
    that we should exercise considerable caution in assessing the prospects
    for prompt and effective implementation of these agreements.” But
    US. negotiators of October and January agreements had observed
    “definite improvement” over past decade. Negotiations had been
                                             ...
    “more straight forward, less political.         A closer kind of relation-
    ship seems to be intended by the.Soviet side. The top level of the
    Soviet Academy for the first time participated directly. The negotia-
    tions were attended by the first instances of meaningful access to Soviet
    facilities.”
        Dr. Low said he had “spent a half-hour or more inside the Soviet
    simulator with a young Russian engineer who explained in detail the
     working of that spacecraft and answered every question that I had.
     Later on, I was in the docking and rendezvous trainer with one of
    their cosmonauts and was allowed to attempt to fly a docking of one
     Soyuz against another. I did not succeed in bringing the two together.
     In addition, in January our delegation was invited to the principal
     Soviet tracking station in the Crimea. Unfortunately, the time avail-
             .
     able . . did not permit us to make this visit, but we have every inten-
     tion of doing so in the future.”
        Advocating “air of cautious optimism,” Dr. Low said U.S.S.R. had,
     “in effect, met the schedules laid down in the first agreement with a
     variance of only a few days. In any event, we have laid out and agreed
     to specific milestones for an even-handed exchange, so that neither side
     will gain more than the other.”
        In response to question, Dr. Low said military components of US.
     and Soviet space programs had not been discussed at NASA-soviet
     Academy of Sciences meetings. (Transcript)
* Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks,
     Alaska, carrying Univ. of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies.
     Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Doyle G. Berry, owner of Berry Aviation Co., said in New Orleans that
     he had reached exclusive agreement with U.S.S.R. to sell Tu-144 super-
     sonic transport in Western Hemisphere. Contract was being drawn up
     subject to State Department approval. (NYT, 3/19/71)
  Two Sprint missiles successfully intercepted ICBM nosecone over Pacific
     in latest test of Safeguard defense system. It was first time two mis-

                                      77
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March l’i

    siles were used in Safeguard test. Target was launched from Vanden-
    berg AFB, Calif., 6700-km (4200-mi) distance. (Reuters, C Trib,
    2/23/71,8)
March 18: House voted 215 to 204 to end Federal funding for SST devel-
    opment. It was first time in seven years that House had voted against
    measure though it had passed House in 1970 by only 20 votes. Wash-
    ington Post said turnaround was due to growing ecological and eco-
    nomic lobby against SST program, to new House members who voted
    33 to 18 against it, and to spotlight on record vote. It was first time
    House had cast recorded vote on SST issue. Post said supporters of SST
    program predicted House vote would kill program, at least for present;
    private industry could not raise funds needed to finance it. (CR,
     3/18/71, H171749; Lyons, W Post, 3/19/71, A l )
  NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Cajun, launched from Kourou,
0

     French Guiana, carried GSFC experiment to 125-km (77.7-mi) alti-
     tude to measure upper atmospheric pressura, temperatures, densities,
     and winds near equatorial latitudes and to verify operation of ground
     instrumentation in preparation for future grenade missions. Rocket and
     instruments functioned satisfactorily. All 18 grenades detonated and
     were recorded on ground. Launch was last of four in Kourou series.
     Previous launches had been conducted March 5 and March 15-16.
        Nike-Tomahawk, launched from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska,
     carried experiment to study electric fields. Rocket and instruments
     functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL; SR list)
* Dr. Marvin J. Kelly, former President and Board Chairman of Bell
     Telephone Laboratories, died at age 77. After retiring from Bell in
     1959 Dr. Kelly had been named adviser to NASA Administrator and
     consultant to IBM, Ingersoll-Rand Co., and Kennecott Copper Corp.
      (NYT, 3/20/71,32)
March 19: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos Po0 into orbit with 1005-km (624.5-
     mi) apogee, 983-km (610.8-mi) perigee, 104.9-min period, and 65.8’
     inclination. (GSFC SSR, 3/31/71; UPI, W Star, 3/19/71, A6)
* NASA launched three-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Alaska: one
     from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, carrying GSFC experiment to study
     electric fields; one from Fairbanks, carrying Univ. of Alaska experi-
     ment to conduct auroral studies; and one from Fox Main carrying
     GSFC experiment to study magnetic fields. Rockets and instruments
     functioned satisfactorily.
* Senate passed unanimously S. 1117, to regulate public exposure to sonic
     booms by prohibiting supersonic flights of civil aircraft over conti-
     nental U.S. (CR, 3/17/71, S3466-76)
  GAO study had disclosed that cost overruns on 6 1 weapon systems had
      reached $33.4 billion, of which some $9.5 billion had taken place
      before production began, Washington Post reported. Report blamed
      “deliberate underestimating,” unanticipated development difficulties,
      faulty planning, poor management, bad estimating, inflation, and de-
      sire to exploit new technology. It said newer DOD programs “are char-
      acterized by a slower development pace and more conservative pro-
      curement practices.” (Nossiter, W Post, 3/19/71, A l )
* Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., received Honorary Knight of St. Patrick
      Award from College of Engineering, Univ. of Missouri at Columbia,
      Mo. (NASA Activities, 4/15/71,61)

                                    78
                                                                   March 19
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

 Boeing Co. had presented to its management results of diversification
    study completed by panel of Boeing executives, Wall Street Journal
    reported. Principal conclusion had been that best chances for new
    nonaerospace work lay in fields of surface transportation and com-
    munity development. Study envisioned broadening Boeing’s business
    base so that in 10 years’ time one-third of Boeing’s output would be
    outside its traditional product lines. ( W H Y3/19/71)
  Washington Post editorial commented on House vote against SST fund-
0

              .
    ing: “. . we do not see the need to hurry-either across the oceans
    or into the building of an aircraft which will convenience only a tiny
    fraction of the population at a time when great numbers of our people
    have more urgent needs. Some would say that we can have the SST and
    everything else at the same time, and perhaps we can. But we aren’t
    doing the other things, which is precisely why the SST has become a
    very meaningful symbol of misplaced values and disordered priorities.”
     ( W Post, 3/19/71)
Murch 20: NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Tomahawk launched
    from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, carried GSFC experiment to
    study electric fields.
        Aerobee 170 launched from WSMR carried Univ. of Wisconsin experi-
    ment to study soft x-rays, but mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
  Tass reported on meeting of Soviet Transport Commission of Council of
    Mutual Economic Assistance in Moscow. Soviet bloc’s economic alli-
    ance had discussed “coming” introduction of Soviet supersonic trans-
    port Tu-1U and future operation of subsonic jumbo jets on Soviet
    bloc routes. Report had mentioned no date for introduction of Tu-144
    into commercial service. (Shabad, NYT, 3/21/71)
Murch 21: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by
     Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 39 266.4-km (24 399-mi)
     apogee, 328.3-km (204-mi) perigee, 701.8-min period, and 63.2O in-
    clination. (Pres Rpt 72; Av Wk,    4/26/71, 19)
  NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Alaska. Rocket
0

     launched from Fox Main, Dew Line Station, carried GSFC experiment
     to study electric fields. Rocket launched from Fairbanks carried Univ.
     of Alaska experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rockets and instru-
     ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
March 22: Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from
     Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, carrying GSFC experiment to
     study magnetic fields. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily.
      (SR list)
* New York attorney Paul Sawyer was sworn in as consultant to NASA
     Administrator on NASA Public Affairs Program. Sawyer was member
     of law firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim, and Ballou. (NASA
     Release 7 1 4 6 )
  Approval of full appropriations for National Air and Space Museum and
     increases in funding for National Museum of Natural History were
     urged by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) in testimony before
     Senate Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Appropriations
     for Dept. of Interior and Related Agencies. Top priority in Air and
     Space museum budget was $1.9 million for planning and redesign
     of new building to be opened July 4, 1976. “The building project has
     been on dead center for five years now, though Congress provided

                                     79
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 22

     authority €or it in 1966. Land is set aside on the Mall and a complete
     set of blueprints are in hand, ready for use; but a combination of
     resistance by the budget bureau and a recommendation from the Sen-
     ate Committee on Rules and Administration have held the building
     back.” Museum was needed to “tell the story of America’s monumental
     achievements in flight. It will offer a mixture of regular and shifting
     exhibits of original aircraft and spacecraft from which the average
     citizen can see for himself the significant breakthroughs in flight and
     what lies beyond.” Sen. Goldwater supported request for redesign of
     original plans for Museum as “surest and swiftest route toward com-
     pletion of the project.’’ Since building was authorized in 1966, esti-
     mated expense of $40 million had climbed to $70 million. (CR,
     3/23/71, S3605-7)
* FAA announced start of major program to criss-cross U.S. with area
     navigation airways. Four transcontinental routes would link New York
     City with san Francisco and Los Angeles, effective April 29. FAA
     would announce additional 115 area navigation routes within next
     two months. Shorter interim area navigation routes had already been
     established to test and develop air traffic control and piloting tech-
     niques. Area navigation used airborne computers that permitted pilots
     to extrapolate signals from existing ground navaids, allowing greater
     choice and flexibility in route selection. (FAA Release 71-33)
   DOD was developing three aircraft for “what some influential lawmakers
      view as essentially the same mission,” close air support, Wushington
      Post reported. To buy USA’S Cheyenne helicopter, USAF’S AX, and
      USMC’s British-built Harrier-about    1000 aircraft all told-would cost
      taxpayers $4 billion to $5 billion over next few years. (Getler, W
      Post, 3/22/71, A l )
March 23: Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified before
      House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-
      Science in support of NASA FY 1972 budget request: “We have recently
      settled on a single set of performance characteristics for the prelimi-
      nary design of the two-stage fully reusable [space] shuttle. Alternate
      approaches are also still under study. We expect to be in a position to
      make decisions this summer on how we will proceed with airframe
      design or development in FY 1972. The $100 million recommended in
      the FY 1972 budget will support, in addition to the engine develop-
      ment, either continued intensive design studies and related efforts or
      the initiation of airframe development.”
         Dr. Low noted “tremendous interest in exploration during Apollo 11,
      when an estimated 107 million people in the US. watched our first
      manned lunar landing mission; and we saw it again last month, when
      104 million watched Apollo 14.” (Text)
   NASA announced award of $S-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to
      Mason-Rust for support services at Michoud Assembly Facility. Con-
      tract was for one year with two one-year options. (NASA Release 7 1 4 7 )
 March 24: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by
      Thorad-Agena boostey. Orbital parameters: 235-km ( 146-mi) apogee,
       172.2-km ( 107-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 81.5O inclination.
      Satellite reentered April 1 . (Pres Rpt 72)
                                 2
 * Senate voted 51 to 46 to cut off all Federal funding for SST, apparently
      ending controversial project. House had voted to stop Federal funding

                                      80
                                                                  March 24
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   March 18. Specific proposal before Senate had been to provide $134
   million more for continued work on two SST prototypes for next three
   months. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said Nixon Administration
   had requested $235 million for SST development in FY 1972 budget,
   but he predicted that if White House continued to seek appropriations
   it would be defeated, Wall Street Journal reported. (CR, 3/24/71,
   S3818-69; WSJ, 3/25/71)
 President Nixon issued statement following Senate disapproval of funds
   for SST, calling action “a reversal of America’s tradition of staying in
   the vanguard of scientific and technological advance.” He said: “It has
    always been America’s pride, and the source of much of our strength,
   that we have constantly reached out toward new horizons in the search
    for knowledge--not from a chauvinistic desire to be number one, but
    from the conviction that we must continue to develop the countless
    new benefits that flow from exploration of the unknown. Development
    of the SST has been a part of that psoud, creative, and deeply humanis-
    tic tradition. Though the Congress has declined to continue helping
    fund this development, I shall strive to ensure that the tradition is
    maintained.” (PD, 3/29/71,541)
 Boeing Co. Vice President for Industrial Relations Lowell P. Mickelwait
    said company would lay off about 7000 workers and disband SST pro-
    gram as result of Senate’s rejection of SST financing. Plans were in
    anticipation of notice of SST program termination from DOT. Of work-
    ers to be laid off within seven weeks of notice, 4500 were force work-
    ing directly on SST production. Others were clerical and office workers.
    Mickelwait said Seattle-area work force could drop to 26 500 or remain
    as high as 31 000 after SST program cancellation. Estimate of 29 000
    workers was “reasonable.” (AP, B Sun, 3/25/71, A l )
 NASA announced selection of RCA Corp. to receive $12-million, cost-plus-
    award-fee contract for Atmosphere Explorer (AE) satellites C, D, and
    E. Spacecraft would be launched in 1973, 1974, and 1975 to study
     upper atmosphere between 80 and 240 km (50 to 150 mi). NASA
    Release 71-43)
 NASA announced availability of computer information packages NASA/
     STIMS (Scientific and Technical Information Modular System) and
     NASA/RECON (Remote Console) from Computer Software Management
     and Information Center (COSMIC), operated by Univ. of Georgia un-
     der NASA contract. Packages would enable users to set up on-line infor-
     mation retrieval systems similar to NASA’s.   (NASA Release 71-44)
March 25: ARC researchers had used sensors on twin-engine Cessna 401
     light aircraft to detect and measure oil spills in Pacific Ocean off
     California, NASA announced. Sensors had detected slicks from heavy
     and light crude oils and light diesel oil. ARC researchers John P.
     Millard and John C. Arveson had said approach should be applicable
     to satellite-borne sensor system. (NASA Release 71-42)
  West Germany’s Bochum Observatory reported Communist China’s sec-
     ond satellite (launched March 3) had stopped transmitting signals on
     March 23. Scientists did not know whether satellite had failed or had
     been turned off. (AP, W Star, 3/25/71, A l )
  President Nixon sent message to Congress proposing establishment of
     Dept. of Natural Resources, Dept. of Community Development, Dept.
     of Human Resources, and Dept. of Economic Affairs. Dept. of Natural

                                     81
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 l
                                                                  W
March 25

     Resources would absorb Dept. of Interior and would include func-
     tions of DOT, NOU, and civilian power functions of AEC. While DOT
     was relatively new entity it was “organized around methods and not
     around purposes.” Much of DOT would be moved into new Dept. of
     Economic Affairs, “but those functions which particularly support
     community development would be placed in the Department which is
     designed to meet that goal.’’
         Dept. of Economic Affairs would include National Transportation
     Safety Board, Transportation Systems Center, FAA, Science Informa-
     tion Exchange program from Smithsonian Institution, and Office of
     Technology Utilization from NASA (PD, 3/25/71,54560)
* President Nixon spoke by telephone with Boeing Co. employees in Seat-
     tle, Wash., and Wichita, Kans., to express thanks for work on SST
     project: “The reason I fought so hard to keep the SST project alive was
     that I believe deeply that America must remain in the vanguard of
     scientific and technological progress-the kind of progress your team
     represents.” ( P D , 3/25/71,560-1)
   Report that Japan planned to build supersonic transport aircraft since
     US. had dropped SST program was denied by Shoichi Akazawa, offi-
     cial of Japanese International Trade and Industry Ministry in Tokyo.
      (Reuters, a7 Post, 3/25/71, A23)
   Economic impact of end of SST subsidy was described by Frank C. Porter
      in Wushington Post: While move could idle 13 000 workers across US.,
      “it is unlikely immediately to cause more than a ripple in the $1 tril-
      lion American economy.” Some experts had suggested that continued
      SST development could cost more jobs ultimately than it would create.
      Meanwhile, i t would cost US. Government extra $97 million to scrap
      program: contract termination costs of $52 million to Boeing Co., $33
      million to General Electric Co., $10 million in miscellaneous termina-
      tion costs, and $2 million to close SST project office at DOT. Govern-
      ment also would have to return $22.4 million in downpayments made
      by airlines. ( W Post, 3/25/71, A23)
   Tass announced construction by Soviet scientists of ‘‘world’s first operat-
      ing installation” to convert atomic energy directly into electricity.
      Installation had produced “several kilowatts” for “new major achieve-
      ment of Soviet atomic science and technology.” AEC said later that,
      while U S . had done same thing on smaller scale, U.S.S.R. might be
      closer to building unit large enough to power giant, multichannel
       comsats, long-range space missions, or compact power station under
      sea or in remote places. (Cohn, W Post, 3/26/71, A l )
 * Sen. Edmund S. Muskie (D-Me.) introduced, for himself and cospon-
       sors, S. 1382, “to authorize the Secretary of Transportation to carry
       out a special program of transportation research and development
       utilizing the unique experience and manpower of the airframe and
       defense industries.” (CR, 3/25/71, S3900)
   French government approved plans for construction of world’s first com-
 9

       mercial air-cushion railroad to relieve auto traffic crisis. (Hess, NYT,
       3/26/71,65)
 March 26: Intelsut-IV F-2, launched by NASA for ComSatCorp Jan. 25,
       began commercial service, transmitting to 15 earth stations in West-
       ern Europe, Latin America, and North America. Satellite was initially

                                      82
                                                                   March 26
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    carrying 830 circuits and transmission was excellent. (INTELSAT Re-
    lease 71-20; ComSatCorp PIO)
* NASA announced plans for first launchings of NASA sounding rockets from
    French Guiana Space Center at Kourou in cooperative France-US.
     upper-atmosphere research project. Project would launch 20 French
     Centaure and NASA Nike-Cajun rockets to obtain data on structure and
     circulation of equatorial atmosphere between 30- and 95-km (18- and
     60-mi) altitudes. Under agreement between French National Center
     for Space Studies (CNES) and NASA, CNES would provide Centaure
     rockets with sodium vapor payloads, F-1 launcher, launch team, and
     tracking and ground support. NASA would be responsible for Nike-
     Cajuns with grenade and ozone payloads, one Nike with an inert 2nd
     stage, and ground support for payloads. Each agency would bear cost
     of its agreed responsibilities. (NASA Release 71-53)
  LeRC tests had shown turbofan built by General Electric Co.’s Aircraft
     Engine Group was quieter than any in use on commercial jets, NASA
     announced. Noise data from January tests of three GE turbofans had
     been analyzed. Francis J, Montegani of L ~ R C Quiet Engine Project
     had said if four quiet turbofans were installed in long-range subsonic
     transport, noise level would be within FAA standards. (NASA Release
     71-81)
* Despite basic differences, lunar samples were not completely different
     from terrestrial rocks, Northern Illinois Univ. geologist S. S. Goldich
     wrote in Science. Basalt horn€els from Keweenawan Duluth complex in
     Minnesota, containing 7% by weight of titanium, were similar in many
     respects to ApoZZo 11 lunar samples. Hornfels’ texture, as well as pri-
     mary textures in lunar rocks, resembled those in Keweenawan rocks.
      (Science, 3/26/71,1245-6)
  Preliminary results of studies of nuclear tracks in glass lens cover of TV
      camera landed on moon by Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, and retrieved
      by Apollo 12 mission were reported in Science by Washington Univ.
      physicists G. Crozaz and R. M. Walker. Studies gave information about
      low-energy nuclear particles from sun and provided basic calibration
      for nuclear tracks in lunar rock surfaces-erosion rate of nearly 10
      millionths cm per year. Results also suggested “small-scale erosion
      process in lunar rocks.”
         Use of Surveyor 3 TV camera glass filter had enabled .General
      Electric Co. scientists R. L. Fleischer, H. R. Hart, Jr., and G. M.
      Comstock to determine, for first time, energy spectrum of solar cosmic-
      ray particles of iron group over energy range from 1 to 100 million
      ev per nucleon. Difference between observed spectrum and limiting
      spectrum derived previously from lunar rock tracks gave erosion rate
      of 0 to 2 A per year. “High-energy fission of lead, induced by galac-
      tic cosmic ray protons and alpha particles, has also been observed.”
       (Science, 3/26/71, 123741)
   Element variation and possible material source of ApoZZo 12 crystalline
       rocks was discussed in Science by Univ. of Tokyo geologists Ikuo
       Kushiro and Hiroshi Haramura. Chemical analysis of nine rocks had
       shown five rocks contained normative quartz; others had normative
       olivine and hypersthene. Rocks showed wide range in ratio of iron to
       magnesium. Findings led investigators to suggest rocks, with one ex-
       ception, represented different parts of differentiated magmatic body,

                                     83
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
March 26

     in which magmatic differentiation by crystallization and settling of
     olivine was most effective. Source material of original magma might
     be peridotite with or without plagioclase or spinel or garnet, depend-
     ing on depth of magma generation. (Science, 3/26/71, 1235-7)
* Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, had been selected to receive 1971
     James Watt International Medal from Institution of Mechanical Engi-
     neers in Lpndon, MSC Roundup announced. Dr. Gilruth had been
     nominated by American Society of Mechanical Engineers and was
     cited for his “distinguished services to Aeronautical and Space Re-
                        .
     search and for . . engineering leadership which inspired and directed
     the Manned Space Flights and successful landings on the Moon.”
      (MSC Roundup, 3/26/71,1)
   NASA announced appointment of B. Porter Brown, Director of Opera-
0

     tions Support Requirements in OMSF, as Special Assistant for Mis-
     sions, Skylab Program, OMSF. (NASA Release 71-45)
   New York attorney Paul Sawyer, who had joined NASA to evaluate
     agency’s public relations efforts on March 22, had taken 30-day leave
     from law firm in which he represented astronauts in negotiating exclu-
     sive rights to their stories for magazines, Washington Post reported.
      Sawyer had said he would not be representing astronauts during NASA
     assignment. (W Post, 3/26/71, A3)
March 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 40 into orbit with 291-km (180.8-
                                            01
     mi) apogee, 186-km (115.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 72.8”
      inclination. Satellite reentered April 9. ( GSFC SSR, 3/31/71; 4/30/71)
   Washhgton Post editorial commented on NASA’s         public information pol-
                                                            ..   . to bring in a
      icy: “There is something strange about the decision
      New York lawyer, Paul Sawyer, as a consultant on its public affairs
      policies. NASA has had, for a decade now, what seems to us and to most
      journalists to be the most effective and most honest public information
      program in government. It is hard to see why public monies should be
      spent to study it, particularly when the man chosen to make the study
      has represented the astronauts in recent months in negotiating private
      contracts for the stories of their activities.” ( W Post, 3/27/71, A18)
   Pattern of recent ICBM construction in U.S.S.R. might presage deploy-
      ment of new Soviet offensive weapon system, according to US. offi-
      cials quoted in New York Times. Construction detected Dec. 20, 1970,
      had shown 20 holes large enough to accommodate Soviet SS-9 ICBM
      or even larger weapons. Holes were distributed in five clusters along
      wide arc forming Soviet offensive missile system from Polish border to
      Chinese frontier. (Szulc, NYT, 3/21/71,1)
 * New Republic published interview with Communist China Premier Chou
       En-lai by Edgar Snow. Premier had said in Peking: “. . . our nuclear
      tests are still in the experimental stage, and every test carried out is
       limited and made only when necessary. The aim of our nuclear tests
       is to break the nuclear monopoly and nuclear blackmail and prevent
       a nuclear war. Therefore, each time when we conclude a test, we
       declare that at no time and in no circumstances shall China be the
       first to use nuclear weapons.” (New Republic, 3/27/71, 20-3)
 March 28: Foreign sources interested in buying SST development package
                                                                                   -
       had contacted DOT, WilliamaM. Magruder, Director of DOT’S SST pro-
       gram, told press in Washington, D.C. Inquiries had come from Japa-
       nese trading firm Ataka, from Middle East source, and from West

                                       84
                                                                     March 28
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1Wl

      German source. Magruder said congressional leaders “have made no
      attempt to discourage” plan to seek package to recoup termination
      costs of SST program, estimated at between $97 million and $157 mil-
      lion, depending on whether airlines got back SST purchase deposits.
       (AP, B Sun, 3/29/71, A3)
   JPL announced that Dr. Gary A. Flandro, former JPL scientist who for-
      mulated planetary Grand Tour concept, had been named winner of
      British Interplanetary Society’s Golovine Award for “outstanding con-
      tributions to astronautics” through basic mathematical work he did
      at JPL from 1965 to 1968. Dr. Flandro, now associate professor at
      Univ. of Utah, would receive award in June. (JPL Release 574)
* Eugene C. Draley, LaRC Director for Center Development, died at age
      55. Draley had joined LaRC research staff in 1938 and had held in-
      creasingly responsible positions, from Head of 8-Foot High-speed
      Tunnel to LaRc Assistant Director. (LangZey Researcher, 4/2/71, 1)
   Sherman M. Fairchild, founder and board chairman of Fairchild Hiller
      Corp., died at age 74. Fairchild had invented first aerial camera and
      had been honored in 1970 by Smithsonian Institution for 50 yrs’
      service in aviation industry. (Fowle, NYT, 3/29/71, 32)
March 29: X-24A lifting body reached its maximum speed of 1687 km
       (1048 mph) and 21 300-m (70 000-ft) altitude during 25th flight from
       FRC. USAF aircraft, launched from EL52 aircraft, was piloted by NASA
       test pilot John A. Manke on powered flight to expand flight envelope,
       determine lateral-directional derivative with rudder bias at 2’ toe
       out, and check lateral-acceleration feedback to control system. (NASA
       Proj Off; Pres Rpt 72)
* U.S.S.R. announced that Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 had reached
       designed 2400-km-per-hr (1500-mph) speed at 16 700-m (55000-ft)
       altitude during test flight Nov. 12, 1970. (NYT, 3/29/71, 53)
    NASA announced award of seven-month study contracts totaling $1387 576
0

       to nine universities and one NASA center to define requirements for
       seven astronomy experiments for proposed High Energy Astronomy
       Observatory ( HEAO) . (MSFC Release 71-52)
 * FAA and DOT announced awards totaling $14246542 in amendments to
       contracts with IBM Federal Systems Div. for additional equipment and
       services to automate air traffic control system. (FAA Release 71-35)
 * Immediate one-year freeze on deployment by US. and U.S.S.R. of land-
        based missiles was urged by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) in
        Senate speech. Both countries would retain freedom to ensure sur-
        vivability of strategic land-based forces as long as they did not add
       to offensive potential. (CR, 3/29/71, S4035-6)
    Editorial in Aviation Week & Space Technology commented on rejec-
        tion by Government of further SST funding: “The fate of the SST
                           .
        should serve notice . . that the aerospace industry can no longer
        survive with its political naivete and aloofness from the fray.” It was
        “sad day when a deliberate national decision is made to abandon a
        major frontier of technological advance. But it will be even sadder
        when the victors in this significant debate gird for their next assault
        on the space shuttle program.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 3/29/71, 9)
 March 30: Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on
        aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
        Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number

                                      85
March 30                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated
    30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of
    these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that
    this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that
    as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engi-
    neers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend-in         terms
    of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed-is magnified
    by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by
                                ..
    training and experience. . This not only causes great personal hard-
    ship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.”
    NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid
    off by group of NASA contractors from June 1968 to September 1970
    had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs,
    32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and
    5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks.
    Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aero-
    space. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12%
    reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50%
    reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of
    those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work
    outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given oppor-
    tunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated
    cc
      we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indis-
    pensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national
    security.”
       In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice
    between technological advances and social advances. Without tech-
    nology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any
    national problem.”
       Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spend-
    ing more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and tech-
    nology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent
    Soviet policy of steadily increasing R&D investment, would soon match
    and then surpass US. program in size and accomplishment. “For this
    comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space
    programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and
    military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The
    most difficult comparison to try to make between the US. and
    U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each
    national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, non-
    parallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611-2)
       Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
    Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with
    confidence to the final phase. . . . In these last missions, we will expand
    the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the
    spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in
    the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared
    with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon
    will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [54& kg]. Changes in the command
    and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and
    major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15

                                      86
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  March 30

   and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and
   will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts
   return to earth.”
      In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews
   will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be
                 .
   included. . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various
   disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how
   human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged
   space flight, up to 2 months’ duration.
      “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment
   Package in the second space flight phase of NASA% earth resources
   program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] com-
   plementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology
   ERTS, to be launched in 1972.”
      FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for
   broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and prom-
   ising external materials for thermal protection ; test demonstrations of
   design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic
   heating, launch aerodynamics, etc. ; design of long-leadtime hardware,
   subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests;
   dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and
   integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other
   components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript)
      Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on
   DOD applications of space transportation system and DOD-NASA        team-
   work on space shuttle : “Present DOD satellite communications program
   consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or
                                                                        . ..
   strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system.
   We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications
   System, Phase 11, which can provide many voice channels to selected
   limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give
   us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces
   overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from
   operational theaters to the United States.”
      In conjunction with NASA studies, USAF was analyzing defense applica-
   tions of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept
   for DOD. USAF was providing NASA with data to help ensure that con-
   figuration was of maximum utility to DOD.
      NASA and USAF had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force
   “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines
   in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high
   performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had
   “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket
   engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a
   250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the cur-
   rent shuttle engine design concepts.’’
      In operational testing area, “USAF and NASA recently conducted
   unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F-111s and
             .
   l3-52s. . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy
   management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship
   to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)

                                    87
March 30                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

       request to Congress for $97.3 million to terminate SST Development
  DOT
    program was prepared by James M. Beggs, Under Secretary of
    Transportation. Sum did not include repayment of $58.5 million risk
    capital contributed by nine US. airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Air-
    lines to support SST R&D. (AP, NYT, 3/31/71, 3:27)
* U.K. government and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. agreed on terms for per-
    petuating Rolls-Royce engine developed for Lockheed’s GlOll TriStar
    jet transport after two-day meetings in Washington, D.C. Terms would
    be submitted to airlines that had ordered aircraft and to banks financ-
    ing sales. (Witkin, NYT, 3/31/71,1)
  ABC, CBS, and NBC TV networks had filed statement with FCC saying they
    planned use of other domestic comsats for program transmission rather
    than building separate satellite system of their own, Wall Street Journal
    reported. Networks were negotiating with several companies on use
    of domestic comsats but would like to keeD their own oDtion oDen in
    case negotiations failed to lead to %atisfa&ory” arrangiments. *( WS],
    30/30/71,6)
  U.S.S.R. at Geneva disarmament conference introduced draft treaty that
    would bind nations “not to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise
    acquire’’ microbiological or other biological agents or toxins “not
    designed for the prevention of disease or for other peaceful purposes.”
    (Lusinchi, NYT, 3/31/71,1)
March 31: Canadian Isis 2 (ISIS-B) International Satellite for Ionospheric
    Studies was launched by NASA from WTR 6:57 pm PST by thrust-
    augmented three-stage Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered orbit with
    1423-km (884.2-mi) apogee, 1355-km (842.0-mi) perigee, 113.5-min
    period, and 88.2’ inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place
    Isis 2 into circular earth orbit that would permit study of topside of
    ionosphere above electron peak of F region and to extend cooperative
    Canadian-US. program of ionospheric studies initiated by Alouette 1
     (launched Sept. 28, 1962) by combining sounder data with correlative
    direct measurements for time sufficient to cover latitudinal and diurnal
    variations during high solar activity. Spacecraft was operating satis-
    factorily and was expected to be fully operational by April 17.
        Canadian-built Isis 2 was eight-sided spheroid that weighed 264 kg
     (582 lbs) ,was 127 cm (50 in) in diameter with two sounder antennas,
    and carried 12 ionospheric investigation experiments. Satellite was
    fourth in series of five satellites to improve understanding of iono-
    spheric physics. First launch in series (Nov. 28, 1965) had orbited
    Canada’s Alouette 2 and US. Explorer 31. Isis 1 had been launched
    Jan. 30, 1969. ISIS program was joint undertaking of NASA and
    Canadian Defence Research Board (DRB) under December 1963
    Memorandum of Understanding. DRB was responsible for spacecraft
    design, fabrication, electrical testing, experiment integration, and
    satellite control. NASA provided launch vehicle and launch facilities.
    (NASA Proj O f NASA Release 71-41 )
                 f;
  NASA announced confirmation of text of agreement with Soviet Academy
    of Sciences on exchange of lunar samples and on procedures toward
    recommendations for joint consideration of objectives and results of
    space research [see Jan. 18-211. Agreement had been confirmed by
    exchange of letters between Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Adminis-

                                    88
                                                                     March 31
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    trator, and Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet
    Academy. (NASA Release 71-57)
* Data from Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched Dec. 12, 1970) was reported
    at American Astronomical Society meeting in Baton Rouge, La., by
    Dr. Riccardo Giaconni of American Science and Engineering, Inc.,
    principal investigator for satellite. Explorer 42 had detected new x-ray
    pulsar Cygnus X-1 generating x-ray pulses at 15 per sec in Constel-
    lation Cygnus, 13 new x-ray objects in Milky Way and remote gal-
    axies, and confirmed that quasar 3C273 in Seyfert Galaxy was x-ray
    emitter. Quasar was billion light years away-most distant object from
    earth known to emit x-rays. (NASA Release 71-50)
* Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill
    Research Range carrying TRW Inc., experiment to conduct auroral
    studies. (SR list)
  MSFC announced award of $2 24+9      700, one-year contract to Air Products
     and Chemicals, Inc., to supply and deliver liquid hydrogen for all
     Government aerospace use in eastern U.S. (MSFC Release 71-55)
During March: Prestige of U.S. science was being undermined by assaults
                                might leave U S . “a second-rate power and a
    from many side-which
                                              P. Lessing wrote in Fortune
    third-rate place to live”-Lawrence
    article.
        Funds had been “damagingly cut in such basic areas as the life and
                       ..
     medical sciences . while a large amount of advanced but abstract
     technology, which could begin to solve the problems of overcrowding,
                                                   ...
     energy, pollution, transportation, and waste,      are going neglected.”
     New hostility to science and technology had arisen among many “ordi-
     nary Americans,” even from within science itself, and among young
     activists. But if man’s store of knowledge were torn down, man would
     “backslide not a few centuries but two hundred thousand years.”
        Severe cutback in research and development because of Vietnam
     war, inflation, and contracted economy-with Federal R&D expenditures
      declining in real dollars by more than 20%-possibly          endangered
      whole structure of science. Decline followed post-World War I1 growth
     that had produced antibiotics, atomic power, cryogenics, computers,
     jet planes, rocket vehicles, radar, transistors, masers, and lasers and
                                                                      .
     had spurred U.S. to do its own basic research. “From . . only a
      sparse dozen Nobel Prizes in the forty years up to 1940, U.S. scientists
      went on in the next thirty years to win forty-five.”
                                     ...
         “While men and talent are         going to waste the things that need
            ..
      doing . keep piling up.” US. was beginning to lag behind other
      nations in high-energy physics, radioastronomy, plasma physics, con-
      ventional energy research, space science, transportation, and life
      sciences. “With two of the later, more scientifically oriented Apollo
      moon flights canceled, though equipment is bought and paid for,
      work on NASA’s forward-looking space station, nuclear-powered rocket,
      and unmanned planetary exploration vehicles has been so cut back that
      after 1975 almost nothing will be scheduled. And research funds in life
      sciences were still lagging 20% behind research capacity-in         field
      that held promises for much safer biological insecticides, genetic
      repair of congenital defects, and basic attacks on cancer and heart dis-
      ease. (Fortune, 3/71,88-9, 153-5)

                                      89
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
During March

  Production of formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, and glycolic acid in uv tests
    under simulated Martian conditions indicated organic material was
    probably be& produced by sunlight on Mars’ surface, JPL scientists
    Dr. Norman H. Horowitz, Dr. Jerry S. Hubbard, and Dr. James P.
    Hardy reported in Proceedings of National Academy of Science of
    USA. Same organic compounds were believed to have been precursors
    to biological molecules on primitive earth. Dr. Horowitz said findings,
    obtained from irradiation of fine soil and powdered glass samples by
    high-pressure xenon lamp and low-pressure mercury lamp, provided
    “most favorable indication for a possible Martian biological evolution
    that we have had in the last five years.” There were “still many un-
    certainties, however, which won’t be resolved until we land on the
    planet.” (Proceedings of NAS, 3/71,5744)
  Promise of zero g in manufacturing in space was described by A. R.
    Sorells in A m r i c a Illustrated, USIA publication distributed in U.S.S.R.
    Technicians anticipated future world of factories in space, where
    machines were grown molecule-by-molecule, as nature grew plants.
    First space workshops were scheduled to fly during decade as pioneers
    of later manufacturing islands circling above earth. Even dream of
    perpetual motion machines might materialize. ( A m Ill, 3-71, 34-37)
  NASA published Manned Space Program Accident/Incident Summaries.
    Result of NASA Safety Office survey of accidents and incidents that
    occurred during Apollo Program development years could be used in
    NASA training programs. Of some 10 000 case documents reviewed, 508
    mishaps had been studied closely. Of these, 47% had occurred during
    operational test and checkout. Procedural deficiencies were largest
    contributor to accidents-46%-and 74% had human error as con-
    tributing factor. (NASA Awareness)
  Scientific impact of SST was described by James J. Haggerty in Air Line
                           ..
    Pilot magazine: “SST . represents one of the most sweeping aeronau-
    tical advances since Kitty Hawk, one that, brought to fruition, will
    have follow-on impact comparable to the introduction of jet propulsion
    or the first conquest of the sound barrier. It has particular importance
    as a research vehicle, because there is no other airplane flying or in
    development with its particular combination of performance character-
    istics. It is equally important as an impetus to technology, since the SST
    contains thousands of components that have never been built before.”
    SST was “atmospheric Apollo, a prober of new regions of flight and
     -. . a thrusting force pushing aeronautical technology to a new plateau.”
     (Air L h e Pilot, 3/71)
  The Making of an Ex-astronaut by former astronaut Dr. Brian T. O’Leary
    was reviewed by Edwin E. Salpeter in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists:
     “The most apparent human drama in the book is the clash between two
    alien cultures, or rather the struggle of a minority culture, the scientist
    surrounded by the dominant culture of the technologist-testpilot-
     administrator combination.” It was interesting psychological sidelight
     that Dr. O’Leary had not worried about “large but inevitable dangers
     inherent in spaceflight itself, but bitterly resented the additional danger
     of flying jets (about a 10 per cent probability of death in a jet accident
     over a 10-year service in the program).” While jet flights had been
    emphasized, opportunities for scientist-astronauts to participate in
     space missions had receded and opportunities for keeping up scientific

                                      90
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              During March

    career in space program “were severely limited.” Dr. O’Leary had
    become, in 1968, first scientist-astronaut to resign. (Bull of Atomic
    Scientists, 3/71, 44)
  Second edition of one-volume Soviet space encyclopedia Cosmnautics
    was published in Moscow, Book listed as editor Valentin Petrovich
    Glushko, reputed chief designer of Soviet rockets and missiles, and
    featured biographical article on him describing his work. Pravda, in
    post-publication article on encyclopedia, had identified chief editor as
     “Professor G. Petrovich.” (NYT, 3/19/71,3)
* Freeze on missile testing was advocated by Stanford Univ. geneticist Dr.
    Joshua Lederberg in Bulletin of Atomic Scientists: “From a technical
     standpoint, the most amenable place for controls is testing; a com-
    prehensive freeze on all missile tests would be most easily verified and
     would provide the utmost assurance against the perpetuation of a
     costly technology race. It would complicate some peaceful applications
     of space technology. However, none of these require precise reentry
     after a brief, high velocity flight. Furthermore, nothing would be lost
     in requiring a definite pattern of international participation in space
     missions to assure that these were a net benefit to the whole earth from
     which they have embarked.” (Bull of Atomic Scientists, 3/71, 4-6, 43)




                                     91
                              April 1971

April 1: Discovery that comets were made of water-ice and discovery of
    new concept of dynamics of interstellar hydrogen gas from data ob-
    tained by Ogo 5 (launched March 4, 1968) and Oao 2 (launched
     Dec. 7, 1968) were announced. Dr. Charles Lillie and Dr. Gary
    Thomas of Univ. of Colorado and Prof. Jacques E. Blamont of Univ.
     of Paris said at NASA Hq. press conference that OAO observations in-
     dicated comets were water with traces of methane, ammonia, and
    cyanogen. OGO observations showed gas surrounding comets to be
     composed almost totally of hydrogen and that interstellar wind pre-
     viously believed to be coming from constellation Hercules actually
     seemed to be coming from Sagittarius and Scorpius. Scientists now
     surmised that there was no stellar wind, but only apparent wind
    caused by passage of solar system through thin and nearly stationary
     interstellar medium of hydrogen. (Lannan, W Star, 4/2/71, A9)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 402 from Baykonur into orbit with 1035-km
      (643.2-mi) apogee, 948-km (589.1-mi) perigee, 104.9-min period, and
     64.9’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; SBD, 4/5/71, 181)
* Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, summarized reasons
     NASA proposed space shuttle development as top space priority for
     1970s, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences
     NASA FY 1972 authorization hearings: US. “should and will continue
     an active space program from now on” and new approach was needed
     to make space “practical and economical” for all Users-NASA,        DOD,
     other Government agencies, and commercial enterprises. Reusable
     shuttle, “entirely new concept in space operation,” would deliver and
     retrieve manned and unmanned payloads; “we will be able to repair,
     modify, or update payloads in orbit and . . . reduce drastically the
     costs of payloads by taking advantage of the much larger weight and
                                    ..   . When future space programs using
     volume that will be available.
     the shuttle are compared with those using conventional launch vehi-
     cles, the shuttle offers a very real economic advantage.”
         Shuttle development should proceed in FY 1972 because necessary
     technology was available, delay in development would widen existing
     four-year gap in US. manned space flight schedule, and shuttle was
      “keystone to the total plan for the US. space program.”
         KASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D.
      Myers discussed candidate concepts for space shuttle : “The principle
     objective in examining various systems is to determine which systems
      have the greatest potential for low operational costs together with low
                                                    .
      development costs. The most attractive system . , is the fully reusable
      system where nothing is discarded in the course of the flight and the
      orbiter and booster are ‘turned around’ with minimum maintenance
      for reuse. This concept has been the subject of intense ‘phase B’ defi-
                        ..
      nition studies over . the past 9 months.”
         Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and
      Applications, reviewed OSSA programs, goals, and motivations : “When

                                     93
                                PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILM
                                                                            c
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 1

    we speak of ‘space’ science and ‘space’ applications, we are talking
    about using a new technology . . . to enhance scientific progress and
    its translation into benefits. In this role, NASA is a service agency; we
    provide the technology, the engineering, the management, and the
    leadership that make possible the exploration of space and the prac-
    tical use of space flight. The scientific community, which represents the
    focus of man’s unceasing drive for understanding, identifies the prob-
    lems and the unknowns, and designs the experiments that will answer
    the key questions. Society levies demands upon us for useful services,
    valuable products, and improvements in the quality of life.” There was
    no difficulty in identifying needs or new missions; acute problem was
    to select those offering greatest reward as range of highest national
    priorities expanded but resources remained limited. (Transcript)
  Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion FY
    1972 NASA authorization bill. Bill added $163 million to Administra-
    tion’s requested $3.271 billion, including additional $45 million for
    Skylab and $25 million for space shuttle, $39.9 million for NERVA
    engine, and $25 million for aeronautical research and technology. Bill
    provided $2.668 billion for R&D, increase of $150 million over re-
    quested $2.518 billion; $58.6 million for construction of facilities, up
    $2.3 million from $56.3-million request; and $706.9 million for re-
    search and program management, increase of $9.5 million over re-
    quested $697.4 million. (H Rpt 92-143)
                                                      .
  Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V Keldysh told session
    of Soviet Party Congress that “we must to a large extent apply [space
    activities] to the solution of practical problems. Armed Forces Journal
    later observed that previously, U.S.S.R. had spoken mostly of further-
    ing “scientific knowledge” as basis of its space program. (AFJ, 6/71,
    5479)
* Leaders of aerospace industry, professional societies, and academic com-
    munity met with President Nixon; Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Science
    Adviser to President; and James D. Hodgson, Secretary of Labor.
    Meeting discussed Technology Mobilization and Reemployment Pro-
    gram to alleviate unemployment in aerospace industry. (PD, 4/5/71,
    592)
  Tenth anniversary of Air Force Systems Command. AFSC-in charge of
    planning, developing, and acquiring all USAF weapon and space sys-
    tems and supporting technologies-administered annual contracts worth
     about $48 billion. Annual expenditures accounted for more than one
     fourth of total USAF budget. AFSC was staffed by 9600 officers, 18500
     airmen, and 31 000 civilians. (AFSC Release 94.71; AFM, 4/71, 43)
April 2: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 403 from Plesetsk into orbit with 213-
    km (132.4-mi) apogee, 205-km (127.4-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period,
     and 81.3’ inclination. Satellite Ieentered April 14. (GSFC SSR,
    4/30/71; SF, 10/71, 386)
          supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted by test
  NASA’s
0

    pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed third flight from
     FRC. Objectives of flight-to   expand flight envelope to higher altitudes
     and higher speeds, evaluate augmented stability and control, and
     determine loads and buffet boundaries-were             achieved. Aircraft
     reached 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.8. (NASA Proj O f    f)
                                     94
                                                                              April 2
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

             announced ic was expanding its airborne research program by ac-
*    NASA
        quiring two Lockheed U-2 high-altitude aircraft under loan agree-
        ment with USAF and concentrating flights over four ecological test areas
        in US. Program objectives were to simulate data output of ERTS
        scheduled for 1972 launch, collect data simultaneously over various
        test sites with passes of ERTS and Skylab after they were orbited, sup-
        port earth resources survey programs of other agencies, and make
        observations in astronomy, atmospheric physics, and geophysics for
                   physics and astronomy programs. (NASA Release 71-60)
        NASA’s
      Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering,
        testified on DOD space activities during authorization hearings before
        Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: DOD space
        funding program for FY 1972 called for $1552.6 million, slightly
        under the $1553.1 million of FY 1971. “The design and fabrication of
        a new set of satellites intended to replace the interim Defense Satellite
        Communications System (DSCS) will be completed in 1971. These satel-
        lites, to be launched next month, have significantly higher power and
        greater bandwidth than their predecessors, and each is equipped with
        a versatile set of antennas capable of serving fixed and transportable
        users dispersed over large areas of the earth. Among these are steer-
        able antennas which can be oriented to satisfy contingency needs in
        changing global situations. To exploit the potential of this new sys-
        tem, we will need better surface terminal equipment. Accordingly, we
         intend to continue the intensive development of new reliable terminals
         and modulation and antijamming equipment.”
             In FY 1972, DOD expected “to start developing a satellite communi-
         cations system that operates in the military ultra-high-frequency
          ( U H F ) band and is tailored to the characteristics of the mobile users.
         When deployed, this system should allow us to retire much of our HF
         radio equipment.”
             Use of navigational satellites “has the potential of attaining a continu-
         ous, highly accurate worldwide position-fixing system. That system
         could support many ground, sea, airborne and space applications.”
         In FY 1972, DOD planned “to undertake system definition and design
         studies of the next-generation Defense Navigation Satellite System
          (DNSS ) .”
             Under Doppler Geodetic Satellite Program coordinated by Defense
         Intelligence Agency, geodetic Doppler receivers would observe USN
         navigation and other Doppler-equipped satellites. Program would pro-
         vide worldwide geodetic data.
              DOD proposed “to continue a small eflort in FY 1972 to develop
         propulsion technology for high-energy orbit-to-orbit stages that will
          be compatible with the shuttle system, with a view to future space
         maneuvering missions projected for the late 1970’s and early 1980’s.”
          (Transcript)
    * USAF planned to measure static electrification on Titan IIIC missile from
          preignition to orbit at KSC during second quarter of 1971, AFSC an-
         nounced. Data would be gathered from two field meters---one on mis-
          sile and one on ground-and would help define electrostatic require-
          ments for future missile systems. (AFSC Release 82.71)
      AEC announced it was developing plutonium-fueled water recovery and
          waste management system for crew on extended space flights. Device

                                           95
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 2

     converted liquid wastes into sterile drinking water by high-temperature
     processing and disposed of nonmetallic cabin wastes by incineration.
     System would meet needs of four astronauts for up to 180 days. (AEC
     Release 0-47)
* LeRC announced award of $4 264 734, fixed-price, supplemental agree-
     ment to United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for 12 RL-10
     rocket engines for Centaur boosters. (LeRC Release 71-11)
April 4: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 404 from Baykonur into orbit with
     1009-km (627-mi) apogee, 817-km (507.7-mi) perigee, 103.1-min
     period, and 65.7’ inclination. Satellite reentered same day. (GSFC
     SSR, 4/30/71; SF’ 10/71,386)
  NASA manned space flight officials proposed four-launch program to place
     astronauts in earth orbit to map US., study earth resources, and study
     pollution. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale
     D. Myers said in AP-reported interview that program was in pre-
     liminary stages and would require additional funding from Congress.
     MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said project would keep
     U S . in manned space flight business during period when U.S.S.R.
     would probably be very active in the field. Project would fill four-year
     gap between Skylab and manned space shuttle tests. It would also
     directly benefit mankind, Kraft explained: “The two-man crews will
     fly at a higher inclination than we’ve ever flown before in earth orbit.
     Using photographic and other sensing equipment developed in the
     space program, they could accurately map the entire United States,
     including Alaska. The astronauts also could make earth resources and
     environmental measurements.” (AP, W Star, 4/4/71, A16)
* Team of 108 scientists from US. and six foreign countries had been
     chosen from some 500 scientists who submitted proposals to partici-
     pate in definition phase of proposed outer planets missions in late
     1970s, NASA announced. Teams from 13 investigating areas would be
     represented by team leader on Outer Planets Mission Steering Group
     responsible for integrating overall science. Scientists represented 26
     U.S. institutions and institutions in Canada, Denmark, West Germany,
     France, Sweden, and U.K. (NASA     Release 71-56)
April 5: First simulated altitude test of manned Apollo 15 CM in KSC
     vacuum chamber was postponed after oil was found leaking from light
     fixture. Problem did not affect spacecraft. (SBD, 4/6/71, 183)
  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hear-
     ings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate
     Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that
     WRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of
     full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information ‘on
     the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and
      structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be oper-
                                       ..
      ated in about 6 months. Results . indicate that we may expect to
     better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given
                                        ..
     to industry on a continuing basis. . We can expect some of our
      improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before
     completion of our program.”
         NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein said:
      “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts
      greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future.

                                     96
                                                                      April 5
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening-mandatory for
    certain military missions-and low recurring costs for multiple mis-
    sions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For un-
    manned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective
    above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications
                                                                  ...
    missions as communications satellites. In manned missions            over-
    riding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate
    unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor sys-
    tems “are needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy
             ..
    missions .to the far planets.”
        Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald
    M. Truszynski reported that satellite network included “ten electronic
                     ...
    ground stations          operated by NASA, which are supplemented by an
    optical tracking network operated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical
    Observatory. The electronic stations provide a worldwide system which
    ..                        . ..
         . tracks each satellite, determines the status of onboard systems,
    ...                                             ...
            commands the satellite’s functions, and         acquires stored or
    real-time data from the satellite. The optical stations, which include
    laser capabilities at selected sites, provide specialized services in pre-
    cision orbital tracking.” (Transcript)
* URC was studying blown-flap STOL aircraft using series of fans mounted
     atop each flap semispan, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported.
     Concept was similar to f a d f l a p arrangements studied in wind tunnel
     tests; Bleed air from main engines was ducted to periphery of each
     fan nacelle and drove fans through tip turbines. Flow from fans then
     passed over flaps, which could be deflected up to 60’ for landing.
      (Av Wk, 4/5/71,44)
April 5-7: Conference on Remote Sensing of Chesapeake Bay was held at
     Wallops Station to identify primary environmental problems of area
     and determine extent to which remote sensing from aircraft or satel-
     lites could contribute to solution. States of Maryland and Delaware,
     Commonwealth of Virginia, NASA, and Smithsonian Institution par-
     ticipated. Chesapeake Bay area was one of four regional test sites un-
     der consideration for evaluation of remote sensing techniques. Experi-
     ments would be conducted in area using data to be acquired by first
      Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-A) scheduled for launch
      by NASA in spring 1972. (NASA Release 71-55; WS PAO)
  National Endowment for Humanities sponsored Thomas Harriot Sym-
      posium at Univ. of Delaware, honoring Elizabethan mathematician,
      astronomer, geographer, navigator, and philosopher sent to New World
      in 1585 by his patron, Sir Walter Raleigh. Harriot had written first
      English account of wealth of America, A Briefe and True Report of
      the New Found Land of Virginia. After 350 yrs of obscurity, Harriot
      was being revived by scholars who were mentioning his name with
      Kepler and Galileo, New York Times reported. Harriot had independ-
      ently begun telescopic observation of heavens in July of 1609, at about
      time Galileo did in Italy, and had drawn what was believed to be
      earliest map of moon in which vast seas and craters were recog-
      nizable. He had observed and counted sun spots through telescope
      using London fog as filter and had calculated period of solar rotation
      and traced moons of Jupiter. In 1601 he had discovered law governing
      refraction of light. (Reinhold, NYT, 4/8/71,39)

                                      97
April 6                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

April 6: Intelsat 1 (Early Bird), in orbit over Pacific, was reactivated to
     mark its sixth anniversary and relay first message ever transmitted
     directly from Hawaii to US. East Coast via commercial satellite.
     Satellite-first   commercial comsat-had      been launched from KSC
     April 6, 1965, (ComSatCorp Release 71-23)
  Distribution of about 6.8 kg (15 lbs) of the 42.6 kg (94 lbs) of samples
     returned from moon’s Fra Mauro area by ApoUo 14 astronauts had
     begun, NASA announced. To date, 187 scientific teams in US. and 14
     foreign countries had been scheduled to receive samples. Additional
     proposals for consideration under Apollo 14 through Apollo 17 sample
     program were under review. More than 700 scientists would analyze
     samples, believed to include material formed at same time as original
     lunar crust. Investigating teams in US. were at 65 different institu-
     tions in 30 states and Virgin Islands. The 56 foreign teams were at
     41 institutions. (NASA Release 71-62)
  Third attempt to test manned Apollo 15 LM in simulated environment
0

     was completed at ICSC. Two attempts during previous week had been
     unsuccessful because technician failed to open oxygen valve and
     because two oxygen regulators failed. (SBD, 4/7/71, 192)
* LeRC announced award of $7939400 follow-on contract to General
     Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for Centaur launch and test support
     services at ETR. Cost-plus-award-fee contract would cover one year,
     during which six Centaurs would be launched. (IRRC Release 71-13)
  Dr. F. A. Speer, head of MSFC’S Mission Operations Office in Program
     Management, became manager of newly augmented HEAO task team
     at MSFC. Team would continue feasibility and definition work for
     proposed 1975 mission. (MSFC Release 71-75)
* AP quoted Fairchild Hiller Corp. spokesman as saying firm was serving
     as clearinghouse for proposals for SST funding. “Sketchy and tenta-
     tive plans’’ existed, AP said, to finance SST through public stock issue
     backed up by $1 billion in bank loans. (AP, B Sun, 4/7/71, A6)
April 6-7: Space Shuttle Technology conference at MSFC discussed space
     vehicle propulsion systems with operational life requirements of 100
     flight missions. (MSFC Release 71-59; MSFC PAO)
April 7: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 405 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     681-km (423.2-mi) apogee, 674-km (418.8-mi) perigee, 98.2-min
     period, and 81.2’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; SBD, 4/8/71,
     197)
  U.S.S.R.’s Lurwkhod 1 lunar rover began sixth lunar day on moon’s Sea
     of Rains, traveling 301 m (988 ft) across lunar surface and com-
     pleting two communications sessions with ground. Vehicle had landed
     on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 4/9/71, 205)
* NASA and Dept. of Agriculture announced advance plans were under way
     for ground and air study of possible southern corn leaf blight during
     1971 growing season. Remote aerial sensing techniques would be used
     in coordination with special ground observations. NASA high-altitude
     aircraft would photograph cornbelt area using special infrared and
     natural color film. Data would be sent to photo-interpretation team
     at Purdue Univ. for analysis. (NASA Release 71-64)
  Computer method being developed by NASA and Stanford Univ. team
     would provide simple means of viewing heart in action, NASA an-
     nounced. System projected three-dimension animated cartoon-like image

                                     98
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   April 7

     of any desired chamber of patient’s heart in lines of light on com-
     puter screen. Display, which would enable doctors to detect cardiac
     malfunctioning more simply than by conventional diagnostic methods,
     was derived from two-dimensional “x-ray movies” made by injecting
     x-ray contrast dye into desired heart chamber. (NASA Release 71-58)
  President Nixon sent message to Congress proposing improvements for
     District of Columbia: “A number of construction projects included in
                                      ..   . point to an attractive new look
     my budget for fiscal year 1972
     for Federal Washington by 1976. These include the Smithsonian Insti-
     tution’s plans to build a new National Air and Space Museum on the
     Mall and a new display area for cultural and technological advances
     of the past two centuries in the National Museum of History and
     Technology.” President asked Congress to appropriate necessary funds
     for these and other projects. (PD, 4/12/71, 605-10)
  President Nixon transmitted Marine Science Aflairs : Annwl Report of
     the President to the Congress on Marine Resources and Engineering
     Development: US. marine science program in 1970 had been marked
     by sound accomplishments and “new policies and programs that ful-
     fill the objectives of the Marine Resources and Engineering Develop-
     ment Act.” FY 1972 budget request provided $609.1 million for
     marine science, technology, and services, “an increase of more than
     $70 million over my request of a year ago. These funds will permit
     NOAA to undertake priority programs of fundamental importance to
     the Nation’s marine science interests; they will permit us to continue
     the accomplishments of the Sea Grant program; to further our par-
     ticipation in the International Decade of Ocean Exploration; to insure
     that necessary marine research and development is conducted for
     national security purposes; and to make certain that marine research
     and development, generally, continue to make productive contributions
     to our growing use of the sea” (PD, 4/12/71, 611)
Szpril 8 .- Miniature analytical clinical laboratory to monitor astronauts’
     health on spacecraft was being developed at Oak Ridge National Labo-
     ratory, AEC announced. “Gravity-Zero” system would permit astro-
     nauts to perform quickly and automatically 16 parallel chemical tests
     on samples of plasma or serum, based on colorimetric determinations.
     Test results would be automatically radioed to ground control, which
     would recommend action to astronauts. (AEC Release 0-51)
  MSFC announced award of $29 136 622 contract modification to Chrysler
     Corp. for additional work in Saturn IB program. Chrysler, prime con-
     tractor for Saturn IB first stage (S-IB), would maintain nine boosters
     in storage and make prelaunch checkout of three of the boosters for
     Skylab program. (MSFC Release 71-60)
  Fritz von Opel-engineer, pilot, and industrialist-died      in St. Moritz,
0

     Switzerland, at age 71. Von Ope1 had flown in rocket-propelled glider
     in 1929 and had developed rocket car which he drove at more than
     3 km (2 mi) per minute in 1928. (UPI, NYT, 4/12/71, 38)
April 9: Cosmic ray tracks found in helmets of Apollo astronauts had indi-
     cated that exposure during space mission was sufficient to damage
     certain nonreplaceable cells on long flights, General Electric R&D
     Center team reported in Science. On two-year mission, fraction of
     cells killed could rise to 0.12% in cerebral cortex, 0.05% in retina,
     and more than 1.5% for giant cells. Proportions might be “highly

                                    99
April 9                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    worrisome, since additional safe shielding would impose important
    weight considerations on spacecraft design.” (Comstock, Fleischer,
    et at., Science, 41/9/71, 154-6)
April 12: Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space
    flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was cele-
    brated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in
    Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with
    articles commemorating flight.
       At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Acad-
    emy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man
    will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study
    of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of Amer-
    ican astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country
    of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of
    U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I lunar rover represented start of new era envi-
    sioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize
    unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space
    stations.
       Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975
    economic plans called for “fundamental development of scientific re-
    search, with a significant role for lunar and solar investigation.”


April 12: Tenth anniversary of the first manned space Bight, made by Cosmonaut
Yuri A. Gagarin in the Vostok 1 In the April 14, 1961, photo Gagarin and U.S.S.R.
                              .
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, standing atop the Lenin-Stalin Mausoleum, responded
to a welcome by crowds during a ceremony in Moscow’s Red Sqwre. (Photo by
courtesy of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.)
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    April 12

        In letter to Pravda, group of Soviet cosmonauts said “it is our
    opinion that businesslike cooperation of space researchers of different
    countries, including the U.S.S.R. and the United States, should develop
    and grow stronger in the interests of peace and friendship among the
    peoples of our planet.”
        Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov said in article reprinted in a
    number of Soviet journals that “main trend of the next development
                                            ...   will probably be as follows:
    of cosmonautics and space exploration
    Further investigation of near-Earth space, studying the Earth from
    space for purposes of space meteorology, geology, agriculture, ocean-
    ology, and marine and air navigation. The task of constructing space
    exploration facilities and the usage of outer space for peaceful pur-
    poses is the favorable basis for fruitful international cooperation
    wherein both big and small countries can effectively participate.”
    U.S.S.R. had ‘‘always directed its efforts into an arena of peace and
    international cooperation. . . . The time is not behind the mountains
    when the remarkable idea about construction of long-duration, piloted
    orbital stations will be implemented.”
       Soviet Military Review editorial said Soviet space program had
    demonstrated “the benefiting the whole of mankind and the contribu-
    tion to worldwide progress. The Gagarin flight, as all subsequent
    achievements of Soviet space exploration, demonstrated the organizing
    and guiding role of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the
    inexhaustible potentialities of the socialist social system and of the
    Soviet economy, science, and technology. Consistency and purposeful-
    ness are a feature of the Soviet program of exploration in outer space,
    on the Moon and on the planets of the solar system.” (Yuenger,
    C Trib, 4/13/71; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/71; UPI, W News, 4/12/71;
    UPI, LA Her-Exam, 4/12/71; SBD, 4/12/71, 263)
  Apollo 1 Astronaut Michael Collins assumed duties as Director of
            1
0

    Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. He had
    served as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs after leaving
    NASA. (Smithsonian Ann; Smithsonian PIO)
* NASA selected Boeing Co. Commercial Airplane Group, General Dynamics
    Corp. Convair Div., and Lockheed-Georgia Co. to conduct nine-month
    studies to determine benefits of applying advanced aeronautical tech-
     nologies to 1975-1985 transport aircraft. (NASA Release 71-66)
  NASA announced award of $2-millionYone-year, fixed-price contract to
0

     General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. for definition and preliminary
     design of Research and Applications Module (RAM) that could be
     attached to space shuttle. (NASA Release 71-67)
April 13: NASA% supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted
     by test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed fourth flight
     from FRC. Purposes of one-hour flight-to expand flight envelope to
    higher altitudes and higher speeds, evaluate augmented stability and
    control, determine handling qualities with stability augmentation sys-
     tem on and off, determine structural loads and buffet boundaries, and
     make preliminary evaluation of ‘flutter characteristics-were achieved.
    Aircraft reached 10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.9. (NASA
    Proj O f
           f)
  NAE announced election of 29 US. engineers to NAE, bringing total mem-
     bership to 356. New members included L/G Samuel C. Phillips (USAF),

                                     101
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 13

    Commander of SAMSO; Joseph F. Shea, Senior Vice President and
    General Manager of Raytheon Co. Equipment Div.; and Ronald Smelt,
    Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (NAE
    Release)
April 14: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 4 6 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    222-km (137.9-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 88.6-min
    period, and 81.3’ inclination. Satellite reentered April 24. (GSFC SSR,
    4/30/7 1 )
 Representatives of 79 INTELSAT member nations opened negotiating and
    organizing meeting at Dept. of State. Twelve observers, including rep-
    resentatives from Communist countries, attended. Purpose of meeting
    was to discuss proposed agreement to base member nation’s voting
    power on its use of INTELSAT and limit US. power to 40%. (AP, NYT,
    4/15/71,14)
 Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev had been guiding
    Soviet space research and rocket engineering since 1963, Wall Street
    Journal reported. Information had been contained in article circulated
    to Moscow correspondents by a Soviet news agency. (WSJ, 4/14/71,1)
 Discovery of “first incontrovertible evidence” of existence of natural
    plutonium 244 by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley scientists
    was described by Dr. Calvin Alexander in Washington, D.C., press
    interview. Dr. Alexander and team had baked 15 mg of Pu 2 4 L t w o
    thirds of world’s supply-in vacuum system at 2144.3 K (3400’F).
    Pu 244 had been made expressly for experiment by Oak Ridge National
    Laboratory. It survived experiment almost intact, having lost only
     (6
      a hundred milliom atoms of mass” in form of rare gas, xenon. Those
    atoms had provided “fingerprint” for Pu 244 similar to fingerprint
    found in certain meteorites. Scientists had suspected meteorite finger-
    print had been remnant of completely decayed Pu 244, but until
    Berkeley experiment they had had no “file” against which to check it.
     (Lannan, W Star, 4/15/71, A6)
 AAAS held symposium in Boston on use of long-baseline interferometry-
    antennas thousands of miles apart, working together, to determine
    angular width and precise direction of distant radio sources. Three
    teams of astronomers who had worked independently reported obser-
    vation in distant space of what appeared to be two objects flying apart
    at 10 times speed of light, but were unable to agree on plausible ex-
    planation for phenomenon that defied laws of physics that said such
    velocity was impossible. Discovery had been made originally by nine-
    man team of scientists from MIT, GSFC, JPL, and Univ. of Maryland.
    Team, under direction of Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro of MIT, using MIT
    Haystack antenna and JPL’S Goldstone antenna, had observed two
    components of quasar 3C-279 accidentally during experiments con-
    ducted in October 1970 to observe passage of 3C-279 around sun.
    Discovery also was described by Dr. David L. Chauncey of Cornell
    Univ. and team from Cal Tech and National Radio Astronomy Obser-
    vatory. Dr. Alan T. Moffet of Cal Tech reported on joint observations
    of phenomenon with Australian astronomers. .
       Following symposium, Rumford Premium, oldest scientific prize
     given in US., was presented to 21 scientists from US. and Canadian
    observatories who had pioneered in development of baseline inter-
    ferometry. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/15/71, 33)

                                   102
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   April 14

        announced signing of $11577 561 supplemental agreement with
    MSC
    Grumman Aerospace Corp. for changes in Apollo LM contract. Agree-
    ment brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1617
    510 000 (MsC-Release 71-18)
  Dr. Armand N. Spitz, astronomer and author, died at age 66 after heart
     attack. Dr. Spitz had founded Spitz Laboratories, organized NASA
    Moonwatch program of using volunteer astronomers to track satellites,
     and created Spitz planetarium--small, inexpensive instrument used in
     schools and small museums. He was member of AAS, fellow of AAAS,
     consultant to NSF, and author of numerous publications. (W Star,
    4/16/71, B5)
April 15: France launched 90-kg (198-lb) D2-A satellite Tourmsol (Sun-
     flower) from Kourou, French Guiana, by Diamant-B booster. Satellite,
     which would measure radiation for six months, entered orbit with
     696-km (432.5-mi) apogee, 457-km (284-mi) perigee, 96.2-min period,
     and 46.3’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; SBD, 4/16/71, 239; SF,
     6/71,197; Spacewarn, 3/23/71,6)
  President Nixon transmitted to Congress World Veather Program, Plan
     for Fiscal Year 1972. Report described significant activities of program
     and planned participation of Federal agencies. In message of trans-
     mission President said: “Satellite technology is being used with in-
     creasing effectiveness to gather global information for earlier, more
     accurate predictions and warnings of hazardous weather. New stations
     are being established for long-term measurement of atmospheric change.
     Computers have been programmed to determine the effect of pollution
     upon the atmosphere. A major international experiment in the Atlantic
     Ocean is being prepared under the Global Atmospheric Research
     Program. During the past year many nations, inchding the United
     States, have indicated their support of this tropical experiment and
     have made tentative commitments to provide ships, aircraft, satellites,
     and other observing facilities. Linked with an increased computer
     capability to assess and integrate results, this experiment should be
     an important step toward attaining a true understanding of the global
     atmosphere.” (PD, 4/19/71,630)
* President Nixon transmitted to Senate Convention for the Suppression of
     Unluwfd Seizure of Aircraft and requested advice and consent to
     ratification. Convention “to ensure that all hijackers, wherever found,
     would be subject to severe punishment for an act which endangers the
     safety and lives of passengers and crew aboard” had been signed at
     Diplomatic Conference at The Hague Dec. 16, 1970. President said:
     “Because of the worldwide threat of hijacking, the Convention provides
     that all States may become parties. I hope that it will be applied uni-
     versally.” (PD, 4/19/71,630)
  New US.-U.S.S.R. missile gap was described by Sen. Henry M. Jackson
0

      (D-Wash.) in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors:
     “Today the United States bomber force is less than 600, our sub-
     launched missiles have numbered 656 for four years, and our land-
     based missiles have totaled 1,054 for four years. During this time the
     Soviet bomber force has remained almost constant, but their submarine
     missile force has grown to almost 400 launchers and is expected to
     overtake ours in two to three years. And the Soviet land-based inter-
     continental force has risen to over 1,440 operational launchers-with

                                    103
April 15                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     more on the way. Thus, while the Soviets are gaining and will soon




           ly-1.:,
     ex ed us in missile weaponry at sea, we have already fallen distinctly
    behi d them on land.
        ‘‘ ver the same period, the actual destructive power of the U S .
     forces has continually decreased, while the Soviet’s destructive power
    has gre tly increased, until the total megatonnage that the Soviets could
     deliver a inst U S . targets is several times our own.
        “The onh strategic area in which we are staying ahead is in the
     number of i ividual warheads, and we are doing that only by going
     to small-yield ultiples. Even here, the Soviets could in time overtake
     us, since their issile forces have considerably greater payloads than
    ours.y7(Text)      \


April 16: NASA announced development of new underwater camera system
    designed to photograph algae on bottom of Lake Erie. Developed by
     LaRC for Environmental rotection Agency, 35-mm Nikon-F camera

                              \
     with Braun Lite 515 flash         it, timing electronics, and water-tight
     plastic cases could automatically cick off one frame per hour for
    more than 10 days underwater and unattended. Summer 1970 joint
     study with Canadian Centre of Inland Waters-Project           Hypo-had
     investigated causes of eutrophication (process leading to overabun-
     dant algae growth, robbing lake of oxygen). The 400 color slides taken
    traced developments in seasonal surge of algae growth and revealed
    previously unobserved effects of bottom currents on sediment resus-
    pension. (NASA Release 71-65)
* Government of Jamaica had asked US. to assist in surveying Jamaica’s
     natural resources with aircraft specially equipped for purpose, NASA
     announced. U.N.’s Food and Agricultural Organization had invited
    NASA to provide instrumented 6 1 3 0 aircraft to gather experimental,
     thermal imagery data by cameras for high- and low-altitude infrared
    photography and sensors during flights at altitudes from 900 to 7600 m
     (3000 to 25 000 ft) over Jamaica and selected coastal waters. Jamaican
     Geological Survey and US. Geological Survey would provide personnel
     and equipment for gathering ground data. (NASA Release 71-70)
  US. and Canadian scientists were planning to build $12- to $15-million
     upper-atmosphere observatory to study relationship of space energy to
     weather, radio communications, and other phenomena on earth, Science
     reported. Transmitter and four receivers would be erected near Great
     Lakes, “where the earth’s magnetic field causes ionized layers of the
     upper atmosphere to form a low-density ‘trough.’ ” Preliminary engi-
     neering studies for observatory, which was scheduled for completion in
     1974, were being conducted under $99950 NSF grant. (Science,
    4/16/71,244)
* ComSatCorp reported net income for first quarter of 1971 had increased
    to $6 691 000 (67 cents per share) from $3 345 000 (33 cents per
    share) for first quarter of 1970. Operating revenues for first quarter
     of 1971 totaled $21 934 000, increase of $6 499 000 (42%) over
     $15 435 000 received in first quarter of 1970. (ComSatCorp Release
     71-25)
* Science editorial commented on underemployment of scientists and engi-
     neers: “Some companies and congressmen would like to believe that
     high technology can be effectively directed to solving problems of
     society such as pollution. This is only wishful thinking. A limited

                                     104
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   April 16

    number of individual scientists and engineers are being hired by
    municipalities, states, and industries, but no mass hiring is likely.”
    It would be “mistake to place too much dependence on government.”
    Retraining without specific job openings was “waste of money, time,
     and emotion.” Experience had shown scientists and engineers quickly
     developed needed skills on the job. “What is needed is a strenuous
    effort to identify possible openings that match to some degree the
    potentialities of individuals.” (Abelson, Science, 4/16/71, 221)
April 17: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 8 meteorological satellite from Plesetsk
    into orbit with 633-km (393.3-mi) apogee, 609-km (378.4-mi) perigee,
    97.1-min period, and 81.2’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; SBD,
    4/21/71,265)
April 17-18: Wallops Station held open house for public in joint Federal
    activities in area that included Assateague National Seashore Park,
    Chincoteague Coast Guard Station, and Chincoteague National Wild-
    life Refuge. (WS Release 71-5; WS PIO)
April 18: FAA issued multiyear aviation forecast: passengers carried by
    scheduled airlines would increase from 173.2 million expected in
     FY 1971 to 186.9 million in FY 1972. Increase of 8% would con-
     trast with growth of about 2% in FY 1970 and 1% increase expected
    in FY 1971. Annual growth rate of 10% was projected through re-
     mainder of decade, with total passengers reaching 513.5 million in
     FY 1982. Over 12 yrs covered by forecast, number of hours &flown      in
     general aviation was expected to double, reaching 49.6 million in
     FY 1982. Scheduled revenue passenger-miles flown by U.S. certificated
     airlines was expected to grow from 133.7 billion in FY 1971 to 147.3
     in FY 1972, 10.2% increase. By FY 1982, figure would reach 485
    billion. (FAA Release 11-49)
April 19: U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 1 orbital scientific station
     from Baykonur into orbit with 269-km (167.2-mi) apogee, 256-km
      (159.1-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 51.5” inclination. Tass said
     experiment was designed for “perfecting the elements of the design
     and the on-board systems and for conducting scientific research and
     experiments in space.” Western speculation, later confirmed [see
    April 23-25], was that Salyut 1 would dock with manned spacecraft
     in attempt to establish first manned orbital workshop. (GSFC SSR,
     4/30/71; SBD, 4/20/71, 254; Mills, B Sun, 4/20/71, A l )
  MSC announced issuance of RFPS for development of human waste collec-
     tion and storage system for space shuttle orbiter stage. Contractor
     would receive $90 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract under which firm
     would fabricate for testing one fully functional unit that could be used
     individually during week-long test by team of three men and one
    woman. (MSC Release 71-23)
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from TERLS carrying
0

     Indian experiment to study luminescent clouds. Rocket and instru-
     ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR List)
  Space Program Advisory Council, established by NASA to advise on space
    program goals and objectives and aid in reviewing plans for and work
     in progress on space programs and accomplishments, held first meeting.
     Council of prominent scientists would report to NASA Deputy Admin-
     istrator on findings of four committees-Applications, Physical Sciences,
     Life Sciences, and Space Systems. (NASA Release 71-71)

                                    105
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 20

April 20: Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, and Alan Gotlieb,
    Deputy Minister of Canadian Dept. of Communications, signed agree-
    ment at NASA Hq. for first cooperative international project for experi-
    mental communications technology satellite. Cooperative Applications
    Satellite C (CAS-c)would be launched into geostationary orbit by
    NASA in 1974 to conduct communications experiments with ground ter-
    minals operating at extremely high frequencies, test one-kilowatt solar-
    power-cell arrays that would unfurl in space like window shades, and
    test electric propulsion and stabilization systems. Canadian DOC would
    be responsible for design, construction, integration, and subsystems
    testing of spacecraft and for tracking, data acquisition, command, and
    control of spacecraft after it reached orbit. NASA would provide Thor-
    Delta booster, launch services, superefficiency power tubes and associ-
    ated equipment, and environmental testing of integrated spacecraft.
    Thel\e would be no exchange of funds between DOC and NASA. Project
    was fifth in series of cooperative satellites which began with launch
    of Alowtte 1 Sept. 28, 1962. (NASA Release 71-72)
 National Space Club luncheon honored Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late NASA
    Deputy Administrator, physicist, and Director of NACA from 1947 to
     1958. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in
    speech: “Dr. Dryden held that the decentralization of authority was a
    desirable goal and dictatorial control of projects, funds, and facilities
    should be avoided. He knew that ideas and skills would be widely
    dispersed. Even though the goals of applied research and development
    projects were concrete and specific, the approach to these goals had
    to be diversified. Freedom of the agencies and scientists engaged in
    the work was a necessity here, as it was in fundamental research, if
    the best use was to be made of their abilities. These concepts have
    lived and grown, and I believe, still represent the fundamental policy
    for the management of programs at NASA today.”
       During luncheon, bust of Dr. Dryden, commissioned by National
    Space Club and executed by sculptress Una Hanbury, was officially
    presented to NAS President, Dr. Philip Handler. (Text; NSC News
    Letter)
 MSFC announced award of $1081 343 contract to Research, Inc., to
    design, fabricate, install, and check out electrical heating devices for
    space shuttle prototype heat protection systems. Device would be
    installed in an existing structural test facility at MSFC and would heat
    up to 1600 K (2500°F) on lower surface and 1300 K (1800°F) on
    top surface of test articles. Work on device would be funded in incre-
    ments, beginning with $100 000 for preliminary design phase. (MSFC
    Release 71-67)
 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received Golf Magazine’s All-America
0

    Award for making first golf shot on moon during Apollo 14 mission
     (Jan. 31-Feb. 9). (NYT, 4/21/71,57)
April 21: L ~ R C had turned over to St. Vincent Charity Hospital in Cleve-
    land, Ohio, small analog computer designed by L ~ R Cscientists Vernon
    D. Gebben and John A. Webb, Jr., at cost of $1500, NASA announced.
    Computer measured increase or decrease of stroke volume of heart, or
    changes in length of time heart valves remained open, to detect certain
    abnormalities early in develapment. Hospital planned to use computer

                                    106
                                                                     April 21
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1Wl

    experimentally before application to human patients recovering from
    open heart surgery. (NASA Release 71-69)
  MSC announced signing of $10 699 4,004, contract modification with Mar-
    tin Marietta Corp. for equipment in support of Skylab earth resources
                                 .
    experiment package (EREP) Modification brought total value of con-

-   tract since February 1970 to $60 million. (MSCRelease 71-25)
  Soviet ICBM construction program was increasing, Secretary of Defense
    Melvin R. Laird said in speech before American Newspaper Publishers
    Assn. in New York: “In December and January it began to look as if
    the Soviet Union was slowing down its rapid rate of ICBM deploy-
    ments after having reached a level of land-based ICBM’s gave them
                                                             that
    approximately 400 more than the 1054 possessed by the United States.
                                                                 ..
    The situation began to change in February and March. . More
    recent evidence confirms the sobering fact that the Soviet Union is
    involved in a new-and      apparently extensive-ICBM construction pro-
    gram.” (Text )
* FAA-DOT program to lower base of positive control airspace to 5486 m
     (18 000 ft) over entire U.S. by end of 1971 was announced by FAA
    Administrator John H. Shaffer. Purpose was to reduce potential for
    midair collisions. Current positive control base was between 5486 and
     18 288 m (18 000 and 60 000 ft) over northeastern and north central
    U.S. and between 7315 and 18 288 m (24 000 and 60 000 ft) over
     remainder of conterminous 48 states. (FAA Release 71-50)
* Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of
     John E. Hirten, former President of Institute of Planners of California,
     as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and
     Urban Systems. Hirten would succeed Michael Cafferty, who had
     returned to private law practice. (DOT Release R-24)
April 22: USAF launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster
     from Vandenberg AFB into orbit with 400.7-km (249-mi) apogee,
     130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9’ inclination.
     Satellite reentered May 13. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; 5/31/71; Pres Rpt
     72)
e House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with
     amendment H.R. 7109, 9g3.434-biHion NASA authorization bill [see
     April 11. (Text; NASA LAR X/35)
* Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried
     Dudley Observatory payload to 123.5-km (76.7-mi) altitude to meas-
     ure particulate matter in upper atmosphere by photometer, microphones,
     plasma detector, and particle collection. Rocket and instruments func-
     tioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned. (NASA Rpt
     SRL)
* Largest inff of immigrant scientists, engineers, and physicians over
             ux
    past 20 y r s was reported by NSF for FY 1970. After sharp decline of
    21% between 1968 and 1969, rise of 30% in 1970 had brought num-
    ber of entries to over 13000 level. (NSF Highlights, 4/22/71, 1)
April 23-25: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz IO-carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A.
    Shatalov, Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov-was
    launched from Baykonur at 4:54 am local time April 23 (6:54 pm
     EST April 22). Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139.2 m i ) ;
    perigee, 200 km (124.3 mi) ; period, 88.2 min; and inclination, 51.3O.
     Tass said spacecraft would conduct joint experiments with Salyut 1

                                     107
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 23-25

    (launched April 19), make comprehensive check of onboard systems,
    test manual and automatic control systems, check out spacecraft ori-
    entation and stabilization in different flight conditions, and conduct
    medical-biological research on influence of space flight factors on
    human organism.
       On April 24 Soyuz 10 linked with Salyut 1 for 5% hrs, undocked,
    and pulled away. Taped pictures released later on Moscow TV showed
    Soyuz 10 moving away from Salyut 1 after docking experiment while
    commentator said : “The principles of rendezvous and docking with the
    use of new equipment were tested and checked out in the course of the
    joint experiment. A rigid mechanical link-up was achieved, followed by
    undocking of the manned ship from the orbital station. After the end
    of this experiment in maneuvering, both vehicles continued to fulfill
    their program.” According to information released later, Soyuz 10
    caught up with Salyut 1 in two stages. First stage automatically brought
    Soyuz 10 within 180 m (590 ft) of target vehicle; in second, approach
    and docking were effected manually. After separation Soyuz 10 cir-
    cled Salyut 1 for about one hour, photographing and filming it from
    various angles.
        Tass announced Soyuz 10 reentered and landed near Karaganda,
    Kazakhstan, at 4:40 am Baykonur time April 25 (6:40 pm EDT April
    24) after “fulfilling the program of studies. The studies carried out
    during this flight are a stage in the general program of work with the
    orbital scientific station.” (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; NYT, 4/23-26/71;
     W Post, 4/25/71, A l )
April 23: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 407 from Plesetsk into orbit with 818-
    km (508.3-mi) apogee, 791-km (491.5-mi) perigee, 100.9-min period,
    and 74.0’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 4’/30/71; SBD, 4/26/71, 290)
* NASA announced tentative schedule for 12-day Apollo 15 manned lunar
    landing mission. Spacecraft, carrying three-man crew, would be
    launched from KSC at 9:34 am EDT July 26. Apollo 15 LM would land
    near moon’s Hadley Rille at about 6:15 pm EDT July 30. Two astro-
    nauts would spend 67 hrs on moon making three trips across surface
     on LRV. Spacecraft and crew would splash down in Pacific at 4:46 EDT
    pm Aug. 7. (NASA Release 71-73)
  USAF F-111 on test flight from Edward AFB, Calif., crashed on gunnery
     range near Barstow, Calif., killing pilot and copilot, who had ejected.
     (UPI, J Post, 4/25/71, A2)
            P
  NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from WSMR. One car-
     ried Univ. of Colorado and GSFC experiment to study airglow, and one
     carried Dudley Observatory and GSFC experiment to collect micro-
     meteoroids. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR
     list)
  Perspective in science funding was drawn by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA
     Associate Administrator, in Science editorial: “The funding proposed
     for 1972 for basic science ($2.4 billion), or even that for the entire
     space exploration program ($3 billion), is a very small fraction of
     the funding that is proposed for efforts to ameliorate societal prob-
     lems today ($90 billion). The real need is not so much for additional
     dollar attention as it is for attention of a different kind. Ideas, new
     approaches, and new insights into the wise management and utiliza-
     tion of our human and natural resources are what is required. Many

                                    108
                                                                     April 21
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1Rl

    experimentally before application to human patients recovering from
    open heart surgery. (NASA Release 71-69)
  MSC announced signing of $10 699 4,004 contract modification with Mar-
    tin Marietta Corp. for equipment in support of Skylab earth resources
    experiment package (EREP) . Modification brought total value of con-
    tract since February 1970 to $60 million. (MSC Release 71-25)
  Soviet ICBM construction program was increasing, Secretary of Defense
9

    Melvin R. Laird said in speech before American Newspaper Publishers
    Assn. in New York: “In December and January it began to look as if
    the Soviet Union was slowing down its rapid rate of ICBM deploy-
    ments after having reached a level of land-based ICBM’s gave them
                                                             that
    approximately 400 more than the 1054 possessed by the United States.
                                                                 .
    The situation began to change in February and March. . . More
    recent evidence confirms the sobering fact that the Soviet Union is
    involved in a new-and apparently extensive-ICBM construction pro-
    gram.” (Text)
  FAA-DOT program to lower base of positive control airspace to 5486 m
0

     (18 000 ft) over entire U.S. by end of 1971 was announced by FAA
    Administrator John H. Shaffer. Purpose was to reduce potential for
    midair collisions. Current positive control base was between 5486 and
     18 288 m (18 OOO and 60 000 ft) over northeastern and north central
     U.S. and between 7315 and 18 288 m (24 000 and 60 000 ft) over
     remainder of conterminous 48 states. (FAA Release 71-50)
  Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of
     John E. Hirten, former President of Institute of Planners of California,
     as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and
     Urban Systems. Hirten would succeed Michael Cafferty, who had
     returned to private law practice. (DOT Release R-24)
April 22: USAF launched unidentified sateIlite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster
     from Vandenberg AFB into orbit with 400.7-km (249-mi) apogee,
     130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9’ inclination.
     Satellite reentered May 13. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71; 5/31/71; Pres Rpt
     72 )
  House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with
     amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion NASA authorization bill [see
     April 11. (Text; NASA LAR X/35)
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried
     Dudley Observatory payload to 123.5-km (76.7-mi) altitude to meas-
     ure particulate matter in upper atmosphere by photometer, microphones,
     plasma detector, and particle collection. Rocket and instruments func-
     tioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned. (NASA Rpt
     SRL)
 Largest influx of immigrant scientists, engineers, and physicians over
    past 20 yrs was reported by NSF for FY 1970. After sharp decline of
    21% between 1968 and 1969, rise of 30% in 1970 had brought num-
    ber of entries to over 13000 level. (NSF Highlights, 4/22/71, 1)
April 23-25: U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz 10-carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A.
    Shatalov, Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov-was
    launched from Baykonur at 4:54 am local time April 23 (6:54 pm
    EST April 22). Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139.2 mi) ;
    perigee, 200 km (1N.3 mi) ; period, 88.2 min; and inclination, 51.3O.
    Tass said spacecraft would conduct joint experiments with Sulyut 1

                                     107
                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 24

    building spacecraft and conducting launch operations. NASA provided
    Scout booster, two experiments, technical consultations, launch crew
    training, and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition. (NASA Release
    71-63; NASA Proj Off;GSFC SSR, 4/30/71)
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 408 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1510-km
     (938.3-mi) apogee, 200-km ( 124.3-mi) perigee, 102-min period, and
    81.8’ inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 29. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/71;
    12/31/71; SF, 10/71, 386)
* New York Times editorial commented on Soyuz-Salyut mission: “The
    latest Soviet spade spectacular follows a long series of indications by
    Kremlin leaders that their present priority in manned space flight is
    establishment of a long-lasting station in space. This latest experiment
    seems an important-as well as expensive-step on the road toward
    that objective.” But there was no guarantee that space stations would
    be restricted to benign purposes. “Logically, there should be no na-
    tional space stations in space. All such facilities should be operated by
    the United Nations employing crews from many nations and they
    should all be open to appropriate international inspection.” Principle
    had been recognized in Antarctic “where the presence of Soviet scien-
    tists in American bases and American scientists in Soviet bases has a
    long, useful and honorable history. With the latest Soyuz and Salyut
    vehicles in orbit, the sensitive issues raised by space stations must be
    faced in the nearest future.” (NYT, 4/241/71)
  Soviet bloc geologists meeting in four-day conference at Riga, Latvia,
    had decided to establish International Coordinating Center of Marine
    Exploration in U.S.S.R., New York Times reported. Center, to ensure
     (6
      rational use of mineral resources of the oceans,” would be open to
    members of Council of Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon) , eco-
    nomic alliance of U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe. (Shabad, NYT,
    4/24/71,9)
April 25: First flight-model Lunar Roving Vehicle (LRV) was installed on
     board Apollo 15 LM on test stand at KSC. LM would be moved to
     Vehicle Assembly Building May 8 to be mated to Saturn V booster
    and CSM. Complete Apollo 15 vehicle would be rolled out to launch
    pad May 11. (MSFC Release 71-71; Murshull Star, 4/28/71, 1)
  At press conference following Soyuz 10 landing Cosmonaut Aleksey S.
     Yeliseyev described Sulyut 1 as “overwhelming. It was a little like a
     train entering a railroad terminal. That’s how we felt as our rather big
     Soyuz eased up to the station.
        LL
           The rendezvous maneuver began from a long distance away. At
     first we could not see the orbital station and we corrected our orbit
     to get closer. We first saw the Salyut from a distance of about 15 kilo-
     meters [9 mi]. At that distance we were able to see the station through
                                                                              .
     a special optical device. At first it looked very tiny, just a black spot. .
     of small size. The station flashed special light beacons for easier recog-
     nition. From that moment on w e kept it constantly in view as we pro-
     ceeded with the rendezvous maneuver.
        “As we approached the station, we kept looking at the station through
     instruments. It was quite an imposing sight. Then the docking took
     place. All the time we kept the required components of the station
     in the field of vision of our television and optical devices. Then we

                                      110
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    April 25

     separated and circled the station, looking at it from all sides and
    shooting movie film of it.
        bt
           It was an overwhelming sight: There was this structure in flight,
     with a tremendous amount of apparatus and all sorts of antennas.”’
     (Shabad, NYT, 4/26/71,1; 4/27/71,30)
        Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov later said that in future, “it will
     become necessary to learn to dock a relatively small transport space-
                                                            .
    ship with a high flying multipurpose laboratory. . . it is already
     necessary to look for more national technical solutions, in particular
    of docking units, as much depends on their design and perfection.
    A new version of docking units was tested during the flight.”
        Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov said “operations of docking and rendez-
     vous lead to a considerable emotional burden on the cosmonauts.
     Medical men and engineers are looking for and finding the most
     rational combination of man and automatic equipment in such a com-
     plex maneuver in orbit. . . . quite a few problems of engineering and
     cosmic psychology must be solved to achieve the best possible coordi-
     nation of man and automatic equipment.”
        Soviet comments on its space station program had shifted in em-
     phasis to possible future docking experiments between Salyut satellites
                                                                           ..
     and manned spacecraft and had “left open the question of whether .
     Soyuz 10 . . . succeeded in doing all it set out to do,” Anthony
     Astrachan later suggested in the Washington Post. Comments by
     Feoktistov strongIy suggested that the Soyuz-Salyut experiment was
     only prelude to creation of permanent orbital lab. ( W Post, 4/26/71,
    A1 1
  Texas A&M Univ. scientists had irradiated five grams of lunar soil to
     determine whether its elements, apparently soluble in water, were
     absorbed in growing lettuce plants, AP reported. Laboratory plants
     growing in moon soil mixture had grown better than those in ordi-
     nary soil. Dr. Paul Baur, Jr., botanist working at MSC, had said if
     plants took up activated elements from lunar soil they could be
     detected on x-ray plates. “This may give us new clues to the ferti-
     lizer requirements of plants.” (W Star, 4/25/71, A16)
  NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from TERLS. One car-
9

     ried India-Japan experiment to study ionosphere. Mission was partial
     success. Second rocket carried Indian experiment to study luminescent
     clouds. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
  Interview with Chien Wei-chang, professor of engineering at Chinghua
     Univ. in Peking who had worked at JPL from 1940 to 1946, was pub-
     lished in Washington Post. Asked if he had had anything to do with
     China’s earth satellite program, Chien had replied, “What do you
     think?” (Roderick, AP, W Post, 4/25/71, A26)
* U.S.S.R. was “clearly a big jump ahead” of US. in “post-moon race
     operations,” Detroit News editorial said. “Credit must be given the
     Russians for having the shrewdness to go all out for orbital space
     stations when they realized, as they must have done before Armstrong
                                       ..  . that they were sure to lose the
     and Aldrin landed on the moon
     moon race. We shall have to watch for a few years because the deci-
     sion has been made to slash the space budget.’’ (Detroit News,
     4/25/71,4M)

                                     111
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
April 25

        tourist facilities were described in New York Times travel section:
  ICSC
     (6
       In these days of popular denigration of space exploration, the tourist
     is likely to approach this vast space-age outdoor science museum in
     a defensively skeptical frame of mind. Three or more hours later he
     is likely to leave the center convinced that it was a valuable and
     exciting experience.” ICSC was “one of the least commercialized major
                                                           ..
     tourist attractions of the,world.” NASA was “selling . on tapes and
     in guide lectures, but not offensively and not at the expense of infor-
     mation you want.” There was little evidence of security “and the
     guides emphasize that you may photograph anything you see.” (Fried-
    lander, NYT, 4/25/71)
April 26: NASA launched series of four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from
     Arenosillo, Spain, carrying Spanish experiments to study luminescent
     clouds. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  “The short and uneventful flight of Soyuz 10 suggested . . . that the Soviet
     Union ran into technical difficulties in its first attempt at establishing
     a manned workshop in earth orbit,” Thomas O’Toole said in Washing-
     ton Post. “Just what the difficulties might have been is unclear, but the
     landing of Soyuz 10 after only two days in space, the brief time Soyuz
     spent docked with the Salute workshop and the apparent failure to
                              ..    . all added up in American minds to a
     transfer crew members
     bungled mission.” ( W Post, 4/26/71, A21)
* Possibility of using electrically controlled optical sensors and signal
     processes-techniques used to guide military missiles to targets-was
     being examined as substitute for sightless eyes by Huntington Institute
     of Applied Medical Research team led by Dr. Robert H. Pudenz,
    New York Times reported. Electrical impulses, as coded messages,
     would stimulate visual cortex of central nervous system and communi-
                                            .,
     cate pulses of information to brain bv wav of optic nerve. Artificial
     system would bypass eyes and optic nerve and radio signals directly
    to brain. (Holles, NYT, 4/26/71,23)
* House Committee on Armed Services’ subcommittee investigating Dec. 30,
     1970, crash of USN F-14 Tomcat fighter aircraft during test flight at
     Grumman facility in Calverton, N.Y., received communication from
     identified source containing 13 allegations of defects and deficiencies
     in F-14A design, manufacture, testing, and administrative controls.
     Rep. F. Edward Hebert (D-La.), as Chairman of investigation sub-
     committee, ordered full inquiry into charges. (Subcom Rpt, 12/20/71)
  Sonic booms from USAF jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused
     disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks,
     Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testi-
     mony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on
     Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets
     originated in California but had received no meaningful response from
     correspondence with USAF. (Testimony)
April 26-28: NAS held annual meeting for first time in $4.25-million
     Washington, D.C., facility that contained 68Pseat Dryden Auditorium.
    Auditorium had been funded in part by Hugh L. Dryden Memorial
     Fund as tribute to former NACA director and NASA Deputy Adminis-
     trator who died in December 1965. Dr. Dryden had been NAS Home
    Secretary for 10 yrs.
        Dr. Frederick Seitz, former NAS President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden

                                     112
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                April 26-28

    at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can
                       owing several successful        manned missions. In
                         n’s professional life w         d as by fate to the
    scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful
    Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privi-
    leged to inspect new vistas.”
        Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the central figure” in US. tran-
    sition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first success-
    ful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In
                    ..   . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise
    this process, he
     an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible
     use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the
     same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined
    missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our
     space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden
    working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the
    visionary.”
        Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to audi-
    torium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost.
        Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS
     by National Space Club was unveiled.
        At business session, NAS announced decision to increase membership
     to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit
     of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972
     and 100.in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years
                             News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann;
     to 60. (NAS-NRC-NAE
    Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71,3:32)
April 26-29: American Physical Society held spring meeting in Washington,
     D.C.
        Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most
     quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be
     coming from one place that could be 644 km (NO mi) below lunar
     surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being
     moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were
     too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that
     sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake
     source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km
                                                        n by Apollo 12 and
      (800-mi) line between seismometers left
     Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4
        Discovery by U b r u (Explorer 42)               Astronomy Satellite
      (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star
     Centaurus X-3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo




                                    113
April 26-29                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If
     Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to
    understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought
    to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two
    hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23)
       Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that
    66
      every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of
    our accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.”
    (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, A16)
 Forty-second annual scientific meeting of Aerospace Medical Assn. was
    held in Houston, Tex. Approximately 5000 aerospace doctors attended.
    Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Opera-
    tions, was out-going president. (MSC Release 71-22)
April 27: Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as NASA Administrator by
    D.C. Superior Court Judge James A. Belson in White House ceremony
    attended by President Nixon. (NASA Off Admin; W Post, 4/28/71, A2)
 USN TF-SA jet aircraft with NASA’s  supercritical wing, piloted by test pilot
    Gary Krier, successfully completed fifth flight from FRC. Flight achieved
    planned purposes : to extend flight envelope to higher dynamic pres-
    sures; evaluate augmented stability and control ; determine handling
    qualities, structural loads, and buffet boundaries ; and make prelimi-
    nary evaluation of flutter characteristics at higher dynamic pressures.
    Aircraft reached 7600-m (25 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.9. (NASA
    Proj Off)
 Paul F. Bikle, ,Director of FRC since 1959, would retire May 31, NASA
    announced. To ensure smooth transition until appointment of new


April 27: Dr. James C. Fletcher was sworn in as NASA Administrator by District of
Columbia Superior Court Judge James A . Belson m President Nixon, Mrs. Fletcher, and
Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator (behind), watched in the President’s ofice.




                                       114
                                                                     April 27
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     director De E. Beeler, FRC Deputy Director, was named Acting Direc-
    tor with Bikle acting as an adviser. (NASA Release 71-77)
April 28: NASA announced decision to discontinue quarantine of astronauts,
    spacecraft, and lunar samples for remaining three Apollo Bights. Dr.
    George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said NASA had concluded
     from analysis of Apollo 11, 12, and 14 quarantine information “that
    there is no hazard to man, animal, or plants in the lunar material.
    These results have been reviewed by the Interagency Committee on
    Back Contamination, and that committee has recommended that fur-
    ther lunar missions need not be subject to quarantine.” (NASA Release
    71-78)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 4 9 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1228-km
     (763-mi) apogee, 1172-km (728.3-mi) perigee, 109.4-min period, and
     74.0” inclination. (GEFC SSR, 4/30/71; SF, 10/71, 386)
* Dr. Clarence L. Johnson, Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft
    Corp., received NAE’S sixth Founders Medal for designing advanced
    aircraft and for experimental and theoretical investigations in aero-
    space sciences. Dr. Johnson was best known for his work in designing
    Hudson bomber, Constellation and Superconstellation transports, P-38,
    T-33 trainer, F-90, JetStar, U-2, Warning Star, YF-12A, and SR-71.
     (NAE Release, 7/13/71; NAE Bridge, 7/71,1)
April 29: USN TF-8A jet aircraft with NASA’s supercritical wing, piloted by
    test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed sixth flight from
     FRC. Purposes of flight-to    explore flutter boundary and evaluate sta-
     bility and control characteristics-were       achieved. Aircraft reached
     12 000-m (40 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.95. (NASA Proj Off)
* Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
     Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and GSFC experiment to study solar x-ray
     emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  NASA announced selection of Boeing Co. to build Mariner Venus-Mercury
     ’73 spacecraft-first to explore two planets on single mission. Boeing,
     one of four companies that had submitted proposals, submitted esti-
     mated cost of $47 million, with award fee based on performance.
     (NASA Release 71-81 )
  Major Soviet space station project included “powerful new launch vehicle
     in the class of America’s Saturn 5,” Kenneth Gatland said in New
     Scientist and Science Journal article. Prototype had been destroyed by
     fire in 1969 while undergoing static test on launch pad at Baykonur,
    he reported. (New Sci & Sci J , 4/29/71,256-7)
  Change in name of Fairchild Hiller Corp. to Fairchild Industries, Inc.,
     was approved by stockholders at annual meeting in Germantown, Md.
     ( W Post, 4/29/71, B11)
April 29-30: Geology fieId trip and lunar EVA practice session using lunar
     roving vehicle simulator was conducted at China Lake, Calif., by
     Apollo 15 prime and backup commanders and LM pilots. Astronauts
     would use LRV to explore moon’s Sea of Rains during July lunar
    landing mission. (NASA Special Release; W Star, 4/30/71, A9)
April 30: Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from TERLS
     carrying India-GsFC experiment to study ionosphere. Rocket and in-
     struments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Recent Soviet launches “indicate continued progress toward a system for
     inspecting and possibly destroying American satellites,” George C.

                                    115
April 30                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    Wilson reported in the Washington Post. Cosmos 400, target satellite
    launched March 19, was hunted by Cosmos 404, launched April 4,
    which “went through a series of maneuvers under propulsion supplied
                                    .
    by the giant SS-9 rocket. . . The Soviet Union has conducted such
    space marksmanship tests before . . . But this time the test showed
                           ..
    more sophistication .       as the hunter satellite stayed in phase with
    the target for a longer period of time than on previous shots.”
     (W Post, 4/30/71, A l )
 USAF placed its 257 operational F-111s on suspended status after inves-
    tigation of April 23 fatal crash showed cause to be failure of ejection
    capsule to function. (Schmidt, NYT, 5/2/71, 66)
 Marshall Space Flight Center announced retirement of Director of Pro-
    gram Management Lee B. James, effective May 31. James, who would
    return to academic community, would be replaced in acting capacity
    by James T. Shepherd, Deputy Director (Technical), Program Man-
    agement. (MSFC Release 71-77)
During April: NASA issued Funds for Research, Development, R&D Plant
    and Scientific and Technical Information, Fiscal Years 1970-1972:
    Annual Report to The National Science Foundation. In FY 1972
    budget, NASA was seeking authorization of $3.271 billion. Effect on
    programs would be: Funds for basic research would remain at FY
    1970 level in FY 1971 and rise in FY 1972, reflecting increased
    funding for Viking and initiation of outer planets Grand Tour project.
    In applied research, estimates for FY 1971 reflected 10% increase
    over 1970 and slight increase in FY 1972, primarily for earth re-
    sources surveys and space station. Budget authority for development
    activities would decline in 1971 and 1972, primarily as result of com-
    pletion of Apollo program and reduction in NASA-AEC NERVA program
    effort. R&D funds were requested in FY 1972 for space shuttle tech-
    nology and engine development facilities. (Text)
 AIA Aerospace Research Center published National Technology Support:
    A Study of Research and Development Trends and Their Implications:
    New patterns were emerging in magnitude and direction of R&D in
    US. “Recent R&D trends reflect diminishing governmental leadership
    in R&D which could lead to an erosion of the national research effort.
    The impact of continued inflation, the higher costs and longer leadtimes
    associated with increasingly sophisticated projects, plus accelerated
    efforts to meet specific national goals, suggest an even greater degrada-
    tion of the total R&D effort than an examination of expenditures would
    indicate.”
        Recent growth of industrial financing and leveling of Federal fund-
     ing indicated shift in direction of national R&D activities. (Whereas
     industrial research and development has focused primarily upon prod-
     uct improvement and product development, most of the nation’s basic
     research and the high risk, high cost activity has been financed by the
     Federal Government. Although their respective R&D programs fre-
    quently are complementary, certain technological projects traditionally
     initiated or sponsored by the Federal Government are beyond the
     financial scope of private enterprise. Consequently, a reduction in
     Federal R&D activity could have a negative impact on the level of
    sophisticated effort nationally.”

                                    116
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              During April

       Investments in higher education, level and nature of Federal R&D
    support, and utilization of existing manpower “provide some indica-
    tion of the long-term scientific and technical capability of the nation.
    Previous Federal support of certain programs has had a feedback
    effect on the desirability of pursuing certain careers. Thus the failure
    to consider the long-term relationship among various fields of science
    implies future imbalances.” Establishment of longer range RW priori-
    t e and well defined national technological strategy was needed. (Text)
     is
* Challenge of educational satellite telecommunications was discussed in
    Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists by Delbert E. Smith: While advances
    in comsat technology promised to revolutionize global communication,
    “it is not certain that educational uses of such a satellite system will
    develop concomitantly. They may, in fact, be lost in the speed with
    which our society utilizes the more spectacular and commercialIy
    viable facets of the medium.” Educational Satellite Center at Univ.
    of Wisconsin had been established to work toward “fuller understand-
    ing of the social, cultural, political and legal consequences of the in-
    evitable massive transformations in global communication patterns
    which are imminent.” Objectives of EDSAT Center were : to provide
    focus for multidisciplinary research and training in educational and
    social applications and impact of comsats, to develop working models
    for application of satellite telecommunications systems to educational
    and social problems, to develop and maintain satellite transmission and
    reception capability for integration of hardware and software research,
    and to disseminate information on educational and social applications
    of space telecommunications. (Bull of Atomic Scientists, 4/71, 14-8)
  Changes and chances in US.-U.S.S.R. foreign affairs were described by
0

    Dr. Hans J. Morgenthau of Univ. of Chicago and City Univ. of New
    York in Foreign Affairs: ‘ L .. . future of American-Soviet relations is
    shrouded in uncertainty. Neither amity nor enmity is foreordained.
    Those who proclaim the inevitability of conflict on ideological grounds
    are as wrong as those who assert the inevitability of peace, or even
    friendship, because the United States and the Soviet Union have
    become more restrained in words and deeds in dealing with each
    other. The future depends first of all upon how the two governments
     conceive of their respective interests and how they will go about
    defending and protecting them. If they conceive of them in com-
    patible terms and pursue them with appropriate concern for each
    other’s sensibilities, the future might well witness the realization of
    Roosevelt’s dream, Stalin’s grand design, and Mao’s nightmare : the
    cooperation of the United States and the Soviet Union in establishing
    and maintaining a modicum of order in the world. Otherwise the
    world will continue to hover on the brink of self-destruction.” (Foreign
    Affairs, 4/71, 4 2 W 1 )
  Study completed by TRW Inc. for DOD and CIA estimated that multiple
    warheads flight-tested to date with Soviet SS-9 ICBMS were not accu-
    rate enough to knock out U.S. Minuteman ICBMS in surprise attack.
    Study said warhead accuracy probably could not be improved enough
    with current techniques to achieve first-strike capability. (Getler,
    W Post, 6/17/71, A l )
  NSF published Research and Development in Industry, 1969: Funds, 1969;
    Scientists & Engineers, January 1970 (NSF 71-18). In 1969 industry

                                    117
During April                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    spent $18.5 billion for ~ - 6 % above 1968 level of $17.5 billion and
    5 times amount spent on R&D in 1953. Increase in 1968-1969 was due
    to increase in companies’ own funds. Between January 1969 and
    January 1970 full-time equivalent number of R&D scientists and engi-
    neers employed in industry dropped from 387 100 to 380 600. Decline
    -first recorded by NSF in 13-yr series of reports, was primarily caused
    by cutbacks in personnel working on Federal R&D programs. Most of
    R&D unemployment among scientists and engineers occurred in aircraft
    and missiles industry. Number of R&D professionals in DOD programs
    remained level between 1968 and 1969. Federal Government was source
    of 47% of R&D dollars spent by industry during 1969, down from 59%
    in 1959. DOD and NASA furnished 89% of Federal R&D funds to industry
    in 1969 and supported 89% of industrial scientists and engineers
    working on Federal programs, at average annual cost of $56 200 each.
    In 1969 industry financed 53% of its R&D with its own funds, increase
    from 41% in 1959. Industry allocated 3% of its 1969 R&D funds to
    basic research with more than 50% of this amount spent on physical
    sciences. (Text)
  Government Exeeuive editorial noted that many experts feared “nation’s
                                              .
    wealth of technological brainpower has . . been clobbered by budget
    cuts close to the point of no recovery. And history records so con-
    sistently it’s become a politico-economic truism that the civilization
    which does not face up to these technological challenges sooner or
    later becomes captive of the civilization which does.” (Gmt Exec,
    4/71,9)




                                   118
                               May 1971

May 1: NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR. Aerobee 150
    carried GSFC experiment to study stellar W, and Aerobee 170 carried
    MIT-GSFC experiment to study stellar x-ray sources. Rockets and in-
    struments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
May 2: FY 1972 NASA budget placed agency “in good shape” for next year,
    Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, said in AP
     interview published in Chicago Tribune. “I think there will have to
    be some major decisions in the next 18 months about the future of
    the space program.” He also said that there was “activity” in Com-
                                                            ...   I would say
    munist Chinese missile program, “but at the moment
    their activities are more threatening to the Soviet Union than they are
    to us.” (AP, C Trib, 5/2/71,8)
* Previously unidentified Soviet “specialist in space engineering” had been
    identified as Boris V. Raushenbakh, corresponding member of Soviet
    Academy of Sciences, New York Times said. Raushenbakh, jet com-
    bustion engineer, had joined Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feok-
    tistov and Boris B. Yegorov in giving interviews to Soviet reporters
    on Salyut 1-Soyw IQ mission April 23-25 at mission control center
     for Salyut-Soyuz. Times said it was believed to be first time that
    Academy member had been publicly associated with operation of
     space experiment. Normally, only former cosmonauts were identified
     with mission control on ground. (Shabad, NYT, 5/2/71)
May 3: U.S.S.R. was “showing signs of an accelerated effort” in space
     “stretching far beyond the implications of last month’s start on an
     orbiting space station,” Aviation Week & Space Technology said.
     “Latest analysis of orbital changes achieved by Cosmos 382, launched
                                           .
     by a Proton booster . . . last fall . . shows that the large unmanned
     satellite was moved once at an acceleration corresponding precisely
     to that required for lunar orbit insertion and once at exactly the
     velocity change needed for trans-earth injection.” ( A v Wk, 5/3/71, 13)
  Dept. of Labor’s Manpower Administration began Technology Mobiliza-
     tion and Reemployment Program to help find jobs for 30 000 of 100 000
     iinemployed scientists, engineers, and technicians in 14 target areas
     hit by layoffs in aerospace and defense industries. (Labor Dept PIO)
  Defeat of SST program and “widespread public antipathy toward tech-
     nology” had “encouraged the political liberals to intensify their attack
     on defense spending and press for a larger welfare budget,” Robert
     Hotz said in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial. “The Air
     Force B-1 supersonic bomber program will inherit a11 the supersonic
     transport’s onus since it has basically the same flight characteristics.”
     ( A v Wk, 5/3/71,9)
May 3-14: International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey Systems was
     held at Univ. of Michigan to inform representatives of 51 countries
     and international organizations of latest techniques for interpreting
     earth resources data acquired by aircraft and satellite remote sensing

                                     119
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 3-14

   systems. Workshop was sponsored by NASA, Dept. of Agriculture, NOAA,
   US. Geological Survey, USN Naval Oceanographic Office, AID, and
   Dept. of State.
      Ambassador George H. W. Bush, U S . Representative to U.N., in
   welcoming address called space technology a global tool and said,
   “for a global tool to be used productively and efficiently, there must
   be a climate of international cooperation.” Workshop and U.N. could
   66
     provide policy makers and program managers in developing countries
   with the basic information to enable them to consider seriously how
   this new technology may help them meet their needs.”
      Dr. William T. Pecora, Under Secretary of the Interior, said in
   keynote address that earth-surveying satellites were “must” for world’s
   welfare. “Whether or not our great population can avoid intolerable
   social problems of a crowded world and maintain the hoped-for living
   standards is a matter of conjecture, but our ability to survive will
   depend in large part on critical assessment of all the earth’s resources.”
      Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications,
   described NASA Earth Resources Aircraft Program ( ERAP) : “Instead
   of waiting for data acquired from spacecraft, users are presently
   obtaining multispectral data of Earth phenomena from sensors carried
   by NASA aircraft . . . to evaluate the sensors and to develop a solid
   foundation for observational and interpretive techniques for earth-
   resources space missions.” ERAP included RB-57FY P-3AY and C-130B
   aircraft. “We shall shortly add two more high altitude (U-2) aircraft.’’
   Lockheed C-130B was flying optical and infrared laboratory with
   24-channel multispectral scanner to provide information on signatures
   used to separate, classify, and identify specific earth resources. “This
   is an expansion of the 12-channel scanner of the University of Michi-
   gan C 4 7 aircraft which we also use for the same purposes. The P-3A
   or Electra is our radio-wave instrument development laboratory.”
   Radio antennas on underside of aircraft were used heavily for oceano-
   graphic and hydrological studies. Since remotely sensed data had to
   be verified with actual ground data, “complementary ground efforts
   are necessary during the research phase of the program.”
      In spacecraft program to begin in 1972, “ERTS satellites will be
   placed into a 920-kilometer [570-mi1, sun-synchronous (near polar)
   orbit. This will permit the satellite, with its narrow-angle sensors, to
   observe the same spot on Earth once every 18 days. It also ensures
   that observations are made with a nearly constant solar-illumination
   angle required for developing identification signatures. The altitude
   permits narrow-angle sensors to be used to obtain virtually undistorted
   images.” (NASA Release 71-74; GE Challenge, Summer 1971; Tran-
   script)
May 4: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin demon-
   strated LRV Rover for press at IGC. Newsmen were permitted to take
   turns driving vehicle at maximum 16-km-per-hr (10-mph) speed. Scott
   told press, “We expect this little buggy to work just fine on the moon.
   It’s really a very straightforward little vehicle, just like driving your
   own automobile.” On first LRV excursion, Scott and Irwin would drive
   about one kilometer (six tenths mile) from Apollo 15 landing site at
   Hadley Rille to west edge of foothill for Hadley Delta at average speed
   of eight kilometers per hour (five miles per hour). On second excur-

                                    120
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS7 1971                                       May 4

      sion next day, they would drive to location as far as eight kilometers
      (five miles) from landing site and seek place to climb front and survey
     valley. “We’ll be looking for bedrock or some unique feature that
      might have sprung up from the moon with the front,” Irwin told
      press. “If we see it and the trail upward looks traversable, we might
      climb as high as 600 ft [180 m] to get to it.” Third and last trip on
      third day on moon would take astronauts to edge of Hadley Rille and
      north along ravine to sample crater cluster that appeared to scientists
      to be volcanic in origin. On return, astronauts would park LRV 90 m
       (300 ft) east of LM with TV camera pointed directly at LM. Irwin
      told press if all went well worldwide TV audience would get first live
      picture of spacecraft rocketing off moon on first leg of return journey
      to earth. (O’Toole, W Post, 5/5/71)
    MSFC announced plans to launch 914mm (36-in) Stratoscope I1 balloon-
      borne astronomical telescope from MSFC in August. Objective of mission
      was to study Galaxies M31 and M32, Planetary Nebula (NGC 7662),
      Orion Nebula, and planet Saturn. Stratoscope I1 project management,
      previously directed by Princeton Univ., had been recently assigned to
      MSFC as part of project reorganization. Seven previous launches had
       been from National Center for Atmospheric Research‘s Scientific Bal-
      loon Flight Station at Palestine, Tex. (MSFC Release 71-78)
    Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong received 14th annual Sylvanus
      Thayer Award from U S . Military Academy Assn. of Graduates in
      ceremony at West Point, N.Y. Citation read: “For his selfless devotion
       to this nation’s aviation and space efforts reflecting the ideals symbol-
       ized in the West Point motto-Duty, Honor, Country. His outstanding
       accomplishments, spanning more than two decades of aeronautical his-
       tory, have made him an acknowledged leader among American space
       pioneers.”
           Earlier he received sabre from 1800-member cadet corps and told
       cadets, “As I stood on the Sea of Tranquility and looked up at the
       Earth, my impression was of the importance of the small, fragile,
       remote blue planet.” Asked about future of US. space programs,
       Armstrong told press, “I am certainly optimistic, but we’re doing con-
       siderably less than we’d like to. But space is here to stay for all
       humanity.” (NASA PAO; Everly, AP, NY Post, 5/5/71, 17)
    US. space program was “beyond the days of reacting to each major
0

       Soviet space event,” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator,
       said in speech before Aviation/Space Writers Assn. meeting in Wich-
                           FY
       ita, Kans. NASA’s 1972 request was typical of those to come for
       several years; “we have made no commitment to any new program
       beyond the 1972 budget.” In response to questions, Dr. Low said
       Soviet Salyut 1-Soyuz 1 mission was “not clearly successful or un-
                                 0
       successful.” It was “inconceivable” that total planned mission was
       48-hr (flight to rendezvous and dock briefly. But U.S.S.R. had “strong
       program. They are concentrating very hard on a major space effort.”
        (Aero Daily, 5/10/71)
    NASA planned to study “dial-a-plane” system in which computer would
        accept telephone requests, determine best aircraft itinerary to minimize
        trip lengths and passenger waiting, and provide effective air transpor-
       tation system for smaller cities and less densely populated areas, NASA
        announced. If studies proved concept feasible, proposal for demon-

                                       121
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 4

    stration project would be made to DOT and FAA, with NASA supplying
    route-scheduling computer and software. (NASA      Release 71-79)
  Spokesman for Army Corps of Engineers announced personnel at I<SC
    District Ofhe would be cut from 30 to 15, effective June 30. Change
    was “result of a greatly diminished workload for NASA and the Air
    Force in the Cape Kennedy area.” (Cocoa, Fla, Today, 5/5/71, B1)
  U.S.S.R. had been running more than seven years behind U S . in devel-
    opment of third-generation computers using integrated circuits,
    Mikhail Y. Rakovsky, Deputy Chairman of Soviet State Planning
    Committee, said at Moscow news conference. Integrated circuit com-
    puters had appeared in U S . in 1964 but were scheduled for produc-
    tion in U.S.S.R. under five-year plan that went into effect this year.
    U.S.S.R. ranked fifth among world’s computer users, behind U.S., West
    Germany, U.K., and Japan. (Shabad, NYT, 5/5/71,13)
  Bipartisan 115-member congressional group-Members of Congress for
    Peace Through Law-issued report criticizing proposed B-1 bomber
    aircraft as unnecessary, ineffective, and obsolete in nuclear age. Re-
    port was prepared by Sen. George S. McGovern (DS.D.) and Rep.
    John F. Seiberling (D-Ohio). (CR, 5/5/71, H3558-63)
May 4-6: Conference on aircraft safety and operating problems was held
    at LBRC. NASA speakers reported on supercritical wing work, effects of
    aircraft noise, general aviation aircraft experience, STOL operations,
    collision hazard warning, steep instrument approaches, ditching, trail-
    ing vortex, exhaust pollutants, and sonic booms. (NASA    Release 71-76;
    LaRC PIO)
May 5: USAF launched unidentified satellite from AFETR on Titan IIIC
    booster into eccentric orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 295-
    km (183.3-mi) perigee, 631-min period, and 26.4’ inclination. Ac-
    cording to press reports satellite was reconnaissance mission to monitor
    Soviet and Communist Chinese missile tests and provide 30-min warn-
    ing of long-range rocket attack. The 800-kg (1800-lb) satellite would
    be transferred to synchronous orbit and stationed over Asia at 36 000-
                                       SSR, 5/31/71; World Data Center A;
    km (22 300-mi) altitude. (GSFC
    SBD, 5/6/71,28; AP, B Sun, 5/6/71, AS)
  Tenth anniversary of first U S . manned space flight. Freedom 7-Mer-
    cury spacecraft launched May 5, 1961-had achieved objective of put-
    ting man into suborbital flight when Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.,
    went to 185-km (115-mi) altitude during 15-min flight. Anniversary
    was observed at ICSC with exhibition of Mercury spacecraft and Red-
    stone launch vehicle in main auditorium, motion pictures on Freedom 7
    and Apollo 14, and guided tours. Following commemorative ceremony,
    Shepard visited Freedom 7 Elementary School in Cocoa Beach, Fla.,
    where he told students he had made his last venture into space and
    would step aside to give younger astronauts a chance. (MSCRelease
    71-28; MSC PAO; W Star, 5/6/71)
* U.S.S.R.’s Salyut I orbital scientific station launched April 19 had com-
    pleted 425 orbits of earth by 1:OO pm Moscow time (6:OO am EDT).
    All systems were functioning normally. ( FBIS-SOV-71-95, 5/10/71,
    L11)
  NASA and DOT released information given in Joint DOT-NASA Civil
    Aviation Research and Development Policy Study Report dated March
     1971. Study had been recommended by Congress and made by NASA,

                                   122
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                        May 5




                                      May 5: Dedication ceremonies for the
                                      historic launch site at Kennedy Space
                                      Center marked the 10th anniversary of
                                      the first US. manned space flight, flown
                                      on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft.
                                      The first American to go into space,
                                      Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.-who
                                      also was commander of the Apollo 14
                                      lunar landing mission Jan. 31-Feb. 9 this
                                      year-stood by the plaque marking the
                                      site at Launch Complex 5/6 during cere-
                                      monies attended by 3000 guests. The site
                                      had been restored to its original condition.




    DOT, and FAA, with assistance from DOD, CAB, and eight other Federal
    agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved
    highest priority because OI widespread concern for environment and
    because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to
    other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least
    10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into com-
    munity background noise.
       Continued Federal support at high level of aeronauticaI R&D was
    necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&D was essential
    if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and
    if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional
    development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory
    role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by
    industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and
    recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agen-
    cies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel be-

                                   123
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 5

    tween aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA
    Release 71-82; Text; A v Wk,     5/10/71,20-1)
  Eastern Airlines signed conditional agreement with Lockheed Aircraft
    Corp. to purchase 50 L-1011 TriStar jet aircraft which it had pre-
    viously ordered. Eastern thus became first of nine companies with
    L - l o l l orders to reaffirm purchase agreement since February bank-
    ruptcy of’ Rolls-Royce, Ltd., manufacturer of aircraft’s RB-211 en-
    gines. (Bedingfield, N Y T , 5/6/71,63)
* Soviet pilots in Egypt were testing “superjets,” probably Mi&%,          ac-
    cording to diplomatic sources quoted by UPI in Boston Gbbe. Aircraft
    were understood to be capable of reaching altitudes to 24000 m
     (80 000 ft) and speeds up to three times speed of sound. They out-
    matched U.S. F 4 Phantoms used by Israeli air force. ( B Globe,
    5/5/7176 1
  USN was concerned that F-14 fighter aircraft might go into potentially
    dangerous flat, fast spin, Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (USN), F-14
    Project Manager, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed
    Services. (Transcript)
May 6 : U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 410 from Baykonur into orbit with 288-
    km (179-mi) apogee, 203-km (126-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and
    65’ inclination. Satellite reentered May 18. (SBD, 5/7/71, 39; GSFC
    SSR, 5/31/71)
  Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) introduced S. 1805, “to provide
    relocation assistance, training assistance, and interest supplements to
    adversely affected workers separated from their employment because
     of the termination of defense and space contracts.” (CR, 5/6/71,
    56341)
  After meeting with President Nixon at White House, Secretary of the
    Treasury John B. Connally, Jr., announced President’s intention to
    send to Congress request for legislation providing $250 million in loan
    guarantees for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (PD, 5/10/71, 738)
  Administration officials had been “playing politics with some of the most
     sensitive secrets that come into the Pentagon-namely, the intelligence
     gleaned from our space photography,” Jack Anderson said in Washing-
     ton Post. Satellite reconnaissance intelligence, known by code name
     CL
        Tango-Kilo” was so tightly guarded that some DOD intelligence analysts
     could not get clearance. “Yet Defense Secretary Me1 Laird and CIA
     Chief Richard Helms have been giving out selective T-K intelligence
     to favorite senators to win support for the defense budget.” ( W Post,
     5/6/71, F7)
  Federation of American Scientists issued report I s There an R&D Gap?
     Report examined DOD charges that U.S.S.R. R&D expenditures exceeded
     those of US. and would result in Soviet assumption of technological
     superiority. Conclusion reached was: “This entire episode has been a
     classical numbers game featuring selective disclosure, questionable
     assumptions, exaggeratedly precise estimates, misleading language, and
     alarmist nonsequiter conclusions.” There was “no claim, much less any
     evidence” that U.S.S.R. was spending more than U.S. on military tech-
     nological advances as measured by “military technology baseresearch,
     exploratory develapment and a fraction of advanced development.’’ No
     one had claimed to be able to measure Soviet expenditures in this
     category. “These expenditures would amount to a few billion at most

                                     124
                                                                     May 6
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   and be most difficult to estimate. Necessary expenditures become
   progressively larger as one moves from research on basic technological
   discoveries to development of weapons. This shows the extreme Hi$-
   culty in making meaningful comparisons on a financial basis of e f -
   forts to protect against technological surprise. Neither the funding nor
   numbers of personnel involved are a sensible measure of original
   technological advance. Of far greater importance is the organization
   and application of available intellectual and other resources.” (Senate
   Com on Armed Services, Hearings on FY 1972 Auth; Science, 8/29/71,
   707-9)
May 7 : U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk on one
   booster. Each satellite was about 0.8 m (2.5 f t ) in diameter, 0.9 m
    (3 ft) long, and weighed 36-45 kg (80-100 lbs). Cosmos 411 entered
   orbit with 1493-km (927.7-mi) apogee, 1317-km (818.3-mi) perigee,
   113.8-min period, and 74’ inclination. Others entered following orbits:
       Cosmos 412, 1536-km (954.4-mi) apogee, 1482-km (920.9-mi)
   perigee, 116.1-min period, and 74’ inclination;
      Cosmos 413, 1508-km (937-mi) apogee, 1476-km (917.2-mi) perigee,
   115.7-min period, and 74’ inclination;
      Cosmos 414, 1495-km (928.9-mi) apogee, 1428-km (887.3-mi)
   perigee, 115.1-min period, and 74,O inclination;
       Cosmos 41 5, 1501-km (932.7-mi) apogee, 1453-km (902.9-mi)
   perigee, 115.4-min period, and 74O inclination ;
       Cosmos 416, 1493-km (927.7-mi) apogee, 1373-km (853.1-mi)
   perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74’ inclination ;
       Cosmos 41 7, 1494-km (928.3-mi) apogee, 1345-km (835.7-mi)
   perigee, 114.1-min period, and 74O inclination ;
       Cosmos 418, 1494-km (928.3-mi) apogee, 1401-km (870.5-mi)
   perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74O inclination. (CSFC SSR, 5/31/71 ;
   SBD, 5/11/71, 53)
 Nonexplosive Sprint missile guided by Safeguard radar system success-
0

   fully intercepted Polaris missile warhead over Pacific Ocean during
   DOD test. DOD spokesman later said Sprint, launched from Kwajalein
   Missile Range in Pacific, had passed close enough to target fired from
   USN missile-firing ship U.S.S. Observation Island to have destroyed it if
    it had been armed with operational nuclear warhead. (UPI, W Post,
    5/13/71, A4)
 French President Georges Pompidou was passenger aboard Concorde 001,
    French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic airliner, in 75-min flight
    from Paris to Toulouse. Aircraft reached twice speed of sound. Later,
    Concorde 002, British prototype, was forced to turn back after taking
    off from Toulouse because of faulty landing gear. Aircraft circled for
   half hour at 600 m (2000 ft) but made perfect landing 38 min after
    takeoff. (Reuters, B Sun, 5/8/71)
 AIA President Karl G. Harr, Jr., told press in Washington, D.C., that
0


    aerospace industry employment would decline almost 12% during
    1971-much less than the 17%% loss in 1970. “This lends support
    to our expectations that 1972 will see a reversal of the declining em-
    ployment trends experienced during the past three years.” AIA fore-
    cast industry’s payroll would shrink by year’s end to 943 000 persons,
    first drop below one million since record keeping began in 1959. From
    1969 to 1970, industry had been forced to release more than one

                                    125
May 7                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   third of its labor force. AIA survey indicated aircraft industry employ-
   ment would decline by 67000 to 506000; missiles and space by
   39 000, to 291 000; and commercial transport aircraft by 14 000, to
   76 000. (AP, W Star, 5/7/71, A3)
 Wallops Station announced selection of Lockheed Aircraft Service Co.
   to receive $300 000, cost-plus-award-fee contract for aircraft mainte-
   nance and operations at Wallops Station. Contract would cover one
   year, beginning in July, with two one-year options. (WS Release 71-7)
 Library of Congress Congressional Research Service released report, The
   Soviet SST. Report by John D. Holmfeld summarized progress of
   Tu-144 from press reports and U S . and U.K. technical journals. Tu-144
   was “clearly an aircraft which is competitive with the Concorde.” It
   had 27.1-m (89-ft) wing span and Concorde’s was 25.6 m (84 ft) ;
   it was 56 m (184 ft) long and Concorde was 62.1 m (204 ft). Tu-144
   weighed 149 700 kg (330 000 lbs) ; Concorde weighed 174 600 kg
    (385000 lbs). Tu-144 would cruise at 2490 km per hr (1550 mph)
   at 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude; Concorde cruised at 2170 km per hr
    (1350 mph) at altitude of 18 000 m (60000 ft) . On New York-London
   route, Concorde flight time was estimated at 3 hrs and 30 min; Tu-144
   probably would require 3 hrs and 10 min. Tu-144 maximum range was
   estimated to be 6400 km (4000 mi). Tu-144 was powered by four
   Kuznetsov NK-144 turbofan engines with 127 480-newton (28 660-lb)
   thrust. Concorde’s four Rolls-Royce Olympus engines had 146 000-
   newton (32 825-1b) thrust. (Text)
May 7-8: Working Group on Philosophy, Science, and Technology met at
   MIT. NASA Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, reviewed
   US. space program: “It is improper, I believe, to claim the ability to
   assess at this time the impact of space on human history. Our involve-
   ment in space has not been an isolated event, nor even a short term
   episode, in man’s growing awareness of his universe and his built-in
   drive to dominate it. Space is simply another dimension of human
   endeavor, of success and failure, of progress and achievement. The
   reasons that the Space Age began when and how it did could be dis-
   cussed at length; the fact of the matter is that we stand now well
   within it, and cannot have the perspective to grasp its full implica-
   tions. But one can discern numerous impacts, many of which con-
   tribute in a variety of ways to our country and to the world. Among
   these contributions have already been: An uplifting of the human
   spirit, with an undoubtedly major impact on the human horizon, the
   scale of man’s thought, and his estimate of his own capabilities. The
   openink of a new frontier. Major advances in technology and in our
   expectation of technology. The development of practical applications,
   with the special long range impact of a quantum jump in communi-
   cations. Substantial contributions to the advancement of science and
   human knowledge. The exploration of our solar system.
      “These benefits are worth a substantial investment of the Nation’s
   resources, not to the neglect of other needs of our Nation and human-
   ity, but as part of our investment in the continuing future and strength
   of our Nation.” (Text)
May 8: Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) Mars probe, launched by NASA from ETR,
   Launch Complex 36, Pad A, at 9:11 pm EDT, failed to enter orbit
   when Centaur stage of Atlas-Centaur booster malfunctioned after nor-

                                   126
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   May 8

     mal countdown and liftoff. Anomalies began to appear with Centaur
     main engine start. Centaur stage oscillated in pitch in diverging man-
     ner and subsequently tumbled out of control, engines shut down from
     starvation caused by tumbling, and Centaur and spacecraft separated
     and reentered earth’s atmosphere approximately 1500 km (900 mi)
     down range and 400 km (250 mi) north of Puerto Rico.
        Failure investigation team composed of LeRC, General Dynamics
     Convair Div., KSC, and JPL personnel had been established to deter-
     mine cause of failure and recommend corrective action required before
     launching Mariner-I. (NASA Proj Off)
  Interview with T u - l U designer, Academician Aleksey N. Tupolev, was
     published in Pravda. Asked to comment on report Tu-144 would go
     into commercial service before Concorde Anglo-French supersonic air-
     liner, Tupolev said: “In accordance with world standards, a new plane
     must fly several million kilometers before it is granted a ladder for the
     boarding of the first passengers. Many stages of development and test-
     ing are already behind the TU-144. And things here are good abso-
     lutely according to the program.” (FBIS-SOV-71-97, 5/17/71, L13)
May 9: Of0 Orbiting Frog Otolith satellite, launched by NASA Nov. 9, 1970,
     reentered atmosphere. Mission had been adjudged successful Dec. 11,
     1970. All objectives-including maintenance of two bullfrogs in space
     to obtain information on functioning and adaptability in weightlessness
     of vestibule, portion of inner ear which controlled balance-had been
     achieved. (GSFC SSR, 5/31/71)
* First detailed Soviet analysis of US.plan for Grand Tour of outer planets
     was reported by New York Times. In Vestnik, principal publication of
     Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet space expert Timur M. Eneyev had
     suggested that four missions covering two planets each might be more
     successful than the two missions to three planets contemplated by NASA.
     He indicated Soviet scientists favored approach of delivering automatic
     space stations to outer planets and suspending them by balloons in
     planetary atmosphere. He said technique, “for all its exotic aspects and
     difficulties of realization, is probably the most promising because it
     would yield far more data about the nature of the giant planets than
     could be obtained from fly-by trajectories.’’ (Shabad, NYT, 5/9/71)
May 10: Dr. James C. Fletcher held first press conference as NASA Admin-
     istrator. In response to questions Dr. Fletcher said strength of US.
     depended critically on development of new technology. “And this means
     new technology of all kinds-electronics, computers, materials, as well
                                                             ..
     as military technology. And I think that’s . . . why NASA . programs
     should be vigorously pursued.’’ NASA had studied possibility of second
     Skylab and “many other manned missions in space, most of them some-
     what cheaper than the second Skylab; and we intend to look at these
                                                                   ..    . the
     very carefully to see what programs, if any, made sense after
     first Skylab is flown.” Dr. Fletcher thought NASA STOL experimental
     aircraft program was “long overdue.”
        Asked his personal plans for NASA, Dr. Fletcher said, “I can’t say
     that I want to go in a new direction from the way NASA has been
     going, except maybe up instead of down.” He was interested in inter- .
     national cooperation in space and “whole business of commercial use
     of the things that NASA has been developing,” including “strides in the
     applications satellites area.” He was “great supporter of the shuttle,”

                                   127
May 10                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     and had been “for many years before coming to NASA.” With develop-
                                                             ..
     ment of shuttle, or “a cheap transfer system to orbit . it’ll open up
     all kinds of new things you can do in space. Since the costs will be
    much less-the costs per launch will be so much less. That is, all kinds
    of new applications, all kinds of new science programs, new manned,
    near-earth programs, almost anything you can think of can be done
    much cheaper once you have the shuttle developed.” With sufficient
    funds, NASA would probably pursue space station. “But in my judg-
    ment, if you have to decide between the shuttle and the space station,
    you pick the shuttle first because you have to have that for the
    second.” (Transcript)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 419 from Baykonur into orbit with 340-km
     (211.3-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 87.5-min period, and
    51.5” inclination. Satellite reentered May 12. (SBD, 5/18/71, 88;
    GSFC SSR, 5/31/71)
  NASA announced signing of contract with Telesat Canada under which
    NASA would launch two Telesat satellites for Canadian Domestic Com-
    munications System. Telesat’s Anik (Eskimo for “brother”) satellites
    would each provide 12 RF channels-10 for commercial use and two
    in reserve. Each RF channel would be capable of carrying one color
    TV channel or up to 960 voice channels. System would be first opera-
    tional comsat system established entirely for domestic communications.
    Two satellites would be launched from KSC, one in late 1972 or early
    1973 and one six months later. Telesat would reimburse NASA for
    Thor-Delta booster and launch services and would have options for
    additional launches as required. (NASA Release 71-85)
  LRV qualification test unit, replica of flight LRVS, was delivered to MSFC
    by Boeing Co., prime LRV contractor. Second flight model LRV, sched-
    uled for use on January 1972 Apollo 16 mission, would be turned over
    to NASA May 12 and stored at Boeing’s Kent, Washington, Space
    Center until after Apollo 15 mission in July 1971. (MSFC Release 71-80)
  MSFC announced new projects in research program on application of
    remote sensing techniques. Land-use survey of five north Alabama
    counties would photograph area from air with remote sensing camera
    to study how land was being used. Results would be used by Top of
    Alabama Regional Council of Governments. In “ground truth survey”
    with Alabama A&M Univ., MSFC would supplement aerial photography ;
    university personnel would make sample ground study to correlate
    remote sensing information. (MSFC Release 71-79)
* Experiments by airlines to fill “growing gap in transportation for small
    isolated communities” caused by rising operating costs of larger air-
    craft, loss of train service, and steady population drop were described
    in New York Times. Frontier Airlines was using 15-passenger Beech-
    craft 99s to serve seven communities in rural Nebraska, Wyoming, and
    South Dakota. Trans-Texas International Airlines was using Beechcraft
    on some routes and planned to evaluate other small aircraft as replace-
    ment for full sized airliners, and Allegheny Airlines had turned over
    its service in 16 cities to nine small air taxi lines, some of which used
    Beechcraft 99s.
       More than 50 small towns had lost regularly scheduled air service
    in past five years. Growing number of independent air taxi commuter
    airlines using 10- to 20-passenger aircraft were gaining economic sta-

                                    128
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                     May 10

    bility, improving safety records, and carrying increasing number of
    passengers over short routes that regular airlines did not want. (Lind-
    sey, NYT, 5/10/71,29)
May 10-14: International Solar Energy Society held conference at GSFC.
    In keynote speech Dr. Manfred Altman, Univ. of Pennsylvania nuclear
    engineer, said there was “great need” for US. and other countries to
    develop energy sources “for which they will not have to compete.”
    There was “total absence of air and water pollution” in use of solar
    energy. “We are facing an uncertain future as far as energy resources
    and energy converters are concerned. One thing which we have learned
     . . . in the aerospace industry is that one cannot make choices among
    alternatives unless they are all roughly at the same stage of develop-
    ment. Let us make sure that solar energy is brought up to the level
    of the other contenders-lest we make poor choices later on. Solar
    energy is not just a dream-if we will it-it can play a major, bene-
    ficial role in our lifetime.” (CR, 6/4/71, S8262)
May 1 : NASA announced availability of new publications: Space Shuttle
       1
    Technologies, F Y 1971 Programs, compilation of 110 projects making
    up NASA shuttle technology program, described projects and listed FY
    1971 funding for each.
        Significant NASA Inventions Available for Licensing in Foreign
    Countries listed abstracts of inventions in which NASA owned principal
    or exclusive rights and which were available for patent licensing in
    various countries. (NASA Special Release ; NASA Release 71-83)
* General Dynamics Corp. demonstrated CL-215 Air Tanker over Anacostia
    River in Washington, D.C. Amphibious aircraft scooped up 5.5 cu m
     (1440 gal) of water from river, took off, and released water from two
    2.7-cu-m (720-gal) tanks to show what it could do to forest fire.
    General Dynamics was interested in selling three CG215s at $1.4
    million each to US. Forest Service, Washington Post reported. (Barnes,
    W Post, 5/12/71, B1)
  Visit to US. by Soviet Americanologist Georgy Arbatov reflected con-
    tinuing tension between US. and U.S.S.R., Joseph Kraft said in Balti-
    more Sun. While Arbatov had been received cordially “in very high
    places,” difficulties arose “whenever conversations came round to spe-
    cifics.” Subject of strategic arms had been particularly thorny, “for
    the Russians appear to be forcing the pace in the arms race with the
    new holes apparently set out for deployment of an improved SS-9 or
    some other monster weapon.” (B Sun, 5/11/71, 17)
  New York Times editorial advocated reimbursement by Government of
9

     airlines’ investment in SST: “The bill which the SST lobby seeks to
    amend is a Supplemental Appropriations bill that contains money for
    the Government’s closing costs arising from cancellation of the contract
     for the plane. The bill does provide an opportunity for the Govern-
     ment to consider its debt of honor to the airlines. They were strongly
     advised by the Department of Transportation in 1967 to advance money
    to the Boeing Company, to be credited against the future purchase of
    SST’S. The airlines realistically recognized that this was risk capital if
    the plane should prove a technological failure, but in view of the
     Federal Government’s insistent if unwise pressure in behalf of the
     plane, they had good reason to rely upon continued Government back-

                                     129
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 11

    ing for the project. Although the $58.5-million involved is not a legal
    obligation, Congress should honor this commitment.” (NYT, 5/11/71)
May 12: USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Cecil A. Powell
    (USAF) in joint NASA-USAF research program, reached 21 000-m
    (70000-ft) altitude and mach 1.35 during 26th flight after air launch
    from B-52 aircraft from FRC. Objectives were to determine lateral-
    directional derivative with rudder bias at 2 toe out, check out lateral
                                                 O
    acceleration feedback to control system, and check out automatic mach
    schedule for upper flaps. (NASA Proj Off)
* Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
    MSC experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned
    satisfactorily. (SR list)
         work on quiet engines was described by Roy P. Jackson, Associ-
  NASA’s
    ate Administrator, OART, at 1971 Society of Automotive Engineers
    Meeting in Atlanta, Ga.: ‘‘The first objective of our work on design
    principle for quiet engines is an experimental CTOL [conventional-
    takeoff-and-landing] engine and nacelle with 15 to 20 PNdb [per-
    ceived noise in decibels] less noise than the comparable JT3D class of
    engines in service today. Program began in 1969 and would be com-
    pleted by end of 1972. General Electric co. and NASA’s        LeRC were
    working together on program. “It is on schedule and should meet or
    surpass the noise reduction objectives. We believe that production of
    quiet engines using this technology could begin to be available for
                                                   .
    retrofit and new aircraft beginning in 1976. . . Such quiet engine
    installation in aircraft and the size of the 707 and DC-8 could permit
    this class of aircraft to operate fully 10 db lower than the present FAR
    36 standard for new aircraft.” NASA expected “to continue technology
    that will show how to drive the noise level down another significant
    increment like 6 db within a few years.” Aircraft “the size of the 707
    should be able to operate at a noise level of 92 EPNdb [effective per-
    ceived noise in decibels]. Our objective is to develop the necessary
    technology for this by 1977. Production engines meeting such noise
    standards could then be developed by industry through normal devel-
    opment and certification cycles and be available for next-generation
    aircraft of all types beginning in the late 1970’s or early 1980’s.’’
     (Text)
  House, in Committee of the Whole, agreed to amendment to H.R. 8190,
    supplemental FY 1972 appropriations bill, to appropriate $85.3 mil-
    lion for continued SST development. Record teller vote was 201 to 195,
    with 2 voting “present.” After committee rose on request, for separate
    vote, SST amendment was agreed to by vote of 201 to 197. (CR,
    5/12/71. H3837-62)
* President Nixon congratulated House for reversing earlier position on
     Federal funding for SST: “Congress has today taken an important first
     step on behalf of thousands of workers across the country who have
     been engaged in the SST program-and whose vital skills and experi-
     ence might otherwise be lost to the Nation.” (PD, 5/17/71, 755)
  LM similar to those used on Apollo 11, 12, and 14 was placed on perma-
    nent display at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Mu-
    seum. ( W Post, 5/7/71, B1; Smithsonian PIO)
  NASA released Apolb 11 Misswn Report (NASA SP-238) , summarizing
     events and results of July 16-24, 1969, Apollo 11 manned lunar land-

                                    130
                                                                         May 12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    ing mission. Report was for sale by National Technical Information
    Service in Springfield, Va. (Text)
  New York State Court of Appeals approved sale of Cornel1 Aeronautical
    Laboratory to EDP Technology, Inc., affirming lower court ruling that
    sale of research facility to private firm was legal. ( W Post, 5/13/71,
    K11)
May 13: Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite-launched Dec.
     12, 1970-was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had completed
    full systematic scanning of galactic plane and substantially complete
    scan (95% ) of celestial sphere. Experiment instrumentation was func-
    tioning in outstanding manner, exceeding many design objectives.
    Spacecraft control section performance-except for tape recorder and
     slight decrease in telemetry modulation, which had not affected data
     quality-was excellent. Acquired scientific data had touched on every
     aspect of observational x-ray astronomy and significant unexpected
    phenomena had been observed. Discovery of three new x-ray pulsars-
     Cygnus X-1, Centaurus X-3, and Lupus X-1-revealed             class of pul-
     sating x-ray source that differed in many respects from previously
     known x-ray pulsar in Crab Nebula. (NASA Proj Off)
  Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
0

     MSC experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned
     satisfactorily. (SR list)
* Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 8190, sup-
     plemental FY 1972 appropriations bill that contained $85.3-million
     for further SST development.
        In New York Times Richard Witkin said bipartisan House effort
     to resurrect SST program, led by minority leader Rep. Gerald R. Ford
      (R-Mich.) , had been “kept at low key so as not to alert the opposition.”
     Knowing issue could be raised when H.R. 8190 came up, “rescue team”
     had “sounded out colleagues to see if the job layoffs and other effects
     of the SST’S defeat had raised doubts in the minds of some who had
     voted to cancel the program.” Help had been enlisted from Adminis-
     tration and from AFL President George Meany. (CR, 5/13/71, D412;
     NYT, 5/13/71, 26)
* Federal court in Orlando, Fla., had dismissed $5-million damage suit
     filed by widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967,
     Apollo spacecraft fire, on grounds it was filed after statute of limitations
     expired, Washington Post reported. (V Post, 5/13/71, A9)
* MSC announced selection of Dynalectron Corp. Land-Air Div. to receive
     $1805 000, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract for support services
     at White Sands Test Facility, N. Mex. (MSC Release 71-33)
* William M. Allen, Boeing Co. Chairman, received 1970 Robert J. Collier
     Trophy during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Citation was to “the
     Boeing Company as leader of the Industry-Airline-Government team
     which successfully introduced the 747 into commercial service with
     particular recognition to Pratt & Whitney division of the United Air-
     craft Corporation and to Pan American World Airways.” (NAA
      Release)
  USAF cleared 40 F-111s to fly after main parachute compartments had
      been fitted with new ejection explosives. Entire F-111 fleet had been
      restricted April 29 following April 23 crash near Edwards AFB, Calif.,
     that killed both crewmen. (UPI, NYT, 5/15/71,9)

                                       131
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 13

  President Nixon designated Robert C. Tyson Chairman of U S . delega-
    tion to World Administrative Radio Conference for Space Telecommu-
    nications in Geneva, June 7 through July 17. (PD, 5/17/71, 759)
  Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee
    on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, submitted to Senate resolutions
    authorizing printing of Committee reports International Cooperation in
    Outer Space: A Symposium and Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70 as
    Senate documents. (CR, 5/13/71,5684&5)
May 14: Three men would spend up to 56 days in MSC altitude chamber in
    early 1972 to obtain medical data and evaluate medical experiment
    equipment for Skylab program, NASA announced. Test would closely
    simulate Skylab conditions so that differences observed during actual
    flight might be attributed to causes such as weightlessness which could
    not be simulated in chamber tests. Test would evaluate 16 medical
    experiments and selected items of experiment equipment and aid in
     training ground-based medical operations team for their participation
     during actual space flight. Chamber was 6 m (20 ft) in diameter and
     was being modified to resemble Skylab Workshop crew quarters. At-
     mosphere would be 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen at 34.5 kilonew-
     tons per sq m ( 5 psi) pressure with 45% to 60% humidity. (NASA
     Release 7 1-86 )
  Evidence obtained by two Aerobee sounding rockets launched from WSMR
     March 14, 1969, supported “closed universe theory” that expanding
     universe would slow down and then reverse itself until cosmos com-
     pressed again into fireball, team of NRL and Johns Hopkins Univ.
     scientists said in Nature. X-ray telescopes aboard rockets had observed
     x-ray flux in Coma and Virgo galaxies 20 times as great as would
     have been expected from individual galaxies. This proved gas in clus-
     ters was different from intergalactic gas and supported theory that
     gases were spread around universe in sufficient density to bring on
     collapse of universe. (Meekins, Fritz, et al., Nature, 5/14/71, 107-8)
* Lockheed Aircraft Corp. issued statement saying it would be forced into
     bankruptcy if it could not find sufficient financing for G l O l l TriStar
     airbus. Bankruptcy could “create great confusion, greatly increased
     costs to the government and displacements and hazards for Lockheed
     employes and shareholders.” (Text)
  MSC announced issuance of RFPS on $400000 design study of space shut-
     tle auxiliary propulsion system. Study would define oxygen-hydrogen
     system compatible for use in both booster and orbital vehicles. (MSC
      Release 71-35)
May 16: MSC announced issuance of RFPS for technological development of
     new surface materials that could stand environmental extremes ex-
      pected to be experienced by space shuttle. MSC would award fixed-
     price contract to company that designed and developed best ceramic
     insulator. (MSC Release 71-36)
May 17: Completion of first phase of high-altitude photography for joint
      NASA, Dept. of Agriculture, and cornbelt states 1971 Corn Blight
      Watch Experiment [see April 71 was announced by NASA. RB-57F
      aircraft based at Scott AFB, Ill., had obtained black and white photos
      of areas of cornbelt region to orient personnel using remote aerial
      sensors and ground observations to study possible southern corn leaf
      blight during 1971 growing season. Second phase, to obtain baseline

                                     132
                                                                      May 17
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    color infrared photos, was in progress for completion later in month.
    Infrared photos would be used for analysis of soil conditions before
    emergence of corn crop. Third phase, from June to September, would
    consist of high-altitude infrared photography in test areas every two
    weeks. (NASA Release 71-88)
  U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed six months of lunar explo-
    ration and was still functioning satisiactorily. Pravda reported vehicle
     was being activated on a month-to-month basis by Crimea tracking
     station. According to Pravda, Lunokhod 1’s systems “began to give
     out” at beginning of fifth lunar day in early April, but recuperated.
     “Now at the height of the sixth lunar day the vehicle, heeding com-
     mand from earth, continues to live, work and move about as if it
     [were] only yesteday, and not Nov. 17 [ 19701, that it descended from
     the landing stage that had brought it to the Sea of Rains. The viability
     of the Lunokhod’s design had turned out to be far greater than its
    creators expected.” (NYT, 5/18/71)
* D. J. Fink, Vice President of .General Electric Co. and General Manager
     of Space Div., told Ninth International Symposium on Space Tech-
     nology and Science in Tokyo that US. did not have monopoly on
     earth resources programs. “A11 of us need the ingenuity of the entire
     world on how to utilize this technology, so I encourage your expanding
     participation and cooperation.” (GE Reprint)
            13
   NASA’s scientist-astronauts were -‘fuming,” Thomas O’Toole said in
     Washington Post. They had been selected to be members of Apollo
     crews landing on moon, primarily as geologists, and members of Sky-
     lab crews, as physicians, physicists, and chemists. But “no geologist
     has landed on the moon yet, and only one has a chance of making it,”
     O’Toole said. Among names of nine prime Skylab crew members and
     six backups recently circulated at MSC, three prime and two backup
     members were scientists and “this enraged the scientists who were
     hoping for two-thirds representation on Skylab.” Three meetings had
     taken place between scientist-astronauts and senior NASA officials-
      Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and
     Applications; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Associate Administrator ; and
      Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight.
      Scientist-astronauts had asked for more freedom in developing their
      scientific careers. O’Toole said NASA officials had been said to be sym-
      pathetic, “but the gripe about getting their own experiments aboard
      Skylab fell on deaf ears.” ( W Post, 5/17/71, A l )
   Eastern Airlines announced it was introducing advanced magnetometer
      at departure gates of major airports in US., Puerto Rico, and Virgin
      Islands to detect potential hijackers carrying weapons. Device, with
      existing equipment, could provide Eastern with 100% screening capa-
      bility, according to Eastern Manager of Operational Safety Jack E.
      Shields. (NYT, 5/19/71,45)
 May 18: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 420 from Baykonur into orbit with
      248-km (154.1-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 88.9-min
      period, and 51.7O inclination. Satellite reentered May 29. (GSFC SSR,
      5/31/71)
 * Benefits of US.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space under agreements signed
      by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences in October 1970 and January
      1971 were described by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Adminis-

                                     133
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 18

    trator for International Affairs, during testimony before House Com-
    mittee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International
    Cooperation in Science and Space: “If a cautious optimism proves
    justified, we can expect definite benefits. Each side will gain access to
    lunar materials from sites additional to those it had explored on its
    own. We will nearly double the coverage of our operational meteoro-
    logical satellites. We shall have created a global network for sounding
    rocket observations of basic importance to world meteorological re-
    search. We shall have demonstrated a mutual participation in earth
    resources survey work. We can greatly expand our knowledge of the
    behavior of man in flight through data on Soviet missions in addition
    to our own. We shall make it possible to avoid any undesirable dupli-
    cation of scientific work in space, to plan complementary missions,
     and to verify anomalous results-all helping us to develop opportu-
    nities for more rational and economic conduct of space science and
    exploration.” Successful performance of rendezvous and docking agree-
     ment ‘‘will give us greater flexibility in space emergencies and for
     joint activities in space which could go a long way toward reducing
     international tensions and demonstrating common human interest.”
     (Testimony)
* Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R-Mich.) introduced for Sen. Edward J. Gurney
     (R-Fla.) S.R. 101, “to authorize and request the President to issue
     a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as ‘National Moon Walk
     Day.’ ” (CR, 5/18/71, S7165)
  FAA released annual statistical report on aircraft landing facilities in U S .
     and its territories : Airports, heliports, and seaplane bases totaled
     11261 as of Dec. 31, 1970-net increase of 211 over end of 1969.
     Included were 20 facilities in Puerto Rico, 4 in Virgin Islands, and 1   1
     in South Pacific Island territories. During 1970, 204 airports, 35
     heliports, and 11 seaplane bases had been reported abandoned. Of
     national total, 4260 landing facilities were classified as publicly owned
     and 7001 as privately owned and operated. (FAARelease 71-68)
May 19: U.S.S.R. launched Mars 2 probe toward Mars from Baykonur at
     9:23 pm local time (12:23 pm EDT). At 10:59 pm Baykonur time
      (159 pm EDT) spacecraft was injected into flight trajectory for Mars
     from “artificial earth satellite” in terrestrial orbit, according to Tass.
     Instruments were said to be working normally and flight was said to
     be close to calculated course.
        Primary objective of six-month, 470-million-km (292-million-mi)
     mission, Tass said, was to conduct complex research of Mars and its
     atmosphere and study characteristics of solar plasma, cosmic rays,
     and radiation along Mars route. Satellite was scheduled to reach Mars
     vicinity in November, when planet was 129 million km (80 million mi)
     from earth. Mars 2 was said to weigh 4650 kg (10 250 1bs)-almost
     five times weight of 1000-kg (2200-lb) Mariner-I scheduled for
     launch by NASA toward end of May. Size of Mars 2 had led U.S.
     space experts to predict that it might attempt Mars orbit.
        Mars 1, launched Nov. 1, 1962, had failed when radio contact was
     lost 106 million km (66 million mi) from earth. Zond 2, launched
     Nov. 30, 1964, had also ended in communication failure. (GSFC SSR,
     5/31/71; SBD, 5/21/71, 112; Shabad, NYT, 5/20/71, 1; FBIS-SOV-
     98-71,5/20/71, L1; A&A, 1962; 1963; 1964)
                                                                       May 19
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 421 from Plesetsk into orbit with 464km
     (288.3-mi) apogee, 273-km (169.6-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and
     70.9’ inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 8. (GSFC SSR, 5/31/71;
     11/30/71; SBD, 5/21/71,119)
  Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Avia-
     tor’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong,
     Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., cere-
     mony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams
     and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in VTOL
     aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot.
      ( W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
* Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
     MSC experiment to study uv spectra. Rocket and instruments func-
     tioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Vanguard satellite whose launch had been attempted Dec. 6, 1957, was
     presented to National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institu-
     tion, by Dr. John P. Hagen, former director of U.S. IGY satellite pro-
     gram. Spherical payload of Test Vehicle 3 (TV-3), first complete
     Vanguard launch vehicle with three live stages, had been thrown
     clear when vehicle exploded on pad. (NASA Hist Off; Vanguard-A
     History, SP-4202,1970)
* Senate, by unanimous vote of 94, passed H.R. 8190, supplemental FY
      1972 appropriations bill that authorized use of $10 million provided
      in Independent Offices and HUD Appropriations Act, 1971, for im-
      provements to MTF/Slidell Computer Complex. Before passage Senate
      voted 58 to 37 to strike from bill $85.3 million for continued SST
      development and, by vote of 92 to 3, adopted amendment appropri-
      ating $155.8 million for expenses to terminate SST program. Expenses
      included $58.5 million refund to airlines; $85.3 million refund to
      Boeing Co., prime airframe contractor, and to General Electric Co.,
      prime engine contractor; and $12 million to cover administrative
      costs. Earlier, White House Press Secretary Ronald L. Ziegler had
      told press Administration had decided after May 18 meeting with
      Boeing officials that it would cost more to continue with SST develop-
      ment than to terminate program. Bocing had added condition to com-
      pletion of contract; condition called for development, at $350-million
       cost, of quieter engine for prototypes. (CR, 5/19/71, S7343-63,
       S7442-56; Lyons, W Post, 5/20/71, A l ; WSJ, 5/21/71, 1)
   NASA announced award of $61.6-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to
       General Electric Co. for hardware development of Earth Resources
      Technology Satellite ( ERTS) system. Under provisions of award-which
      definitized July 27, 1970, letter contract-GE would develop two flight
       spacecraft ( ERTS-A and ERTS-B) , provide equipment and services
       needed for GSFC ground data-handling system, and develop spacecraft
       receiver and six ground platforms for remote-site data-coIIection-system
       experiment. (NASA Release 71-89)
 * Administration officials expected U.S.S.R. to test-fire SS-9 ICBMS within
       few months, New York Times reported. Two silos were being rebuilt
       at Baykonur test center in Kazakhstan to same dimensions as larger
       silos that had been appearing all over western Russia since December.
       (Beecher, NYT, 5/19/71,1)

                                      135
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 20

May 20: NASA held Hq. news conference on Mariner status. Dr. George M.
    Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, reported on failure of May 8
    Mariner-H launch. Review by JPL, LeRC, and General Dynamics Con-
    vair Div. personnel had isolated failure to integrated circuit in pitch
    channel of rate gyro preamplifier in Centaur stage autopilot. When
   Atlas-Centaur ignited, “amplifier output was . . . only 20 to 40 percent
    of what it should be.” Second anomaly had been noted 25 sec after
   main engines started; “engines did not gimbal all the way to the stops.
         .
    . . At 1.2 degrees they stopped and hung up. So the signal for the
    first 20 or 25 seconds indicated that the engines oscillated with in-
   creasing amplitude in response to autopilot signals but the signals were
                                                   .
   at a lower gain than they should have been. . . With the engine then
   thrusting at an angle, the vehicle wound up and started tumbling.”
   Amplifier had functioned properly during checkout 40 min before
   liftoff, “so sometime between T-30 minutes and the Atlas sustainer
   engine shutdown ignition of the Centaur stage, this component failed.”
   Investigators had assumed “that we had in the circuit a failed diode
   or a diode with a loose connection in it, that a voltage transient during
                     .
   powered flight . . then got into the integrated circuit and caused all
   of the other events.”
       To avoid repetition of anomaly, NASA was “subjecting the autopilot
   cans to additional temperature cycling and vibration tests” to ascertain
   they were operating within limits “under some off-nominal conditions.”
   New test was being conducted on autopilots for Mariner-I Atlas-Centaur
   23 “to make sure that the diodes are indeed there and properly func-
                                                              .
   tioning and properly protecting the integrated circuit . . before we
   fly again.”
       Failure of three Atlas-Centaurs in 15 flights had led to appraisal of
   LC
      general quality of the vehicle,” Dr. Low said. Conclusion “was that,
   if anything, quality has improved. There is no trend away from im-
                    ..
   proving quality. .”
       Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Associate Administrator, OSSA, described
   checkout problem with propellant utilization in Atlas-Centaur 23. Short
   had been discovered in system that measured amount of hydrogen and
   oxygen in tanks and controlled flow of each propellant to engine.
   “Therefore it became necessary to open the tank and get inside to
   locate the fault, find it and fix it.” Reassembly was expected to be
   completed by weekend and five- to seven-day checkout on Mariner-I
   begun. Launch date could occur from May 28 until June 6 with good
   launch windows available. (Transcript)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, reviewed NASA program before
   25th annual conference of AIAA Board of Governors in Williamsburg,
   Va.: “This country needs space programs that move out vigorously to
   create new technology. A space effort that limps along on yesterday’s
   knowhow will not do much for the country. A slow program may cost
   less, but be worth nothing in terms of meeting the country’s needs.
   And a slow program-or no program-is all we are going to have with-
                                             .
   QUt the strong support of the public. . . We should invent and fly
   more self-supporting satellites. We are seeking and getting valuable
                                                                       ..
   scientific knowledge from space we could not get in any other way .
   about the Earth and its atmosphere, the sun and the planets, and the
   universe. And about man himself.’’ National security was at stake.

                                   136
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   May 20

    “It would not be safe for the United States, with its great responsi-
    bilities for world peace, to lag behind any other country in space
    technology. This is an axiom we did not quibble about in the ’60s and
    should not quibble about in the ’70s.” Space program had proved
    “excellent hotbed for forcing new technology, which in turn raises our
    national productivity and prosperity and increases our ability to solve
    pressing social problems of today’s urban society.” Finally, space ex-
    ploration was needed as inspiration for modern man. “I think we are
    inspired, and our children are inspired, to be living in an age when
    man first moved out into space and began the exploration of our solar
    system. I think we should be ashamed of ourselves, as a society, if
    we withdrew from space exploration now after such an auspicious
    beginning.” (Text)
* Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was named Deputy Director of Science
    and Applications at MSC. Veteran of four space flights totaling nearly
    30 days in space, Lovell would assist in overall management of Science
    and Applications Directorate. (NASA Special Release ; wsc Release
    71-34)
  NASA-inspired Earth Awareness Foundation-nonprofit, educational and
    advisory body originated by NASA officials and Apollo astronauts-
    marked first anniversary. Group was chartered to develop community
    solutions to environmental problems using NASA-developed knowledge
    to maximum extent practicable. During first year group had estab-
    lished community chapters called “Earth I Care” clubs, mostly on
    school campuses ; started “Summer Scientist” program to study pollu-
    tion; established newsletter; presented awards for concern with en-
    vironmental quality ; and produced slides and films on environment
    from NASA photos taken in orbital flight. (MSCPAO)
  President Nixon announced agreement between U.S. and U.S.S.R. “to
    concentrate this year on working out agreement for the limitation of
    the deployment of antiballistic missile systems (ABMs)” and to “agree
    on certain measures with respect to the limitation of offensive strategic
    weapons.” Agreement had been made “in the conviction that it will
    create more favorable conditions for further negotiations to limit all
    strategic arms.” President called agreement “major step in breaking
     the stalemate on nuclear arms talks.” Agreement was announced
    simultaneously in Moscow. (PD, 5/24/71,783)
  House, by rollcall vote of 116 to 157, rejected entire sum of $155.8
     million that had been approved by Senate May 19 for termination of
     SST program. Senate and House conferees then met in executive ses-
    sion to resolve differences between Senate and House versions of
    H.R. 8109, supplemental FY 1972 appropriations bill.
       At evening session, House agreed by voice vote to include in bill
     $97.3 million for SST termination costs, but rejected inclusion of
     $58.5 million for refunds to airlines. (CR, 5/20/71, D449; 5/21/71,
    57594)
  Plans for offshore airport in Atlantic Ocean off Long Beach, N.Y., were
     described by Lawrence Lerner of Litton Industries Environetics Div.
     at national convention of NoIsE-organization to represent persons
     bothered by aircraft noise. Called ctvetp~rt,’7    facility designed to
     handle jet aircraft would consist of 14-km (9-mi) platform 8 km (5 mi)
     offshore, constructed on reinforced concrete. Facility could be pre-

                                    137
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 20

    fabricated on land and floated to its location. With nine runways in
    operation, wetport could serve 50% more air traffic than New York’s
    airports combined. “Fingers” of structure would contain basins and
    harbors for 80 to 120 ships. (Carper, Y Post, 5/21/71)
May 21: Draft treaty to establish new organization to operate worldwide
    comsat system was approved by 73 of 79 nations holding membership
    in INTELSAT. Key provisions of treaty included creation of new policy-
    making board of governors on which US. control would shrink from
    52% to 40%, appointment of new director general to assume control
    of INTELSAT system currently operated by ComSatCorp, new six-year
    contract with ComSatCorp for continued operation and technical man-
    agement of INTELSAT system, and limitation of board of governors to
    12 nations that used INTELSAT most. Board actions on important mat-
    ters were to require two-thirds vote. No single nation nor any three-
    nation group would be able to block decision under board‘s considera-
    tion. Agreement could be amended either by two thirds of members
    holding two thirds of investment or by 85% of members holding 45%
    of investment. Signatories would meet every year to determine member-
    ship shares on which seats on board would be based.
                                                                      .
       Following approval of agreement, President Nixon said: “. . this
    kind of breakthrough, through which it will be possible to have instant
    communication around the world, will reduce the ignorance. It will
    increase the information. It will reduce those areas of difference which
    exist because of ignorance and lack of information to a minimum.”
     (W Star, 5/21/71 ; PD, 5/24/71, 786-7; INTELSAT PIO)
* President Nixon presented National Medal of Science to nine scientists
    in White House ceremony. Recipients, announced Jan. 27, included
    Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics
    Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space
    Flight. ( P D , 5/24/71,784)
* Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, scientist-astronaut selected in August 1967,
    had been granted one-year leave from NASA for teaching and medical
    research at Baylor Univ. School of Medicine in Houston, NASA an-
    nounced. Dr. Holmquest would pursue “sub-specialty studies in the
    field of nuclear medicine in addition to general medical research and
    research related to NASA programs, such as a more convenient method
    of measuring changes in body calcium.yyHe would return to astronaut
    program May 15,1972. (MSC Release 71-73)
  Senate voted 27 to 25 to adopt conference report on H.R. 8190, supple-
    mental FY 1972 appropriations bill. Report deleted $58.5 million for
    refunds to airlines from SST termination funds. (CRY5/21/71, 57593-
    7697, S7610-20)
  William M. Magruder, Director of SST Development for DOT, told press
    in Washington, D.C., that Ataka and Co. of Japan had suggested it
    could obtain financing of $500 million or more from major Japanese
    industrial concerns to resurrect SST program. In return Ataka would
    become 50% partner in enterprise. On May 23, however, Ataru
    Takizawa, Vice President of Ataka and Co., said in Tokyo there was
    no truth to report that his firm made exploratory proposal to revive
    US. SST program. (Aug, W Star, 5/22/71; AP, a7 Post, 5/23/71)
  US.-sponsored resources survey of Jamaica, in which NASA provided
    C-130 aircraft [see April 161, had been described as among most

                                    138
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    May 21

    complete and efficient jobs accomplished in air and ground data
    gathering, MSC R o d ~ reported. Allen H. Watkins, MSC Manager
                                 p
    of Earth Observations Aircraft Program, had said 95% of data acqui-
    sition objectives had been achieved in “most complete ground truthing
    that the aircraft program has ever experienced.” (MSC Roundup,
    5/21/71,1)
* Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen received National Transporta-
    tion Award of silver bowl from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew during
    Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Award was for Boeing’s construction
    of 747 jumbo jet aircraft. (AP, B Sun, 5/22/71)
* FAA said air traffic congestion had eased sufficiently at New York’s
    Kennedy International Airport to permit suspension of hourly limits
    on landings and takeoffs that it imposed in 1969. Flight quotas would
    probably be removed after June 15. (Lindsey, NYT, 5/22/71, 54:3)
* New York Times editorial commented on NASA under new Administrator,
    Dr. James C. Fletcher: “The task of reversing NASA’s downhill course
    will not be easy, but there are grounds for believing that this period
                                                 ..
    of doldrums can be overcome. It will help . if the agency’s efforts
    in respect to Mariner 9 and Apollo 15 succeed as planned.” Two
    forces at work suggested “NASA may yet recapture some of the public
    support and interest which evaporated after its first spectacular
    Apollo flights to the moon’s surface. One is the capability of satellites
    to survey the earth with an efficiency never before known. . . . Beyond
    this there is the promising possibility of use of space research as a
    means of encouraging international cooperation. . . . over the next
    decade NASA may make its most important contribution as an instru-
    ment for demonstrating that men and women from many nations and
    many ideologies can work together for the benefit of all the earth.”
     (NYT, 5/21/71,23)
* New York Times editorial praised end of SST: “This action expresses a
    sound sense of nationd priority and of concern with ecological values.
     It also exposes last week‘s surprise vote in the House to revive the SST
    as a political power play that reflects no credit on the leadership of
    either party. To reopen a major issue without advance warning to
    opponents was highhanded; to do so without getting up-to-date cost
    estimates from the Boeing Company was frivolous.” (NYT, 5/21/71)
May 21-22: Application of laminar air-flow techniques in medical surgery
    was discussed during symposium on Clean Room Technology in Sur-
    gery Suites at IGC. (NASA Special Release 5/14/71; KSC PAO)
May 22: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 422 into orbit from Plesetsk with
    1011-km (628.2-mi) apogee, 986-km (612.7-mi) perigee, 105-min
    period, and 74O inclination. (CSFC SSR, 5/31/71; SF, 11/71, 428)
* U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover would begin “a new mode of opera-
    tion requiring only minimum movements,” Tass announced. Vehicle
    would remain in semihibernation, photographing surrounding area and
    transmitting data to earth until its instruments wore out. (UPI, NYT,
    5/23/71; SBD, 5/25/71,129)
  Reuters quoted MSC spokesman as saying scheduled technical talks be-
0

    tween U.S. and U.S.S.R. on space cooperation had been postponed
    because Soviet specialists were too busy to attend. (NYT, 5/23/71)
* Future space shuttle missions were described by Dale D. Myers, NASA
    Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in speech before

                                    139
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 22

    South Carolina Lions Clubs in Greenville, S.C.: “These payloads cover
    the areas of space physics, astronomy, space applications, life sciences,
    unmanned planetary exploration, and earth resources, military and
    commercial.” Payloads ranged from 113-kg (250-lb) Explorer and
    Space Physics Satellites to 9100-kg (20 000-lb) astronomy mission
    u
      requiring annual revisits by the shuttle for servicing maintenance
    and updating of instrumentation.” Sortie flights conducted solely by
    shuttle could be made within its seven-day orbit capability. Scientist
    could “conduct his own experiment in the orbiting shuttle and return
    with the data as well as his own observations. When the space station
    becomes operational, crew rescue missions could also be flown.” (Text)
* Activities of Soviet aircraft industry were described in Izvestia by U.S.S.R.
    Aviation Industry Minister Pave1 Dementyev: “Recently the IG62,
    TU-134 and YAK40 aircraft, which are of a high modern technical
    standard, have been developed and are being produced and used. This
    year the major route TU-154 aircraft comes into service. These liners
    are the basic aircraft of our civil fleet and are to replace their prede-
    cessors-the TU-104, AN-10, IL-18 and IL-14.” (FBIS-~ov-71-103,
    5/27/71, K5)
  Soviet progress in thermonuclear synthesis was described in Pravda
    article by Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sci-
    ences: “Over recent years we have successfully developed work on high-
    temperature plasma in connection with the search for ways of solving
    the problem of thermonuclear synthesis. In the 5-year period that has
    begun the creation of a Tokamak-type installation with optimum
    parameters is planned in order to increase two or three times, the
    density of the particles and the retention-time of the plasma, which
    is an essential condition for the creation of a thermonuclear reactor.
    Evidently the time has already come for starting research into the
    transformation of the energy emitted in the process of thermonuclear
    synthesis into electrical energy.” (FBIS-sov-71-103, 5/27/71, L1)
  Washington Evening Star editorial said “sad little commentary on the
    times” had arisen from NASA report of space age spinoff, a miniaturized
    ultrasonic alarm system that had been used to aid accident and illness
    victims. “But the purpose which NASA foresees is what’s depressing.”
    NASA OART saw invention’s main value “in preventing minor challenges
    to teachers or fights between students from developing into major dis-
    turbances or even riots. That’s the view from space of this poor earth
    beneath, but what a pity. Whatever happened to that luminous blue
    ball, ashine in the limitless, starry night?” (W Star, 5/22/71)
May 23: Chinese-built version of Soviet ~ i c i l 9 fighter produced at Muk-
    den, Manchuria, at rate of 200 per year had been “backboneyyof
    Communist Chinese Air Force for number of years, New York Times
    said. So many had been produced from blueprints supplied by U.S.S.R.
    before Sino-Soviet split in early 1960s that Communist China had sold
    some to neighboring Pakistan. Western sources quoted by Times had
    recently reported that 2800 combat aircraft of Communist Chinese Air
    Force were being supplemented by new jet fighter of Chinese design
    being produced in China at rate of 10 per month. Aircraft, called F-9
    in West, flew at twice speed of sound, had combat range of 480 to 800
    km (300 to 500 mi) and could operate above 15000 m (50 000 ft) .
    (NYT, 5/23/71)

                                     140
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   May 24

                supercritical wing, flown on TF4A jet aircraft piloted by
May 24:   NASA
    NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed seventh
    flight from FRC. Aircraft reached 12 900-m (42 500-ft) altitude and
    mach 0.98. Objectives were to expand flight envelope to higher alti-
    tudes and explore flutter and buff et boundaries, evaluate stability and
    control characteristics, and evaluate control system. (NASA Proj Off)
  At Apollo 1 5 press briefing in Washington, D.C., Astronaut Alfred M.
    Worden, CM pilot, described planned activities in lunar orbit, includ-
    ing first “working walk” in space. At 320 000 km (200 000 mi) from
    earth on return journey from moon, he would move outside CM, hand-
    walk on 7.6-m (25-ft) tether along rail, and open bay in SM to
    retrieve two canisters of film used to photograph moon while space-
    craft was in lunar orbit. It was necessary to retrieve film before SM
    was jettisoned 160 km (100 mi) from earth before CM’S reentry.
    Worden said one hour had been allotted to space walk but underwater
    practice had indicated retrievals could be completed in 20 min. Two
    roundtrips from CM to SM were necessary because only one canister
    could be carried at a time.
       First canister would weigh 36.3 kg (80 lbs) and hold 2000 m
    (6700 ft) of film, including more than 1600 exposures of lunar sur-
    face taken from 113-km (70-mi) lunar orbit. Photos would be en-
    larged on earth to compose blowup 15.2 m (50 ft) wide and 160 km
    (100 mi) long showing details on lunar surface as small as 1.5 m
     (5 ft) in diameter. NASA hoped these would include photo of LRV.
    Second canister would weight 3.6 kg (8 lbs) and hold 1100 m (3600
    ft) of film used in mapping camera.
       While Worden retrieved cannisters, CM’S hatch would be opened.
    Astronaut James B. Irwin would guide Worden along tether and
    Astronaut David R. Scott would stow canisters when Worden passed
    them through hatch. Worden told press, “We’re going to be doing
    something out there, not just testing out an engineering concept or
    working out a procedure to do something.” (Transcript)
  Grumman Aerospace Corp. pilots Robert K. Smyth and William H.
    Miller conducted successful 58-min flight of USN F-14 from Grumman
    facility at Calverton, N.Y. Same pilots had flown first USN F-14 on
    second flight, on Dec. 30, 1970, when it crashed into woods near
    Grumman facility seconds after they successfully ejected. Aircraft was
    kept at speeds below 467 km per hr (290 mph) during maneuvers to
    familiarize pilots with handling characteristics. (Witkin, NYT, 5/25/71)
  Rep. Glenn M. Anderson (D-Calif.) introduced Emergency Conversion
    Loan Act to aid victims of aerospace industry depression. Legislation
    would immediately qualify jobless engineers, scientists, and techni-
    cians for conversion loans from banks in amounts up to 60% of prior
    salary, but not to exceed $12000. (CR, 5/24/71, m915)
* Dept. of Labor released results to date of Technology Mobilization and
    Reemployment Program to relocate unemployed aerospace and defense
    industry personnel. While 10 284 professionals had registered with
    state unemployment agencies since program’s May 3 inception, about
    300 jobs had come into registry. These did not include aerospace and
    defense jobs already listed but not yet tallied. Labor Dept. spokesman
    said program hoped to provide jobs for about 30000 out of about

                                    141
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 24

    100 000 scientists, engineers, and technicians it would serve over next
    two years. (Shabecoff, NYT, 5/25/71)
May 24-25: Technical conference sponsored by MSFC and Huntsville, Ala.,
    section of Optical Society of America at MSFC reviewed research in
    holography and optical filtering being conducted by NASA, industry,
    and universities. Holography was technique of using lasers to obtain
    three dimensional image of object or scene without use of camera or
    lenses. Method was employed in display systems and testing. (MSFC
    Release 71-85; MSFC PAO)
May 24-26: Eleventh European Space Symposium was held in West Ber-
    lin, Germany, to discuss applications satellites. In welcoming address
    Dr. Manfred Bodenschatz of German Society for Aviation and Astro-
    nautics (DGLR) said: “We have passed through the infancy period of
    space flight and realized the untold possibilities of utilization. . . .
    It is only to be regretted that the general public has not apparently
    fully realized this and one does . . . begin to note a certain indiffer-
    ence to space flight accompanied by the feeling that the major space
    powers will be doing it for us anyway.” Purpose of symposium was
    “to demonstrate clearly that a whole range of , . . fields of application
     already exists and must be enlarged upon, and that European space
    technology, science, and industry can and must render its own impor-
     tant contribution here if it does not want to be left hopelessly behind.”
     (SF, 10/71, 393-4)
May 25: USAF’S X-24A lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot John A.
     Manke, successfully completed 27th flight after air launch from B-52
     aircraft over FRC in joint NASA-USAF program. Objectives of powered
     flight were to determine lateral-directional derivatives with rudder bias
     at 2’ toe out, evaluate handling qualities with y accelerometer feed-
     back and power on, determine transonic pitch damping, and obtain
     upper-flap pressure with upper flaps at 1 3 O . Although only three of
     four engine chambers ignited, most objectives were achieved, with
     vehicle reaching 19 500-m (64 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.1. (NASA
     Proj Off)
* Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to Congress urging
     that U S . “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is
     out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.”
     Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said on House floor: “As we attempt
     to plan for a significant and aggressive national space program for
     the 1970’s, it is well to remember that on this date in 1961 the late
     President John F. Kennedy made an equally difficult and challenging
     decision. It is time again that we seize the initiative and make a posi-
     tive decision for a strong national space program.’’ (CRY 5/25/71,
     S7698, E5023)
  Apollo 15 lunar surface experiments-passive          seismic, lunar surface
     magnetometer, solar wind spectrometer, suprathermal ion detector,
     cold cathode gauge, and heat flow-were described by experimenters
     during NASA Hq. press briefing on Apollo 15 science objectives. Mis-
      sion would return up to 68 kg (150 lbs) of lunar samples rather than
     maximum 44.5 kg (98 lbs) for previous Apollo missions; man-hours
     spent on moon would increase from 18 to 40; and area covered could
     extend to 56 km (35 mi) by use of LRV.
         Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo Program Chief Seismologist, said pri-

                                     142
                                                                                May 25
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




May 25: Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to a joint session of
Congress urging that the United States “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this
decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” The
goal was achieved when Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on the Apollo 11 mission, became
the first man to set a foot on the lunar surface, at 1 0 5 6 pm EDT, July 20, 1969.


     mary aim of passive seismic experiment was to discover where moon-
     quakes occurred. “SO far we have identified 1 zones in which moon-
                                                     1
     quakes occur, but one of these is particularly active, accounting for
     about 80 percent of the energy we record.” Source might be “an iso-
     lated pocket of magma under pressure at depths between 30 and 400
     miles [SO and 600 km] .” Third seismometer, to be placed on moon by
     Apollo 15, was expected to provide data as to whether all 1 zones 1
     corresponded to same source mechanism ; i.e., small magma reservoirs.
     Active zone fell on line that bisected Apollo 12 and 14 seismometer
     stations, “so that makes 15 an exceedingly vital station to us. If we just
     get one perigee passage and a couple of these moonquakes before
     station 12 or 14 ceases to function, we’ll have taken quite a step for-
     ward.” Apollo 15 would be at edge of prominent mascon basins,
     Serenatatis and Imbrium. “We expect . . . to impact an S-IVB smack
     in the middle of one of them, probably Serenatatis. So this will be the
     first time we get seismic waves propagating through one of these mascon
     features, and, hopefully, we will be able to say something about how
     its structures differ from the other mare we have been able to record
     seismic waves through.”

                                          143
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 25

       Edward M. Davin, Program Scientist, Lunar Surface Experiments,
    said Apollo 12 magnetometer had been ‘‘very successfully recording a
    surprising magnetic field. . . . we now have a general model of the
    moon based upon three layers . . . a crust, an inner layer, and a core.”
    Apollo 15 lunar surface magnetometer could determine “if there is
    any asymmetry in the magnetic field” and provide additional informa-
    tion on electrical conductivity that indicated thermal distribution of
    lunar interior.
       JPL scientist Dr. Conway W. Snyder said solar wind spectrometer
    experiment would be “measuring the weather in space. The solar wind
    which is a plasma-this        is an ionized gas-is    quite analogous to
    weather on earth. . . . it is the phenomenon that determines what mag-
    netic fields are in space, affects cosmic rays, and generally is the fun-
    damental entity in space once you stop considering the planets them-
    selves.” With addition of second spectrometer on moon “we hope to
    be able to start making some definite interpretations of the very com-
    plicated kind of plasma effects that go on the moon.”
       Suprathermal ion detector experiment was described by Rice Univ.
    scientist Dr. Kent Hills. ApoZZo 12 and 14 ion detectors had revealed
    ion clouds that were not lunar-oriented but had been formed elsewhere
    “from an expanding neutral gas cloud.” With Apollo 15 experiment,
    third station north of other two would give “extended distance with
    which to investigate these things and . . . a different direction.”
       Cold cathode gauge experiment would indicate amount of gas on
    moon, Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas said. Ion
    detector already on moon had detected gas clouds in which concentra-
    tion sometimes increased 100 times. With second gauge “we hope that
    there will be the prospect o seeing the same event on two gauges, and
                                 E
    then we will be able to tell quite a lot more about where these gas
    sources would be and also learn something about how they propagate
    across the lunar surface.”
       Heat flow experiment, with 3-m (10-ft) drill, was to measure amount
    of heat coming from interior of moon, Columbia Univ. astronomer Dr.
    Marcus E. Langseth said. Measurement would be made by monitoring
    heat budget in near-surface material (lunar regolith) over one year
    with thermometers on probes about 2 m (6 ft) below lunar surface.
     Measurements could be useful in resolving contradictory data from
    magnetometer experiments on Apollo 12 and 14.
       Experiments outside Apollo 15 ALSEP package-laser ranging retro-
    flector, lunar field geology, and lunar soil mechanics-were discussed
    by Wesleyan Univ. astronomer Dr. James E. Faller; Donald A. Beattie,
    Program Manager, Lunar Surface Experiments; and Dr. James K.
    Mitchell of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Laser array would provide
    third leg of triangle formed by laser retroflectors on ApoZZos 12 and
    14, improve ranging reliability from current stations, and “provide
    for greater efficiencies in telescope use time.” Geology experiment
    objectives were to sample Apennine Mountain front, study Hadley Rille,
    examine mare, sample volcanic complex to north of landing site, and
    study cluster of craters southeast of landing site. Soil mechanics experi-
    ment would measure density, strength, compressibility and adhesive
     and cohesive characteristics of material on lunar surface. “The thing
    that is going to be of considerable interest is the lunar roving vehicle

                                     144
                                                                        May 25
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                  .
    because if we can calibrate this vehicle . . a knowledge of vehicle
    tracks and power consumptions should provide . . . continuous record
    of the soil conditions as the crew m d from point to point.” (Tran-
    script)
 Mstislav V. Keldysh was reelected President of Soviet Academy of Sci-
    ences at general assembly meeting in Moscow. Following reelection,
    Tass said: “The successes of the U.S.S.R. in the exploration of space
    have been associated with Keldysh’s work. They included the first
    Sputniks, the flights to the moon and around it, flights to the planets
    of the solar system, the first manned space flight, the first experimental
    orbital station, the return ol Luna 16 with lunar soil to the earth and
    the first Soviet moon rover.” (FBIS-Sov-71-102, 5/26/71, L1; Shabad,
    NYT, 5/31/71,32)
  Sen. Lawton Chiles (D-Fla.) inserted House Memorial 780 from Florida
    Legislature in Congressional Record “to request that Kennedy Space
     Center be the site for construction of the space shuttle.” (CR, 5/25/71,
     S7680)
  Gen. Charles P. Cabell (USAF, Ret.), former CIA Deputy Director and
     NASA consultant, died at age 68 after heart attack. (Honsa, ?V Post,
     5/27/71, B17)
May 26: NASA supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted by
     NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed eighth
     flight from FRC. Objectives of flight-to explore flutter boundary and
     evaluate stability and control characteristics near speed of sound-
     were achieved. Aircraft reached 14 000-m (46 000-ft) altitude and
     mach 0.975 with military rated power and 10 600-m (35 000-ft) alti-
     tude and mach 1.1 with afterburner. Flight was last in exploratory
     flight program; aircraft would be checked out and cleaned before
     beginning performance-data-gathering program in late July or early
     August. (NASA Proj Off)
  Cooperative US. and West Germany barium cloud experiment originally
0

     scheduled for launch during April 20-26 launch window, had been
     postponed until September because of unfavorable weather conditions
     and minor technical difficulties, NASA announced. Experiment was to
     study behavior of barium ion cloud at high altitudes to measure mag-
     netic and electrical fields in space and to study plasma physics. (NASA
     Release)
* RAND Corp. report The Space Shuttle as an Element 2n the National
     Space Program (RM 6244-1PR) completed in October 1970-study
     that questioned economic feasibility of NASA’s      reusable space shuttle
                      entered in Congressional Record’ by Sen. Walter F.
      program-was
      Mondale ( D-Minn.) Study, undertaken for USAF, concluded “total space
     funding requirements over the next 20 years are not significantly dif-
      ferent for plans that use the shuttle and those that accomplish the same
      missions without the shuttle.” Results indicated “that criteria other than
      cost should be used to evaluate the desirability of the space transport
      system.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7823-9)
   Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) on Senate floor questioned need for
      space shuttle and space station: “I have written to NASA on a number
      of occasions to ask whether . . . there is a need for the space shuttle-
      space station. All NASA has told me in reply is that first, the shuttle
      would enable us to continue to have an active space program, and

                                      145
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 26

   second, it would reduce the costs of the space program. But why do
   we actually need it? What would it help us to accomplish that we
   could not otherwise accomplish? NASA seemingly has no answer to
   these questions.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7811-2)
 DOD spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press new large missile silos be-
0


   ing built in U.S.S.R. appeared to be designed for two different kinds
   of ICBMS but more than half of new holes might be for relatively small
   SS-11 ICBM. (Getler, W Post, 5/27/71)
 NSF published Recent Trends in Enrollment and Manpower Resources in
   Graduate Science Education, 1969-70. Graduate enrollment in sciences
   and engineering declined slightly between 1969 and 1970. Decrease and
   declining growth rate 1967-1969 contrasted with 9% annual rate of
   increase in enrollment for advanced degrees in science and engineering
   that characterized seven-year period from 1960 to 1967. Number of
   faculty and post-doctoral students had increased during 1969-1970, but
    annual rates of growth were “far below” comparable figures for 1967-
    1969. (NSF Highlights, 5/26/71)
May 26-28: NASA’s    second Goveinment-Industry System Safety Conference
    was held at GSFC. In keynote address Rep. Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.)
    said: “The traumatic and inspiring experience of Apollo 13 now can
   be given profound symbolic meaning. The life on board became vi-
    tally important to millions of fellow passengers on Spaceship Earth.
    For a few moments in history we glimpsed the highest priority. The
    support crew focused on solving the most urgent problem-and            suc-
    ceeded like seasoned professionals.”
        Agenda covered results of application of NASA system safety tech-
    niques to automotive design, oil drilling and exploration, consumer
    products, surface ships, helicopters and urban transit, and aeronautics
    and space. NASA’s     first System Safety Conference had been held in
    1968. (NASA Release 71-52; CR, 6/7/71, E55234; GSFC PAO)
May 27: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced in released
    statement he had approved launch of Mariner-I Mars probe: “I have
    reviewed the results of the Mariner H failure analysis, and of the
    Mariner I Launch Readiness Review. I am satisfied that a complete and
    thorough job has been done, that the failure has been identified, and
    that proper corrective action has been taken. At the same time, I fully
    recognize that the Atlas-Centaur is an extremely complex vehicle, that
    there are literally thousands of parts and components that must func-
    tion perfectly, and that a finite probability of failure must exist on
    each launch.” Failure of Mariner-H May 8 had been traced to inte-
    grated circuit in Centaur booster. (NASA Release 71-92)
 U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 423 from Plesetsk into orbit with 489-km
     (303.9-mi) apogee, 279-km (173.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and
    71’ inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 26. (GSFC SSR, 5/31/71;
     11/30/71; SBD, 6/2/71, 169)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, met with MSC officials dur-
    ing his first official visit to Center. Later, at press conference, he said
             image could not rest on “absolutely fantastic achievement” of
    NASA’s
     first lunar landing by man. NASA needed to convince taxpayers of basic
    technology that had been developed on way to moon. Each part of
    NASA program “has to be defended as a separate piece.” (Maloney,
    H Post, 5/28/7 1)

                                     146
                                                                           May 27
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                             U.S. of “irrational hostility” toward science and tech-
* Growing climate in
    nology was scored by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate
    Administrator for Planning, in speech before Washington, D.C.,
    chapter of Aviation/Space Writers Assn. : “It is irrational precisely
    because those most vocal . . . are the very ones professing the greatest
    concern about poverty, poor housing, hunger, and the quality of the
    environment. All of these problems of society depend in varying degree
    upon our technoIogica1 capabilities, and certainly on increased pro-
    ductivity for their solutions. Some . . . require advanced research into
     the nature of the environment and ecological interactions.” Anti-science
     and anti-technology voices were doing U.S. “great disservice. The
     problems they are rightly anxious and concerned about cannot be
     solved by a return-to-nature cult.” Resources of knowledge that awaited
     man in space had “great significance to man, to Earth environment,
     and to the ecology. We are learning of the relationships between Earth
     and Sun and their effects on our lives which could be learned in no
     other way save by means of the rocket and spacecraft.” (Text)
  LeRC announced NASA had awarded Air Research Manufacturing co. of
     Garrett Corp. $4.5-million7 /I.O-mo, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to build
     four turbine-alternator compressors ( TAC) for experimental nuclear
     power generation system. System was to produce up to 100 kw as
     part of LeRC Brayton cycle power conversion system. (LeRC Release
     71-23; NASA Release 71-93)
  Soviet scientist Anatoly Fedoseyev, head of Soviet delegation to Paris
     Air Show, defected to West, according to French sources later quoted
     by U P I . ( U P I , W Post, 6/20/71, A l )
* Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had said settlements with US. Government on
     military contracts and other problems had resulted in net loss of $86.3
      million in 1970 and $96.6 million in fourth quarter of 1970, Wall Street
     Journal reported. (WSJ, 5/27/71,3)
May 27-June 6: Twenty-ninth Paris International Air Show was held at
     Le Bourget Airport. More than one million visitors to world’s largest
      air show viewed Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport in its first ap-
      pearance in West ; Anglo-French supersonic airliners, Concorde 001
      and 002; Soviet Mi-12, world’s largest helicopter; Lockheed C-5A
     Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft; Lockheed 1011 TriStar ; and more
      than 200 private aircraft in total exhibition of 600 aircraft. U S .
      Pavilion exhibited Apollo moon rocks. Canadian Pavilion contained
      mockup of integrated STOL system envisaging 10-min air hops be-
      tween suburban shopping areas and city centers. (B Sun, 5/26/71,
      5/31/71; Hess, NYT, 5/26/71)
Muy 28: Mars 3 probe was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur at 8:26
      pm local time (11:26 am EDT) into parking orbit from which it was
      injected into heliocentric trajectory toward Mars. Payload would sup-
      plement that of Mars 2, launched May 19. All instruments functioned
      normally. By 10 pm Moscow time (3 pm EDT), Mars 2 was 2495000
      km (1 550 000 mi) from earth and Mars 3 was 44 000 km (27 000 mi) ,
      Tass reported. Each satellite weighed 4650 kg (10 250 lbs) and had as
      prime mission objective complex research of Mars and its atmosphere.
      Tass said that Mars 3 carried instrumentation for exploration of Mars
      and neighboring space, for investigating solar radio emission in one-
      meter wave band in experiment developed and manufactured by

                                        147
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 28

      French specialists in French-Soviet cooperative program, and for
      measuring characteristics of solar plasma and cosmic rays. (FBIS-SOV-
      71-104, 6/1/71, L1; SBD, 6/2/71, 69; Shabad, NYT, 5/29/71, 1)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 424 from Plesetsk into orbit with 287-km
      (178.3-mi) apogee, 198-km (123-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and
      65.3O inclination. Satellite reentered June 10. (GSFCSSR, 5/31/71 ;
     6/30/71; SBD, 6/2/71,169)
  New mission plan had been adopted for Mariner-I (Mariner 9 ) Mars
      probe scheduled for launch no earlier than May 29, NASA announced.
      New plan-which       would provide high-quality data return for all of
     original experiments but less data than planned for original two-
     spacecraft mission-assigned 65” inclination, 12-hr period, and 1200-km
      (750-mi) periapsis (low point in orbit around Mars) to Mariner-I,
     with Nov. 14, 1971, arrival date. New inclination would yield map
     covering almost 70% of Mars and period would ensure two-tape-load-
     per-day data return. (NASA Release 71-94)
  Soviet Aviation Industry Minister Pave1 Dementyev told Paris press con-
0

     ference Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 was expected to go into
      commercial service in late 1973 or early 1974, about same time as
     Anglo-French Concorde. Only one Tu-144 was operational; two other
     prototypes under construction were expected to fly at year’s end.
     Tu-144 had logged several hundred flying hours and flown at 2458 km
     per hr (1528 mph) at 6100 m (20000 ft). Aleksey N. Tupolev, de-
     signer of Tu-144, said at press conference that Pan American World
     Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby was interested in aircraft, “but
     it is too soon to speak about markets or negotiations with interna-
     tional airlines until the Tu-144 has completed its test program.”
      (Reuters, W Post, 5/29/71)
  December 1970 Mariner 6 and Mariner 7 experiments to simulate w
     spectrum that would be viewed by uv spectrometer observing Jupiter
     or other outer plants were described in Science by Univ. of Colorado
      scientists J. B. Pearce, K. K. Kelly, and C. A. Barth, and JPL scientist
     A. L. Lane. Mixture of ammonia, nitrogen, and hydrogen had been
     released from spacecraft 240 million km (149 million mi) from earth
     and 120 million km (74.5 million mi) from sun. Spectra were re-
     corded while gases were illuminated by sunlight. (Science, 5/28/71,
     941-3)
  Fourth round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks ended in Vienna. Talks
     would resume in Helsinki July 8. (W Post, 5/29/71)
May 29: Countdown for launch of NASA’s       Mariner-I spacecraft toward Mars
     orbit was interrupted by hold at 4:59 pm EDT 72 min from launch.
     Hold was caused by difficulty in interpreting data from Centaur stage
     guidance package. Difficulty was not resolved by 6 pm and launch was
     postponed to next day. (NASA Proj Off)
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 425 from Plesetsk into orbit with 550-km
      (341.8-mi) apogee, 508-km (315.7-mi) perigee, 95.1 min period, and
                               SSR, 5/31/71; SBD, 6/2/71, 169)
     74” inclination. (GSFC
M a y 30: NASA successfully launched Mariner 9 (Mariner-I) from ETR at
     6:23 pm EDT on Atlas-Centaur 23 booster into 398-million-km (247-
     million-mi) direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars. No problem had been
     found in Centaur guidance package when May 29 data was fully
     understood. Launch was second attempt to send spacecraft to orbit Mars

                                    148
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                         May 30




May 30: Mariner 9, launched from the Eastern Test Range on a 398-million-kilometer
(247-million-mile) direct-ascent trajectory, headed toward the planet Mars. Encoun-
tering Mars NOD. 13, the spacecraft would be the first to orbit a planet other
than earth. Mariner %weighing 1000 kilograms (2200 pounds) and spanning almost
7 meters (22% feet) with its solar panels eztended-would orbit Mars 90 days to
study the atmosphere and surface in detail and map 70 percent of the surface.

     during 1971 opportunity; Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) launch attempt
     May 8 had failed because of malfunction in Centaur stage of booster.
     Scheduled for arrival at Mars on Nov. 14, Mariner 9 would make
     detailed study of Martian surface and atmosphere and map 70% of
     surface during planned 90-day orbit of planet.
       Launch vehicle performance and spacecraft injection were nominal.
     Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed four solar panels at 6:40
     pm, and locked sensors on sun at 7:16 pm, soon after leaving earth's
     shadow. About four hours into flight Canopus sensor was energized
     and spacecraft rolled 55" and locked onto star Achernar. Canopus ac-
     quisition was achieved at 10:26 pm and spacecraft would remain in sun-
     Canopus orientation for mission except during maneuvers. All space-
     craft systems were operating normally.

                                        49
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
May 30

        Mariner 9 weighed 1000 kg (2200 lb) at launch and carried six
    scientific experiments: infrared radiometer to measure surface tem-
    perature ; w spectrometer to investigate composition and structure of
     atmosphere; infrared interferometer spectrometer to measure surface
     and atmospheric radiation ; S-band occultation experiment to study
    pressure and structure of atmosphere; TV cameras to transmit low-
    and high-resolution photographs of surface ; and experiment to inves-
    tigate Martian gravity field. Orbit of spacecraft was designed to guar-
    antee it would not hit Mars for at least 17 yrs, to avoid contamination
    of planet before studies on surface were made by landing spacecraft.
        OSSA assigned project responsibility to JPL, including mission oper-
     ations and tracking and data acquisition. Launch vehicle was respon-
    sibility of LBRC, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair
    Division. (NASA Proj O f NASA Release 71-75)
                           f;
May 30-June 6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D.
    Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa during visit to France attended Paris
    Air Show ; inspected aerospace facilities at Bretigny, Toulouse, and
    Salon-de-Provence, and attended reception by Mayor of Dijon. (NASA
    Release 71-84; MSC PIO)
Muy 31: Since Tu-144 had been exposed to Western inspection at Paris
    Air Show, Soviet press had been “slowly coming to grips with prob-
    lems of supersonic flight long passed over in silence,” New York Times
    reported. Sowetskaya Rossiya had quoted Western comments that
    Tu-144’s engines were quieter and produced less pollution than those
     of Concorde. “Extensive discussion” of possible environmental and
    health problems caused by supersonic transport had not been reported
    in U.S.S.R. previously. (Shabad, NYT, 5/31/71)
* Communist China was preparing to test-fire its first liquid-fuel ICBM
    beyond its borders, probably into Indian Ocean, New York Times
    quoted US. China experts as saying. Preparations for ICBM launch
    included outfitting of tracking ship and extension of missile range
    tracking stations in Sinkiang Province, but political consideration
    might cause deferment of testing for several months. It was estimated
    it would take at least three years after initial testing for China to move
    its first group of operational ICBMS. (Beecher, NYT, 5/31/71)
  Igor I. Sikorsky, founder of Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft
    Corp., had been named 1971 recipient of USAF Academy’s Thomas D.
    White National Defense Award, presented annually for contributions
    ‘<to the national defense and security of the United States,” Aviation
     Week & Space Technology reported. (Aw Wk, 5/31/71, 23)




                                    150
                              June 1971

June 1 : US.-Canadian agreement on joint program to use satellites and
     aircraft in surveys of natural environment was announced by NASA.
     Objective was to advance remote sensing technology for monitoring
     air, water, land, forest, and crop conditions and for mapping ice move-
     ments, ocean currents, and geologic, hydrologic, vegetation, and soil
     phenomena. Canadian Dept. of Energy, Mines and Resources (EMR)
     would receive data at ground station in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan,
     and data-handling facility at Ottawa directly from NASA’s    ERTS satel-
     lites, scheduled for 1972 and 1973 launch. Canadian and U.S. test
     areas would be designated. Ground and aircraft data acquired and
     exchanged would be available to international community as soon as
     practicable. No funds would be exchanged between EMR and NASA.
      (NASA Release 71-95 )
* British aviatrix Sheila Scott left London Airport in twin-engine Piper
     Aztec for 55 000-km (34 000-mi) flight around world one and one
     half times, during which her physical reactions would be relayed via
     Nimbus 4 satellite to ground station at Fairbanks, Alaska, and then to
     GSFC computer. NASA and U.K.’s Institute of Aviation Medicine had
     installed equipment in aircraft to monitor pulse, breathing, voice,
     brainwaves, mental alertness, and other functions while Miss Scott
     spent 18 hrs in air under cramped conditions. Instrumentation also
     would monitor air pollution at normal flight level of 3000 m (10 000
     ft). (Cerutti, C Trib, 6/2/71; NASA OSSA)
* Storage lifetime of seals, O-rings, and gaskets in rocket engines and
     Saturn IB and Saturn V booster stages had been extended from 8 to
      10 yrs in program of rocket test firing at MSFC, MSFC announced.
      (MSFC Release 71-91)
   Comments on U S . Mariner 9 and U.S.S.K. Mars 2 and 3 missions were
     made in New York Times editorial : Three spacecraft-“one American
     and two Soviet-now speeding toward Mars represent the best type of
     international competition. Their rivalry centers about the pursuit of
     knowledge, with the honors going to that nation whose instruments
      send back the most important data on the red planet that is one of the
     earth‘s nearest space neighbors.” US. led Mars race to date, “because
      of the brilliant feats by Mariners 4, 6, and 7. In the 1960’s the pic-
      tures and other data acquired by these pioneering vehicles completely
      revolutionized scientists’ views of the Martian terrain and environ-
     ment.” (NYT, 6/1/71)
 * NASA issued Management Instruction continuing NASA Historical Advisory
      Committee to advise and assist in implementation of NASA historical
      program and designating as members Dr. Louis Morton, Chairman of
      Dartmouth College Dept. of History, Committee Chairman; Dr. A.
      Hunter Dupree, Dept. of History, Brown Univ.; Dr. Melvin Kranz-
      berg, Dept. of Humanities, Case Western Reserve Univ.; Dr. Rodman W.
      Paul, Dept. of History, Cal Tech; and Dr. John B. Rae, Dept. of His-

                                     151
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 1

    tory, Harvey Mudd College. Executive Secretary for Committee was
    James P. Nolan, Jr., of NASA Office of Management Development.
     (NASA  NMI 1156.2C)
  President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Frederic G. Donner
    for reappointment as member of ComSatCorp Board of Directors. (PD,
    6/7/71,867)
June 2: DOD spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C.,
    that cost increase for USN F-14 fighter aircraft was about $2 billion.
    If tentative plans to produce more than 700 aircraft materialized, cost
    would increase $2.8 million per aircraft, from $11.5 million to $14.3
    million. Earlier, manufacturer Grumman Aerospace Corp. had blamed
    cost increase on inflation and other factors contributing to poor busi-
    ness conditions. (Witkin, NYT, 6/3/71,15)
  Physicist Dr. Edward Teller criticized DOD secrecy in speech at PMR Hq.
    a t Point Mugu, Calif. He said Soviet development of SS-9 ICBM and
    expanded ABM system posed threat to U.S. deterrent capability but
    DOD secrecy made it impossible to reveal details of threat. As result,
    many in Congress and Nation doubted threat’s reality. (PMR Missile,
    6/3/7191)
June 3.- House, by vote of 302 to 64, passed H.R. 7109, $3.433 billion
    FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, after agreeing by voice vote to
    amendment deleting $500 000 for feasibility studies of offshore air-
    ports. House rejected amendment that would have eliminated $125
    million for space shuttle system. (CRY6/3/71, H4588-628)
  At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D.
    Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4
    Cosmonaut Pave1 R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I.
    Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of
    Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft ; examined
    display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A.
    Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz C M ; and admired
    Lumkhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had
    returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts
    went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 space-
    craft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model
    of Soyuz spacecraft ; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag
    they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges.
     ( FBIS-SOV-71-108, 6/4/71, F1; NYT, 6/3/71,41)
  Ground test version of Skylab workshop arried at MSFC aboard NASA barge
    Orion from MSC. Called “dynamic test article,” workshop would be
    modified for extensive structural testing in MSFC dynamic test tower
     during two-month program to start about Nov. 1. (MSFC  Release 71-93)
  Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies
    at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new
    NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing
     (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space ,flight has opened up new
    vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our
    place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has
    brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.”
        Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of
    what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our

                                   152
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   June 3

     everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100
    or perhaps 1,000 years.”
        Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and
     suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for
     Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71,1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
  NASA Performance Evaluation Board had given NR Space Div. incentive
     award fees of $234600 and $307350 for Apollo CSM and Saturn V
     2nd stage (S-11) , NASA announced. Awards covered management per-
     formance under contracts during 1970. ( NASA Release 71-97)
  “USAF in Space” exhibit opened at Smithsonian Institution. Exhibit in-
     cluded two Vela nuclear detection satellites and DOD comsat, scale
     models of wind tunnels and space chambers, no-torque impact wrench
     to counter effect of weightlessness, astronaut equipment, prototype
     space tool for tests simulating weightlessness under water, and sextant
     used on Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini 7 mission. Also exhibited were scale
     models of AFCRL solar telescope and Titan boosters and integrating
     maneuvering life support System-NASA-USAF        spacesuit for EVA out-
                                       Newsreview, 9/71, 8-9)
     side orbiting laboratories. (AFSC
* House agreed to H.R. 461 electing Rep. Mendel J. Davis (D-S.C.) to
     House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CRY6/3/71, H4628)
June 4 : Mariner 9, en route to Mars on orbiting mission, successfully com-
     pleted first midcourse maneuver with 5.11-sec burn that produced
     6.7-m-per-sec (15.1-mph) velocity change. Maneuver placed Mariner 9
     on trajectory that would approach to within 1600 km (1000 mi) of
     Mars; second maneuver would be conducted Oct. 24 if necessary to
     correct trajectory further. Spacecraft had traveled 21 779 000 km
      (13 533 000 mi) since launch May 30 and was 2 076 000 km ( 1 290 000
     mi) from earth, traveling at 10 985 km per hr (6826 mph). It was
     scheduled to reach Mars vicinity Nov. 13. (NASA Releases 71-96,
     71 100 )
        -
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 426 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1996-km
      (1240.3-mi) apogee, 389-km (241.7-mi) perigee, 109.2-min period,
                                  SSR, 6/30/71; SBD, 6/14/71, 231)
     and 74” inclination. (GSFC
  USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A.
0

     Manke, completed 28th flight from FRC in joint NASA-USAF test pro-
     gram. Objectives were to obtain lateral directional derivatives with
     rudder bias at 2” toe out, evaluate handling qualities with power and
     yaw accelerometer feedback system on, and determine supersonic lift-
     to-drag ratio data and longitudinal trim. Flight was intended to reach
     maximum mach number, but only two of four chambers ignited. Pilot
     immediately switched to two-chamber profile and mission plan. (NASA
    Proj Off)
  Draft treaty on lunar law was submitted to U.N. Secretary General
     U Thant in letter from Soviet Foreign Affairs Minister Andrey
     Gromyko with request it be included in agenda of 26th U.N. General
     Assembly meeting: “In all stages of the exploration of outer space,
     the Soviet Union has invariably advocated a progressive development
     of international space law in the interests of all people. The building
     of a firm international foundation for the activity of states in outer
     space promotes the cause of peace and helps to strengthen mutual
     understanding and cooperation between states.” Soviet government
     felt “steps should be taken now with the object of further elaborating

                                    153
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 4

     and giving concrete expression to the standards of international law,
     regulating the activity of states on the moon.”
        Treaty specified that future exploration and use of moon be based
     upon consideration for well being of present and future generations ;
     barred use of moon for “hostile actions”; reaffirmed ban on deploy-
     ment of nuclear and other weapons of mass annihilation on moon and
     on use of moon for military purposes; ensured against unfavorable
     change or pollution of lunar environment; specified that surface and
     interior of moon could not become property of any state, states, per-
     sons, or organizations; and urged that signatory states ensure that all
     steps be taken to preserve man’s life and health on moon. (Tass,
     FBIS-~OV-71-l10, 6/8/71, A1 )
  President Nixon sent message to Congress on energy sources. Of solar
     energy, President said: “The sun offers an almost unlimited supply of
     energy if we can learn to use it economically.” NASA and NSF were
     66
      reexamining their efforts in this area and we expect to give greater
    attention to solar energy in the future.” President proposed that all
    important Federal energy resource development programs be consoli-
    dated within new Dept. of Natural Resources. “We believe that the
    planning and funding of civilian nuclear energy activities should now
    be consolidated with other energy efforts in an agency charged with
    the mission of ensuring that the total energy resources of the Nation
    are effectively utilized. The Atomic Energy Commission would still
     remain intact, in order to execute the nuclear programs and any related
     energy research which may be appropriate as part of the overall energy
    program of the Department of Natural Resources.” (PD, 6/7/71,
    855-66)
  John C. Lindsay Memorial Award for 1971 was presented to Harry E.
    Peters of GSFC Laser Data Systems Branch during GSFC Scientific Col-
    loquium. Award, given annually to GSFC employee who had made out-
    standing contribution to science or technology, was presented for
    individual contributions to the advancement of hydrogen maser fre-
    quency standards resulting in most stable frequency standards known
    and making possible dramatic improvement in space tracking and
    system precision. (Goddard News, 6/14/71, 1 )
June 6-30: Soym 11-carrying Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladis-
    lav N. Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev-was launched by U.S.S.R. from
     Baykonur at 9:55 am local time (12:55 am EDT) to join Sdyut I
     “orbital scientific station” (launched April 19). After manned flight
     record of almost 24 days in space, mission ended in tragedy June 30
    when the three cosmonauts were found dead in returned spacecraft.
        Orbital parameters for Soyua; 11 were apogee, 237 km (147.3 mi) ;
    perigee, 163 km (101.3 mi) ; period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 51.5’.
    Spacecraft dbcked with Sdywt 1 at 10:45 am Moscow time (3:45 am
    EDT) June 7. Tass announcement said: “In accordance with the Soviet
    programme of creating long-term orbital stations, the ‘Salyut’ orbital
    scientific station has started to function as the first piloted scientific
    station. . . . After successfully docking the Soyuz-11 transport space-
    ship with the scientific station . . . the crew of Soyuz-11 entered the
    scientific station. Solved for the first time was the engineering and
    technical task of delivering a crew to an orbiting scientific station by
    a transport ship.” Tass said Salyut-Soyuz space system was 20 m

                                     154
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                       June 6-30

     (66 ft) long, weighed more than 25 tons, and consisted of compart-
     ments containing equipment for scientific and technical experiments,
     for spacecraft control, and for crew work and rest. Cosmonauts would
     check out spacecraft subsystems; test orientation and navigation equip-
     ment ; study geological-geographical objects on earth’s surface, atmos-
     pheric formations, and snow and ice cover; study physical character-
     istics, processes, and phenomena in atmosphere and outer space; and
     study medico-biological influence of space ,flight factors on human
     organism.
        Cosmonauts checked out systems, conducted experiments, and sent
     messages of thanks to scientists, engineers, and workers who took part


June 6-30: Soyuz 11 carried Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolshy, Vladislav N. Volkav,
and Viktor I. Patsayev into space for transfer to Salyut 1, an “orbital scientific
station” launched April 19. After a record-breaking 24-day flight the crew, return-
ing in the Soyuz 11, died before landing because an imperfectly sealed hatch
permitted air to escape. The interior view of the forward section of the Salyut
spacecraft’s main working area shows the command and control panel and two seats.




                                       155
June 6-30                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    in creation of space station system. TV transmissions showed crew
    performing duties in spacecraft. After one week in orbit, crew was
    in good health and had completed first phase of experiments with all
    systems functioning normally. Crew was allowed one-day rest before
    continuing experiments. By 1:00 pm Moscow time (6:OO am EDT)
    June 13 Salyut-Soyuz station had completed 100 orbits of earth.
       Cosmonauts continued to follow preplanned program of work, rest,
    and two hours of exercise per day and reported they were in good
    health. Experiments included communications with ground via orbit-
    ing Molniya I comsat, astronomical observations, medical experi-
    ments, observation of cyclone in Pacific near Japan, and experiments
    with plants in hothouse on board. They reared tadpoles into frogs and
    grew cabbages and onions. By 12:OO noon Moscow time ( 5 : O O am
    EDT) June 22 station had completed 245 orbits of earth. Station com-
    pleted 18th day in orbit June 24, surpassing 17-day 17-hr endurance
    record set by Soym 9 June 2-19,1970.
       On June 29 cosmonauts completed flight program and prepared for
    reentry. Crew transferred equipment to Soyuz 11 and undocked from
    Salyut 1 at 9:28 pm Moscow time (2:28 pm EDT). Crew reported suc-
    cessful undocking and said all systems were functioning normally. At
    1:35 am Moscow time June 30 (6:35 pm EDT June 29) spacecraft’s
    braking engine was fired for prescheduled period. At end of engine
    firing communication with Soym 11 crew ceased.
       Tass said: “According to the program, after aerodynamic braking
    in the atmosphere the parachute system was put into action and
    before landing-the soft-landing engines were fired. The flight of the
    descending apparatus ended in a smooth landing in the pre-set area.
    Landing simultaneously with the ship, a helicopter-borne recovery
    group, upon opening .the hatch, found the crew . . . in their seats,
    without any signs of life. The causes of the crew’s death are being
    investigated.” ( GSFC SSR, 6/30/71; FBIS-Sov-71-109-126,6/7-30/71;
    Newsweek, 7/12/71)
June 7: Preparations for Apollo 15 mission were proceeding on schedule
    with liftoff planned for July 26, Capt. Chester M. Lee (USN, Ret.),
    Apollo Mission Director, told press in Washington, D.C. Astronauts
    would be able to remain on lunar surface for long EVA periods be-
    cause of new spacesuit that would give astronauts greater mobility
    and facilitate experiments. New suit had neck and waist convolutes
    to permit bending at neck and waist, improved zipper for pressure
    control, improved thermal garment, more abrasive material protec-
    tion, and increased water and oxygen supply. Suits also had pocket
    for fruit bar so astronauts could take bites during mission. (Transcript)
  Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Washington that
    Salyut l - S o y m 11 mission was “clear demonstration of the Soviet
    Union’s continuing interest in manned space flight and represents a
    further experiment to determine the value of manned earth orbital
    operations.” He wished Soviet cosmonauts “every success in their
    mission.” (Reuters, B Sun, 6/8/71)
  Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Salyut 1-Soym 11
    mission: “The Russians deserve congratulations for the achievement,
    which puts them some two years ahead of the United States in the
    space platform game.” News from Moscow implied “that another

                                    156
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    June 7

     kind of breakthrough may be in the making;           development of far
     greater significance to the future of man in spac than the momentary
     triumph of an orbital linkup or a moon landing. There is evidence
     that the traditional Soviet passion for secrecy in space is beginning to
     COOL” (W Star, 6/7/71)
* Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport was expected to go on international
     market at $25 million less than Anglo-French Concorde, Armed Forces
     Journal said. Informed scmrces had said U.S.S.R. would offer airlines
     up to 10 yrs credit to obtain sales in West. (AFJ, 6/7/71, 13)
* House passed H.R. 7960, g622-milIion FY 1972 NSF appropriations bill
     by vote of 319 to 8. FY 1971 appropriation was $511 million. (CR,
     6/7/71, H4763-85
   Retired Lam scientist William J. O’Sullivan, who had conceived and
     developed Echo I comsat (launched Aug. 12, 1960), died at Newport
     News, Va., at age 55. He had received NASA Exceptional Scientific
     Achievement Award in October 1961 and National Rocket Club award
     for conceiving use of lightweight inflatable satellites for communica-
     tions relay and air density studies. (W Post, 6/8/71, C8)
June 8: USAF launched Sesp satellite on Thor-Burner I1 booster from Van-
     denberg AFB into orbit with 579.4-km (360-mi) apogee, 544-km
      (338-mi) perigee, 95.8-min period, and 90.2” inclination. Satellite,
     would test infrared celestial mapping sensor system. (GSFC SSR,
     6/30/71; Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 6/11/71, 221)
   Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported
      H.R. 7109, $3.281-billion NASA FY 1972 authorization bill-$152 mil-
     lion less than $3.433 billion approved by House June 3 and almost
      $10 million above NASA request of $3.271 billion. Committee deleted
      $45 million increase voted by House for Skylab and additional $25
      million House had voted for space shuttle.
         Committee version of bill would provide $2.543 billion for R&D,
      $55.3 million for construction of facilities, and $681.3 million for
      research and program management. Total of $3.281 billion was lowest
      total recommended by Senate Committee since FY 1962 and was
      $35.1 million less than total Committee recommended in FY 1971.
      (S Rpt 92-146)
 * U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 spacecraft were functioning normally en
      route to Mars, Tass announced. At 6:OO am Moscow time June 8
       (11:OO pm EDT June 7 ) Mars 2, launched May 19, had completed 14
      communications sessions and was 4 897 000 km (3 042 900 mi) from
      earth. Mars 3, launched May 28, had completed 19 communications
      sessions and was 2 880 000 km ( 1 789 000 mi) from earth. (Sov Rpt,
      6/25/71,7)
   FAA released statistics on aircraft hijacking: Since 1961, 28 persons had
      been convicted for hi jacking US. aircraft and had received sentences
      of up to 50 yrs or life; 12 cases were awaiting trial or outcome of
      mental examinations; and in 8 others charges hac! been dismissed
      when offenders were committed to mental institutions. FAA said 146
      persons had participated in 113 successful and unsuccessful hijacking
      of US. aircraft. Of these, 92 persons were listed as fugitives, one of
      whom was believed to have committed suicide. Fifteen hijackers who
      fled to Cuba had returned and had been tried. (FAA Release 71-82)

                                    157
                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 8

  NR Rocketdyne Div. had been granted $26 228 158 contract modification
    for continued support on Saturn launch vehicle rocket engines, MsFC
    announced. Contract-effective July 1, 1971, through Dec. 31, 1972-
    allowed analysis of F-1, J-2, and H-1 engine performance, field engi-
    neering, logistics, and retention of Rocketdyne problem-sdving group
    for remainder of Saturn program. (MSFC Release 71-97)
* Washington Daily News editorial commented on Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mis-
                                 .
    sion: “What is significant . . is not the docking, in itself, but the
    evidence o i the Soviet Union’s zealous determination to exceed every-
    body in space-for whatever purpose. There is nothing in all this that
    the US. space agency cannot, when it chooses, accomplish-given the
    funds and priorities. It is not a question of firsts-the U S . has had
    its share of those, and more. The difference is that to Russia the priori-
    ties and judgments are made in one place, the Kremlin. In the United
    States, not only the space agency but the President, Congress and the
    prevailing public mood share the decisions.” ( W News, 6/8/71)
June 9: Newspaper editorials commented on Salyut 1 S o y u z I 1 missions :
        New York Times: “It must be recognized that Salyut and its suc-
    cessors raise important new problems ior international law and inter-
    national relations. Back in 1960, during the celebrated case of the
    American U-2 plane shot down over the Urals, Soviet leaders became
    very indignant about a manned American vehicle flying over their
    country. There have been no similar protests about the manned and
    unmanned satellites of the space era, but uneasiness must grow as
    political leaders in many countries contemplate the potential military
    uses of large semipermanent manned space stations such as Salyut.”
     ( N Y T , 6/9/71)
        Baltimore Sun: “One point the achievement demonstrates is the
    intensity of Russian concentration on a definite program. As repeatedly
    defined, and demonstrated in practice, it is a program which sees orbi-
    tal endeavor as the logical next step, with deeper explorations limited
    for the time to automatic systems.” (B Sun, 6/9/71)
  MSFC announced it was evaluating proposals to provide technical systems
    to develop and calibrate instruments for marine and atmospheric re-
    search from 6 firms out of 80 who had received RFPS. Contract winner
    would install equipment in MTF’S Central Instrument Facility. (MSFC
    Release 7 1-99)
  Deputy Secretary of Defense David M. Packard, in testimony before Sen-
    ate Banking and Currency Committee investigating financial status of
    Lockheed Aircraft Corp., warned against danger of setting precedent in
    passing legislation to guarantee up to $250 million in private loans to
    Lockheed: “It’s very desirable not to establish a precedent that the
    government will [aid) any company that gets into irouble.” (Samuel-
    son, N Y T , 6/10/71, 1)
  NASA selected eight firms to negotiate contracts for MSFC engineering
    support services. One-year contracts to be negotiated were: $8 million
    to Brown Engineering Co. for services at Astronautics Laboratory,
    $1.5 million to Hayes International Corp. for services at Product Engi-
    neering and Process Technology Laboratory, $4 million to Federal
    Electric Corp. for services at Quality and Reliability Assurance Labo-
    ratory, $3.5 million to Northrop Services Inc. for services at Aero-
    Astrodynamics Laboratory, $1 million to Planning Research Corp. for

                                      158
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                           June 9




June 1 : Director Lee R. Scherer of NASA’s  Apollo Lunar Exploration Ofice received
       0
Soviet lunar samples from Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of the Soviet
Academy of Sciences in exchange for Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Participating in d e
ceremony a the Academy in Moscow were ( l e f t to right) Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of
          t
the Manned Spacecraft Center‘s Planetary and Earth Sciences Division; Scherer ;
Prof. Vinogradov; interpreter lgor Pochitalin; and Soviet Academician Boris Petrov.



     services at Central Systems Engineering Office, and $10 million to
     Sperry Rand Corp. for services at Astrionics Laboratory. (NASA Release
     71-1 02)
June 10: U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged lunar samples in Moscow ceremony
     to mark expansion of cooperation in space. Lee R. Scherer, Director
     of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, presented three grams (0.10 0 2 )
     of ApoZZo I 1 and three grams of ApolZo 12 lunar material to Academi-
     cian Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of
     Sciences, and received three grams of Soviet Luna 16 samples in
     return. Scherer said, “Although the quantity of material is small, its
     significance is very great.” U S . Embassy in Moscow released state-
    ment saying exchange provided opportunity for scientists of both
    countries to benefit from study of material from lunar areas to which
     they would not otherwise have access. “The exchange of lunar samples
     exemplifies the desire of NASA, as stated in the agreement of January 21,
    to expand cooperation in space research and exploration. The US.
    Government looks forward to the broadening and deepening of this
    cooperation.” (NASA Release 71-103 ; Shabad, NYT, 6/11/71, 10)
  Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station
    carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study airglow. Rocket and
    instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Appointment of L/G Charles H. Terhune, Jr., (USAF, Ret.), as Deputy
0

    Director of JPL was announced by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL
    Director. Gen. Terhune would assume duties July 9, succeeding Adm.
    John E. Clark (USN), who had announced his retirement. (JPL Re-
    lease 571 )

                                       159
June 10                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                        for OMSF space shut program were announced by
                        in Washington, D.C., ould be responsible for overall
                       cluding assignment of responsibilities, basic perform-
     ance requirements, control of major milestones, and funding alloca-
     tions to NASA centers. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for
    Manned Space Flight, had assigned responsibility for program con-
     trol, overall systems engineering and systems integration, and overall
    responsibility for definition of elements of total system that interacted
    with other elements to MSC, which also would be responsible for shuttle’s
    orbiter stage. MSFC would be responsible for booster stage and shuttle’s
     main engines. KSC would be responsible for design of launch and
     recovery facilities. All three centers would station personnel at MSC
    for systems engineering and integration activity. (NASA Release 71-104)
June 11: Cosmos 427 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk. Satellite
    entered orbit with 301-km (187-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) peri-
    gee, 89.7-min period, and 72.9’ inclination and reentered June 23.
     (GSFC SSR, 6/30/71; SF, 11/71, 456)
 Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, delivered commencement
    address at Cal Tech: “One of the paths we can take-the obvious one
    -is to help develop some new area of high technology that will serve to
    strengthen our Nation’s economic base, and thus indirectly, our whole
    culture. We don’t necessarily have to perform this task with produc-
                                   .. .
    tivity foremost in our minds         even though that’s really the way it
    works.
        “A second path-and       the demand for this path will be growing
    rapidly, I believe-is to attack directly the social, economic, and other
    serious problems of our time that have a definite technological com-
                                   .
    ponent. Problems of ecology . . have technological solutions. Urban
    and interurban transportation have technological solutions. As soon as
    we determine the appropriate political system which will spend the
    time and money, we already know a good deal abaut how to solve
    problems like these, and what remaining technology needs to be devel-
    oped will undoubtedly appear. Other problems such as rural and ghetto
    health, housing, hunger, and poverty, have only a partly technological
    solution ; still others, with strong human and sociological components,
    are even harder to deal with, and it may be a long time before
    problem-solvers learn to deal with ‘people’ problems. . . . while it
    wasn’t easy to land men on the Moon-it was nevertheless a straight-
    forward, engineering kind of problem. And as someone has said, there
    weren’t any people between here and there.”
        Third path-and he thought few persons “yet realize what a broad
    and important path it can be in years ahead”-was         “to pursue long-
    range study and research on applications of problem-solving techniques
    to some of the more purely human problems.” (Text)
  NASA Wallops Station participation in Cornell Univ. experiment to obtain
    data on importance of celestial, magnetic, topographic, and meteorologi-
    cal cues in guidance systems of nocturnally migrating birds was an-
    nounced by NASA. Station would provide support in tracking birds with
    18-m (60-ft) dish on space range antenna ( SPANDAR) . Birds would be
    captured in nets, examined, and small magnets would be attached.
    They would then be released by weather balloon to continue flight
    under varying cloud conditions. Each bird would be tracked by radar

                                       160
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    June 11

    as it made orientational decision and departed in migration. (NASA
    Release 71-98)
* Space officials feared budget pressures could prompt either President
    Nixon or Congress to cancel final two Apollo missions in 1972, Wall
    Street Journal said. In event of cancellation, NASA would propose to use
    Apollo equipment for “lengthy orbital flights due to start in 1973” in
    the Skylab program. (WSJ, 6/11/71, 1)
  NSF released Federal Support to Universities and Colleges, Fiscal Year
    1970. Between 1969 and 1970 Federal funds had declined by $227
    million, or nearly 7%, to level of $3.227 billion-lowest funding level
    since 1966 and first drop in actual dollars in Federal support since
    1963. Decline might be attributed to shift in Government policy from
    direct Federal grants for facilities construction to subsidizing interest
    charges on loans from non-Government sources. (NSF Highlights,
    6/11/71, 1 )
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton told Senate Com-
0

    mittee on Banking and Currency he would resign if change in Lock-
    heed management was condition for firms receiving $250-million
    Government loan guarantee. (Samuelson, W Post, 6/12/71, A l )
June 13: Appointment of Laurence T. Hogarth as Deputy Director, Office
    of Long-Range Plans, in NASA Central Planning Office became effective.
     ( N A S A Activities, 7/15/71, 119)
June 14: Status of space shuttle technology was described by MSFC propul-
    sion engineer Gerald M. Thompson during AIAA/SAE Seventh Propul-
    sion Joint Specialist Conference at Salt Lake City, Utah. Because
    “shuttle propulsion technology has been vigorously pursued in a totally
    organized approach for several years,” no major technology work
    remained to be done before shuttle main engine development phase
    began. Designs with strong technical bases were ready to proceed.
     However, if hydrogen propulsion was selected for air-breathing engines
     that would return shuttle stages to landing fields on mission completion,
     additional technology development would add about one year to
     schedule. Main engine development was to begin in 1971, with flight
     certification targeted for March 1978. (MSFC Release 71-103)
  Plans for joint experiments in which ATS-F           (scheduled for May 1973
     launch) would be used from September 1973 to May 1974 to explore
     technical, economic, and educational practicality of regular TV trans-
     missions to low-cost ground receivers in remote areas of US. were
     announced by NASA, HEW, and Corp. for Public Broadcasting. Experi-
     ment would begin with transmission of educational and health pro-
     grams to ground receivers in Rocky Mountain region and Alaska.
     NASA was designing 15-w transmitters to operate in 2500- to 2690-mhz
     band and would provide access to ATS ground station. Other ground
     transmission and receiving facilities would be provided by HEW and
     CPB. (NASA Release 71-105)
  Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
     Univ. of Hawaii solar astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments
     functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
* Japanese Space Development Committee’s First Technical Div., which had
     been investigating performance of Mu-4 carrier rocket that orbited
     Tansei satellite Feb. 16, had recommended that plans for launching
     first “full-fledged” scientific satellite during summer 1971 be approved,

                                     161
June 14                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

       Space Business Daily reported. Recommendation followed assessment
       of malfunctions during launch and orbit which caused mission to fall
       short of its programmed objectives. Satellite, which had orbited earth
       96 times to date, had malfunctions of its solar battery performance
       measuring device, control command device, and stabilization device.
       (SBD, 6/14/71,228)
    Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.)-who           had been Vice President
       under President Johnson-addressed Space Seminar of Hugh O’Brian
       Youth Foundation at KSC: “One of the reasons that I have been active
       in the Space Program is because I believe that this program did some-
       thing for all of the things I thought were important in life.” Space
       program was “pioneer in beginning to make the discovery in environ-
       mental control.” It had proved men could live in pure environment
       and “that there’s a relationship between the living space that we have
                                                       .
       and the number of people that can be there . . [and] that you can
       have clean water and clean air. And it’s proven to us that you can
      work together.”
          Space program had helped produce computer and had developed
       satellite monitoring system. Possibly “one of the greatest efforts for
       world peace has come right out of the science and technology of space
       research.”
          Sen. Humphrey recalled his role as negotiator of Nuclear Test Ban
       Treaty: “I went to Moscow when it was signed. I have the pen that
       President Kennedy used to sign the treaty . . . he said, ‘I give you
      this pen, Hubert, because it’s your treaty.’ ”
          He had been in Moscow when ApoZZo I I Astronaut Neil A. Arm-
      strong made first moon walk. “I was in the offices of Pravda and
                ..                                               .
                    . and a dispatch came through from Reuters . . noting
      Izvestia
      that the launch had been successful, and I had said to the editors of
      Pravda, ‘Why don’t you run this as a headline?’ There was nothing in
      their paper that indicated that our launch had taken place. And when
      I went to Izvestia the same afternoon I said ‘Look, the launch has
      taken place and I see nothing in your headlines in your papers.’ I am
      happy to tell you that they were somewhat embarrassed and the next
      morning, at the National Hotel, under my door was a copy of Pravda
      and Izvestia with front page stories saying that there had been a suc-
      cessful launch.” When Neil Armstrong “touched down that Sunday
            .
      night . . the only information that I was able to get was out of the
      Voice of America through the United States Embassy because the
      Russians had blacked O U ~ . ” (CRY6/18/71, H548G7)
    Representatives of Bankers Trust Co. and Bank of America told Senate
      Banking and Currency Committee investigating financial condition of
      Lockheed Aircraft Corp. that they would not make further loans to
      Lockheed without Government guarantee. (Samuelson, W Post,
      6/14/71, A2)
    Role of radioelectronics in space was described in Pravda by Soviet
0

      Academician V. Andreyanov: “Radioelectronics might be called the
      nervous system of cosmonautics. It links our planet by living threads
      with the spacecraft and apparatuses when they fly to Mars, work on
      the moon, or study the earth and circumterrestrial space, like the
      Salyut station. In less than 15 years, research into space and the
      nearest planets has not only stimulated the development of many fields

                                     162
                                                                        June 14
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    of science and technology but has also been accompanied by the emer-
    gence of new fields of knowledge and technical methods. A ‘spacifica-
    tion’ of the sciences had been noted. Concepts which were earlier un-
    usual have also appeared in radioelectronics : space radio communi-
    cations, space telemetry and television, space radionavigation, and
    radio methods for studying celestial bodies and interplanetary space.”
     (FBIS-sOV-71-123,6/23/71,       L5)
June 15: USAF launched unidentified satellite at 11:41 PDT from Vanden-
    berg AFB on new Titan IIID booster. Satellite entered orbit with 289.7-
    km (180-mi) apogee, 178.6-km (111-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and
    96.3O inclination. Booster used five-segment, 3-m (lo-ft) solid-fuel
    strap-on boosters and was reportedly capable of placing 6800 kg
     (15 000 lbs) in low earth orbit. Satellite reentered Aug. 6. (GSFC SSR,
    6/30/71; 8/31/71; SBD, 6/18/71,258; Pres Rpt 72)
  NASA announced completion of supercritical wing shakedown flights
     aboard modified USN F-8 jet fighter from FRC. Last flight in eight-
     flight series to allow test pilots to “get feel” of aircraft and investigate
     effects on wing at various speeds and altitudes, had taken place May 26.
     FRC officials reported finding no “surprises” during test series and said
     air foil appeared to confirm wind-tunnel tests. Research aircraft would
     be off flight status for two months while small irregularities on wing
     surface were corrected and network of about 250 pressure sensors
     was added to wing’s top surface to locate and measure any shock wave
     created in air flow. Effectiveness of supercritical wing depended on
     moving shock wave to near back of wing for increase in total wing
     efficiency. (NASA Release 71-101)
  Rep. F. Edward Hebert, Chairman of House Armed Services Committee,
     announced that he would move to block $806-million procurement
     funds for USN F-14 jet fighter aircraft until USN solved overcost prob-
     lems. Funds were included in $21.9-billion military weapons authori-
     zation bill before House. (AP, W Post, 6/16/71, A2)
         Grumman Aerospace Corp. released statement saying it would be
     6b
        very appropriate” for Congress to stop funding USN’S F-14 jet fighter
     aircraft until cost-overrun problems were settled. (W Star, 6/16/71,
     A4 1
  Dr. Vasily V. Parin-Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet
     Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of
     Sciences-died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known
     primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems
     during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness
     on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order
     of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing
     Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 6/17/71, 42)
June 15-1 7: House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee
      on NASA Oversight held hearings on failure of Atlas-Centaur to launch
     Ats 4 into planned orbit Aug. 10, 1968, and failure to orbit OAB-B
     Nov. 30,1970, and Mariner 8 May 8,1971.
         Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified June 15
      on NASA policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the
     manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of
      the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute mini-
      mum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as

                                       163
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 15-17

     to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are
     established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior
     to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures cou-
     pled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted
     before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ”
        In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be
     brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit
     us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first work-
     shop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a
     single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability
     for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into
     program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab
     which we recently adopted.”
        In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of
     related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a
     mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available
     factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the
     mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights . . . to achieve
     the objectives, or ( 3 ) defer achieving the mission objectives to future
     years.”
        In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete
     intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each
     launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at
     same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Mariner 9
     was backup, flying hybrid mission.
        Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16
     operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures,
     giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience.
     Launch vehicles for automated missions-such        as Scout, Delta, and
     Atlas-Centaur-were “complex systems without much redundancy, and
      cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about
      90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be
      considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would
      be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added
      weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch
      vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand
     Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desir-
      able and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of
      achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle.
         Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and
      Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy,
      expanding on application in OSSA: “We do not schedule backup mis-
      sions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at
      least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft.
      When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch
      vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly under-
      stand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be
      subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will al-
      ways review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alter-
      native recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost
      mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on
      the program and then decide which alternative to choose.”

                                     164
                                                                  June 15-17
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

         Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and
     Applications, testified June 17 : “In the basic considerations which
     establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space
     vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human
     passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which
     cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a
     requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but
     have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful
     design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and,
                                                                   ..
     most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . are
     characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity
     characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony ; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
   Representatives of nine European Space Conference member countries
     and five Atlantic and Pacific area countries met at FAA Hq. to explore
     possibilities for unified preoperational program in aeronautical satel-
     lites over Pacific and Atlantic Ocean areas. At final meeting, group
     decided to establish International Collaboration Ad Hoc Group to
     make specific proposals for unified program to Second Aeronautical
     Satellite Meeting in Madrid Aug. 3. (FAA Releases 71-91, 71-93)
lune 16: NASA interest in “phased approach” to development of reusable
     space shuttle system was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA
     Administrator. Contractor studies near completion indicated “pre-
     ferred configuration” was “two-stage delta-wing reusable system in
     which the orbiter has external propellant tanks that can be jettisoned.”
     While studies to date had favored “concurrent approach” in which
     development and testing of orbiter and booster stages would proceed
      simultaneously, NASA also had studied feasibility of sequencing devel-
      opment, test, and verification of system’s features. “We now believe
      that a ‘phased approach’ is feasible and may offer significant advan-
      tages.” Additional studies in progress, plus those nearing completion,
      would enable NASA “to make a decision this fall on the technical and
      programmatic approach to be followed in the space shuttle program.”
       (NASA Release 71-107)
   NASA and USAF signed agreement to conduct joint Transonic Aircraft
0

      Technology (TACT) Program to explore application of supercritical
      wing technology to highly maneuverable advanced aircraft. F-111 was
      selected as test bed aircraft. NASA’sLaw, USAF, and General Dynamics
      Corp. had completed more than 1600 hrs of wind-tunnel tests to
      develop supercritical airfoil for TACT program. Final configuration
      development and wind-tunnel tests for low-speed high-lift devices and
      transonic and supersonic conditions would be conducted at ARC.
       (AFSC Release 188.71; NASA Release 71-124)
   House considering H.R. 8687, FY 1972 military procurement authoriza-
      tion bill agreed to amendment cutting $806 million for procurement of
      F-14A jet fighter aircraft. (CR, 6/16/71, H5266-303)
 * Thirtieth anniversary of opening of Washington National Airport. Num-
      ber of passengers using facility annually had grown from fewer than
      400000 in 1941 to nearly 10 million in 1970. At commemorative
      ceremonies FAA award for extraordinary service was presented to
       Edward V. Rickenbacker, veteran pilot and retired Eastern AirIines
       Chairman. Airport received commemorative plaque from Arlington

                                     165
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 16

     County (Va.) Board. (FAA Release 71-89; Bernstein, W News,
     6/16/71,35; Eisen, W Post, 6/17/71, D3)
June 17: NASA announced selection of Descartes as lunar landing site for
     Apollo 16, scheduled for launch in March 1972. Descartes, in central
     lunar highlands, provided opportunity to sample volcanic-like high-
     lands basin fill and uplands volcanic terrain. (NASA Release 71-106)
   Impact of NASA installations on local communities was described by NASA
     Deputy Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs George J. Vec-
     chietti in testimony before House Select Committee on Small Business’s
     Subcommittee on Small Business Problems in Smaller Towns and
     Urban Areas. During hearings on impact of Government installations
     on small business, Vecchietti testified : “The rapid growth of facilities
     and activities at NASA installations over the past few years have un-
     questionably generated development o€ a wide range of commercial
               . ..               .. .
     facilities.     Unfortunately      most of the impacts are of an intangi-
     ble nature and difficult to quantify. Economic impacts, for the most
                                         ..
     part, have been favorable. But .      those communities bordering NASA
     installations have been adversely affected by the wind-down in space
     activity.” (Testimony)
   Apollo 7 Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham announced his resignation
     from NASA, effective on or about Aug. 1, to become Vice President of
     Operations for Century Development Corp., developers of Greenway
     Plaza in Houston, Tex. (NASA Releuse 71-110)
   New civilian program to “absorb the nation’s technical talent, respond to
     our unmet social needs, and enlist widespread enthusiasm and sup-
     port” was proposed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech
     before National Society of Engineers meeting in Washington, D.C.
      66
         The development of new cities may be the important challenge we
      face, because it dramatizes the need for new research and engineering
      in the way the challenge of the Soviet Sputnik spurred the American
      space program in the late fifties and early sixties.” (Text)
   Launching of eight Soviet Cosmos satellites, Mars 2, and Muriner 9 had
      raised number of man-made objects in space to 2378, Reuters re-
      ported. Of total, little more than one fifth were satellites or payloads;
      remainder was space junk. Spokesman for USAF Air Defense Com-
      mand had said USAF had recorded 2840 objects, 760 payloads, and
      2080 bits of debris that had decayed since launch of Sputnik 1
      Oct. 4,1957. (LA Times, 6/17/71)
 * President Nixon issued Proclamation 4060 commemorating World Law
      Day. He said: “We can see many heartening evidences that law is
      becoming stronger and more just around the world under the pres-
      sures which reason and necessity exert. Within the nations, human
      rights and ecological wisdom continue to gain stature in the law.
      Among the nations, security and cooperation-on         every front from
       space to the seabeds-are being enhanced through negotiations, treat-
      ies, and conventions. The United Nations is entering its second quar-
       ter of a century, and many other international organizations are
       working effectively through and for world law.” (PD, 6/21/71, 942)
 June I7-Jdy 2: Fourteenth Plenary Meeting of Committee on Space. Re-
       search (COSPAR) was held in Seattle, Wash. International meeting of
       scientists hosted by NAS included symposia and working groups on

                                      166
                                                               June 17-July 2
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    1970 total solar eclipse, astronomical observations from space, use of
    stratospheric balloons in space research, and lunar lasers.
       Grumman Aerospace Corp. scientist Dr. Henry C. Courten, pro-
    fessor of astronomy at Dowling College, said mysterious tracks on
    photographic plates he made during 1966 and 1970 solar eclipses
    appeared to be of small planet or asteroid belt inside Mercury’s orbit.
        Cal Tech scientist and lunar expert Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg told
    COSPAR meeting four rocks gathered by Apolb 14 astronauts had
    ages ranging from 3.85 billion to 3.95 billion yrs. Ages were sur-
    prising “since it was anticipated that Fra Mauro would yield rocks of
    greater antiquity.” Discovery suggested that volcanism was active on
    moon far longer than had been thought and was still forming lunar
    crust more than 600 million yrs after moon came into being. It also
    suggested that Sea of Rains had been carved by collision 600 million
    yrs after moon’s formation, or 100 million to 150 million yrs later
    than lunar experts had originally believed.
        Soviet scientists Yuri G. Nefyuduv, L. I. Kakurin, and A. D.
    Yegorov said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Andrian 6. Nikolayev and Vitaly I.
    Sevastyanov “found it difficult to keep the upright posture and had to
    be assisted while walking” during first three hours after return from
                                             ..
    June 2-19, 1970, mission. “Next day .         their walk was still inade-
    quate and erect positions were maintained with great efforts.” When
    cosmonauts returned to physical activity, few days after flight, effects
    of prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary.
        Astronaut John W. Young represented U.S. astronaut corps at cere-
    mony to honor 10th anniversary of first space flight by Soviet Cosmo-
    naut Yuri A. Gagarin. He asked, “What better tribute to the memory
    of Yuri Gagarin can we offer than the hope that the growing unity of
     efforts in space-which    this COSPAR meeting so well exemplifies-
    may one day extend to all the Earth? (NAS Release, 4/21/71; AP,
     W Post, 6/13/71, A7; O’Toole, W Post, 6/27/71, A l ; UPI, W Post,
    6/28/71, A7; NASA Activities, 7/15/71,107)
        NAS and NRC submitted to COSPAR United States Space Science Pro-
     gram, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science
    in U.S. during 1970. Report included summaries of observations from
     spacecraft, sounding rockets, high-altitude balloons, and aircraft made
     or reported during 1970 and discussed flights planned for 1971. (Text)
June 18: Discoveries of identical, complex patterns of amino acids and
     pyrimidines in two meteorites might indicate basic phase of chemical
     evolution leading to origin of life, ARC scientist Dr. Cyril A. Ponnam-
     peruma told meeting of New York Academy of Sciences. Team of ARC
     scientists had found that Murray meteorite that fell in Kentucky in
     1950 had same 18 amino acids, plus two pyrimidines, as were dis-
     covered in December 1970 in Murchison meteorite (which fell in
     Victoria, Australia, in September 1969). “Starting with these 18
     amino acids, it would be theoretically possible to build up a living or-
     ganism.” Discovery appeared to be first conclusive proof of extraterres-
     trial chemical evolution, strengthening case for chemical evolution
     theory and increasing likelihood of life elsewhere in universe. (NASA
     Release 71-709)
  David S. .Gabriel, Deputy Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Systems
     Office, was appointed by Bruce T. Lundm, L ~ R CDirector, to chair

                                    167
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 18

    Centaur Quality and Workmanship Review Board. Board was to
    “carefully examine and reevaluate the philosophy, practices and pro-
    cedures employed in the Centaur quality assurance and workmanship
    program” and to report findings and recommendations by mid-August
     1971. (Review of Recent Launch Failures, House Sci & Astro Com,
    NASA Oversight Subcoin, 10/71; OSSA)
  U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I lunar rover, on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed
     experiments for eighth lunar day and was put in stationary position
     for lunar night. Experiments had included examinations of lunar
     rocks, stereoscopic panoramic photography, and measurements of
     chemical composition and physico-mechanical properties of crater
     150 m (164 yds) in diameter. Vehicle had traveled more than 10 km
      (6 mi) since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and was still functioning
    normally. (Sou Rpt, 7/8/71, 12)
  Second phase of joint NASA, Dept. of Agriculture, and corn belt states
     1971 Corn Blight Watch Experiment [see May 171 had been com-
     pleted and participating RB-57F aircraft was photographing seven-
     state area of about 11.7 million hectares (45000 sq mi) in third phase
     of experiment, NASA announced. (NASA   Release 71-112)
  Pravda described French bubble hydrogen-filled chamber “Mirabelle,”
     scheduled to enter operation soon for particle research. Active volume
     of chamber was cylinder 4.5 m (24.8 ft) long and 16 m (52.5 ft) high
     with 1.6-m (5.3-ft) diameter. In opinion of Soviet Academy of Sci-
     ences member Anatoly Logunov, “the considerable volume of ‘Mira-
                                 ..
     belle’ will make it possible . to trace the mechanism of birth of new
     particles during the collision o€ the known ones. It is also planned to
     carry out a research into the symmetry of elementary particles. The
     chamber which has almost the largest volume in the world today in
     the aggregate with the most powerful in the world Serphukov Accelera-
                                                           ..    . elementary
      tor is a qualitatively new means for research into
     particles.” (FBIS-SOV-71-120, 6/22/71, L3)
June 19: Soviet space official Anatoly Fedoseyev, head of Soviet delegatfon
     to Paris Air Show, had defected to West May 27, UPI quoted French
     sources as saying. Reportedly Fedoseyev had been refused asylum at
     Le Bourget Airport in Paris by French officials, who later relented and
      allowed him to proceed to NATO Hq. in Brussels aboard USAF helicopter.
      Fedoseyev was believed to be one of highest ranking Russians to defect
      to West-vice minister in charge of space research for Soyuz and
      Luna spacecraft programs. Sources had further reported that 80 mem-
     bers of Soviet delegation to Air Show had been recalled to Moscow
      May 27 and Soviet oficials had refused to sit down with French
      Defense Minister Michel Debr6 at official luncheon in protest of French
      action. UPI said both NATO and US. officials later had denied knowl-
      edge of Fedoseyev and his mission. (UPI, W Post, 6/20/71, A19)
June 20: PAET Planetary Atmosphere Experiments Test was launched by
      NASA from Wallops Station at 3:31 pm EDT on four-stage Scout booster.
      Primary objective was to investigate means of determining structure
      and composition of unknown planetary atmosphere. Secondary objec-
      tives were to determine profile of water vapor in earth‘s atmosphere,
      with altitude, from absorption measurements of reflected sunlight in
      infrared; investigate effect of radio signal attenuation on relay com-
      munications when transmitting from aft hemisphere of a blunt entry

                                      168
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUMCS, 1911                                              June 20




June 18: NASA announced completion of the second phase of the 1971 Corn Blight
Watch Experiment by NASA, the Department of Agriculture, and the corn belt states.
President Mixon and Secretary of Agriculture Cliford M. Hardin (center left to
right) were briefed in Indianapolis June 24 on the RB-57 aircraft‘s role in the
experiment, by Air Force Maj, Francis X. McCabe and Dr. Arch B. Park, Chief of
        Earth Resources Survey Program. In the second phase, color infrared photos
NASA’s
were taken of the test area for analysis of soil conditions before emergence of the corn
crop. In the third phase, June to November, high-altitude IU photos would be made every
two weeks to watch for signs of the southern leaf blight’s occurrence in the crop.


     vehicle; determine if nearly circular spiral pitching motion could be
     achieved with blunt entry vehicle; obtain flight-performance data on
     low-density ablator ; and measure vehicle and spacecraft performance
     parameters.
        Spacecraft achieved planned trajectory within nominal limits, reached
     6500-m-per-sec (21 327-fps) entry vehicle velocity at time of sepa-
     ration, and impacted within expected area 965 km (600 mi) down-
     range about 158 km (85 nm) northeast of Bermuda. PAET entry vehi-
     cle instrumentation was functioning during reentry. Real-time and
     delayed-time playback telemetry records covering reentry period and
     radar track to near impact were obtained.
        PAET entry spacecraft was 641 cm (25.2 in) long and 91.4 crn
      (36 in) in diameter. Forebody was blunt cone with spherical seg-
     ment nose and afterbody was hemispherical. PAET program was di-
     rected by OART. ARC was responsible for spacecraft design, fabrica-
     tion, and testing. Wallops Station was responsible for launch, tracking,
     and data acquisition. (NASA Proj Off; WS Release 71-10)

                                          169
June 20                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

         would join California Statewide Air Pollution Research Center in
  ARC
      smog research program to sta n late June, NASA announced. Program
      would include 12 Cessna 40         rcraft flights over San Francisco Bay
      area yearly for three years, to trace photochemical production of pol-
      lutants and their dispersion in atmosphere. Aircraft would carry some
      230 kg (500 lbs) of research equipment for tests at altitudes to 5200 m
       (17 000 ft) . Data collected would be available to research collaborators
      and data users in Air Pollution Control Office of U S . Environmental
      Protection Agency, California State Air Resources Board, Los Angeles
      Air Pollution Control District, Assn. of Bay Area Governments, and
     other NASA centers. (NASA Release 71-108)
June 21 : Extrasensory perception tests aboard Apollo 14, launched Jan. 31,
     were described by Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell during press
     conference at Foundation for Research on the Nature of Man at
     Durham, N.C. In unauthorized experiment, Mitchell had tried to send
     messages to four “receivers” on earth while en route to moon. He had
     carried cards bearing ESP test symbols and concentrated on random
     order of cards while receivers on earth wrote down order in which
     they believed he was “transmitting.” While plan had called for “trans-
     mission” once daily for six days, Mitchell had been able to perform
     experiment for only four days. Two of his receivers had reported
     (4
        receptions” for all six days, one for one day only, and another for
     two days. Mitchell said preponderance of wrong answers was signifi-
     cant because it was “so far below chance that the odds are approxi-
     mately 3000 to one against it being a chance result.” If it was not
     chance, Mitchell said, results indicated “extrasensory exchange.”
     Mitchell declined to identify his receivers, but Olof Johnsson of Chicago
     had said he was one psychic who had participated. (AP, NYT, 6/22/71,
     22; UPI, W Star, 6/22/71, A l )
* Senate passed S.J.R. 101, to “authorize and request the President of the
     United States to issue a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as
     ‘National Moon Walk Day.’ ” (CR, 6/21/71, S9476)
* NAE announced reelection of Clarence H. Lindner as full-time President
     for three-year term, and election of new members to NAE Council. New
     council members were Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NSF; Francis H.
     Clauser, Cal Tech; James Hillier, RCA Corp.; Frederic A. L. Holloway,
     Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey; J. Ross Macdonald, Texas Instru-
     ments, Inc.; and Kenneth G. McKay, AT&T. Robert W. Cairns, Hercules,
     Inc., was reelected to Council. (NAE Release)
* St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial described plight of McDonnell Douglas
     Corp. in “aerospace depression”: Total employment was off almost a
     third from high of 43 500 in mid-1967 and layoffs were continuing
     though at declining rate. “The loss of these 14,100 jobs is equivalent
     to a loss of income for all the families in a city of 35,000 persons. . . .”
     In one 30-day period, 1600 McDonnell Douglas workers had been laid
     off. “That is equal to 20 per cent of the workforce from a city the size
     of Berkeley, where the corporation has its headquarters.” Hope for
     McDonnell Douglas “rests in large measure with the company’s plans
     to produce the F-15 fighter-bomber. Already Congress is looking at
     this program with a wary eye, and . . . there are indications that
     production may be slowed as part of an increasingly cautious con-
     gressional approach to military spending.” (St Louis P-D, 6/21/71 )

                                      170
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               J ~ n 21-25
                                                                       e
June 21-25: US.-U.S.S.R. negotiations on compatible docking systems for
    spacecraft resumed as three joint working groups, including some 20
    Soviet scientists and engineers, met with NASA scientists and engineers
    at MSC. Purpose of meeting was to devise single set of technical re-
    quirements for docking systems. Soviet delegation was headed by
    Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Intercosmos Council of Soviet Academy
    of Sciences. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, headed NASA group
    participating in meetings provided for in US.-U.S.S.R. agreement
    reached in Moscow Oct. 28,1970.
       Delegates discussed possibility of joint test flights to test require-
    ments being developed for docking systems. Experiments “might be
    conducted between spacecraft of the Apollo and Salyut station types
    and between spacecraft of the Soyuz and Skylab programs,” NASA
    statement said.
       Soviet visitors were escorted on tour of MSC by Astronauts Fred W.
    Haise, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly 11, and John W. Young. Several
    “flew” computerized simulators used to train Apollo astronauts to dock
    CM and LM for lunar landing. (NASA Release 71-111; Transcript)
  Jamaican and U.N. officials visited MSC to review data acquired by NASA,
    Jamaican Geological Survey, and US. Geological Survey during earth
    resources survey of Jamaica made in April at request of Jamaican
    government and U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization. NASA’s
    instrumented C-130 aircraft had gathered data on Jamaica water sup-
    ply. Jamaica had average 508-cm (200-in) annual rainfall but much
    mountain river water never reached reservoirs. It was believed that
    submarine springs carried portion of water offshore into Caribbean
    Sea. Allen H. Watkins, Manager of MSC Earth Observations Aircraft
    program, said excellent data gathered on flights had been supplemented
    by most nearly complete “ground truth” operation yet attempted by
    MSC aircraft program. During MSC visit, Jamaican group was trained
    by NASA to use equipment needed for later analysis of data in Jamaica.
     (MSC Release 7 1 4 2 )
June 22: NASA received design patents No. 220980 through 220985 for
    early conceptual designs of space shuttle. Inventors were employees
    of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp. Space
    Div. (Jones, NYT, 6/26/71; Patent Off PIO)
* MSC announced selection of GE Houston Operations to receive $576730,
    cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for Skylab flight garments and crew provi-
    sions. (MSC Release 7 1 4 1 )
  Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
    MSC experiment to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instru-
    ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Soviet scientist Anatoly Fedoseyev, said to have defected to West on
    May 27 [see June 191, had been given permission to stay in England,
    London Times reported. (London Times, 6/22/71 ; British Embassy
    PIO)
  Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.) introduced for himself and cosponsors
    amendment to H.R. 7109, FY 1972 NASA authorization bill that would
    require “reasonable and economic” percentage of recycled scrap
    materials be used in NASA construction and procurement programs.
    (CR, 6/22/71,59615-20)
                                   171
June 23                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

June 23: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified before Senate
    Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUI), Space, and Sci-
    ence during hearings on NASA FY 1972 appropriations bill. He urged
    that “strong program in space and aeronautics is essential to our long-
    term national well-being. Our capabilities as a Nation to deal with
    domestic problems of high priority-poverty,        cities, the environment
     . . . and indeed, our pursuit of happiness and cultural advance-ulti-
    mately depend on whether we can maintain a strong economy with
    continually increasing productivity. Increasing productivity, in turn,
    depends primarily on technological advance, which, in turn, results
    primarily from the large scale focussed technological efforts like our
    major space programs.”
        In addition were both long-term and near-term direct benefits, many
    already realized. “When 50,000 lives were saved as a result of satellite
    advance warning at the time of hurricane Camille, the space program
                             .
    probably paid for itself. . .
        “I believe that the space program is a value in itself to the nation
    and to the whole world. With our everyday preoccupation, necessarily,
                                                                          .
    with the many serious and often depressing problems we face . .
    there is, I believe, a human hunger for positive elevating goals to
    work for at the same time as we do what needs to be done in all these
    other difficult areas. I believe the strong attraction that the landing
    of the first man on the moon had on people everywhere, and much of
    the underlying basis of support in the country for the space program,
    stems from the fact that the space program provides such goals. The
    space program gives us goals seemingly beyond human capability,
    goals which transcend earthly boundaries.’’
        Space shuttle had tremendous impact for future because it not only
    reduced cost by being reusable itself, but it also gave options of reusing
    payloads. “You do not have to throw them away once you put them
    up there. . . . There are many more application satellites we can use
    with this kind of an arrangement, because we will be able to reuse
    them.”
       Skylab, “first and only NASA experimental space station,” due to fly
    in 1973, would be “larger but 2 years later than the Soviet Salyut
    now in orbit.” U.S.S.R. probably would be able to “do things in space,
                                            .
    laboratories, 2 years earlier than we . . to know what the earth is
    like, to know what the clouds are like, to understand more about the
    earth’s resources. . . . Another aspect, which I am uncertain about,
                                                      .
    is what they plan to do in a military way. . . they will have the
    potential of doing military things on this same vehicle. We do not
    plan to do this on the Skylab. We also must consider the scientific
    value of Salyut, which I think is important, but not as important to
    us as the applications and the military aspects of it.”
       Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard
    C. McCurdy testified that “models” of anticipated further reduction of
    1500 civil service positions in fall “indicate that we have reached a
    point in which really good people of considerable experience will be
    going out the door. Certain parts of our operations will be closed. This
    means that we have come to a place where reductions in force are
    eating into our capability to do the job.” (Transcript)

                                    172
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   June 23

                                                            H.R. 9382, FY
* House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported
    1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill which cont              $3.272
    billion NASA appropriation. Committee recommended                 tion in
    Apollo program funding from $612.2 million requested to $610.2 mil-
    lion; increase in Skylab funding from $535.4 million to $550.4 million
    to provide rescue capability; additional $5 million over estimate for
    STOL development, to total $115 million; deferment of $20 million
    proposed for space shuttle facilities; and reduction of $6.6 million in
    $726.6 million requested for research and program management.
    (H Rpt 9230.5)
* US. and U.S.S.R. reached compromise agreement at Geneva conference
    on draft treaty to provide compensation for damages caused by objects
    from outer space and submitted draft articles of proposed treaty to
    legal subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Outer Space. Key articles
    provided for arbitration with final decision not binding on signatory
    states, although there would be moral and political obligation to pay
    compensation high enough to restore injured person or damaged
    property to original condition, if possible. (UPI, W Star, 6/23/71, A12)
  NASA held pre-proposal conference for study of tracking and data relay
    satellite system (TDRSS) to provide design and cost information on
    tracking and data relay satellites and interfacing elements of overall
    system. TDRSS was envisioned in RFP as providing extended coverage
    and service to comsats in near earth orbit. NASA intended to award
    two separate and concurrent contracts for definition studies of system
    to include spacecraft, user telecommunications system, ground station,
    and network scheduling and operations control center. About 90 RFPS
    had been mailed in advance of conference. (NASA Release 71-113;
    NASA PAO)
* Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced H.R. 9379, “bill to establish
    an Office of Technology Transfer.” He said: “As a nation we have
    enjoyed many valuable side-effects, spin-offs or ‘fallouts’ from [Fed-
    eral] research. Many of the examples of the miracles of modern sci-
    ence, oi technology transfer, the path from ‘science to sales’ come from
    the annals of NASA, largely because NASA has made a concerted effort
    to accomplish the transfer of their space technology to everyday usage
    and have publicized that effort especially well.” (CR, 6/23/71,
    H5825-6)
* NASA announced receipt of more than 600 proposals from potential do-
    mestic and international users of data expected from ERTS and earth
    resources experiment package to be carried on Skylab. It was greatest
    number of proposals for experiments ever received by NASA in re-
    sponse to announcement of opportunity for analysis of space-derived
    data. ERTS-A would be launched in spring 1972 and ERTS-B in 1973.
    First Skylab carrying EREP would be launched in 1973. Proposals in
    response to February invitation had come from more than 550 domestic
    and 80 international sources. They were being evaluated by nine pan-
    els of more than 100 scientific experts in various disciplines. (NASA
    Release 71-114)
  U.K. government confirmed to Congress that financing of Rolls-Royce
    engines for Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s GlOll TriStar jet aircraft
    would “not become effective,’ unless Congress acted by Aug. 8 to
    authorize US. Government loan guarantee to Lockheed as requested

                                    173
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 23

    by Nixon Administration. Confirmation was in letter to Senate Bank-
    ing and Currency Committee. (NYT, 6/24/71,56)
  NASA selected General Electric Co. and RCA Service Co. for further com-
    petitive negotiations leading to award of contract for technical sup-
    port services at MTF. (MSFC  Release 71-109)
June 24: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 428 from Baykonur into orbit with
    248-km (154.1-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89-min pe-
    riod, and 51.7O inclination. Satellite reentered July 6. (GSFC SSR,
    6/30/71,7/31/71; SBD, 6/25/71,299)
  NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC experi-
    ments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between
    35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades and recording
    their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from Point Barrow,
    Alaska, reached 110.8-km (68.9-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades
    exploding as planned. Rocket launched from Churchill Research Range
    carried 19 grenades to 124.4-km (77.3-mi) altitude; 17 soundings were
    recorded. Rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 31 grenades
    to 114.3-km (71-mi) altitude; all 31 detonated and were recorded on
    ground. (NASA   Rpts SRL)
  Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
0

    Lockheed Aircraft Corp. x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and
    instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  USAF YF-12 aircraft, one of two in joint NASA-USAF       aeronautical re-
    search program to advance technology of supersonic military and civil
    aircraft, crashed on routine flight from Edwards AFB, Calif. Both
    pilots parachuted to safety.
        Coincidentally, NASA announced addition of another USAF YF-12
    to program. New aircraft was specially instrumented for inflight pro-
    pulsion studies of engine internal flow dynamics, propulsion and air-
    frame interreactions, air inlet dynamics, atmospheric turbulence and
    temperature variations, rapid airflow changes, and factors affecting
    inflight stopping and restarting of engines. (AFSC PIO; FRC Release
     16-71; Aero Daily, 6/28/71, 316)
  Lowell Observatory astronomers had made first accurate mapping of
     weather of Mars as result of worldwide cooperation of observatories in
     NASA-funded ground-based planetary patrol program centered at Lowell,
     Christian Science Monitor said. Principal investigator Dr. William A.
     Baum had said object of program, begun in 1969, was to “maintain
     nearly continuous photographic surveillance of Mars, Jupiter, and
    Venus during favorable periods.” Mars weather seemed analogous to
    weather in arid regions of earth. (CSM, 6/24/71)
* TRW Inc. would develop conceptual designs for manned research labora-
    tory to support communications and navigation experiments under
     10-mo, $288 000 contract, MSFC announced. Study assumed laboratory
    would be launched in 1980s and could be flown as research and appli-
     cations module or as segment of orbiting space station. (MSFC  Release
    71-108)
* Information systems on board manned orbital stations could collect data
     on geological formations and potential mineral deposits, G. Katys,
     head of Soviet institute for problems of control, said in interview
     released by Tass. TV systems, panoramic cameras, radiometers, and
     spectrometers in infrared range would find application on orbital sta-

                                   174
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  June 24

    tions for earth resources research. There would be need to install heat-
    sensitive devices to locate volcanoes and sources of geothermal energy
    and TV cameras to clarify topographic maps. Identification of photos
    had already produced tangible results in hydrologic and oceanologic
    research. Photos of rocks, geological structure, and tectonic distur-
    bances had been interpreted. Cosmonauts on orbital stations could
    conduct research in various sectors of earth's surface, choosing most
    interesting zones. (FBIS-SOV-71-126, 6/30/71,16-17)
  MSFC announced selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for l6-m0, $1.1-million
    contract to develop turbopump assemblies for hydrogen and oxygen
    space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system (APS) technology program.
     Six-phase contract included exploratory study; design for tubopump
    components; fabrication of turbopump system; testing, refurbishing,
     acceptance testing, and delivery to NASA ; and engineering support.
     (MSFC Release 71-110)
  MSFC announced it had modified existing contract with Martin Marietta
    Corp. for work in Skylab Program to incorporate earth resources
    experiment package (EREP) into flight version of multiple docking
    adapter, device to permit Apollo spacecraft to dock with Skylab clus-
    ter. Total cost of modification was $6070 500. EREP would contain
    photographic experiments to study earth from orbit. (MSFC Release
    71-11 ) 1
  JPL announced selection of Motorola, Inc., Government Electronics Div.
0

     for negotiations on $2 179 000 contract with award fee to design,
     fabricate, and test flight-data subsystem for NASA Mariner Venus-
     Mercury spacecraft for 1973 mission. JPL also had selected Litton
     Industries Guidance and Control Systems Div. for negotiations on
     $10.4-million contract for development, fabrication, and testing of
     gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (to be carried on Viking
     lander) to analyze Mars surface. (JPL Releases 581,582)
* House passed by voice vote H.J.R. 742 making continuing appropriations
     for FY 1972, including provisions under H.R. 9382 for NASA, NASC,
     and NSF [see June 231. (CR, 6/24/71, H5848-50)
  NSF released Federal R&D Expenditures Related to Budget Functions,
     1960-72. Between 1960 and 1972 chief areas of Federal R&D funding
     had been defense, space research and technology, and health-totaling
     86% of estimated R&D expenditures of $15.7 billion for 1972. In 1960
     same three categories had totaled 95% of $7.3-billion R&D funding.
     Throughout 1960-1972 period, these three functions had led in R&D
     expenditures in same order. Ratio of R&D expenditures to total Federal
     budget outlays rose from 8.5% in 1960 to 12.4% in 1965. Ratio had
     decreased each year since 1965 and 7.4% estimated for 1972 was
     lowest in 1960-1972 period. Decline reflected more the absolute in-
      crease in total Federal outlays since 1965-from $111 billion to esti-
     mated $211 billion in 1972, excluding interest-than     any substantial
     absolute decline in R ~ expenditures. These expenditures rose from
                                D
      $13.8 billion in 1965 to $16.3 billion in 1968, but dropped back to
     $15- to $16-billion range after that.
         Defense consistently accounted for bulk of R&D expenditures but its
      share fell from 87% of Federal R&D total in 1960 to 53% in 1966,
      when space expenditures peaked. Later defense share increased but
      leveled off from 1968 at 57% to 58% of total Federal R&D. Space

                                    175
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
June 24

    research and technology rose from 5% share of Federal R&D expendi-
    tures in 1960 to 36% in 1966. “This function experienced a dramatic
    rise in funds during that period followed by sharp cutbacks.” Space
    had been only function with smaller R&D expenditure in 1970, 1971, or
    1972 than in 1966. Its expected 1972 share was 20%. (NSF Highlights,
    6/24/71,1)
  Dr. Addison M. Rothrock, retired NASA Director of Plans and Programs,
    died in Alexandria, Va., at age 68. During 4.5-yr career as propulsion
    research scientist he had joined NASA’s predecessor, NACA, i 1926 and
                                                                 n
    had become Assistant Director for Research in 1947. When NASA was
    established in 1958 he was appointed to similar post. Dr. Rothrock had
    retired from NASA in 1963 to serve as professor of applied science at
    George Washington Univ. ( W Post, 6/27/71, C6)
June 25: Four-stage Javelin rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station
    at 4:44, am EDT, carried NOAA experiment to 662-km (411-mi) alti-
    tude. Objective of mission was to investigate region of ionosphere
    above maximum electron density, where it could be treated as electron
    gas, Data was to be compared with data from GSFC Langmuir probe
    in payload and with measurements taken simultaneously by NBS Iono-
    sphere Sounding Station at Wallops Island, Va. Mission was unsuccess-
    ful.( WS Release 71-12; SR List)
  NASA announced assignments within MSC Flight Crew Operations Direc-
    torate: ApoZZo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had been named
    Deputy Director and ApuZZo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr.,
    would resume duties as Chief of Astronaut Office. Stafford also would
    assist Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, in
    technical matters related to flight crew activities. Post of Deputy
    Director had previously been vacant. (NASA Release 71-116)
  ComSatCorp filed with FCC for first-step rate reduction of 25% for
    Atlantic area satellite services, effective July 1, and proposed second-
    step reduction for leased voice-grade channels affecting Atlantic and
    Pacific area in early 2972, provided satellite traffic met forecast in-
    creases. ( ComSatCorp Release 71-36)
  Tass reported death of Soviet rocket designer Aleksey Isayev and identi-
    fied him for first time as designer of engines for Vostok and Voskhod
    rockets and Soyuz manned spacecraft. Tass said Soviet unmanned
    “interplanetary stations” also had been created under Isayev’s direc-
    tion. Izvestia said in biographical sketch that Isayev was one of main
    creators of aircraft that had made world’s first jet powered flight on
    May 5,1942. (AP, W Star, 6/27/71, A l l )
June 26: Anatoly Fedoseyev, who had been described as Soviet space
    expert, had sought asylum from U.S.S.R. in France on May 27 [see
    June 191 and was in England “reportedly talking to British and
    American interrogators,“ Chicago Tribune editorial said. “He could,
     if he desired, supply information of great value in the launching of
    our own space laboratory, Skylab, in 1973. More important, he could
    tell us whether Salyut is being used as a superspy in space to track
    our Polaris submarines.” Some scientists believed Polaris might be
    tracked by heat produced in its nuclear reactors. “And they suspect
    that the cosmonauts aboard Salyut are busy testing this very concept
    with delicate electronic sensors.” (C Trib, 6/26/71)

                                    176
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   June 26

  Soviet Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 cosmonauts were described by Dr. Vladimir
    Dupik in Sovietskaya Rossiya article as best-fed crew in history of
    space flights. Length of flight had necessitated diet of four hot meals
     daily including “first breakfast” of veal, bread, candy, and coffee;
     Gb
        second breakfast” of tongue, sausage, and curds; lunch of dried,
    salted fish, borscht, meat, bread, cake and black currant juice. Fourth
     meal was not described. Oven had been installed in spacecraft for
     first time in Soviet space program, spices had been added to meats to
     improve flavor, and 14 varieties of meat carried had “higher moisture
     content which makes them juicier and gives off a nice aroma.’’ (UPI,
    W Star, 6/27/71, A l l )
  NASA announced resignation of Ronald J. Philips, Director of Office of
     Technology Utilization, effective July 3. He would become Senior Vice
    President of technology application program sponsored jointly by
     International City Management Assn., National League of Cities, US.
     Conference of Mayors, and Ford Foundation. (NASA Release 71-117)
* New York Times reported comments on U.S.S.R. acceptance at Geneva
     conference of idea that claims commission of outside parties could fix
    amount of compensation for damages caused by objects launched into
    space. Observers saw acceptance as “major breakthrough in seven-year
     United Nations effort to complete space treaty covering payment for
     such damages.’’ While US. and smaller powers had urged course,
     U.S.S.R. had heretofore refused. (Teltsch, NYT, 6/26/71, 5)
  AAAS Board agreed to accept invitation from AAAS Soviet counterpart
     Znaniye (Knowledge) for annual exchange of four scientist-lecturers.
      (AAAS Bulletin, 2/72; AAAS PIO)
  IATA Secretary General Knut Hammarskjold expressed IATA’S opposition
     to proposed use of UHF band in satellite communications along air
     routes over Pacific Ocean. He said its use would make system twice
     as costly as one functioning on VHF band already employed in airway
     communications. Opposition was expressed in letter to US. and mem-
     ber governments of ESRO, which planned similar system for Atlantic
     Ocean. (NYT, 6/26/71)
June 28: NASA press conference at MSC summarized June 21-25 US.-
     U.S.S.R. discussions on joint space docking. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC
     Director and head of NASA delegation to discussions, said talks had
     been friendly throughout. “It was a period of hard work covering very
     difficult technical areas.” Meetings had been successful “in reaching
     conclusions, in principle, on all these subjects that we discussed, and
     in some detail in several of the subjects.” Need had been felt by both
     sides for “possibility of flight studies to test the technical require-
     ments for docking and rendezvous, . . . one that would use the actual
     kind of compatible . . . equipment” that would make possible space
     rescue from spacecraft of either side that might be in trouble. US.
     and Soviet CMS and space stations with mixed crews could orbit earth
     within four years. Soviet crews and US. crews “would no doubt, if
     they docked, . . . want to open the hatches and visit with one another.”
     Dr. Gilruth said flight test might take place in mid-70s. (Transcript)
* Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), on behalf of himself, Sen. Clifford P.
     Case (R-N.J.), Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.), and Sen. William
     Proxmire (D-Wis.), called up his amendment to H.R. 7109, FY 1972

                                    177
June 28                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     NASA authorization bill, which would delete from bill $138 million for
     space shuttle development. (CR, 6/28/71, ,510061-80 ; 10084r112)
  Senate passed H.R. 7960, $706.5 million FY 1972 NSF authorization bill.
     Bill included $2.5 million for Global Atmospheric Research Program
      (GARP) ; $4 million for Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico; $7.7 mil-
     lion for Kitt Peak National Observatory; $2.5 million for Cerro Tololo
     Inter-American Observatory in Chile ; $7 million for National Radio
     Astronomy Observatory; and $19 million for National Center for
     Atmospheric Research. Report accompanying bill described program
     of Research Applied to National Needs (RANN) established by NSF
     during FY 1971 to coordinate research in selected environmental,
     social, and technological problems. Major research efforts consolidated
     to form RANN were : weather modification, earthquake engineering,
     interdisciplinary research relevant to problems of our society (IRPOS) ,
    and other efforts formerly funded under scientific project support.
     (CR, 6/28/71, S997P-81; S Rpt 92-232)
* MSC announced award of $125 000, one-year, fixed-price R&D contract to
     NR to study safety techniques for spacecraft in earth orbit. (MSC
    Release 71-44)
  Bruce N. Torell was elected President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United
    Aircraft Corp. at regular meeting of board of directors. Torell would
    succeed Bernard A. Schmickrath, who was elected a vice president.
     Changes would be effective July 1 (P&W Eagle, 7/71, 2)
                                        .
  Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1970 was presented to B/C
    Robert A. Duffy (USAF), Vice Commander of SAMSO, in Washington,
    D.C., ceremony. Citation was for efforts bringing “dramatic improve-
    ments in the effectiveness and maneuverability of advanced re-entry
    systems, and in both the effectiveness and variety of penetration aids
     designed to compound the difficulties of an enemy in intercepting re-
    entry systems.” (W Star, 6/29/71, A4)
  NASA announced it had issued Management Study of NASA Acquisition
0

    Processes, report of team established in September 1970 to review
    NASA project and program planning for R&D and activities and proce-
    dures for acquiring goods and services from definition of require-
    ments through contract award. Report covered processes used for acqui-
    sitions leading to use of formal source evaluation boards for agency-
    level and field center-level source selections. Study group had con-
    cluded that basic framework of NASA acquisition process was sound,
    but it recommended some improvements in project planning, source
    solicitation, and source selection. (NASA Release 71-118; Text)
June 2830: AAS 17th annual meeting in Seattle, Wash., was devoted to
    exploration of outer solar system.
        JPL astronomer Dr. Donald G. Rea said Jupiter was biggest enigma
    and challenge to most space scientists. It “emits about three times as
    much energy as it receives from the Sun. It has a magnetic field 20
    times that of Earth, intense radiation belts, and apparently rotates at
    three different speeds. An important characteristic for flight projects
    is its gravity which will allow us to send a spacecraft to study Jupiter
    and then continue on” to investigate outermost planets of solar system.
        JPL scientist James E. Long recommended spacecraft be launched
    in 1981 for insertion into Jupiter orbit early in 1984 after 750-day
    trip from earth. “Depending on Jupiter’s radiation hazard, the space-

                                    178
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 June 28-30

    craft will have an active li
    “imperative that we get direct
    phere over long periods . .
    involved.”
       Technology for Thermoelectric Outer Planet Spacecraft (TOPS) ,sus-
    tained by self-repairing computers and capable of 10-yr scientific
    missions to outer planets, was described by JPL engineers Car1 C.
    Wertz, Paul 0. Chelson, and Richard A. Easton, J P L computers being
    developed and tested were STAR (self-testing and repairing) and CATS
     (computer-aided telemetry system) . Both had built-in redundancy, with
    backup parts for each unit that might fail. Easton said STAR computer
    was spacecraft’s brain and CATS computer its nervous system. Self-
    repairing computers were needed for outer planetary mission because
     6‘
      potentially hazardous environments, such as the asteroid belt between
    Mars and Jupiter, or radiation from Jupiter itself, require that Grand
    Tour spacecraft subsystems be self-adaptive to either transient or per-
    manent failures. Another consideration is the eight-hour roundtrip
    communications delay from Neptune or Pluto.”
       Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications,
    received Lloyd V. Berkner Award, presented annually by AAS to per-
    sons making significant contributions to commercial space utilization.
       AAS Flight Achievement Award was presented to Astronaut John L.
    Swigert, Jr., for Apollo 13 crew.
       LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright received AAS 1970 Space Flight
    Award “in recognition of his contribution to space ‘flight through early
    planning for the organization of NASA, his direction of the Lunar and
    Planetary Program, his influence while Deputy Associate Administrator
    of the Office of Space Science and Applications, and later the Office
    of Manned Space Flight and his current position as Director of NASA
    Langley Research Center.”
       In speech on technology crisis Cortright said: “It is ironic that after
    10 years of ‘delivering the goods’ in an unparalleled manner, culmi-
    nating in manned exploration of the Moon, the space program is fight-
    ing for its life with a host of other priority programs. Already the
    national team of Government, industry, and university scientists, engi-
    neers, and technicians has been reduced to about 1/3 of its peak of over
    400000. If we are not to see the progress of a decade of dedicated
    national effort squandered away, we had better make our case for
    space loud and clear. I think we have a compelling case-even in these
    days of relevancy.” (J P L Releases 577, 578, 579; NASA Activities,
    7/15/71, 117 ; 8/15/71, 129-34; Langley Researcher, 7/19/71, 1;
    Boeing Release 5-0826)
June 29: Mariner 9, en route to Mars, was 7 900 000 km (4 909 000 mi)
    from earth at 9:OO am EDT after traveling 82 500 000 km (51 263 000
    mi) and receiving over 500 commands since launch May 30. Space-
    craft was expected to accomplish its basic 90-day scientific mission
    objectives, but was using more nitrogen gas than predicted for main-
    taining attitude stabilization. Current predictions indicated nitrogen
    gas supply would be depleted in early August 1972, nine months after
    spacecraft went into orbit around Mars. Increased rate of consumption
    was due to circuit design error in attitude-control-system electronics.
    (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 71-120)

                                    179
June 29                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  Tenth anniversary of launch of SNAP-3AY first radioisotope thermo-
     electric generator-launched from KSC aboard USN Transit &A satellite
     by Thor-Able-Star booster June 29, 1961, in joint NASA-DOD-AEC pro-
     gram to develop use of nuclear power in space. SNAP-3A was still
     transmitting signals earthward but was no longer in use. It had
     orbited earth more than 50 000 times and traveled more than 2.4 bil-
     lion km (1.5 billion mi). (AEC Release 0-103; A&A, 1961)
  Senate, by vote of 82 to 5, passed H.R. 7109, $3.281-billion FY 1972
     NASA authorization bill, after rejecting by vote of 64? to 22 Mondale
     amendment No. 233 that would have deleted from bill $138 million for
     space shuttle program.
        Senate also passed by voice vote H.J.R. 742, making continuing
     appropriations for FY 1972, after rejecting by vote of 63 to 24 modi-
     fied Proxmire amendment limiting ceiling for defense expenditures to
     $68 billion. (CRY6/29/71, S1012fj-62, S10177, S10272-98)
* Plans for 1974 World Weather Program experiment GATE (GARP Atlantic
     Tropical Experiment) were announced by NOAA. Part of Global Atmos-
     pheric Research Program (GARP) , project would study behavior of
     cloud clusters and their role in larger circulation of atmosphere in
     Atlantic Ocean area from west coast of Latin America eastward to
     Ethiopia, with more intensive study of cloud clusters in smaller ocean
     area. GATE project was one of succession of experiments to increase
     understanding of atmosphere in order to develop numerical models
     and program computers for long-range weather prediction. (NOAA
     Release 71-82)
  MSFC announced award of $97996 contract to Brown Engineering Co.
     for development of systems simulator to assess life support and habit-
     ability requirements for future space applications. Simulator was sched-
     uled for Oct. 1delivery. (MSFC Release 71-112)
  President Nixon transmitted to Congress third annual report of National
     Science Board, Environmental Science: Challenge for the Seventies.
     Report found environmental science “unable to match the needs of
     society for definitive information, predictive capability, and the analysis
     of environmental systems as systems. Because existing data and current
     theoretical models are inadequate, environmental science remains un-
     able in virtually all areas of application to offer more than qualitative
     interpretations or suggestions of environmental change that may occur
    in response to specific actions.” Situation constituted “crisis for the
    Nation.” Report recommended establishing national program for ad-
    vancing science of environmental systems. (PD, 7/5/71, 1019; Text)
June 30: Soyllz 11 Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N. Vol-
    kov, and Viktor I. Patsayev were posthumously awarded titles of Hero
    of the Soviet Union for “heroism and courage shown during the test
    of the new space complex, the orbital station Salyut and the transpori
    ship Soyuz-11.” Cosmonauts had died during reentry from June 6-30
    mission. (FBIS-SOV-71-127, 7/1/71, L1)
  Soviet government ordered formation of special commission to investigate
    deaths of Soyzu 11 cosmonauts during reentry from 24-day mission.
     (Mills, B Szm, 7/1/71, A l )
  President Nixon sent message to Nikolay V. Podgorny, Chairman of
0

    Presidium of Supreme Soviet, on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: “The
    American people join me in expressing to you and the Soviet people

                                     180
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  June 30

    our deepest sympathy on the tragic death of the three Soviet cosmo-
    nauts. The whole world followed the exploits of these courageous
    explorers of the unknown and shares the anguish of their tragedy.
    But the achievement of cosmonauts Dobrovolsky, Volkov and Patsayev
    remains. It will, I am sure, prove to have contributed greatly to the
    future of space and thus to the widening of man’s horizons.” (PD,
    7/5/71,1010)
* Donald K. Slayton, MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations, sent cable
    on behalf of U.S. astronauts to Soviet Academy of Sciences: “We
    share with the world community deep sorrow for the loss of Cosmo-
    nauts Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor Patsayev, and
    we mourn with all the Russian people the deaths of three brave coun-
    trymen.” (Reuters, B Sun, 7/1/71, A2; MSC pro)
  US. manned space flight program would continue on schedule despite
    Soyuz II tragedy, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, told press in
    Houston.
       Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Opera-
    tions, said cosmonauts could have been killed by a toxic gas that acci-
    dently escaped, either by a chemical reaction or by a substance being
    heated inadvertently. He said odds were 1000 to 1 against one cosmo-
    naut dying from effects of 24 days of weightlessness and it was almost
    impossible for all three to die simultaneously from weightlessness.
       Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, told press cosmo-
    nauts’ deaths might have been caused by failure of spacecraft’s
    oxygen-supply system or by physical rupture of spacecraft. Deaths,
    he said, were “a terrible tragedy. They were pioneers in their achieve-
    ments in space-in establishing the first manned space station. Our
    hearts go out to their families and to their colleagues. The cause of
    their death is not yet known to us. But I would speculate that the
    fault was with the spacecraft and not with the men. In all of our ex-
    perience man has readily adapted to new conditions, while machines
    have sometimes failed.” Dr. Low said he did not expect changes in
    NASA% Skylab program because of cosmonauts’ deaths: “All of our
    experience in 24 manned flights suggests we can and should move
    ahead.” (UPI, W Star, 7/1/71, A3; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 107)
  Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
    GSFC solar astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments functioned
    satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Discovery of two discrete sources of very-high-energy gamma rays in
0

    southern Milky Way by team of scientists from Case Western Reserve
    Univ. and Univ. of Melbourne, Australia, was announced by NSF. Rays
    had been detected by instruments aboard three balloon flights made
    at altitude of 40 km (25 mi) in stratosphere on Feb. 6 and 27 and
    Nov. 27, 1969. All three balloons had been launched from Australia.
    Newly discovered sources also emitted x-rays. Scientists hoped that fact
    sources emitted both gamma and x-rays might provide additional clue
    as to how their energy was generated. They might be related to other
    unusual objects discovered during last decade such as quasars and
    pulsars. (NSF Release 71-171)
  Breaking-in process of world’s most powerful atom-smasher-500-bev
0

    accelerator at Batavia, 111.-began with first firing of protons around
    6.4-km (4-mi) ring. Accelerator would build up to original design

                                   181
June 30                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     energy of 200 bev and was expected ultimately to produce seven times
     the energy of Soviet accelerator at rpukhov, near Moscow. (Sullivan,
    NYT, 7/2/71,24)
* International law had been “enuichedY’by draft of international conven-
     tion on responsibility for damaging space objects, Tass reported from
     Geneva. Document had been completed by juridical subcommittee of
     U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. Tass said con-
     vention, which would be submitted to September meeting of U.N. space
                                                      ..
     committee, provided “reliable and acceptable .       juridical foundation
     for %tiling problems of material responsibility which . . . may arise
     due to the rapidly expanding research programmes and the use of
     space.” (FBIS-~ov-71-126,6/30/71, L8)
* Soviet progress in science and technology was discussed in Sovetskaya
     Rossiya article by M. D. Millionschikov, Vice President of Soviet Acad-
     emy of Sciences: “In recent years there has been an immense improve-
     ment in the development of astronomy and astrophysics. Our science
     has made discoveries of fundamental significance and has shifted con-
     siderably the limits of phenomena in the universe known to man.
     Research into the nature of powerful sources of radiowaves discovered
     some years ago has led to the conclusion that the objects noted are
     located almost on the edge of the observable area of the universe at
     a distance of 5 billion light years. The power of radiation exceeds all
     currently known scales. In order to explain the colossal energy they
     radiate from the standpoint of the most powerful known mechanism
     for emitting energy-thermonuclear synthesis-it is necessary to sup-
    pose that its source must be simultaneous thermonuclear explosion of
     a mass equivalent to a hundred million stars the size of the sun.”
     (FBIS-~OV-71-134,6/30/71, L1)
  Miss Baker-13-yr-old South American squirrel monkey launched and
    returned from 483-km (300-mi) altitude on USA Jupiter missile May
    28, 1959-arrived at Alabama Space and Rocket Center, where she
    would reside permanently. Monkey was transferred from US. Naval
    Aerospace Medical Institute. (Huntsville Times, 6/29/71)
* Award by DOT of $3.5-million contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. for
    construction of tracked air cushion research vehicle was announced by
    Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Vehicle, 15.5 m (51 ft)
    long and weighing nearly 27 000 kg (60 000 lbs) , would accommo-
     date four persons including operator and test engineer. DOT would
    test vehicle at its High Speed Test Center in Pueblo, Colo., on its com-
    pletion¶ scheduled for March 1972. (DOT Release FRA 971)
  FAA announced award of $390 000 contract to Saphier, Lerner, Schindler
0

    -Environetics     (Div. of Litton Industries) for proposed two-phased
    study of offshore jetport [see May 211 to serve metropolitan New
    York City. (FAA Release 71-99)
  NASA leaders were “realistic enough to sense that their case for the [space]
    shuttle must be built on more than chauvinistic appeal to national
    prestige, which sold the Apollo in the early 1970s,” Jonathan Spivak
    said in Wall Street Journal. They were “working hard to trim the shut-
    tle’s prospective costs, demonstrate its economic payoff and convince
    the scientific community that it offers attractive new opportunities for
    research.” But NASA’S “primary problem” was “convincing the public
    and the politicians that it still makes sense to go into space at all. The

                                    182
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    June 30

    moon is no Ionger a glamorous goal; Mars is too far distant and
    expensive, and orbiting space stations to date have made few influential
    converts.” (VS,I, 6/30/71, 10)
During June: Skylab was described in article by Dr. George M.Low, NASA
    Deputy Administrator, in Astronautics & Aeronautics: “By far the
    largest manned spacecraft we have ever built, Skylab will be the fore-
    runner of permanent stations in space. In orbit 435 km [270 mi]
    above Earth, the Skylab cluster will be 36 meters [118 ft] long and
    will weigh 82 238 kilograms [E31304 lbs]. One of its major compo-
    nents will be a workshop with 362 cubic meters [474 cu yds] of work
    area. Other parts will include a Multiple Docking Adapter, Airlock
    Module, Apollo Command and Service Module, and an Apollo Tele-
    scope Mount, the last of these a full-fledged solar observatory capable
    of observing, monitoring, and recording phenomena on the Sun’s sur-
    face that cannot be seen from Earth.” Skylab would carry from earth
    orbit “about 50 scientific, medical, applications, and solar-astronomy
    experiments. Twenty of these will be in the life sciences, to determine
    how man performs and adjusts under conditions of prolonged space
    flight. The study of materials and manufacturing will be another area
    of interest. By means of an electron-beam generating device and an
    electric furnace, metals will be melted, molded, and welded, and other
    metallurgy and crystal tests performed in a work chamber exposed to
    zero-gravity and the vacuum of space.” (A&A, 6/71, 20-1)
* NASA released two publications for sale by Superintendent of Documents,
    GPO. Apollo 14 Prelimin,ary Science Report (NASA SP-272), prepared
    by MSC, described Apollo 14: mission and summarized scientific results.
        On the Moon With Apollo 15, guidebook to Hadley Rille and Apen-
    nine Mountains, had been prepared by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, MSC
     Chief Scientist. Publication would aid in following progress of Apollo
     15 mission by giving timeline for mission, describing and illustrating
    lunar surface scientific experiments, and defining terms. (Texts)
* NASA released Goals and Means in the Conquest of Space by R. G.
     Perel’man (NASA Technical Translation F-595 dated May 1970).
    Translation of Tseli i Puti Pokoreniva Kosmosa, “Nauka” Press,
     Moscow, 1967, concluded: “The time will come when space liners will
     be sent across interstellar routes, but the achievements of Soviet sci-
     ence and technology will never be forgotten, since they first made it
     possible for man to set foot in the universe, and since the labor of
    every Soviet citizen is involved.” (Text)
  Stanford Univ. and MIT experiments to determine internal structure of
     protons and neutrons by use of 21-bev beam at Stanford’s Linear
     Accelerator Center were described in Scientific American by Dr. Henry
     W. Kendall of MIT and Dr. Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky of Stanford Univ.
     Scientific team had smashed what they thought were basic atom par-
     ticles, to find that “the way ultrahigh-energy electrons are scattered by
     protons and neutrons suggests that these ‘elementary’ nuclear particles
     have a complex internal structure consisting of pointlike entities.”
     New entities had been named “partons” because they seemed to be
     parts within parts. Scientists had concluded, “It is still too early to
     say whether the parton model will lead to an understanding of the
     nucleon’s structure or whether entirely new ideas may be required.”
      (Scientif;c American, 6/71, 61-77)

                                     183
         PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FIL



                                July 1971

July 1: Bodies of dead Soyuz 11 cosmonauts, killed during return from
     June 6-30 mission, lay in state in flower-decked biers in Central House
     of Soviet Army in Moscow. Thousands of persons waited in miles-
     long line to pay last respects. Top Communist Party and U.S.S.R. gov-
     ernment leaders appeared shortly after hall was opened. Bodies would
     be cremated in preparation for July 2 funeral. (Gwertzman, NYT,
     7/2/71,14; B Sun, 7/2/71)
  Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz I1 cosmonauts:
        Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone
     wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right
     for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to
     Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is
     testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States
     space prbgram that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.”
      (C Trib, 7/1/71)
                                        ..  those men who fly such missions
        Christian Science Monitor: c L .
     are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limita-
     tions of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on
     the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them.
     As a result, the Soyuz 1 event argues the more determinedly that
                                 1
     nations-for    the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet
     Union-should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71)
        Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event
     does not proceed from their numbers-three deaths next to, say, thou-
     sands among the world‘s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it
     proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to
     take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daiIy, men in
     combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and
     unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share.
      So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that
     must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these
     men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer
                                                           beyond.” ( W Post,
     limits of human knowledge and endurance-and
     7/1/71)
                            “. . .  it should be apparent that the staggering
        New York Times:
      dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the
     knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time
     to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition.
                                             .
      The real lesson of this tragedy is . . that space exploration ought to
      be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71)
        Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23
      days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its
      designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful
      before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B
      Sun, 7/1/71)

                                      185
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
July 1

* MSC announced award of four, four-month, fixed-price extensions to
    contracts for space shuttle preliminary design. McDonnell Douglas
    Corp., North American Rockwell Corp., and General Dynamics Corp.
    would each receive $2800000, and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. would
    receive $1400 000. (MSCRelease 71-46)
  NASA issued invitation to scientists to participate in definition phase for
    Planetary Explorer missions to Venus. Emphasis would be on low-cost
    approach using spin-stabilized Explorer spacecraft launched by Delta
    booster. From respondents to invitation NASA would select scientists to
    play active role in defining typical payload for initial missions in 1976
     and 1977 and to make recommendations for subsequent orbiter and
    probe missions in 1978 and 1980. (Text; NASA Release 71-124)
  Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., retired from NASA to become
     Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB,
     Calif. He had logged 289 hrs 53 min in space during astronaut career.
     (AP, W Post, 7/2/71, A3)
* LaRC Director of Aeronautics Laurence K. Loftin assumed for one year
     post of Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the
     Air Force for R&D Grant L. Hansen. (Aw Pk,5/31/71, 23)
* Robert F. Froehlke was sworn in as Secretary of the Army. (USA PIO)
July 2: Ashes of S o p z 11 Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav
     N. Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev, killed during reentry from June 6-
     30 mission, were buried in Kremlin Wall in Moscow’s Red Square.
     Military funeral, climaxing national day of mourning, was watched by
     millions of TV viewers and attended by leading Soviet and foreign
     officials and thousands of other onlookers. Condolences were sent by
     world leaders. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford represented President
     Nixon at funeral.
        Eulogy at funeral was presented by Andrey P. Kirilenko, head of
     funeral commission: “On a small island of the motherland traveling at
     a fantastic speed across the expanses of the universe they were filled
     with courage and the conviction that the tasks of the party and people
     would be fulfilled ; and they fulfilled these tasks, successfully com-
     pleting a complex and varied program oi scientific research and tech-
     nical experiments. The results of their observations are invaluable for
     science, for the future of space technology, fcr mankind. For 24 days
     we saw the valorous cosmonauts on the television screens and listened
     to their voices. With unbated attention we followed their work. Mil-
     lions of people, as it were, became intimately linked with the heroes of
     the cosmos. We all impatiently awaited the cosmonauts’ safe return to
     home territory. Their lives tragically came to an end when the long
     cosmic journey was close to completion.”
        Letter from 19 surviving cosmonauts printed in Pruwdu said: “To-
     day we are paying the last tribute to our talented and courageous com-
     rades. There is not only grief in our hearts, but also pride for what
     they have done for the homeland in outer space. We know that our
     road is a difficult and thorny one, but we never doubted the correct-
     ness of our choice and were always ready for any difficult flight. We
     express firm confidence that what happened cannot stop the further
     development and perfection of space engineering and man’s striving
     for space, striving for knowledge of the mysteries of the universe.”

                                    186
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    July 2

    (FBIS-sOV-129--3, 7/6/71, L1; Kingston, Canada, Whig-Standard,
   7/2/71,1; AP, W Star, 7/1/71, A2)
 Unofficial sources in Moscow said deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts had
   been caused by embolism which occurred because of improperly sealed
   hatch, according to press reports. London Evening News Moscow cor-
   respondent Victor Louis reported cosmonauts had failed to close hatch
   securely during undocking from Salyut 1; as spacecraft reentered at-
   mosphere it had lost pressure and crew had been deprived of oxygen.
   Official commission formed to investigate deaths had not yet released
   findings. (Mills, B Sun, 7/3/71, A l ; Auerbach, W Post, 7/3/71, A l )
 Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., was opened to public for signing
   of condolence book for Soyuz 11 cosmonauts. ( W Post, 7/3/71, A12)
 NASA launched series of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC
   grenade experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and
   wind data between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi). First rocket,
   launched from Churchill Research Range, carried 19 grenades to
   122.4-km (76.1-mi) altitude, with all 19 grenades exploding as
   planned.
      Second rocket was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, with 31
   grenades, but electrical power to DOVAP ground transmitter was lost
   and no trajectory data were recorded beyond 4.5 sec GET. All gre-
   nades exploded and were recorded, but data were not useful with-
   out trajectory data. Third rocket, launched from Point Barrow as
   backup, successfully carried 19 grenades to 94.5-km (58.7-mi) alti-
   tude, with all grenades detonating and recorded as planned.
      Fourth rocket, launched from Wallops Station, carried 19 grenades
   to 122-km (75.8-mi) altitude. All 19 grenades detonated as planned
   and 14 sound arrivals were recorded. (NASA Rpts SRL)
 NASA announced award of $2.3-million contract to Sperry Rand Corp.
   Flight Systems Div. for design and construction of STOLAND. Ad-
   vanced STOL avionics system based on digital computer would pro-
   vide navigation and control information to pilot via advanced elec-
   tronic displays and drive aircraft’s control surfaces in response to
   inputs from pilot or computer. STOLAND would be installed in C-8
   Buffalo aircraft being modified as jet STOL aircraft in NASA-DOT-FAA
   program to develop data base for systems concepts, design criteria,
   operational procedures, and certification criteria for STOL aircraft,
   STOL runways, and STOL air traffic control system. (NASA         Release
   71-125)
 Decline of science in America was discussed by Arnold Thackray, Univ.
   of Pennsylvania professor of history and sociology, in Science : “That
   some new social accommodation and organization of the scientific
   enterprise is in process of formation is, I think, evident from the
                                                                        .
   present restlessness in the larger scientific and political community . .
   reflected in a host of articles, meetings, discussions, and resolutions.
    From a historian’s perspective the central question would seem to be
   whether specialist societies will reorganize in ways that help accom-
   modate broader social concerns, or whether such societies will undergo
   a relative decline in importance. It could well be that generalist
   societies, like the AAAS and the National Academy of Sciences, are
   better adapted to pioneer these new roles, which also cut across tra-
    ditional disciplinary boundaries and concerns. If so, we may be on

                                   187
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
July 2

     the edge of a new era in the life of scientific societies as social organ-
     isms, an era in which both general and scientific politics feature un-
     ashamedly in the raisons d’etre of reinvigorated and reorganized gen-
     eralist scientific societies.” (Science, 7/2/71,27-31)
  NSF published Unemployment Rates for Scientists, Spring 1971. Rate
     was 2.6% in 1971, jumping from 1.5% in 1970. National unemploy-
     ment rate for all workers for first quarter 1971 averaged 6.5%.
     Doctorates experienced 1.4% unemployment rate in 1971 and 0.9%
     in 1970, while nondoctorate scientists were reported at 3.570 rate in
     1971 and 2.9% in 1970. Defense and space constituted largest areas
     of activity, with 11% and 4% of unemployed. Approximately 45%
     of 1971 unemployed scientists reported last science-related job had
     been supported to some degree by Government funds. (NSF Highlights,
     7/2/7191)
  John R. Schaibley, Executive Assistant to Apollo Program Director,
     OMSF, died in Virginia after extended illness. He had been with NASA
     since 1959 and had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA
     Ann)
July 3: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated following eighth
     lunar night since vehicle was landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17,
     1970. Temperature in instrumentation compartment was 295 K
     (72OF), pressure was 100 375 newtons per sq m (753 mm mercury),
     and all systems were functioning satisfactorily. (Tass, FBIS-sov-129-3,
     7/6/71, L1)
July 4 : Boris Petrov, chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Scientific Council
     on Space, said in Pravda that deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts would
     not halt U.S.S.R.’s manned orbital space station: “New flights into
     space, the building of new manned orbital stations of the Salyut type,
     lie ahead. Undoubtedly, larger and more complex multipurpose and
     specialized manned space stations will be built. One can say with
     confidence that the 1970s will become an epoch of the development
     and broad use of long-term manned orbital stations with changing
     crews which will make it possible to switch from occasional experi-
     ments in space to a regular vigil by scientists and experts in space
     laboratories.” (UPI, NY News, 7/5/71, 7)
July 5: L/G Samuel C. Phillips, SAMSO Commander, had been appointed to
     NASA Space Systems Advisory Committee, Aviation Week & Space
     Technology reported. (Av Wk, 7/5/71,9)
* Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented on deaths of
     Soviet cosmonauts: “Space technology has already proved some of its
     greatest gains for the common good on earth are in medical areas.
     If the deaths of the Soyuz 1 cosmonauts focus more attention not
                                        1
     only on the need for this research but also for the need to share it
     with all mankind, they will have made a contribution far beyond the
     specific achievements” of their voyage. (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/5/71, 7 )
July 6 : Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred
     M. Worden began three-week preflight medical isolation to minimize
     exposure to disease or illness that could delay planned July 26 launch
     to moon. Crew would be confined to ICSC crew quarters, training build-
     ing, and launch pad until liftoff. ( W Post, 7/7/71, A13)
  Award of $1.4million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. Vertol
     Div. for fabrication and test of hingeless, low-disk loading tilt rotor

                                     188
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                      July 6

     was announced by NASA. Contract was part of joint USA-NASA program
    to provide technology for design of research aircraft. Although actual
     flight had not been scheduled, rotor would be fabricated consistent
     with flight application. (NASA Release 71-126)
* MSC announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to receive
     $380 009, 10-mo, firm-price extension to contract for design study of
     space shuttle auxiliary propulsion system (APS). McDonnell Douglas
     would define oxygen-hydrogen system compatible for both booster and
     orbiter vehicles. (MSC Release 71-47)
* Astrologer Jeane Dixon in Fashington Daily News predicted “tremen-
                                                        .
     dous adventures in space for the United States . . provided we keep
     an eye on platform placements and docking attempts above earth.” She
     also said that three US.satellites had been intercepted “and deadened”
    by U.S.S.R. (VNews, 7/6/71, 7 )
jzdy 7: NASA announced it had issued RFPS for automated HEAO to study
    high-energy radiation from space. Proposals were due Aug. 27 at MSFC
     and contract would be awarded early in 1972 if HEAO became ap-
    proved project in FY 1972. Single contract for two spacecraft would
     continue through launch and mission operations support for seven
     years. Contract called for system engineering of HEAO payload; design
     and development of spacecraft ; pFocurement and integration of orbit
     adjust stage and shroud; integration of experiments; design, develop-
     ment, and delivery of one set of HEAO ground support equipment; and
    launch operations support. Winning contractor also would provide mis-
     sion operations support for observatory for up to two years for each
    mission. (NASA Release 71-127)
  Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York Univ. Medical Center
    had accepted for evaluation and testing motorized wheelchair con-
     trolled by sight-switch, NASA announced. Switch, worn on head, enabled
    user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movements with
    his eyes. It had been developed under NASA direction to help astronauts
     in training to operate equipment under extreme flight conditions. Insti-
     tute’s director, Dr. Howard A. Rusk, had estimated that more than
     100000 quadriplegics-persons with no use of arms or legs-could
     achieve mobility if chair could be made available. (NASA Release
    71-122; A&A 1970)
  Pravdu article said prospects were good for US.-U.S.S.R. agreement in
     SALT, which resumed in Helsinki July 8, but stressed that agreement
     must provide “equal security” for both nations. “Action is met by
     counteraction. If one side strengthens its defense, then the other fever-
     ishly looks for new, more powerfuI means to pierce the defensive
     shield of the opponent. This process, if it is not stopped with the help
     of reasonable agreements in curbing the arms race, is endless.” (NYT,
    7/8/71,3)
July 8: NASA launched NRL’S S o h d 10 (Ezpplorer &) (Solrad-C) solar
     radiation satellite from Wallops Station at 6:58 pm EDT by Scout
     booster. Satellite entered orbit with 630.3-km (391.7-mi) apogee, 436.3-
    km (271.1-mi) perigee, 95.3-min period, and 51” inclination. NASA
     mission objective was to place satellite in orbit where it could monitor
     sun’s x-ray and uv emissions.
        Solrad 10, 115-kg (253.5413) 12-sided cylinder, carried 14 experi-

                                     189
July 8                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     ments to monitor solar electromagnetic and uv radiation continuously
     and to measure, on command, stellar radiation from other celestial
     sources. Information gained by satellite was expected to contribute to
     better understanding of physical processes in solar flares and other
     solar activities and potential effects of this activity on shortwave com-
     munications and on manned space travel. Satellite was third in series
     of solar radiation satellites launched from Wallops Station in joint
     NASA-NRL program. Two previous satellites were Explorer 30 (Solrad 8,
     launched Nov. 19,1965) and Explorer 37 (Solrad 9, launched March 5,
     1968). Solrad program was sponsored jointly by OSSA and Naval Air
     Systems Command, with NRL providing project management for mis-
     sion. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 71-115; WS Release 71-13)
  Technological intelligence concerning SALT was reaching U.S. through
0

     Soviet scientist who had defected to West under pseudonym of Anatoly
     Fedoseyev [see May 261 but had been identified subsequently as
     Ignatiy A. Nikitrine, deputy director of Soviet space program iq charge
     of electronics and cybernetics, Don Cook of Los Angeles Times reported
     in Washington Post. Meanwhile, AP said, British officials insisted scien-
     tist’s real name was Fedoseyev and that he was expert in field of
     (6
        powerful magnetrons’’ whose research had applications to Soviet space
     effort. (W Post, 7/8/71, A l ; AP, W Post, 7/9/71)
  US. and Soviet astronomers had concluded joint observations of quasars
     to determine their size and structure, Tass reported. Observations had
     been conducted from three locations-in Crimea, in eastern, and in
     western parts of U.S.-about       10000 km (6200 mi) apart. Soviet
     scientists had used 22-m (72-ft ) radiotelescope. (FBIS-SOV-71-132,
     7/9/71, L1)
* MSC announced selection of Lockheed Electronics Co., Inc., to receive
     $20-million, one-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract for general elec-
     tronic, scientific, and computing center support services, at MSC.
     (MSC Release 71-48)
* MSFC announced award of $325000 contract to North American Rock-
     well Corp. for 12-month study of inspace propellant logistics and
    safety. (MSFC Release 71-116)
* Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had released market analysis that showed it could
                                                                    60% more
    sell at least 400 new G l O l l TriStar jet airbuses-about
    than needed for firm to break even, Dow Jones reported in Washington
    Evening Star. (W Star, 7/8/71, B9)
July 9: NASA began distribution to 24 US. scientists of lunar soil samples
     returned by Soviet Luna 16 spacecraft and exchanged by U.S.S.R. for
    Apolb 11 and 12 samples June 10. About 50% of total three grams
     (one tepth ounce) of material would be distributed to principal U.S.
    experimenters in stages. First lot was about 600 mg (9 grains), or
    about 20% of total sample. Dr. Paul Gast, chief of MSC Planetqry and
    Earth Sciences Div., had said Soviet scientists had implied samples
    from Sea of Fertility differed from US. lunar samples because regolith
    w s thinner and closer to underlying strata than soil of other lunar
       a
    mare areas. Dr. G a t said Soviet samples contained wider grains than
    did U S samples. (NASA Release 71-128)
           ..
  Aerobee 170B sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR to
    191.5-km (119-mi) altitude on flight performance mission. Rocket and

                                    190
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                       July 9

     instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (SR
     list; Proj Scientist)
   President Nixon, in Proclamation 4066 proclaiming Oct. 24 United
      Nations Day, said: “Through the UN, we all share stewardship over
      the planet Earth: together we face the challenges of coordinating
      measures to heal and protect the world’s fragile ecosystems; of en-
      suring that the new resources of the sea are developed for the benefit
      of all mankind; of promoting international cooperation in the use
      of outer space.” (PO, 7/12/71,1044)
* Appointment of Robert E. Bower, Director of Advanced Development for
      Grumman Aerospace Corp., as Director for Aeronautics at LaRC had
      been announced by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Re-
      searcher reported. Bower succeeded Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., who had
      become Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the
      Air Force for R&D [see July 13. (Langley Researcher, 7/9/71, 1)
* Award to Global Associates of $4-millionYone-year, cost-plus-award-fee
      contract to provide institutional support services at MTF was an-
      nounced by MSFC. Selection had been made following competitive nego-
      tiations during which eight firms had submitted proposals. Contract
      included maintenance of rocket stage testing facilities in standby status
      and support services for other Fideral agencies using MTF.. (MSFC
     Release 71-117)
   International Galabert Prize, awarded annually by French for outstanding
      successes in exploration of outer space, had been presented to Soviet
      Academy of Sciences for Luna 16, Tass reported. (FBIS-SOV-71-133,
      7/9/71, L2)
   Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said at Washington, D.C. press conference,
      ‘‘I hope to see the day when our astronauts go up in Russian space-
      craft and the Russian cosmonauts in ours.” He would explore idea with
      Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin before he left for visit to
      U.S.S.R. in August, “if our own government will permit me to do so.”
      (UPI, W Post, 7/10/71, A3)
July 10: Soviet defector Anatoly Fedoseyev told London Daily Telegraph
     he had left U.S.S.R. because life had become unbearable and “sooner
      or later I would have finished up in a prison or concentration camp.”
      He had laughed at reports he was space expert comparable in impor-
     tance to NASA% Dr. Wernher von Braun and that his name was
     Nikitrine [see July 51. Fedoseyev told Telegraph he had “nothing to
      do with space projects” and was not ABM specialist. (AP, W Star,
     7/10/71)
J d y 11: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, commented on
     Salyut 1-Soym 11 docking in AP interview published by Chicago
      Tribune. Docking indicated U.S.S.R. was “more or less on schedule
     in their declared program for developing a major experimental station
     in space, at least two years ahead of u . In answer to question Dr.
                                             s”
     Fletcher said prospect “frightens me only because I don’t know what
     they’re doing there. They may have some military purposes that we
     don’t know about.” On U.S.S.R.’s two vehicles en route to Mars he
     said that ‘%re don’t know what these vehicles are going to do, but it’s
     conceivable that there will be attempts to land.” Dr. Fletcher said
     NASA had been “shocked and saddened” by loss of Soyuz 11 wsm

                                     191
July 11                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     nauts but “we find no reason to make any major changes in our plans
    for manned missions.” (AP, C Trib, 7/11/71)
e Jeffrey T. Hamilton, Special Assistant to NASA Assistant Administrator
     for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, became Director of
    Technology Utilization, succeeding Ronald J. Philips, whose resigna-
     tion had been announced June 26. (NASA Ann, 7/13/71)
  Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, announced appointment of Dr.
     Aaron Finerman of State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook to manage
     JPL’S newly established Office of Computing and Information Systems.
     (JPL Release 583)
  Boeing Co. was reactivating 767 project that was “simmering on a back
     burner” while SST was alive, William Hines said in Washington
    Sunday Star. Project “borrows liberally” from NASA aircraft develop-
     ment work. Boeing 767 subsonic jet would be about same size as
     Boeing 707, with same passenger capacity, but would be more than
     160 km per hr (100 mph) faster. Cruising speed would be 1167 km
    per hr (725 mph) or mach 0.98, “about the greatest achievable with-
    out generation of a sonic boom.”
        LaRc Director Edgar M. Cortright had said aircraft’s speed was
    attributable to its supercritical wing that could operate at speeds near
    mach 1 in shockproof condition. Boeing spokesman had said aircraft
    could be in service by end of decade. Hines said Boeing also was con-
    sidering production of stretched version of 727. (W Star, 7/11/71, D4)
Jdy 12: U.S.S.R. announced findings of special commission which investi-
    gated deaths of S o y a I I cosmonauts during reentry from June 6-30
    mission. Official report distributed by Tass said spacecraft’s flight had
    proceeded normally up to descent trajectory, with cosmonauts Georgy
    T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N. Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev perform-
    ing according to flight program. About 30 min before landing “there
    occurred a rapid drop of pressure within the descent vehicle, which
    led to the sudden death of the cosmonauts. This is confirmed by the
    medical and pathologico-anatomic examinations. The drop in pressure
    resulted from a loss of the ship’s sealing. An investigation of the
    descent vehicle, which made a soft landing, showed that there are no
    failures in its structure.” (Tass, FBIS-SOV-133-3, 7/12/71, L1)
  NASA launched series of three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying GSFC
    grenade experiments to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind
    data beGeen 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades
    and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket launched from
    Churchill Research Range carried 19 grenades to 124.9-km (77.6-mi)
    altitude with 18 grenades detonating as planned and 16 sound arrivals
    recorded. Rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried 31
    grenades to 108.8-km (67.6-mi) altitude with 31 explosions and 30
    sound arrivals recorded. Rocket launched from Wallops Station car-
    ried 19 grenades to 135.8-km (84.3-mi) altitude, with 19 explosions
    and sound arrivals recorded. (NASA Rpts SRL)
  NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers
0

    had selected MSFC to integrate two proposed earth orbital projects,
    space station and research and applications modules (RAM), super-
                                                                    by
    vising definition, design, and verification of design concepts, MSFC
    announced. Development of space station would follow development of

                                    192
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    July 12

    space shuttle. RAM was family of space payload carrier modules to be
    delivered to earth orbit by shuttle. (MSFC Release 71-118)
* NASA announced availability of two new publications. First, Implantable
    Biotelemetry Systems (SP-50944, listed biomedical telemetering in-
    struments developed by NASA for monitoring physiological functions
    in human beings and animals and described devices and techniques
    for radiotelemetry physiological monitoring. Analysis of Apollo 10
    Photography and Visual Observations (SP-232) described Apollo 10
    mission and contained miniature halftones of photos taken by ApoZZo
     10 astronauts, which could be obtained for study. (NASA Release
     71-30; NASA Hq WB, 7/12/28)
* FAA announced it would lower base of area-positive-control airspace
     (APC) from 7300 m (24000 f t ) to 5500 m (18000 ft) over south-
    western US., effective Aug. 19, to provide operating aircraft with
    additional protection against midair collisions. (FAA Release 71-105)
* President Nixon forwarded to Congress nomination of L/G Benjamin 0.
    Davis, Jr. (USAF, Ret.) , Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation
    for Safety and Consumer Affairs, to be Assistant Secretary of Trans-
    portation (Safety and Consumer Affairs). (PD, 7/19/71, 1060)
  AFSC announced reassignment of officers: M/G Lee V. Gossick, Deputy
    Chief of Staff, Systems, would become Chief of Staff for AFSC on
    departure of M/G Clifford J. Kronauer; M/G Kenneth W. Schultz,
    Deputy for Minuteman, SAMSO, Norton AFB, Calif., would succeed
    M/G Gossick as Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems; B/G Abner B. Martin
    would succeed M/G Schultz as Deputy for Minuteman; B/G Herbert A.
    Lyon, Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems, AFSC, would succeed
     B/G Martin as Deputy for Reentry Systems; B/G William W. Gilbert,
     Vice Commander of USAF Flight Test Center, Edwards AFB, Calif.,
     would command European Communications Area, with additional
     duties as Deputy Chief of Staff , Communications, USAF, Europe.
      (AFSC Release 216.71; AFSC PIO)
July 13: ApoZlo 15 completed simulated liftoff at 9:34 am EDT in prepara-
     tion for launch from KSC July 26. Spacecraft was unmanned and fully
     loaded with propellants. Astronauts would practice countdown in space-
     craft without fuel July 14. (SBD, 7/14/71,56)
* Selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for negotiations leading to award of
     $500-rnillionycost-plus-award-fee contract for development and delivery
     of 35 space shuttle engines by 1978 was announced by NASA. Selection
     followed 12-mo competition during which NASA had accepted proposals
     from three firms on April 21. Program would be managed by MSFC
     and would support space shuttle orbital flights beginning in 1978.
      (NASA Release 71-131)
  NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Wallops Sta-
     tion carrying Univ. of Texas experiments to study ionosphere. Rockets
     and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Sleep analyzer developed for NASA by Dr. James D. Frost of Baylor Univ.
     and built by SCI Electronics, Inc., Div. of SCI Systems, Inc., as Skylab
     experiment had been made available as research device to US. medical
     institutions, NASA announced. Device would record quality of sleep of
     Skylab astronaut during 28-day stay in space by combining and evalu-
     ating inputs of electro-encephalogram and electro-occulogram. Medical
     application of device could be to treat insomniacs and other patients

                                    193
July 13                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     experiencing “sleep neuroses.” FAA doctors were considering study of
     sleeping patterns of air controllers and pilots after stressful duty.
      (NASA Special Release)
* Senate Committee on Banking approved by vote of 10 to 5 revised bill
      authorizing Government guarantee of loans to companies whose failure
      would “adversely and seriously affect the economy of the nation.” Bill
      would permit Government to guarantee up to $2 billion in such loans,
      with limit of $250 million for one company. Bill represented first
     legislative test of Administration’s efforts to save Lockheed Aircraft
      Corp. from bankruptcy, New York Times said. (Witkin, NYT,
      7/14/71,1)
  President Nixon announced appointments to Citizen’s Advisory Com-
      mittee on Environmental Quality, including Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank
      Borman. (PD, 7/19/71,1056)
   FAA announced award of $530 125 contract to Cornell Aeronautical Labo-
      ratory, Inc., for analytical and experimental program to develop new
     microwave landing system (MLS) for civil-military common use, to
      replace VHF/UHF instrument landing system (ILS) developed in early
      1940s. Microwave system would provide more precise electronic guid-
      ance to aircraft on approaches and landings than current system ;
      selectable flight paths to permit greater number of aircraft operations
      at airports; closer spacing of parallel runways; and procedures to ease
      noise over surrounding communities. (FAA Release 71-109)
  US. faced no dire threat from current “numbers or accuracy’’ of Soviet
     SS-9 missiles, but must extend its own antimissile system as “bargain-
     ing chip” with U.S.S.R. at SALT, Deputy Secretary of Defense David
     Packard said in testimony before House Committee on Foreign Rela-
      tions’ Subcommittee on Arms Control. (NYT, 7/14/71, 7)
  Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced FAA was consider-
      ing major policy change to permit establishment of FAA facilities and
      services at privately owned airports open to public. Such facilities
      and services were restricted to publicly owned airports. FAA Admin-
      istrator John H. Shaffer said policy change would be “in accord with
      FAA% assigned mission and responsibility of assuring safety and effi-
      ciency of all civil aircraft operations and of promoting air commerce
      and civil aeronautics.” (FAA Release 71-110)
  Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, was formally presented with mem-
      bership in Soviet Academy of Sciences by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly
      F. Dobrynin in ceremony at Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C.
      ( AEC Release 0-120)
  Cornell Univ. and EDP Technology, Inc., announced that contract for sale
      of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell to EDP had been
      allowed to expire by mutual consent. (Van Gelder, NYT, 7/14/71, 58)
J d y 14: Apollo 15 completed final practice countdown at KSC in prepara-
      tion for launch to moon July 26. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/71, 16)
  Discovery of hydroxyl molecule in interstellar dust between stars of M-82
0

      and NGG253 galaxies 97 billion km (60 billion mi) from earth by
     use of big dish radio telescopes, was reported by Dr. Leonid N.
     Weliachew, visiting fellow at Cal Tech from Meudon Observatory in
      France. Discovery implied that chemical evolution was proceeding
     throughout universe. Hydroxyl was considered a chemical essential to
      evolution of life. (LATNS, W Post, 7/15/71, A3; B Sun, 7/19/71)

                                    194
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                     July 14

          announced award of $250000, 10-mo, “phase A” contract to NR
    MSFC
     Space Div. to study feasibility of developing low-cost, reusable, chemi-
     cal-propulsion stage that could be launched from earth on space shuttle
     booster and refueled in space for up to 10 missions. Vehicle could be
     used for high-lift capability to low earth orbit, for placing large pay-
     loads in geosynchronous orbit, and for lunar and unmanned planetary
     missions. (MSFC Release 71-120)
  MSC announced award of three seven-month, firm, fixed-price contracts
0


     for development of new surface materials for space shuttle orbiter stage.
     McDonnell Douglas Corp. would receive $325 000 ; GE Aerospace
     Group, $319200; and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $322500.
     (MSC Release 71-50)
  Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.) and Sen. Edmund S. Muskie
      (D-Me.) proposed US. and U.S.S.R. freeze deployment of nuclear
     weapons while they sought agreement to control strategic arms at SALT.
     Joint proposal was made during hearings of Senate Committee on
     Foreign Relations’ Subcommittee on Arms Control. (Finney, NYT,
     7/15/71,1)
July 15: Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382,
     FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill that contained $3.325-
     billion NASA appropriation. Committee added $24 million for NERVA to
     NASA request of $2.518 billion for R&D,  making total of $2.542 billion,
     and rejected House recommendations for cuts in construction of facili-
     ties appropriation, including $20 million for space shuttle funding.
     (CR, 7/15/71, D703; SBD, 7/16/71,70)
  LaRC awarded $3 934 000 contract to Carey General Contractors, Inc., and
     Metropolitan Construction Co. of Missouri for joint construction of
     4200-sq-m (45 500-sq-ft ) Aircraft Noise Reduction Laboratory. Re-
     search facility, to be completed by November 1972, would include
     acoustics physics laboratory, applications area with anechoic room and
     reverberation room, and external effects simulation laboratory. (NASA
     Release 71-133)
  Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented LM similar to those
     used for Apollo 11, 12, and 14 lunar landings to Michael Collins,
     Director of Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum and
     Apollo 11 astronaut. LM would remain on permanent display at
     museum. (Smithsonian Release 111-71 ; NASA PAO)
July 26: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by
     Thorad-Agena booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 506.9 km (315 mi) ;
     perigee, 487.6 km (303 mi) ; period, 94.5 min; and inclination, 75’.
     (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 7/26/71,109)
* U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 9 from Plesetsk into orbit with 642-km (398.9-
     mi) apogee, 615-km (382.1-mi) perigee, 97.2-min period, and 81.1”
     inclination. Tass said satellite carried meteorological equipment to
     obtain pictures of clouds and snowcaps on day and night sides of earth
     and data on thermal energy reflected and radiated by earth and atmos-
    phere. ( GSFC SSR, 7/31/71 ; SBD, 7/19/71, 78; FBIS-SOV-71-137,
    7/16/71, L1)
* Findings on atmosphere of Mars from uv spectrometer observations made
     during NASA’s 1969 Mariner flyby missions were reported in Science
     by Univ. of Colorado scientists Dr. Charles A. Barth and Dr. Charles
    W. Hord: “Mars . . . reffects sunlight in the ultraviolet, but it is the

                                    195
July 16                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     atmosphere, not the surface, that is responsible for the reflected light.
     Even though there are atmospheric scatterers in addition to the
     molecular scatterers, it is possible to relate the intensity of the scat-
     tered radiation with the atmospheric pressure. The variation of the
     pressure over the planet reveals the topography to vary over 7 kilome-
     ters [41/2miles] in height and to be correlated with visible features.
     The carbon dioxide polar cap, in addition to being a cold trap for
     volatile gases in the atmosphere, may also be a very efficient absorp-
     tion trap for nonvolatiles. This last property may make the cap a
     repository for gases produced by geological or biological activity.”
     (Science, 7/16/71,197-201)
* Lowell K. Zoller, Chief of Program Control Group in MSFC Office of
     Program Development, had been appointed manager of task team
     for research and applications modules (RAM) by MSFC Director, Dr.
     Eberhard F. M. Rees, MSFC announced. RAM was proposed family of
     space payload carrier modules to be delivered to earth orbit by space
     shuttle. ( MSFC Release 71-122)
  White House announced President Nixon would accept resignation of
     Dr. William D. McElroy as Director of National Science Foundation.
     Dr. McElroy would remain in position until February 1972. ( P D ,
     7/26/71,1078)
July 16-18: Lewis Research Center celebrated 30th anniversary. Ground-
     breaking had been on Jan. 23, 1941, but anniversary celebration had
     been postponed for summer weather. Ceremonies honored former
     LeRC employees who had transferred to other NASA centers, retired
     employees, and visiting NASA officials, including Dr. George M. Low,
     Deputy Administrator. Each employee received 30th anniversary coin
     and special anniversary edition of Lewis News. Anniversary exhibi-
     tion included F-106 aircraft, Apollo 8, Gemini 7 , and Mercury space-
     craft. Center Director Bruce T. Lundin described progress of LeRC-
     which had been dedicated May 28, 1943, as aircraft engineering
     research laboratory by Dr. George W. Lewis, NACA Director of Aero-
     nautical Research, for whom it was later named. Center now occupied
     3400 hectares (8500 acres) with 4000-member staff and plant valued
     at $311 million. Open House was held for general public July 17 and
     18. (LeRC Release 71-30; Lewis News, 7/16/71, 1 ; NASA Hq WB,
     7/5/7171)
July 17: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments planned
     for ninth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains and was preparing for
     lunar night, Tass announced. Experiments included stereoscopic pho-
     tography of crater bed and slopes, chemical analysis of rock, studies
     of crater 190 m (208 yds) in diameter, and measurements of cosmic
     radiation. Vehicle had traveled 10.2 km (6.3 mi) over lunar surface
     since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (FBISSOV-138-3, 7/20/71, L1)
  Nine Soviet scientists visited AEC’S Nevada test site near Las Vegas dur-
     ing meeting of US. and Soviet scientists on peaceful uses of atomic
     energy. (NYT, 7/14/71,41; AEC PIO)
July 19: Apollo 15 astronauts would wear pressure suits-instead of flight
     coveralls as originally planned-during LM jettison, NASA announced.
     Requirements for crew to wear suits had been reevaluated after deaths

                                     196
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   July 19

    of three cosmonauts during reentry from June 6-30 Soyuz 11 mission.
     (NASA Release 71-134)
  U.S.S.R. sent telegram to American Science and Engineering, Inc., de-
    signer of Apollo 15 x-ray detector, accepting invitation to cooperate
    with US. in studying x-ray sources during Apollo 15 mission. Soviet
    scientists would train 2591-mm (102-in) telescope on same region of
     sky that Apollo 15 crew would explore during return to earth and
     would compare notes on how strongest x-ray source in sky appeared
     through telescope and through x-ray detector. (McElheny, W Post,
    7/21/71, A10)
  Clare F. Farley, Executive Officer in Ofice of NASA Administrator since
     1968, became Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization.
     Farley was succeeded as Executive Officer by Henry E. Clements,
    formerly of USAF Hq. Directorate of Space Research and Development.
     (NASA Ann, 7/12/71)
  Sen. B. Everett Jordan (D-N.C.) introduced, for himself and cospon-
    sors, S. 2302 “to establish an Office of Technology Assessment for the
    Congress as an aid in the identification and consideration of exist-
     ing and probable impacts of technological application; to amend the
    National Science Foundation Act of 1950; and for other p~rposes.’~
     (CRY7/19/71, 511346)
  President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Stanford Univ.
0

     chemist John D. Baldeschwieler to be Deputy Director of OST. He
     would succeed Dr. Hubert Heffner, who had resigned to return to
     duties at Stanford. (PD, 7/26/71, 1066,1080)
  Apollo program’s contribution to lunar science was praised in Aviation
     Week & Space Technology editorial: “Apollo has taken lunar explo-
    ration out of the hands of tree-full-of-owls theorists and put it into
    the care of the lunar explorers, who will eventually provide sufficient
     data to unravel some of the major mysteries of the moon and our
     universe.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 8/19/71,7)
  Los Angeles Harbor Commission granted one-year extension to lease
     with Hughes Tool Co. for storage area for Spruce Goose, mammoth
     wooden flying boat designed by Howard Hughes and flown once, on
     brief taxi test in 1947 [see Feb. lo]. (UH, W Post, 7/21/71, C8)
July 20: Final countdown for July 26 launch of Apollo 15 manned lunar
    landing mission began at ICSC at 6:30 am EDT. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/71,
     A1 )
  More than 20 hrs of live TV coverage from ApoIIo 15 spacecraft and
    lunar surface would be carried via orbiting Intelsat comsats, ComSat-
     Corp announced. Coverage would include liftoff, transposition and
     docking, intravehicular transfer, landing site approach, lunar surface
     exploration, first color broadcast of lunar liftoff, rendezvous and dock-
     ing, film transfer in space, lunar eclipse, press conference from space,
     and splashdown. ( ComSatCorp Release 71-39)
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 429 from Baykonur into orbit with 256-km
      (159.1-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 88.8-min period, and
     51.7’ inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 2. (GSFC SSR, 7/31/71;
     8/31/71; SBD, 7/26/71,109)
* President Nixon issued Proclamation 4067 designating day as National
     Moon Walk Day, “to commemorate the anniversary of the first moon
     walk on July 20, 1969, and to accord recognition to the many achieve-

                                    197
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
July 20

    ments of the national space program.” He said, “Two years after the
                  .
     first landing . . other brave men are .following in the footsteps of
     [Astronaut Neil A.] Armstrong and [Astronaut Edwin E.] Aldrin
    to explore the unknown and advance scientific knowledge for the
    benefit of all mankind.” (PD,  7/26/71,1068)
  U.S.S.R., in first status report on Sulyut 1 (launched April 19) since
    deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts June 30, said Salyut 1 was function-
    ing normally after 1490 orbits of earth. Tass said station was in orbit
 - with 262.3-km (163-mi) apogee and 223.7-km (139-mi) perigee and
     all systems were functioning normally. (UPI, C Trib, 7/21/71)
e Senate by unanimous vote of 87 passed H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-
    science appropriations bill that included $3.321 billion NASA appro-
    priation and $647-million NSF appropriation (after adopting amend-
    ment increasing NSF research funds by $25 million). (CR, 7/20/71,
     S11478-502)
  Senate passed H.R. 9388, FY 1972 AEC authorization bill that contained
     additional $37 million in operating costs for space nuclear propulsion
     program, bringing total authorization for space nuclear propulsion to
     $52 million. (CR, 8/20/71,S11502-65)
  Members of 28-nation U.N. Scientific Subcommittee on Space, meeting
     in New York, had agreed to establish study panel to examine uses of
     satellites for earth resources surveys, New York Times reported.
     Agreement represented compromise. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had opposed
     earlier Swedish proposal that panel consider establishment of opera-
     tional systems within U.N. framework. U.S. position, expressed by
     NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W.
     Frutkin, had been that practical application of using satellites for
     remote sensing of earth would be demonstrated adequately only after
     testing of NASA’s ERTS in spring of 1972. (Teltsch, NYT, 7/20/71, 12)
  Wapakoneta, Ohio, birthplace of ApoZZo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong,
     celebrated second anniversary of first moon walk by Armstrong with
     display of flags and model of LM on concrete blocks on street corner.
     For third anniversary, in 1972, Armstrong expected to return to home
     town for dedication of $l-million Armstrong Museum being con-
     structed at edge of town. Daniel R. Porter, Director of Ohio Historical
     Society, had said museum would feature Ohio’s contributions to aero-
     space age from early balloon ascents through achievements of Wright
     brothers, who had lived in Ohio, to space exploits of Ohioan Astro-
     naut John H. Glenn. Exhibits would include experimental aircraft
     flown by Armstrong as test pilot, gallery of flight artifacts, “NASA
     Room” containing space travel exhibits, and “infinity cube,” mirrored
     room with lighting to give effect of projection into infinity. (Wilford,
     NYT, 7/21/71,22)
  FAA announced award of two cost-sharing research contracts totaling
     almost $6 million to Boeing Co. to determine feasibility in design
     hardware of acoustical treatment techniques in reducing noise levels
     of United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div.’s JT8D and JT3D
     engines. (FAA Release 71-118)
July 21 : Senate-House conferees on H.R. 7109, FY 1972 NASA Authoriza-
     tion bill, filed H Rpt 92-368 proposing compromise bill authorizing
     $3.355 billion. Report authorized $702.7 million for space flight
     operations, $30 million above NASA request of $672.7 million, and

                                    198
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  JuIy 21

    recommended $15 million be spent on Skylab rescue capability and
    $15 million on space shuttle. (H Rpt 92-368)
  Black Brant VC sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops
    Station on test and support mission to evaluate flight performance.
    Vehicle developed aerodynamic instability and payload broke off.
     (SR list; Proj Scientist)
* President Nixon accepted resignation of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg as AEC
    Chairman, effective on date to be determined, but asked him to re-
    main as head of U.S. delegations to atomic energy conferences in
    U S S R . , Geneva, and Vienna during 1971. President also asked Dr.
    Seaborg to serve as consultant after meetings. He said: ‘&As world
                                                                    a
    famous chemist, scholar, and administrator, you have contributed in
    a unique and meaningful way to far greater understanding and appli-
    cation of the miracles of the atom.”
       President submitted to Senate nomination of James R. Schlesinger,
    Assistant Director of Office of Management and Budget, to be AEC
    member and successor to Dr. Seaborg as AEC Chairman. (PD, 7/26/71,
     1069,1080)
  “Apollo Day” was celebrated in State of Indiana. Gov. Edgar H. Whit-
    comb attended ceremonies at Spring Mill State Park honoring
    Indiana-born astronaut, the late Virgil I. Grissom who was killed in
    Jan. 27,1967, Apollo fire. (MSFC Hist Off)
  Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, Assistant Executive Secretary in NASA Office
    of Administrator, became Director of Office of Scientific and Techni-
    cal Information in NASA Office of Industry Affairs and Technology
    Utilization. (NASA Release 71-142)
July 22: NASA and AFCRL scientists would measure plume from Apollo 15
    during launch July 26 in attempt to solve mystery of ApoZZo 12 light-
    ning strike during Nov. 14, 1969, launch, AFSC announced. Measure-
    ments were part of Lightning Strikes to In-Flight MissiIes program
    to test conductivity and electrical field breakdown strength on Minute-
    man and Atlas missiles. Scientists theorized that exhaust plume acted
     as electrical conductor and might have influenced electrical fields in
    thunder clouds and provoked lightning stroke.
       AFCRL project scientist John L. Heckscher said USAF tests showed
    that “the rocket plume acts as a good conductor of electricity-like a
     wire . . . stretched from the rocket to the ground. And, should the
     rocket enter a thunder cloud, it would act like a lightning conductor.
     In the Apollo 15 launch we’re primarily interested in the effective
    length of the conducting plume. The rocket is 363 feet [110 m] long,
     and the visible portion of the plume, which contains incandescent car-
    bon particles and other burning matter, is perhaps another 500 ft
     [152 m] of good conductor. However the trailing invisible portion
     may also be electrically conductive and that’s what we want to find
     out.” (AFSC Release 180.71)
* Mariner 9, launched by NASA May 30, had covered 142600000 km
     (88600000 mi) in 167-day journey to Mars. Spacecraft was
     15300000 km (9500000 mi) from earth and had received more
    than 600 commands. (NASA Release 71-136)
  ARC-developed oximeter-device to measure oxygen content of blood by
    light absorption of blood circulating through ear-was being used by
    National Cancer Institute’s Leukemia Service for early detection of

                                   199
July 22                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     shock, NASA announced. Device had been introduced to Cancer Insti-
     tute by Biomedical Application Team (BATEAM) of Research Triangle
     Institute. Team was employed by NASA to exchange space-developed
     technology between physical and medical sciences. Oximeter had been
     developed in 1960s to study effects of rapid acceleration in centrifuge
     on subjects, to determine reactions to simulated manned space flight
     conditions. (NASA Release 71-132)
  Tass said Communist Party Central Committee and Soviet Council of
     Ministers had decided to unveil busts of Salyut 1Soyyuz 11 Cosmo-
     nauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N. Volkov, and Viktor I.
     Patsayev in their home towns and to erect obelisk in their honor at
     landing site of Soyuz 11 spacecraft. Memorial plaques would be
     placed on buildings at cosmonaut training center and at cosmonauts’
     schools. Cosmonauts’ names would be given to their schools and to
     streets in Odessa, Moscow, and Aktyubinsk, cosmonauts’ home towns.
      (FBIS-SOV-71-142,7/22/71)
* Japan would launch scientific observation satellite from Uchinoura Space
     Center Sept. 20, Space Business Daily reported. Satellite design and
     planned orbit would be similar to that of Japan’s Tansei, launched
     Feb. 16. (SBD, 7/22/71,96)
  SES-100B Surface Effect Ship, built for USN by Textron Bell Aerospace
     Div., was launched at Michoud Assembly Facility. Ship was 23.7 m
      (78 f t ) long, weighed 90 700 kg (100 tons) , and traveled at 41 m per
     sec (80 knots) on air cushion maintained by eight lift fans and con-
     tained by catamaran-style side hulls and flexible bow and stern seals.
     Test and evaluation program would be conducted in Lake Pontchartrain
     and Gulf of Mexico beginning July 23. (Bell Aerospace Div Release)
July 23: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 430 from Plesetsk into orbit with 265-
     km (164.7-mi) apogee, 187-km (116.2-mi) perigee, 89-min period,
     and 65.4’ inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 5. (GSFC SSR, 7/31/71;
     8/31/71; SBD, 7/26/71, 109)
  Battery and companion unit in Apollo 15 LM failed during tests at ICSC
     and were replaced. Investigation revealed battery had been contami-
     nated with magnesium chips. Problem did not delay countdown, which
     continued on schedule toward 9:34 am EDT liftoff July 26. (Wilford,
    NYT, 7/24/71,29)
          M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.
  NASA’s
9

     Dana, successfully completed seventh flight from FRC, reaching 18 300-m
      (60000-ft) altitude and mach 0.83. Objectives were to expand flight
     envelope to mach 0.85, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8,
     and evaluate reaction control system. (NASA Proj Off)
* Appointment of John P. Donnelly, Vice President for Corporate Com-
     munications of Whittaker Corp., as NASA Assistant Administrator for
     Public Affairs effective Aug. 15, was announced by NASA. He would
     be responsible for development and direction of public affairs activities,
     including public information, public services, and educational pro-
     grams. Acting Public Affairs chief since resignation of Julian W. Scheer
     March 22 had been Alfred P. Alibrando, Director, Public Affairs Div.
     (NASA Release 71-137; NASA Ann, 2/23/71)
* NASA announced it had signed agreement with New York Times Special
     Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for one byline article
     each by Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and

                                     200
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                       July 23

     Alfred M. Worden after mission and three articles by Scientist-A
      Harrison H. Schmitt while crew was on lunar surface. Agreement,
     extending to 30 days after mission’s end, provided for payment by
      Special Features of 50% of gross proceeds from syndication of articles.
      It also permitted still photos in Apollo 15 astronauts’ homes and inter-
     views o family members. Agreement did not infringe on NASA policy
              f
      of free flow of information to all media nor limit NYT coverage of all
     aspects of space program. (NASA Release 71-138)
* The Decision To Go to the Moon by John M. Logsdon of George Yash-
     ington Univ. was reviewed in Science by L. Vaughn Blankenship, State
     Univ. of New York at Buffalo political scientist: Book pulled together
     u
       most of the publicly available data and commentary on the events
     surrounding President Kennedy’s decision in May 1961 to commit the
     United States to effecting a lunar landing before 1970.” Logsdon
     seemed to conclude that “because the decision process somehow corre-
                                                                        ..
     sponded to his theory of how decisions are, or should be made . the
                                               It was “legitimate to choose to
     decision must have been a good
     present a history of this decision within the limited framework adopted
     in this book” but “less legitimate to tout this decision as evidence of
     a political system operating at its best. Or if it is its best, we may well
     worry for the future.” Dr. Logsdon replied to review Sept. 17. (Science,
     7/23/71,317-8; 9/17/71,1079-80)
  GAO published Comparison of Military Research and Development Expen-
     ditures of the United States and the Soviet Union. Report quoted
     Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as
     saying much Soviet R&D was likely to have been directed toward mili-
     tary and space programs. Spin-off to civilian industry in U.S.S.R. was
     considered to have been small because all invention and innovation of
     military application, while in principle available for civilian use, was
     surrounded by impenetrable security blanket. Consequently, strain of
     R&D effort had been much greater for Soviet economy than for that
     of US. (CRY7/31/71, E8607-81)
July 24: President Nixon issued statement supporting legislation before
     Congress to provide emergency loan guarantees for major business
     enterprises confronted with temporary financial stringencies : “The ad-
     ministration originally sought legislation only to help the Lockheed
     Aircraft Corporation. That support is still needed very badly. But I
     have instructed Secretary of the Treasury Connally . . . to accept the
     broader legislation. It wouId be most useful in providing a systematic
     procedure for helping any major business enterprise with temporary
     financial problems whose failure would adversely affect the economy
     of the Nation or a region thereof.” (PD, 7/26/71, 1078)
July 25: President Nixon telephoned Apollo 15 astronauts to extend good
     wishes on eve of launch. (PD, 8/2/71,1099)
* KSC launch complex where Apollo 15 spacecraft and Saturn V booster
     stood ready for liftoff had been struck by lightning 11 times during
     past six weeks, Vashington Post reported. First strike, June 14, had
     been equivalent to 98000 amps-almost three times as powerful as
     average lightning strike and two thirds as strong as biggest lightning
     strike ever recorded in Florida. Two more strikes had followed within
     15 min of each other and a 31 000-amp strike had hit launch pad one
     day later. On July 20 five separate lightning bolts with total amperage

                                     201
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
July 25




July 26-August 7: Apollo 15 carried three astronauts on the fourth successful lunar
landing mission, returning them with 77 kilograms (170 pounds) of samples after
66 hours 55 minutes on the moon’s surface. During prelaunch activities in Firing
Room 1 of the Kennedy Space Center‘s Launch Control Center, Dr. James C .
Fletcher, NASA Administrator (right) , spoke with NASC Executive Secretary William A.
dnders; L/G Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), former Apollo Program Director; and
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning ( l e f t to right).

     of almost 100000 amps had been recorded. Ninth strike of 22000
     amps had occurred June 25, and last-weakest to date at 6600 amps-
     had occurred July 19. Neither spacecraft nor launch vehicle had been
     damaged. Apollo 15 was first spacecraft to have even a near miss from
     lightning strikes while being prepared for launch. (W Post, 7/25/71,
     A16)
                            Apollo 15 (AS-510) carried three-man crew on
July 26-August 7: NASA’s
     fourth successful lunar landing mission. LM-10 Falcon landed on
     moon’s Hadley-Apennine region and two astronauts conducted experi-
     ments, rode first manned lunar roving vehicle (LRV) on moon, and
     explored lunar surface. After 66 hrs 55 min on surface, Falcon re-
     joined orbiting CSM-112 Edeavor and astronauts transfered for safe
     return to earth with lunar samples.
        July 26-28: Spacecraft-carrying Astronauts David R. Scott (com-
     mander), Alfred M. Worden (CM pilot), and James B. Irwin (LM
     pilot)-was launched from KSC Launch Complex 39, Pad A, on time
     at 9:34 am EDT July 26 by Saturn V booster. Launch was watched by
     2000 invited guests-including 185 members of British Astronomical
     Society and Royal Astronomical Society and 41 Congressmen-and
     estimated 1million other viewers.
        Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with
     171.4-km (106.5-mi) apogee and 169.4-km (105.3-mi) perigee. Trans-
     lunar injection (TLI) was achieved at 2:56 GET and CSM separated
     from LM/S-IVB/IU at 3:22 GET. Docking of CSM with LM at 3:34 GET
     was shown clearly by onboard color TV.

                                         202
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                          July 26-August 7




   seismometer 55 sec after impact.
       First midcourse correction (MCC-1) was canceled because space-
    craft trajectory was near nominal. Shortly after CSM-LM docking,
    telemetry data indicated electrical sh        service propulsion system
     (SPS). Troubleshooting isolated pro           d MCC-2 at 28:41 GET
   used SPS bank A to analy                         nt short. Data indicated
    bank A could be safely                nually. Modified procedures were
    developed for using bank B alone for remaining midcourse corrections
    except lunar orbit and transearth insertions, which would be dual
   bank burns.
       Scott and Irwin entered LM at 33:56 GET, 50 min earlier than
   planned, to check out LM communications and other systems. TV pic-
   tures of CSM and LM interiors were shown between 34:55 and 3 5 ~ 4 6
   GET. During checkout crew discovered range/range-rate exterior glass
   cover had broken, removing helium barrier. Crew began LM house-
   keeping 1% hrs earlier than scheduled and vacuumed broken glass.
   At 61 :13 GET, during preparations for water chlorination, water leak
    developed in CM chlorination septum gland but was stopped by crew,
   following repair instructions from ground, and water was absorbed
   with towels. Door of scientific instrument module (SIM) was jettisoned
   at 74:06 GET.
       J d y 29-August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit with 314.8-km
    (195.6-mi) apolune and 107.5-km (66.8-mi) perilune after LOI burn
                                                                   ...
   at 78:32 GET (4:06 pm EDT July 29). “This is really profound          it’s
   fantastic,” Scott said of view from moon. Apennine Mountains looked
   unreal. “They stand out in tremendous relief. They appear to be smooth
   or rounded. But they are cratered and in many places rough in texture.
                                                            ..
   We don’t see any jagged peaks. They don’t look like . any other
   mountains we’ve seen on earth.”
       CSM-LM undocking and separation maneuver was initiated during
    12th lunar revolution, on far side of moon at 100:14 GET, but space-
   craft did not undock. Worden entered tunnel to inspect CSM-LM um-
   bilical and found plug was loose. After he reconnected plug and
   adjusted spacecraft attitude, undocking and separation were achieved
   at 100:39 GET-about 25 min later than planned.
       LM Falcon touched down in moon’s Hadley-Apennine region near
   Salyut Crater at 104:42 GET (6:16 pm EDT July 30) about 600 m
    (656 yds) north-northwest of planned target. “OK Houston,” Scott
   said after touchdown, “the Falcon is on the plain at Hadley.” He said
   LM’S engine had stirred up so much dust that landing site had been
   completely obscured from 15-m (50-ft ) altitude to touchdown: “We
   dew IFR from then on down.”                                  \
       Stand-up extravehicular activity (SEVA) to observe and photograph
   landing site and surrounding area began after cabin depressurization
   at 106:43 GET. Scott put his head out of upper hatch and described
   and photographed area for 33 min. Scott said he could describe site

                                   203
July 26-August 7                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




July 29-August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit July 29 and the LM Falcon touched
down in the moon’s Hadley-Apennine region July 30 for three EVA periods of
exploration. The lunar roving vehicle Rover, deployed during the first EVA July 31,
was photographed by Astronaut James B. Irwin near Hadley Rille (right center above),
with the Hadley Delta in the background and St. George Crater partially visible at
the upper right edge. Astronaut David R. Scott was working at the Rover. In the
photo at right Irwin scooped a trench, with Mount Hadley in the background. A
gnomon indicated the local vertical and the sun angle. Meanwhile CM pilot Alfred M.
Worden, orbiting the moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography.

     for hours. Area was covered with craters, but strewn with very few
     large boulders; it was hilly, but not rocky or rugged.
        First EVA began July 31 at 9:04 am EDT. Scott climbed down ladder,
     deployed MESA containing camera which recorded his descent, and
     stepped on lunar surface. Irwin followed and, while Scott removed TV
     camera from MESA and deployed it on tripod, Irwin collected contin-
     gency sample. Crew had difficulty deploying LRV Rover; during check-
     out they found that front steering mechanism was inoperative and that
     there were no readouts on LRV battery No. 2 amp-volt meter. Battery
     was found to be operating satisfactorily and decision was made to
     perform EVA-1 without LRV front-wheel steering. Crew mounted LRV
     and proceeded on EVA-1 traverse at 121:45 GET. Crew described EVA
     as “exploration at its greatest,” and repeatedly used words “fantastic,”
     “breathtaking,” and “spectacular” to describe features as they rode
     LRV at about eight km per hr (five mph). Scott said Rover handled
     quite well: “It negotiates small craters quite well, although there is a

                                        204
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                         7
                                                           July %-August




                                                ...   and I can maneuver
    lot of roll. The steering is quite responsive
               . ..
   pretty well.      There is no accumulation of dirt in the wire wheels.”
    Stops at stations where crew collected lunar samples and took photos
    were broadcast on TV with excellent transmission. At end of traverse
   ALSEP was deployed. Scott and Irwin reentered LM after 6 hrs 33 min
   exploring surface, 28 min sooner than planned because Scott used up
   more oxygen than anticipated.
      After resting inside LM, recharging and repairing portable life sup-
   port system (PLSS), and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts
   left LM at l42:15 GET (7:49 am EDT Aug. 1). LRV was powered up,
   circuit breakers were cycled, and LRV front steering was found to be
   completely operational. EVA-2 traverse included stops at Spur Crater,
   Dune Crater, Hadley Plains, and area between Spur and Window
   craters. Numerous samples and photos were obtained and TV trans-
   mission was good. Crew completed heat flow experiment initiated dur-
   ing EVA-1, collected core sample, and deployed U.S. flag. After stow-
   ing sample container and film in LM, astronauts reentered LM at 1499327
   GET, after 7 hrs 12 min on surface during EVA-2.
      Third EVA began at 163:18 GET (4:52 am EDT Aug. 2), 1hr 45 min
   later than planned because of cumulative changes in surface activities
   timeline. Late start and requirement to protect nominal liftof€ time
   required shortening EVA. Alternate EVA plan was devised with traverse
   west from LM to Hadley Rille. Astronauts traveled to Scarp Crater,
   “The Terrace” near Rim Crater, and Rim Crater, collecting samples
   and photographing lunar surface features. Scott tripped over a rock

                                  205
                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
July 26-August 7




July 29-August 4: The command and’service modules were photographed in lunar orbit
from the lunar module, giving a view of the scientific instrument module (SIM) bay,
housing cameras and sensors to record data from the moon’s surface and atmosphere.


     and fell, but experienced no difficulty in getting up. Astronauts re-
     trieved drill-core-stem sections and samples near ALSEP, returned to
     LM, off-loaded LRV and stationed it for TV coverage of LM liftoff, and
     reentered LM at 168:08 GET, after 4 hrs 50 min-bringing total EVA
     time to 18 hrs 35 min.
        While LM was on moon Worden, orbiting moon in Endeavor, com-
     pleted lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous.
     His observations included discovery of fields of cinder cones made by
     volcanic eruptions, delineation of landslide or rock glacier on north-
     west rim of crater on lunar farside, interpretation of ray-excluded zone
     around crater Proculus as result of fault system, and discovery of layers
     on interior walls of several craters, suggesting volcanic collapse craters
     of calderas in maria.
        Scott and Irwin depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, re-
     pressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 77 kg (170 lbs) of
     lunar samples at 171:34 GET ( 1 : l l pm EDT Aug. 2)-66 hrs 55 min
     after landing on moon. Liftoff, accompanied by USAF anthem “Off We
     Go Into The Wild Blue Yonder” taped and broadcast by astronauts
     from LM, was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon
     and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked success-
     fully at 173:36 GET, as TV viewers watched. Scott and Irwin trans-
     ferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. CSM-LM
     separation and LM jettison were delayed one revolution to verify that

                                       206
                                                             July 26-August 7
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

         and LM hatches were completely sealed. LM ascent stage was jet-
    CSM
   tisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 26" 22' north
   latitude and 15' east longitude at 181:30 GET, 93 km (59 mi) west of
   Apollo 15 ALSEP site. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, Apollo 14,
   and Apollo 15 seismometers.
      Orbit-shaping maneuver was performed during "3rd lunar revo-
   lution in preparation for subsatellite launch. Scientific subsatellite was
   launched at 222:39 GET (4:13 pm EDT Aug. 4 ) into lunar orbit with
    141.3-km (87.8-mi) apolune and 102.0-km (63.4-mi) perilune. Hex-
   agonal, 36-kg (80-lb) satellite 79 cm (31 in) long and 36 cm (14 in)
   in diameter carried three experiments and was housed in SIM bay
   with seven other new experiments. Satellite extended three 11/-m
    (5-ft) booms, one with magnetometer to measure interplanetary and
   earth magnetic fields near moon and two for stabilization. Satellite also
   carried charged-particle sensors and equipment to detect variations in
   lunar gravity caused by mascons.
      Transearth injection maneuver at 223:49 GET put cSM on trajectory
   for home after 85 hrs 18 min (74 revolutions) in lunar orbit.
      August 5-7: At 241:58 GET (11:32 am EDT Aug. 5) Worden left
   CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film
   cassettes from SIM on SM. He made three trips to SIM bay, two to
   retrieve cassettes and one to observe condition of instruments, re-
   entering CSM after 38-min 12-sec EVA.
      CM Endeavour separated from SM at 294:44 GET. Drogue and main
   parachutes deployed but one of three main parachutes partially closed
   during descent, causing harder landing than expected. CM splashed
   down in mid-Pacific about 10.1 km (5.5 nm) from recovery ship
   U.S.S. Okinawa at 295:12 GET (4:47 pm EDT Aug. 7)-12 days 7 hrs
                                         4
   12 min after liftoff. Astronauts, we ring fresh flight suits, were car-
   ried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for post-flight
   examinations. After being declared in very good shape, astronauts
   were flown on following day to Hickam AFB, Hawaii, and to Ellington
   AFB, Tex. CM was retrieved and placed on board recovery ship. Lunar
   samples, data, and equipment were flown to Elliigton AFB, and CM
   was off-loaded at San Diego.
      Mission achieved primary Apollo 15 objectives: to make seleno-
   logical survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of
   Hadley-Apennine region ; emplace and activate surface experiments;
   evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar
   surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility ;
   and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar
   orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near
                                                   n Delta V thrust switch




                                                   rbits) ; first subsatellite

                                   207
July 26-August 7                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     launched in lunar orbit; and largest amount of lunar samples brought
     to earth.
        Apollo 15 was 12th Apollo mission to date, 9th manned Apollo
     mission, and 4th successful lunar landing mission. A p o l b 14 mis-
     sion had been conducted Jan. 31-Feb. 3. Apollo program was di-
     rected by OMSF; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft develop-
     ment, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch opera-
     tions. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under
     overall direction of OTDA. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245;
     NYT, 7/26-8/7/71; W Post, 7/27-8/8/71; GSFC SSR, 7/31/71;
     NASA Special Release; NASA Release 71-119K; Lannan, W Star,
     7/30/71, A l ; AP, W Star, 8/1/71, A101
July 26: President Nixon issued statement on successful Apollo 15 launch:
     “The flight of Apollo 15 is the most ambitious exploration yet under-
     taken in space. Even as it reflects man’s restless quest for his own
     future, so it also reenacts another of the ‘deeper rituals of his bones’-
     not only the compulsion of the human spirit to know where we are
     going, but the primal need in man’s blood to know from what we
     have come. We hope, by this journey, to know better the origins of
     Earth, the moon, and their other planets. We hope to understand
                                                                         ..
     something more of the mysteries of God’s great work. And .               we
     hope to understand more of man himself.” (PD, 8/2/71, 1088)

August 7: Safe splashdown--with an extra bump. The Apollo 15 command module,
completing its 1%-day lunar mission, descended to the waves on two of its three
parachutes. The third parachute collapsed, increasing impact velocity to 35 km
per hr (22 mph), but did not endanger the astronauts or the spacecraft.




                                      208
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    July 26

                                           H. Rpt. 92-377 on H.R. 9382,
* House and Senate conferees submitted
     FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill. Report recommended
     total NASA appropriation of $3.298 billion. Recommended NASA ap-
     propriation included $2.523 billion for R&D instead of $2.518 billion
     proposed by House and $2.542 billion proposed by Senate; $52.7
     million for construction of facilities instead of $33.8 million proposed
     by House and $56.3 million by Senate; and $722.6 million for re-
     search and program management as proposed by Senate, instead of
     $720 million as proposed by House.
        Report also recommended $622-million NSF appropriation, $1.150
     million below NSF budget request. (H Rpt 92-377)
* Rep. Joel T. Broyhill (R-Va.) introduced H.R. 10065 “to redesignate the
     Washington National Airport as ‘Neil Armstrong Airport.’ ” Bill was
     referred to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce.
      (GR, 7/26/71, H7164)
  Union of Concerned Scientists-Boston area coalition of scientists, en-
     gineers, and other professionals-issued report saying AEC tests had
     confirmed unreliability of emergency cooling system designed to sup-
     ply water to nuclear reactors but that AEC continued to license opera-
     tion and construction of reactors containing system. Report said if
     accident occurred “resulting catastrophe and loss of life might well
     exceed anything this nation has seen in time of peace.” (AP, NYT,
     7/27/71, 53)
July 27: U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 (launched May 19) and Murs 3 (launched May
     28) were continuing to operate satisfactorily en route to Mars, Tass
     announced. By 6:OO am Moscow time (11:00 pm EDT July 26) Mars 2
     had completed 43 communications sessions and was 17 580 000 km
      (10 924 000 mi) from earth; Mars 3 had completed 38 sessions and
     was 16400 000 km (10 190 000 mi) from earth. Data from Mars 2
     and Mars 3 measurements of corpuscular beams of solar and galactic
     cosmic radiation had confirmed data from same measurements con-
     ducted by Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon. (Tass, FBIS-Sov-1&3,
     7/27/71, L1)
* House agreed to conference report on H.R. 7109, FY 1972 NASA authori-
     zation bill, and sent measure to the Senate for further action. Report
     had recommended total authorization of $3.355 billion [see July 211.
      (CR, 7/27/71, H7185-8, D768)
  Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
     Univ. of Michigan experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instru-
     ments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  UPI compared $4OO-million cost of ApoZZo 14 mission (Jan. 31-Feb. 9)
     with $445-million cost of Apollo 15 mission. Breakdown of Apollo 15
                                                                          v
     cost was reportedly: CSM, $65 million; LM, $50 million; Saturn
     booster, $185 million; ALSEP, million; LRV, $8 million; lunar orbit
                                    $25
     science laboratory, $17 million; and operations, $95 million. Total
     estimated cost of entire A~ollolunar exploration program through
     Apollo 17 was $26.5 billion. (UPI, NYT, 7/27/71, 14)
          Apollo 15 was 5351st man-made object launched since U.S.S.R.’s
  NASA’s
     Sputnik I Oct. 4, 1957, according to Air Defense Command Hq. figures
     reported by AP. Center was tracking 2454 objects still in orbit. (NYT,
     7/27/71,14)

                                    209
July 28                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

July 28: U.S.S.R. launched Molniyu 1-18 comsat from Plesetsk to ensure
     46
       operation of a system of long-distance telephone and telegraphic radio
      communications, and also the transmission of programs of USSR cen-
      tral television to points of the ‘Orbita‘ network . . . in the far north,
      Siberia, the Far East, and Central Asia.” Orbital parameters : apogee,
      39 340 km (24 444.7 mi) ; perigee, 995 km (618.3 mi) ; period, 707.2
      min; and inclination, 65.3”. (GSFC SSR, 7/31/71 ; Tass, FBIS-SOV-71-
      145,7/28/71, L1; SF, 1/72,30)
* Senate agreed to conference report on H.R. 7109, FY 1972 NASA authori-
     zation bill that recommended $3.355-billion authorization. Bill was
      cleared for President’s approval. (CR, S12328-9)
  NASA announced it would start Life Scientist Program, recommended by
     NAS, to increase cooperation between university and NASA life scientists
      in advancing disciplines related to NASA mission. Disciplines included
      medical, biological, behavioral, bioengineering, and life support engi-
     neering sciences as related to support of living systems in aeronautic
      and space operations, and exobiology-inquiry into existence of life
     outside universe, scientific origin of life, and planetary ecology. Pro-
      gram would start with selection of five scientists from different uni-
     versities by evaluation of proposed investigations and their relevance
     to NASA% needs and interests. Scientists selected would spend one third
      of time with their graduate students at MSFC, ARC, or LaRC. Each would
     be awarded three-year grant on step-funded basis. (NASA Release
     71-140)
  USN had been forced to drop plans for purchase of F-14B jet fighter
     aircraft-more powerful version of F-14 Tomcat fighters-because of
     continuing financial problems, which had already pushed estimated
     price to $16 million per aircraft, Wushington Post reported. (Getler,
     W Post, 7/28/71, A l )
  Soviet biochemist Zhores Medvedev, in book smuggled to West, had said
     that, despite space achievements, science in U.S.S.R. was being throt-
     tled by bureaucracy and political ideology, AP reported. In Plight oj
     Soviet Science Today Medvedev had said system willing to let only
     certain scientists travel abroad harmed U.S.S.R. (AP, NYT, 7/29/71,
     37 1
July 29: USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle had completed flight-test program
     and would be reshaped and renamed X-24B, FRC announced. Decision
     to end flight operations and reshape vehicle had been made by joint
     NASA-USAF flight research team.
        X-24A was one of three lifting-body vehicles in joint NASA-USAF
     program managed since 1967 by FRC. Vehicle had made 28 flights-
     10 glide and 18 powered-since beginning test program April 17, 1969,
     reaching 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) and 22 000-m (71 000-ft) alti-
     tude. New X-24B would be built around existing basic X-24A struc-
     ture, but outward appearance would be changed dramatically, with
     sharply pointed flat-iron shape replacing bulbous one. New shape
     would also have improved hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio that would
    permit investigation of how well vehicle designed for good hypersonic
    performance would perform at low supersonic, transonic, and subsonic
    speeds, with emphasis on landing. Other changes would include 4.6-m
     (15-ft) extension of nose, removal of rear center fin, 1.5-m (5-ft) wid-
    ening in rear, and 680-kg (1500-lb) increase in weight. Modifications

                                     210
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    July 29

     would be completed by Martin Marietta Corp. in about one year. (FRC
    Release 18-71)
  NASA announced selection of Martin Marietta Corp. to receive $12-million7
0

     award-fee contract to support JPL in design and development of major
    subsystems of Viking Orbiter. Martin Marietta would assign engineers
     and technicians to JPL and provide major subassemblies for propul-
    sion system. (NASA Release 71-143)
  House, by vote of 362 to 30, agreed to conference report submitted
     July 26 on H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill
     that recommended NASA appropriation of $3.298 billion. (CR, 7/29/71,
    H7363-72)
* U.K. Aerospace Minister Frederick Corfield told Parliament Black Arrow
    Iaunch vehicle would be abandoned after final launch in 1971. Project,
     which cost $27.6 million and took six years to develop, was U.K.’s only
     satellite launching program. (AP, W Star, 7/30/71)
* Moscow Trud published account of test flight by Soviet pilot Oleg Gudkov
    of new supersonic fighter aircraft to ascertain whether aircraft could
     be brought out of spin. Test had been successful. (FBIS-SOV-71-149,
    8/3/71, M1)
  DOD spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim said next round of 48 F-14 Tomcat
     fighter aircraft for USN probably would not include improved “B”
     version but denied July 28 Washington Post report that USN had
     dropped plans to purchase F-14Bs. Friedheim said in press interview
     that new engine to power F-14B had fallen behind schedule and that
    lag in production had affected decision on next 48 aircraft. When
    engine became available, “assessment will be made on proceeding with
    the F-14B.” ( W Post, 7/29/71, A7)
  First two DC-10 jet transport aircraft were delivered by manufacturer
0

    McDonnell Douglas Corp. to American Airlines and United Airlines
    at Long Beach, Calif. (Bedingfield, NYT, 7/30/71, 54)
  House, by vote of 306 to 98, agreed to Senate amendment to H.R. 9667,
     $2.9-billion FY 1972 DOT appropriations bill that included $58.5 million
     to repay airlines for money they invested in SST. (CR, 7/29/71,
    H7373-87)
  Washington Post editorial criticized NASA agreement with New York Times
     Special Features, syndicate division of New York Times, for byline
     articles by ApoZZo 15 astronauts [see July 231 and reprinted excerpt
     from Sept. 19, 1963, New York Times editorial that had scored earlier
     NASA agreement with publications. Post said: “. . . we would like to
     record . . . some reservations about the practice of commercializing
     the space program by permitting any of its official participants to sell
     personal accounts of their experiences. Strictly in legal terms, there
     is not much doubt that such material is subject to copyright protec-
    tion. But, leaving aside regulations, there is a question of propriety,
     first raised back in 1963, when the Field Enterprises Educational
    Corp. and Life Magazine nailed down contracts totaling $1 million
     for the personal stories of 16 astronauts over a four-year span.” New
     York Times editorial in 1963 had said sale of astronauts’ stories repre-
     sented “stain of commercialism on the record of the space program,”
     and that astronauts “should not be permitted to reap enormous private
     profits from outside sources on the basis of their participation in a
     great national effort.” (W Post, 7/29/71, A14)

                                    211
July 29                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  Dept. of Commerce issued Metric America (SI?-345). Report said US.
e
    was only major nation that had failed to convert to metric system and
     urged Congress to effect conversion within 10 yrs. (AP, B Sun,
    7/30/71, A l ; DOC PIO)
July 30: President Nixon telephoned congratulations and good wishes to
     ground and flight crews of Apollo 15 following moon landing. (PD,
     8/2/71,1099)
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 4 1 from Baykonur into orbit with 284-km
                                 3
      (176.5-mi) apogee, 165-km (102.5-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and
     51.7” inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 1 . (GSFC SSR, 7/31/71;
                                                    1
     8/31/71, SBD, 8/2/71,148)
  Apollo missions plus Surveyor, Orbiter, and Soviet missions had per-
     mitted first detailed study of formative stages of planetary body, UCLA
     scientist Dr. George W. Wetherill said in Science article. “Future work
     will require sampling distinctly different regions of the moon in order
     to provide data concerning other important lunar events, such as the
     time of formation of the highland regions and of the mare basins, and
    of the extent to which lunar volcanism has persisted subsequent to the
     first third of lunar history. This work will require a sufficient number
     of Apollo landings, and any further cancellation of Apollo missions
     will jeopardize this unique opportunity to study the development of a
     planetary body from its beginning. Such a study is fundamental to
     our understanding of the earth and other planets.” (Science, 7/30/71,
     383-92)
  House, by vote of 192 to 189, passed H.R. 8432, to authorize emergency
     loan guarantees to major business enterprises. Bill would provide for
     $25O-million loan to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. to stave off bankruptcy,
    New York Times said. (CR, 7/30/71, H7453-520; Shanahan, NYT,
     7/31/71,1)
  B/G Benjamin N. Bellis (USAF), project manager for F-15 jet fighter
     aircraft and for F-14 and F-15 joint engine development, said in
     interview with Washington Evening Star that USN had instructed him
     to drop plans for construction of F-14B engine in FY 1972 and 1973
     and to assume USN would not want new engines until at least FY 1974.
     DOD spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim later told Star that top DOD offi-
     cials insisted no final decision against proceeding with advanced
    version of F-14 had been made. (Kelly, W Star, 7/29/71, 4)
  White House announced Administration had requested $ll2-million
    supplemental appropriation for DOD to pay for 12 additional F-111
    fighter bombers. Washington Evening Star later said this would be
    sufficient to keep production line at General Dynamics Corp. Fort
     Worth, Tex., plant o en. It -had been scheduled to close in spring of
     1972. (W Star, 7/31771, A13)
  President Nixon formally changed name of Presidential Boeing 707
     aircraft from Air Force One to The Spirit of ’76. Change was made
     at request of David J. Mahoney, Chairman of American Revolution
    Bicentennial Commission. Air Force Two would retain its name. (AI?,
    W Post, 7/31/71, A2)
  FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer announced FAA was installing new
    computer-assisted weapon detection system at one gate of Dulles
     International Airport i n Virginia to keep potential hijackers from
    boarding commercial flights. System automatically screened passen-

                                    212
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   July 30

    gers at rate of 20 per min as they p             through electro-magnetic
    fields that detected metal. Information           evaluated by computer
    that could discriminate between di                tal objects on basis of
    weight. Alarm sounded when excess metal or gun was detected.
     (FAA Release 71-126)
* New York Times editorial commented on resignation of Dr. Glenn T.
    Seaborg as AEC Chairman and appointment of Dr. James R. Schlesinger
    to succeed him: “In an earlier era the nation looked to the A.E.C.
    primarily to produce the nuc              ons on which national defense
    policy rested. Today the emp               shifted to the task of generat-
    ing vast amounts of nuclear energy for present and future needs, to
    do so economically and in a manner that safeguards the environment,
    and it is in this area particularly that Dr. Schlesinger will be expected
    to throw light and show leadership.” He could “take another hard
    look at the prospects for controlled thermonuclear fusion as an energy
    source. Substantially increased research funds invested in this area
    might enable this country in the decades ahead to increase power
    production and consumption greatly at minimum cost to the environ-
    ment.’, (NYT, 7/30/71,30)
July 31: President Nixon, at ceremonies marking dedication of Rathbun
    Dam in Centerville, Iowa, referred to Apollo 15 astronauts: “At this
    very hour, if you were watching television you could see that fantas-
    tic ride in a golf cart on the moon.” Apollo 15 astronauts “look down
    on earth. What does it look like? Well, we’ve had descriptions from
     other astronauts and often they have remarked about the fact that
    from far out there the earth looks like a very peaceful planet.” (PD,
    8/9/71,112-5)
  New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15 lunar landing:
    “Today, tomorrow and Monday will come the payoff for the years of
    work by the astronauts and thousands of others who made possible
    last night’s success. The trek across the moon’s surface these next
    three days wilI be the longest both in time and in distance to date,
    partly because of the availability of the lunar rover to permit moon
    rides as well as moon walks. The vast variety of geological conditions
    in the neighborhood of the Falcon’s landing site suggests that these
    excursions may be extremely fruitful.” (NYT, 7/31/71)
* NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from ESRANGE, Kiruna,
    Sweden, to sample noctilucent clouds and particulate matter in upper
    atmosphere. First payload was launched to altitude of 114, km (70.8
    mi) and recovered within 2 hrs 15 min after launch in good condi-
    tion. Mission was considered 100% successful.
       Second payload attained 106 km (65.9 mi) and was recovered
    within 2 hrs of launch. Two of eight collector doors opened prema-
    turely and caused slightly reduced apogee, but experiment results
    were not affected and mission was judged 100% successful. (NASA
    Rpts SRL)
During JuZy: Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) praised US. space shut-
    tle program in Aerospace article: “Logic dictates that we should move
    ahead with the shuttle program, Experience tells us that the aero-
    space industry can respond to even seemingly impossible challenges-
    and that nations that reject the major challenges of their times do not
    remain major powers. And a hard fact of international economics is

                                    213
During July                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     that the United States can remain prosperous in this world only by
     maintaining and utilizing its advanced technology.” (Aerospace,
     7/71,3-7)
  First book taken from earth to moon was not microfilmed Bible carried
     by Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell on Apollo 14 (launched Jan. 31,
     1971) as had been reported by UPI, Robert H. Goddard Library
    publication Goddard Biblio Log said. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,
    had carried miniature copy of Robert Hutchings Goddard-Father o       f
     the Space Age on Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969, 45 years after
     Goddard’s first liquid-fueled rocket flight) but had not been allowed
     by NASA to leave book on moon. Apollo 11 astronauts had given three-
     by two-inch book, published by Achille J. St. Onge, to Mrs. Esther
     Goddard, who had donated it to Goddard Library at Clark Univ.
      (Goddard Biblw Log, 7/71,11-2)
  After more than quarter century of dominating international aviation
     scene, US. was “well on its way to becoming, if not an also-ran, just
     another contender for the trophies of the world’s aviation markets,”
     John F. Loosbrock said in Air Force Magazine article. “For indica-
     tors, one only had to stroll the display line, watch the flying demon-
     strations, and eavesdrop at the chalets” at Paris Air Show. Bitterest
    pill was “lack of American presence in the supersonic-transport com-
     petition, while the Soviet TU-144 and the Anglo-French Concorde
                                                          . .”
     were impressing customers, the press, the public. .        Equally im-
     portant was “dazzling array of commercial and military aviation
    products” displayed by European suppliers. For US. to forge ahead
     again in aviation and advmced technology generally it was going to
     require “new ways of looking at the problem, new ways of doing
     things. We are pricing ourselves out of the market, not only for what
     we hope to sell abroad, but even for what we would like to sell to
     ourselves.” (AF Mag, 7/7, 6 )




                                   214
                            August 1971

August 1: Pope Paul VI told crowd assembled at Castel Gondolfo that he
    had sent confidential message to Apollo 15 astronauts on their July 26-
    Aug. 7 lunar mission. Astronauts had replied: “Our journey is for all
    men and we hope that the talents which God has given us will enable
    us to satisfy those who so kindly support our undertaking.” (AP,
    W Star, 8/2/71, A2)
  Number of accredited newsmen covering ApoUo 15 mission had dwin-
    dled to 402 from high of 1200 for Apollo 11, UPI noted. ApoUo 12
    had been covered by 700 newsmen and Apollo 14, by 600. (W Star,
    8/1/71, A10)
* Cuban internal radio newscasts gave detailed account of Apollo 15 mis-
     sion. Radio RELOJ, all-news station in Havana, read reports of astro-
     nauts’ activities on moon. (NYT, 8/3/71)
  Twenty-fifth anniversary of AEC. In statement commemorating event
     Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, outgoing AEC Chairman, said, “The primary
     mission of the Atomic Energy Commission to develop and use atomic
     energy to improve the public welfare, to promote world peace and to
     assure the common defense and security has been a success.” (AEC
     Release 0-131)
August 2: Twin eight-cent stamps commemorating decade of US. achieve-
     ment in space were issued during ceremonies at KSC, MSC, and MSFC
     in conjunction with Apollo 15 mission. Stamps, depicting Apollo 15
     lunar landing and LRV carrying Apollo 15 astronauts, later went on
     sale throughout U.S. (MSFC Release 71-132; NYT, 7/18/71, 24; W
     Star, 8/1/71, B7; MSFC PAO)
* Interview of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, was pub-
     lished by US. News & Forld Report. Dr. Petrone said: “Many peo-
     ple think Apollo had only a singular goal-that is, land a man on the
     moon and return him safely to earth. That was not the only goal of
     Apollo. Very clearly, in President Kennedy’s address to the Congress
     in May of 1961, a landing on the moon was chosen as a focal point.
     The intention was that the U.S. would become pre-eminent in space-
     learning to operate, I believe as President Kennedy said, on a new
     ocean, a new frontier.” Space research was “definitely relevant. Many
     of the problems we’re trying to solve have to do with the environment.
     We’ve already made a head start in that field with our work on
     spaceships, which requires that we carry the environment with us.
     We have got to purify the gases we have, we’ve got to remove odors,
                                             .
     we have to restore the oxygen we use. . . We are learning how to
     rehabilitate an environment. These tools, these techniques, these un-
     derstandings will have relevance here on earth.” (US News, 8/2/71)
* Newspapers commented on Apollo 15 mission, while astronauts were
     exploring lunar surface.
        Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Apollo 15: “Once
     again, a superbly synchronized lunar mission has proven man’s

                                   215
August 2                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

      capacity to focus the knowledge of hundreds of specialists to achieve
      a singular goal. Apollo 15 is one more grand historic achievement.
      It testifies to the benefit that science and technology, properly har-
      nessed, can reap for mankind.” (CSM, 8/2/71)
         French novelist and TV critic Jean Dutourd commented on Apollo
      15 TV coverage in France Soir. It had made him walk away from TV
      set. “It must be confes~ed,~~wrote, “that these experiments are an
                                    he
      unspeakable bore.” (Reuters, W Post, 8/3/71, A l l )
         New York Times editorial defended manned space flight: “After
      Apollos 16 and 17 next year, there are no known plans of any nation
      to send any more men to the moon. A vast and complex technology
      developed at the cost of many billions of dollars over the last decade
      is being abandoned even as its vast potentialities are being demon-
      strated. If American resources do not permit manned lunar explo-
      ration beyond the end of next year, the United Nations should take
      over the task, appealing to all governments for funds and soliciting
      contributions as well from private individuals and private business
      enterprises. The dusty planet that is the moon could become the
      planet of human cooperation, a new frontier of hope for all man-
      kind.” (NYT, 8/2/71, 22)
    Senate approved conference report submitted July 26 on H.R. 9382,
9

      FY 1972 HUD-SpaCe-SCienCe appropriations bill that included $3.298-
      billion NASA and $619-million NSF appropriations. Bill was cleared for
      President’s approval. (CR, 8/2/71, 5128324; PD, 8/16/71, 1157)
    Louis H. Brennwald, former Vice President of Northrop Aircraft Corp.
      in charge of Puerto Rico operations, became Director of Administra-
      tion for Ames Research Center. (ARC Astrogram, 9/2/71, 1; ARC
      PIO)
* Senate by vote of 49 to 48 passed and cleared for President’s approval
    H.R. 8432, authorizing $250 million for emergency loan guarantees
    to major business enterprises. Legislation ended immediate threat of
    bankruptcy to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and assured Lockheed ade-
    quate funds to complete construction of G l O l l TriStar jet transport
    aircraft, Washington Post later said.
       President Nixon issued statement following Senate action : “The
    Senate’s decision to approve a government loan to the Lockheed
    Corporation is in the best interests of all the American people. I
    greet this vote-as I greeted the vote in the House of Representatives
    last week-with gratitude and deep satisfaction. This action will save
    tens of thousands of jobs that would otherwise have been eliminated.
    It will have a major impact on the economy of California, and will
    contribute greatly to the economic strength of the country as a whole.
    It will help ensure that the Nation’s largest defense contractor, and
    its largest airframe manufacturer, will continue serving the Nation’s
    needs. It will also help ensure that this country will continue to play
    a leading role in the development of aerospace technology.” (CR,
    8/2/71, S12823-63; Samuelson, W Post, 8/3/71, A l ; PD, 8/9/71,
    116-7)
August 2-6: US. and Soviet scientists met in Moscow to recommend joint
    projects and exchanges in near-earth space research, investigations of
    moon and planets, development of spave meteorology, and space ap-
    plications related to natural environment. Recommendations of three

                                     216
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               August 2-6

    working groups representing NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences
    would be forwarded to Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh and
    to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for consideration-
    US. participants were led by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate
    Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Deputy Associate
    Administrator (Science) Leonard Jaffe; and NOAA’S Director of
    National Environmental Satellite Services David S. Johnson. U.S.S.R.
    participants were headed by Dr. Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Coun-
    cil for International Cooperation in Space Research of Soviet Acad-
    emy of Sciences; Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet
    Academy; and Deputy Chief L. A. Aleksandrov, Deputy Chief for
    Technology, Main Administration of Hydrometeorology Services,
    U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers. (NASA Release 71-147; NASA Int Aff)
August 3 .- Astronaut-geologist Harrison H. Schmitt praised ApoZZo 15
    astronauts in MSC briefing for their completion of EVA geological
    activities: “I don’t think there is any question that we had a fan-
    tastic exploration mission. There’s just no question in my mind we
    sent two very competent observational scientists to the moon.” Sam-
    ples collected, Schmitt said, “sounded very much like . . . crystalline
    rocks . . . that may well, and I emphasize may . . . represent the early
    lunar crust. I am not sure until we see the samples that we’re much
    closer to understanding the origin of the rille than when we started,
    except that there probably are some origin theories that can be
    eliminated now.
        ‘? think that the net result of the mission was to indicate that our
    preliminary thinking about the moon . . . still looks like a valid pic-
    ture, it’s a valid foundation [on] which to attempt to further select
    sites and to further approach the analysis of rocks and soils that are
    brought back.” (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
  Apollo 15 LM Falcon’s liftoff from moon was described by Tom Wicker
     in New York Times: ‘‘The first televised liftoff of a manned space-
     craft from the moon had none of the beauty and power of those
     moments when a huge Saturn rocket rises majestically into space
     from Cape Kennedy. The quick pop that sent off the Falcon in a
     shower of sparks looked more like something held over from the
     Fourth of July, and the part of the landing craft left on the moon was
     all too suggestive of an auto graveyard.” Two years after first moon-
     walk, “Americans do not . . . seem nearly so interested as they were
     in these prodigious feats of modern man. Even in living color and
     with that great American love object-an auto, of sorts-to liven up
    the scene, the latest moon show seemed to need something. Unfortu-
     nately the LEM liftoff didn’t turn out to be it.” (NYT, 8/3/71, 27)
  U.S.S.R.’s Lumkhod 1 lunar rover (landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov.
     17, 1970) was powered up to begin experiments for 10th lunar day.
     (UPI, W Post, 8/4/71, A6)
* New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 15: “All the evidence
     suggests that this is the most productive scientific expedition ever
     carried out in space. Even before the astronauts’ own return, the
     information they have sent back has already forced reconsideration
     of some key ideas about the natural history of the moon. In ultimate
     perspective, however, it may turn out that the dividends from the
     Falcon’s stay on the moon will be as substantial in the realm of

                                    217
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
August 3

    changed human ideas and aspirations as in scientific knowledge. For
    millions who watched the superb television pictures of the two astro-
    nauts working comfortably on the lunar surface, the image that came
    across was that of a friendly moon, a place where men could walk
    and ride and work with ease. This is a far cry from the traditional
    picture of the moon as a hostile, alien environment totally inhospit-
    able to man.” (NYT, 8/3/71)
  GAO investigation of NASA selection of NR Rocketdyne Div. for prime
    contract for final design and manufacture of reusable space shuttle
    [see July 131 was requested by Bruce N. Torell, President of Pratt &
    Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp., in telegram to Elmer B.
    Staats, US. Comptroller General. Bases for protest were that source
    selection had disregarded objective of the RFP, NASA had failed to
    conduct “written or oral discussions” on proposals, Pratt & Whitney
    felt its proposal was “clearly entitled to a superior technical evalua-
    tion to the technical proposal of Rocketdyne,” and NASA had failed
    to give proper consideration to “Pratt & Whitney’s test-proven flight
    weight design and greater expesience.”
       In letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, nine sena-
    tors requested that no award of space shuttle engine contract be made
    until GAO investigation had been completed. (CR, 8/6/71, S13789)
  Arcas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station car-
0

    rying Univ. of Pennsylvania Ionospherics experiment. Rocket and
    instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
* Twenty-fifth anniversary of invention of computer by Dr. J. P. Eckert
    and Dr. John W. Mauchly of Univ. of Pennsylvania. New York Times
    editorial Aug. 9 commented on anniversary: “Man’s invasion of
    space, up to and including Apollo 15’s latest feats, would have been
    impossible without computers. So would much of the rest of modern
    science and technology.” (Smith, NYT, 8/4/71, 43: NYT, 8/9/71, 28)
  Dr. Georgy N. Babakin, prominent Soviet space scientist who had de-
    signed equipment for unmanned Soviet spacecraft, died at age 56.
    Izvestia obituary said Dr. Babakin had been recipient of Hero of
    Socialist Labor, highest Soviet civilian title, and corresponding mem-
    ber of Soviet Academy of Sciences and had made “a great contribu-
    tion to the development of Soviet space technology and the study of
    the moon and Venus.” (NYT, 8/5/71,34)
* Of 80 new underground missile silos being constructed by U.S.S.R., at
    least 6 had been started after US. and U.S.S.R. announced May 20
    that they would seek to limit construction of nuclear weapons, Wush-
    ington Post quoted sources as saying. (.Getler, W Post, 8/3/71, A l )
August 4: NASA issued RFPS to major airframe manufacturers for design
    and fabrication of two experimental transport jet STOL aircraft to
    start Quiet-sToL program to relieve airport noise and congestion.
    Aircraft, incorporating propulsive lift principles, would provide tech-
    nological data and experience for developing environmentally accept-
    able, economical, and safe fan-jet STOL transport system in NASA-DOT-
    FAA-USAF program. Program would implement major recommenda-
    tions of joint NASA-DOT Civil Aviation Research and Development
     (CARD) Study by providing industry with basis for STOL development,
    Government regulatory agencies with rules for STOL certification and

                                   218
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   August 4

    operation, and USAF with modernized tactical airlift capability.
    (NASA Release 71-146)
  Committee for the Future-group       of wealthy private citizens-was seek-
    ing to finance return trip to Hadley Rille, ApoZZo 15 landing site,
    with surplus Apollo spacecraft, Reuters reported in Baltimore Sun.
    Group hoped to recover contemplated $4800-million investment by
    selling moon rocks, TY film, and photographic and literary rights, and
    by charging for scientific experiments conducted. Group had an-
    nounced proposal to operate mission “Harvest Moon” after final
    ApoIIo flight in 1972 because it seemed incredible that man could
    invest $25 billion and 10 yrs to reach moon and then “stop without
     .. . looking at the moon’s value to man and his future.” Members of
    committee had spoken informally with NASA officials, Reuters said.
    Officials had said privately that plan stood little chance of approval.
     (B Sun, 8/4/71, A6)
* NASA, National Weather Service and Environmental Data Service
    spokesmen, questioned by Washington Post, said their agencies had
    received complaints from public that ApolZo 15 mission had caused
    heavy rainfall over Washington, D.C., area. They denied that mis-
    sion was responsible and that rains accompanying Apollo 13 and 14
    missions had been anything more than coincidence. (Cohen, W Post,
    8/5/71, B1)
  Senate Committee on Armed Services unanimously approved H.R. 8687,
    $21-billion FY 1972 military procurement authorization, decrease of
    $100 million over House-passed figure of $21.1 billion. Committee, at
    Administration’s request, restored $801 million for procurement of
    48 F-147 carrier-based fighter aircraft built for USN by Grumman
    Aerospace Corp. (CR, 8/4/71, D824; Finney, NYT, 8/5/71, 11)
August 4-13: ARC’S specially equipped Convair 990 jet aircraft Galileo
    carried 29 scientists and 4500 kg (10 000 lbs) of instruments on series
    of ‘flights from Hickham AFB, Hawaii. Purpose of flights was to in-
    vestigate Mars’ invisible infrared light radiations while flying above
    99% of earth‘s occluding atmospheric water vapor during Mars’ closest
    approach to earth since 1671. Flight path was 869 km (540 mi) south
    of Hawaii along 13” north latitude meridian. Mars was about 56 mil-
    lion km (35 million mi) from earth. Galileo also carried vector mag-
    netometer to investigate continental drift and sea floor spreading in ARC
    experiment. Expedition was sponsored by ARC Airborne Science Office.
     (NASA Release 71-145; UPI, NYT, 8/7/71, 8; ARC Astrogram, 8/19/
    7L1)
August 4-20: Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, outgoing AEC Chairman, and group
    of US. nuclear scientists toured peaceful nuclear energy facilities in
    U.S.S.R. at invitation of Chairman Andronik Petrosyants of Soviet
    State Committee for Nuclear Energy. (AEC Release 0-126; AEC PIO)
August 5: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 432 from Baykonur into orbit with
    252-km (156.6-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period
    and 51.7” inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 18. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/71,
    SBD, 8/9/71,179)
  ESRO and FAA announced in Madrid agreement on program for use of
    satellites to control civil air traffic. At least four satellites would be
    launched over Atlantic and Pacific beginning in 1975. System would
    be used for air-to-air communications and as navaid to avoid midair

                                     219
August 5                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     collisions. Committee to administer program would be appointed from
     ESRO, FAA, and representatives of Australia, Canada, Ireland, Philip-
     pines, Japan, and Portugal. (Reuters, B Sun, 8/6/71, A2)
  British aviatrix Sheila Scott arrived at London Airport in Piper Aztec
     aircraft to complete 55 000-km (34 000-mi) solo flight during which
     she participated in NASA Nimbus 4 experiment [see June 11. Miss Scott
     claimed seven records. ( W Post, 8/6/71, A6)
  First commercial flight of McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jet transport air-
     craft was ‘flownby American Airlines between Los Angeles and Chicago.
    More than 80% of seats were occupied during 3 hr 18 min flight.
     (CR, 8/6/71, E9096-7; Yarborough, W Star, 8/18/71, D10; AAL
    PRO )
  Soviet engineer 0. Sashin described in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya ac-
    tivities of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by
    Luna 17, Nov. 17, 1970: At time of launch “it was supposed that the
           ..                                                           .
    whole . program could be fulfilled in 3 lunar work days. . . Over
    these three days Lunokhod-1 . . . visited a multitude of craters, re-
                                            .
    peatedly surmounting rock fields. . . In all, during the 3 working
     days envisaged by the initial program, 42 radio communications ses-
    sions were held with Lunokhod-1, during which 8,924 radio commands
    were issued and fulfilled. . . . the route covered by the apparatus
     amounted to 3,551 meters [3883 yards], the television cameras trans-
    mitted to earth more than 80 high-quality panoramas of the sur-
    rounding locality and the scientists obtained vast information about
                                                                            .
    the moon. The fourth working day passed, then a fifth, and a sixth. . .
    Each was succeeded by a 2-week lunar night with all its ‘charms’ in-
    cluding an outside temperature which drops to below minus 150
    degrees. But the next morning came and Lunokhod-1, roused by a
    radio command from earth, obediently set about its work.
                                                                    .
        “The work of the self-propelled lunar scout . . . continues. . . 132
    radio communications sessions have been held . . . in which 22,792
    radio commands have been given. A route 10,226 meters [ll 183
    yards] . . . over the lunar surface has been covered. The 10th work-
    ing day on the moon has arrived. And again the indefatigable scout
     [is] continuing its search.” (FBIS-~ov-158-3, 8/16/71, L1-3)
  Results of Harris survey of 1614 US. households on priority areas for
    cuts in Federal funding were published in Washington Post. Top three
    candidates for cuts were Vietnam war, foreign aid, and space program;
    50% of those polled favored cut in space program; 13% would cut
    program least of Federal spending areas listed. Support for spending
    in education, urban aid, and environmental areas, Harris said, “appears
    to be on the rise.” (Harris, W Post, 8/5/71)
August 6: USAF launched nine satellites from Vandenberg AFB by one Atlas
    booster at 5:11 pm PDT (8:ll pm EDT). Ov 1-20 Orbiting Vehicle-
    carrying energetic proton analyzer, particle energy and flux thermal
    detector, and w solar radiation experiment-entered orbit with 1932.8-
    km (1201-mi) apogee, 136.8-km (85-mi) perigee, 105.9-min period,
    and 92” inclination and reentered Aug. 28. Ov I-21-carrying      velocity
    mass spectrometer, atmospheric composition sensor, and ELF/VLF an-
    tenna effects transceiver-entered orbit with 917.3-km (570-mi) apogee,
    788.6-km (490-mi) perigee, 101.9-min period, and 87.6” inclination.
    Cannonball 2 (OAR 901) carried accelerometers to model atmospheric

                                    220
                                                                      August 6




                                                         It reentered Sept. 19.
         Five remaining satellites were ejected from Ov 1-21. RTD 701,
      which would serve as calibration target, enter            with 915.7-km
      569-mi) apogee, 774.1-
      87.6’ inclination. Four
      data for use in design and de
      parameters : apogee, 917.3
       (474-482 mi) ; period 101.
       (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 8/10/71, 187; GSFC SSR, 1/31/72)
    President Nixon approved H.R. 7109, $3.384-billion NASA FY 1972 au-
0

      thorization bill that became P.L. 92-68. Total authorization was $84
      million above budget request of $3.300 billion and $86 million above
      FY 1971 new obligational authority (NOA) of $3.298 billion. Bill
      authorized for R&D $2.603 billion, increase of $85.5 mill‘      ion over
      budget request of $2.518 billion and decrease of $90 million from
      FY 1971 authorization of $2.693 billion; for construction of facilities,
      $58.4 million, up $2.1 million from budget request of $56.3 million
      and $24 million above FY 1971 authorization of $34.5 million; and
      for research and program management, $723 million, down $4 million
      from budget request of $727 million but $40 million above $683.3
      million authorized in FY 1971.
         Bill included $29.3-million budget amendment to cover Federal pay
       increases. It added $30 million to budget request for Skylab and Space
       Shuttle programs, $43 million for nuclear power and propulsion, $2.5
      million for earth resources survey, and $12.5 million for aeronautical
       research and technology. It reduced requested authorization for lunar
      and planetary exploration by $10 million. (PD, 8/9/71, 1136; NASA
      Budget Off;A&A 1970)
    Final communications session of 10th lunar day was held by Soviet
       ground controllers with Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon, Tass an-
       nounced. Vehicle had traveled 215 m (235 yds) during 10th lunar
       day, bringing total distance covered since landing on moon Nov. 17,
       1970, on board Luna 17 to 10 452 m (11430 yds) . (FBIS-SOV-159-3,
      8/17/71, L1)
      announced $51000 grant to Emory Univ. to develop and evaluate
    NSF
0

    experimental program to reorient former defense-aerospace scientists
    and technologists into research on societal problems. ( NSF Release
    71-177)
  Daniel J. Haughton, Chairman of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., told press in
    London that he hoped G l O l l TriStar airbus and Rolls-Royce RB-211
    engine program would be revived in “matter of weeks.” Lockheed
    needed more orders to reach estimated breakeven figure on TriStar
    sales of from 255 to 265 aircraft. (AP, NYT, 8/7/71, 28)
                            on of Dr. James R. Schlesinger and William 0.
a Senate confirmed nom
                            c. (CR, 8/6/71, D845)
    Doub as members
August 7 President Nixon issued statement following successful splashdown
        :
    of Apollo 15 spacecraft: “Apollo 15 has returned safely to Earth. It
    brings with it new proof of man’s invincible will to master the moment

                                      221
August 7                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     of his own destiny. It brings new tribute to man’s unquenchable thirst
    for understanding. It brings the seeds of scientific understanding which
     may open a new chapter in the history of our planet. We salute Astro-
    nauts Scott, Irwin and Worden, who have stood poised on behalf of
     mankind on the brink of man’s new world.’’ (PD, 8/16/71, 1154)
* Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard
     recovery ship for first time. Congressmen-prevented from attending
    previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and
    expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific-were
    flown to U.S.S. Okinuwa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not
    in session. Watching ApolZo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague
     (D-Tex.) , Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’
     Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane
      (D-Mass.) ; Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) ; Rep. Richard T. Hanna
      (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A.
    Mosher (R-Ohio). (WPost, 8/8/71, A10)
  U.N. Secretary General U Thant said in message to President Nixon that
    Apollo 15 was “another brilliant chapter in man’s peaceful exploration
    of outer space.” (Reuters, NYT, 8/8/71)
  Philadelphia Inquirer editorial praised Apollo 15 crew : “Their workman-
    like approach to arduous tasks, combined with fascinating descriptive
     commentary, gave Scott and Irwin good credits for showmanship as
    well as technical expertise. And the superb orchestration from mission
     control in Houston with Joseph Allen directing the score with the
    precision of a maestro on the podium, added an esthetic touch to a
     performance that should win raves from drama critics as well as space
     buffs. All concerned with Apollo 15 rate the nation’s applause for an
     almost flawless performance thus far.” ( P Znq, 8/7/71)
  Arcas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Greely, Alaska, carried
     GSFC experiment to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with
     Nimbus 4 satellite overpass. Because of problems with ground tracking
     equipment no telemetry signal was received from payload until rocket
     reached 27-km (16.8-mi) altitude on descent side of apogee. Radar
     did not acquire rocket or ejected payload and payload was not recov-
     ered. Flight, first in three-flight series, was rated partially successful.
     Second and third rockets in series would be launched Aug. 9 and 14.
     (NASA Rpt SRL; SR list)
August 8: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 433 into orbit with 299-km (185.8-mi)
     apogee, 112-km (69.6-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period and 49.4’ inclina-
     tion. Satellite reentered Aug. 9. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/71)
  ApoZZo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M.
    Worden were greeted by crowd of 3500 persons during brief stopover
     in Hawaii en route to Ellington AFB, Tex. On arrival in Texas astro-
     nauts were cheered by 2500 persons who waved banners and flags while
     band played “Fly Me to the Moon.” Astronauts were first to return
     from moon without being required to undergo quarantine. (Stevens,
    NYT, 8/9/71,1; AP, C Trib, 8/10/71)
  Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to Presi-
     dent Nixon on successful completion of A p o h 15 mission, Tass re-
     ported. Podgorny had asked President Nixon to convey congratulations
     and good wishes to “courageod Apolb 1s astronauts. (FBIS-sOv-71-
     153,8/9/71, GI)

                                      222
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  August 8

  Newspapers published preliminary summary of Apollo 15’s scientific and
    technical achievements. Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post: “The
    voyage of Apollo 15 did far more than extend man’s reach into the
    heavens. It showed dramatically that man belongs in space. At the
    end of their three days on the moon and six in lunar orbit, the astro-
             .
    nauts . . had gathered more scientific information about the moon
    than all the manned and unmanned spacecraft that had flown before
    them.”
       Cameras and instruments in SIM had made first extensive observa-
    tions from lunar orbit. One of first findings was confirmation that
    moon was not perfectly round and was dimpled. Evidence from seis-
    mometer was backed up by bistatic radar in which spacecraft signals
    were used to penetrate lunar surface to core. Seismometer’s reception
    of LM’S impact on moon indicated that even small explosion or impact
    could be recorded at extreme range and verified earlier hypothesis that
    meteorite impacts were being recorded daily from all over lunar surface,
    Addition o i Apollo 15 station to existing seismic net completed triangu-
    lar array of instruments for determining focal points of moonquakes.
       Data from cold cathode gauges at Apollo landing sites and mass
    spectrometer in orbiting Endeavour confirmed presence of thin lunar
    atmosphere. Spectrometer picked up pockets of neon and argon and
    scooped up carbon dioxide that had apparently burst from fissure near
    where sun was lighting lunar surface at daybreak. Other data obtained
    by Endeavour’s instruments indicated lunar highlands were rich in
    aluminum and deficient in magnesium. Waterless basins were rich in
    magnesium and deficient in aluminum. Most highland regions con-
    tained three times as much aluminum as lowlands, and one mountain-
    ous region had five times as much aluminum as typical lunar basin.
    Magnetometer on subsatellite launched into lunar orbit discovered
    moon had electromagnetic boundary layer. Camera system recorded
    data for comprehensive map of areas never before flown over, with
    details and resolution previously impossible.
       Report by Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin o terracing
                                                                  f
    along sides of Hadley Rille identical to terracing noted on sides of two
    tallest mountains in Apennine group-Hadley Delta and Mt. Hadley-
    suggested mountains and Hadley Rille had been thrust up from moon
    by internal pressures that built up inside moon when object the size
    of state of Rhode Island struck moon and created Sea of Rains 4 billion
    yrs ago. Scientists had previously thought Hadley Rille to be younger
    than mountains and independent of their formation. Samples might hold
    clues to sun’s history and its effects on earth climate, past and future.
       Walter Sullivan said in New York Times: “Sun-determined changes
    in the earth’s climate have controIIed man’s history, from the ice ages
    that plagued the cave men to the desiccation that buried Middle East-
    ern civilizations, not under invading armies but invading sands. By
    understanding the role of the sun in these past events, man may be able
    to assess the effect our parent star will have in determining climates
    of the future.” (W Star, 8/8/71, AlO; W Post, 8/8/71, B1; NYT,
    8/8/71 )
* Newspaper editorials praised U.S. exploration.
       New York Times: “The Apollo program was born a decade ago as
    an element in Soviet-American rivalry for prestige and political advan-

                                    223
August 8                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     tage. But the program’s brilliant success has made obsolete the nation-
     alistic considerations that seemed so important in the early 1960’s. Now
     it is evident that lunar exploration and eventual settlement offer rewards
     and challenges for all mankind. Do Washington and Moscow have the
     courage and imagination to begin makingthat prospect a reality?”
     (NYT, 8/8/71)
        Washington Post: “There seems to be very little doubt that the mis-
     sion completed yesterday by astronauts Scott, Irwin and Worden has
     been the most productive in the history of the Apollo program. The
     yield of scientific data has already been large and much more is sure
     to come as laboratories around the world analyze the rocks, pictures
                           .                                  .
     and other material. . . The trip has been a bonanza . . and it may
     well go down in history as one of the most useful expeditions ever
    conducted in helping mankind understand the universe in which it
    lives.” ( W Post, 8/8/71)
  Responsibility for NASA space tug activities was assigned to MSFC by Dale
     D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in letter to
     Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, MSFC Director. MSFC would manage “in-
    house and contracted activities” and provide liaison with DOD and
     European groups interested in participating in development and use
     of space tug. Dr. Rees later said Space Tug Project Group would be
    established within Advanced Systems Analysis Office of Program De-
    velopment. (MSFC Release 71-178)
  Joint NASA-US.Geological Survey project CARETS (Central Atlantic
     Regional Ecological Test Site) was described in Washington Post
     article. NASA high-altitude aircraft were flying from Wallops Station
     over Maryland and Virginia to obtain data for ecological analysis.
     Information gleaned would be included in land use maps, water use
     and pollution maps, and research reports. (Pfeiffer, W Post, 8/8/71,
    ClO)
  U.S.S.R. had in past year “become the potential target of a vastly in-
    creased number of nuclear bombs and missile warheads,” Washington
    Sunday Star noted. While US. was menaced only by Soviet nuclear
    weapons, U.S.S.R. had become “first to be put at a disadvantage in
    the game of nuclear proliferati~n.~~    France and China had begun
    deploying missiles that could reach targets within U.S.S.R. but not
    targets in US. France’s first squadron of nine intermediate-range
    nuclear missiles had become operational Aug. 4. Another nine were
    to be added. Missiles carried 100-kiloton warhead-five       times as
    powerful as atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima-and sufficient range
    to reach some major industrial cities of U.S.S.R. Communist Chinese
    had deployed small number of medium-range nuclear missiles and
    US. experts thought they were not concentrating on development of
    intermediate range and intercontinental missiles.
       US. had 100 Minuteman missiles, 50% of which would carry up
    to three warheads; 54 Titan missiles; 41 submarines carrying 16 mis-
    siles each, with 31 submarines being converted to carry 10-warhead
    Poseidon; and 470 strategic bombers. U.K. had 3 Polaris submarines;
    40 Canberra V-8 bombers; and 2 aircraft carriers with 80 Buccaneer
    strike aircraft capable of delivering nuclear weapons. French also had
    36 Mirage IV-A aircraft capable of low-level delivery of 60-kiloton
    nuclear bombs. NATO forces in Europe had 7000 tactical nuclear

                                     224
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                    August 8

     weapons available, with about 2250 missiles and aircraft to deliver
     them. (Kelly, W Star, 8/8/71, A15)
Augmt 9: Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and
     Operations, told press at MSC that preliminary examination of Apollo
     15 crew had revealed astronauts were in good health, but were not
     returning to normal as rapidly as expected. Examination had also
     revealed that Astronaut David R. Scott had ruptured blood vessels
     under four fingernails-apparently during first EVA on moon. Ruptures
     had resulted from increased pressure on fingers from spacesuit as Scott
     moved his arms to conduct experiments. Although Scott had mentioned
     some discomfort to his hands after EVA-1, officials had assumed dis-
     comfort was typical hand cramp experienced by previous astronauts.
     Dr. Berry said Scott’s injury was not serious enough to warrant space-
     suit modifications: “It’s just one of those things that you’ve got to put
        ...  with, and we keep trying to make suits better all the time, and
     up
     I think this current suit is probably as far along the line to being
                                                                        . .”
     comfortable and providing mobility as any suit we’ve ever had. .
     (Transcript)
* NASA’S M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana,
     reached mach 0.93 during eighth flight from FRC in joint NASA-USAF
    program. Purposes of flight were to evaluate effects of moving center
     of gravity slightly forward and of decreasing launch mach number by
    launching at 12 200-m (40 000-ft) altitude instead of 13 700 m
     (45000 ft). (NASA Proj Off)
* Arcas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Greely, Alaska, carried
    GSFC payload to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with
    Nimbus 4 satellite overpass. Because of problems with ground track-
    ing equipment, no usable telemetry signal was received from payload
    until rocket reached 45-km (28-mi) altitude on descent side of apogee.
    Payload recovery was not successful; telemetry data were late and
    quality of signal was poor. Experiment was rated partially successful.
    Launch was second in three-flight series. First had been conducted
    Aug. 7. (NASA Rpt SRL)
  Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 15.
       Washington Daily News: “The record harvest of rocks and other
     data brought back by Apollo 15 may turn out to be one of the biggest
    steps ever toward understanding the solar system, the dominant influ-
    ence on earthly existence. This has been the most remarkable decade
    of research and development in history, and the space program has
    been the core of it.” (WNews, 8/9/71)
       Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The pictures taken by Endeavour
    and the data being supplied by the tiny satellite the astronauts left
    orbiting the moon are providing the most exact and comprehensive
    intelligence yet about minerals on the moon.” It was “becoming obvi-
    ous that what we spend in space we are investing in the future of
    mankind.” ( P Bull, 8/9/71)
  Prague newspaper Rude Pravo commented on Apollo 15: “The scientists
    eagerly anticipate the results of the work of the astronauts and instru-
    ments which were sent on such a long trip. People of goodwill
    throughout the world who follow these flights will always wait long
    into the night for the two words from Houston, Baykonur, and even-

                                    225
August 9                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    tually from other places on earth: ‘Mission complete.’ ” (FBIS-Czecho-
    slovakia-71-155,8/1 1/71, D1)
  President Nixon had sent letter to daughter of Soyuz I1 Cosmonaut
     Georgy T. Dobrovolsky after seeing photo of girl at cosmonauts’
    funeral, Time reported. Letter had said: “I know your father would
    want YOU to face his loss with a strength and courage to match his
    own. As your sister Natasha grows older I know you will help her
    understand how very proud of her father you both should be.” (Time,
    8/9/71,31)
August 10: President Nixon approved H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-
    science appropriations bill that contained $3.298-billion NASA FY 1972
    appropriation and $619 million NSF appropriation. Bill became P.L.
    92-78. NASA total included $2.523 billion for R&D, $52.7 million for
    construction of facilities, and $722.6 million for research and program
    management. Bill appropriated $39 million for NERVA program, $13
     million for space shuttle main engine test facilities, and $5.5 million
     for space shuttle thermal-protection facilities.
       President also signed H.R. 9667, $2.9-billion DOT FY 1972 appro-
    priations bill that included $58.5 million to repay airlines for money
    they invested in SST but eliminated funding for SST program. Bill
    became P.L. 92-96. (PD, 8/16/71, 1157; NASA Budget Off; H Rpt
    92-377)
  Scientists at LRL in Houston began opening bags of rocks returned from
    moon by Apollo 15 crew. Before and after day-long debriefing Astro-
     nauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin assisted geologists in identi-
    fying samples. Material included football-size piece of black, glass-like
    rock ; brick-size chunk of volcanic rock pitted with small cavities
     (vesicular basalt) ; and 91/2-kg (21-lb) rock, largest single sample ever
    returned from moon, from rim of Hadley Rille. Scientists were anxiously
    waiting to examine crystalline rock in sample bag No. 196, scheduled
    to be opened Aug. 12, that Scott had described as possible chip of
    moon’s original crust, ( W Post, 8/11/71; AP B Sun, 8/10/71, A l )
  Lagos, Nigeria, Morning Post congratulated Apollo 15 astronauts for suc-
    cessful mission, which they attributed to ingenuity and resourcefulness
    of NASA. Lunar explorations, Post said, would strengthen faith in and
    appreciation of God’s work. ( FBIS-Nigeria-71-153, 8/11/71, W6)
  NASA launched three sounding rockets from WSMR. Two Aerobee 170
    sounding rockets, one carrying NRL experiment to study stellar spectra
    and one carrying GSFC experiment to conduct x-ray studies, were un-
    successful. Boosted Arcas I1 carried GSFC experiment to 70-km (43.5-
    mi) altitude to measure mobility of charged particles in lower D
    region. Rocket functioned satisfactorily, but some anomalous data were
    received. Data would be correlated with data from two Nike-Cajun
    launches scheduled for Aug. 31. (SR list; NASA Rpt SRL)
  Australian pilots Trevor Brougham and Bob Dickeson landed twin-engine
    Beechcraft Baron aircraft at Darwin, Australia, after 125-hr 27-min
    flight round the world which was believed to have set world record for
    light aircraft. (Reuters, W Post, 8/11/71, A6)
August I I : Dr. Paul W. Gast, Director of Planetary and Earth Sciences at
    MSC, explained at MSC briefing significance of photos taken by Apollo
    15 astronauts: Scientists had always wondered whether earth and moon
    had a gradual or cataclysmic kind of history. “What we’ve sort of seen

                                     226
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  August I1

     in the Apollo 15 site is that indeed the lunar history is in part cata-
     clysmic.” Dr. Gast said photos of Apennine Mountains confirmed that
    mountains wereformed out of same collision that created Sea of Rains
    north of mountain range, involving another body as big as state of
     Rhode Island. “We theorized that this would be the case,” Dr. Gast
     said, “but until now it had just been a hypothesis.” Dr. Gast and his
     colleagues had examined about 24 of the more than 1400 photos taken
    on lunar surface, but they were able to make conclusions because pic-
    tures were clear and detailed. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 8/12/71,
    A13)
August 12 : USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by
     Titan IIIB-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 402.3-km
     (250-mi) apogee, 133.6-km (83-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and
     110.9’ inclination and reentered Sept. 3. (Pres Rpt 72; SF, 2/72)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 434 from Baykonur into orbit with 11798-km
      (7331.0-mi) apogee, 187-km ( 116.2-mi) perigee, 228.2-min period,
     and 5 1 . 5 O inclination. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/71; SBD, 8/13/71, 205)
* ApoZZo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M.
     Worden held press conference at MSC, during which they showed films
     and described mission. Irwin and Scott praised performance of LRV
     Rover and said it had exceeded their expectations. Showing film taken
     from Rover during traverse, Irwin said he hoped simulated ride didn’t
     make viewers seasick. Ride on LRV, he said, “is kind of a combination
    of a small rowboat in a rough sea and a bucking bronco.”
        Scott said only change he would recommend for Rover was “some
    manner of strapping yourself in the vehicle other than just pure seat
    belts.” He also said moon should be explored to far greater extent
    than was currently planned, with :‘a whole base of scientists” and “a
    Rover that can carry 6 to 10 men. I think we can . . . establish bases
    on the moon similar to those in the Antarctic and explore it and dis-
     cover a vast amount of data that we don’t even know we have up
    there.”
        Core sample drilling, Scott said, was “one of the best things we
    ever did on the moon. It was very difficult, very time consuming and
    at times it was rather perplexing . . . because we did not expect the
    regolith or the surface material to be quite as well integrated or
    packed as it was. There was nothing wrong with the equipment, it
    was just that we encountered the unknown. And we had to compen-
                      ..     . that’s why man goes to the moon. His subjective
    sate for that and
    mind can evaluate the situation and come up with a fix far better
    than a machine. The machine would have stopped. It would have
    never gotten the drill.”
        Scott said in closing, “We went to the moon as trained observers . . .
    to gather data, not only with our instruments on board, but with our
                                                                 ..
    minds, and I’d like to quote a statement from Plutarch . : ‘The
    mind is not a vessel to be filled, but a fire to be lighted.’”
        Astronauts later revealed they had left plaque and tiny silver figure
    of a fallen man on moon as memorial to 14 astronauts and cosmo-
    nauts who had died in pursuit of space exploration. Plaque, bearing
    names of eight astronauts and six cosmonauts, had been left in small
    crater about 6 m (20 ft) north of rille. (Transcript; AP, B Sun,
    8/13/71, A l )

                                    227
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
August 12

* Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by              from WSMR carry-
                                                   NASA
    ing NRL experiment to conduct solar studies. Mission was partial suc-
    cess. (SR list)
 LRL geologists Dr. William C. Phinney and Dr. Paul W. Gast described
    anorthosite rock from Apollo 15 sample bag No. 196 to press at MSC
    lunar sample briefing. Dr. Phinney, praising crew’s descriptions of
    samples, said ‘Lasin all cases so far where we’ve looked at what the
    rocks are, it matches exactly what the astronauts said it was. It’s
                                                          .
                                                        . . essentially pure
    about fist size, 269 grams-1/-lb-anorthosite
    plagioclase.” Grain was quite coarse, 1-cm (0.4-in) grains, “about the
    coarsest grain size of any lunar rocks that we’ve seen so far.” Its
    milky-white color suggested ‘‘that it has probably undergone a fair
    amount of stress, maybe a shock type of deformation.”
        Rock, popularly called “Genesis rock,” was significant because it
    supported hypothesis that moon had been extensively molten with
    anorthosite crystallizing from liquid, floating to top, and producing
    anorthositic crust. Although discovery did not prove hypothesis, Dr.
    Gast explained, it was “a long step in the direction” of determining
    moon’s origin. “If results on the dating of this anorthosite and some
                               .
    of the chemistry on it . . turn out that all point to the fact that it is
    essentially 4.6 or 4.7 billion years old, which is the time that we think
                         .
    the moon formed, . . it gets to be rather difficult to argue with the
    hypothesis.” (Transcript )
August 13: Dr. Charles A. Beiry, MSC Director of Medical Research and
     Operations, described Apolb 15 crew’s medical status to press at
    MSC. Astronauts James B. Irwin and David R. Scott had suffered brief
    periods of irregular heart rhythm on moon, probably as a result of
     extreme fatigue. Irwin also had dizzy spells in space. Arythmic heart-
    beats and dizziness had not been disclosed to press earlier, Dr. Berry
     said, because tests were still being conducted and complete informa-
     tion was not known. Until Aug. 13 Irwin was still suffering from
    effects of weightlessness; he still had mild dizzy spells and, when lying
     prone, felt as if his bed were tilted downward about 30°. Astronaut
     Alfred M. Worden’s medical data during transearth coast EVA had
     been close to predicted, and Worden was adjusting better than Scott
     and Irwin.
        None of the three, however, had returned to preflight norms, but
     there was “no medical danger” as far as crew was concerned. “Things
     from past space flights were all going in a pattern and now suddenly
     these guys don’t fit the pattern.” In assessing astronauts’ return to
     normal it was important to note how Apollo 15 differed from previ-
     ous manned space flight missions. Important factors were longer time
     spent on lunar surface, longer lunar orbit stay time, and longer time
     spent in 100% oxygen atmosphere.
        Heartbeat irregularities, which had lasted about 10 heartbeats, were
     usually associated with fatigue, low potassium level, and increased
     adrenalin flow-all of which were present in astronauts. Because of
     fatigue levels of which astronauts were often unaware, flight surgeons
     were considering recommending that first EVAS on Apollo 16 and
     Apollo 17 be shortened. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 8/14/71, 1)
  NASA announced selection of Apollo 17 prime and backup crews. Prime
     crewmen were Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans

                                     228
                                                                   August 13
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    (CM pilot) , and scientist-astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt (LM pilot).
   Backup crewmen were David R. Sco
   B. Irwin. Apollo 17 would be laun
   lunar-landing mission with 68-hr                      stay time. (NASA
   Release 71-149)
 New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo
   program to fund space station and shuttl hile U.S.S.R. Sulyut I was
   already in orbit: “In effect, the unique         ican capability to land
   men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule
   so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with
   what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more
   bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations
   in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations
   for military as well as civiiian purposes. This is a prospect that liter-
   ally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71,26)
August 13-14: New York Times published series of three articles by
   Apollo 15 astronauts describing the July 26-Aug. 7 lunar-landing
   mission.
       Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came
    in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you,
    but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment
    our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and
    pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had
                                                .
    been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . I radioed to mission con-
    trol, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the
    sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our
    arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an
    emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots
    of eggs spread across the lawn, but there’s only one golden one, and
    there it was-The Golden Egg.”
       Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe
    moon as barren and desolate dead world, ‘‘it can be a beautiful one
                                                        ...   When I first
    to anyone who loves the mountains of earth.
                                .
    climbed down the ladder . . I was really taken back by those moun-
    tains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and
    so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight,
    were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking
    to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun
    glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a
                                                                          ..
    glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me.
    you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of
    place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly
    what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at
    home.”
       Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with
    “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are
    suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down
    and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought
    of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from
                         ..
                          . one of the most important observations from
    all that is below.
    Apollo 15, as f a r as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a
    great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training

                                    229
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
August 13-14

                                           ..
    we studied and discussed volcanoes . but I guess I wasn’t really
    prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the
   moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71,1; 8/14/71,1)
August 14: Arcas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Greely,
    Alaska, carried GSFC payload to obtain ozone measurements in con-
   junction with Nimbus 4 satellite overpass. Ozone payload and ground
    telemetry tracking equipment functioned satisfactorily. Payload was
    recovered and good data were collected. Launch was last in three-
    flight series that began Aug. 7. (NASA Rpt SRL)
 Chicago Tribune editorial commented on Apollo 15 crew: “Out of all
    they saw, collected and recorded by camera they hope to make a
    significant contribution to science and the understanding of the uni-
    verse, and they hope from this to apply what they learned to the
    betterment of life on earth. If there is one regret, it is, as Scott said,
    that after the vista from this peak of experience, what comparable
    mountain remains to be searched?” (C Trib, 8/14/71)
August 15: John P. Donnelly, former Vice President for Corporate Com-
    munications for Whittaker Corp., became NASA Assistant Administra-
    tor for Public Affairs. Appointment had been announced July 23.
    (NASA Activities, 8/15/71, 135)
 Baltimore Sun editorial praised NASA decision to include scientist-
0

    astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt in Apollo 17 crew: “Exploration
    of the moon can be scientifically justified as a great and extremely
    costly project only by the faith that it will produce evidence on which
    the world’s whole scientific community can agree regarding the ori-
    gins and age of the moon, the earth, perhaps the entire solar system.’’
    Even though Apollo program was to end with Dr. Schmitt’s flight, “it
    may very well take a new turning by reason of his presence.” (B Sun,
    8/15/71)
August 16: France’s Eole (CAS-1) Cooperative Applications Satellite was
    launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 2:39 pm EDT. Four-stage
    Scout boosted spacecraft into orbit with 906.1-km (563.6-mi) apogee,
    677.8-km (421.2-mi) perigee, 100.7-min period, and 50.2O inclination.
       Primary NASA objectives were to place spacecraft into appropriate
    earth orbit to obtain meteorological data from balloons and to analyze
    meteorological data acquired from constant-density surface balloons for
    study of characteristics and movements of air masses. Secondary NASA
    objective was to acquire technology of satellite range and range-rate
    system for locating free-moving balloons.
       The 85-kg ( 187-lb) satellite-developed by France’s Centre Nationale
    d’gtudes Spatiales (CNES) and named for mythical God of Winds-
    would collect information on wind, temperatures, and pressures from
    up to 500 instrumented balloons flying at 1 900-m (39 000-ft) alti-
                                                    1
    tude in Southern Hemisphere. Balloons, to be launched by CNES and
    Argentine personnel from three sites in Argentina, could be interro-
    gated by Eole day and night, individually, in sequence, or in pro-
    grammed group of up to 64 at a time.
       Eole’s meteorological objectives were to study circulation of atmos-
    phere from tracks of balloons, provide basis for standard reference
    system of pressure and temperature to be used in World Weather
    Program, and learn more about local winds. Mission would prove
    feasibility of modified Doppler system plus range measurements to

                                     230
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 August 16

      determine accurately location of each balloon and prove out super-
     pressure balloon design and lightweight, frangible balloon-borne elec-
     tronics.
        Eole was launched under May 27, 1966, Memorandum of Under-
     standing between CNES and NASA with no exchange of funds. CNES
     designed, built, and tested spacecraft and balloons and would manage
     balloon launchings, spacecraft tracking, data acquisition, and data
     processing. NASA provided launch vehicle, prelaunch support, launch
     operations, and initial tracking and data acquisition. Data would be
     analyzed simultaneously by CNES and by Eole Data Interpretation
     Group comprising representatives of NASA, CNES, NCAR, NOAA, and
     UCLA. (NASA Proj off; NASq Release 71-144)
  Gerald J. Mossinghoff, formdr Director of Congressional Liaison Div. in
     NASA Office of Legislative Affairs, became Deputy Assistant Adminis-
     trator (Policy). Robert H. Hood, former Manager of Spacecraft and
     Launch Systems in Washington, D.C., office of McDonnell Douglas
     Corp., became Deputy Assistant Administrator (Programs). (NASA
    Ann, 8/13/71)
 August 16-ZU: Working Group on Remote Measurement of Pollution met
     at LaRC to investigate remote sensing in identifying and monitoring
     contaminants. Group reported trace gases were amenable to remote
     sensing, water pollutants could be measured in limited number, and
     remote measurement of specific particulate pollutants would follow
     only after improved understanding of their physical, chemical, and
     radiative properties. Remote sensing could provide essential informa-
     tion in all three categories that could not be obtained from other
     sources. Satellites and aircraft could obtain overall picture of global
     or regional pollution from gases but were inappropriate for local
     measurements because of inability of instruments to measure gases
    in upper atmosphere.
        Group recommended global measurement from satellites of gases
    contributing to ozone photochemistry and radiative equilibrium; study
    to establish feasibility of measuring these gases with current tech-
    niques in stratosphere and troposphere; acceleration of research on
    application of remote sensing to water pollution ; coordinated physio-
    optical research program to advance level of understanding of optical
    properties of real atmosphere ; immediate measurement of earth‘s
    albedo, reflected electromagnetic radiation ; and establishment of
    global network of atmospheric turbidity-monitoring sites to determine
    any changes in worldwide turbidity due to man-made particulate
    matter. (Remote Measzcrement of Pollution, NASA SP-285)
AWmt 17: U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments and
    was powered down for 11th lunar night on moon. Vehicle had landed
    on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (FBIS-SOV-71-137-3,
    8/13/71, L1)
* High-power radar transmitter was being added to 3000-m-dia (1000-ft-
    dia) radio telescope near Arecibo, Puerto Rico, in joint NASA-NSF
    program, NSF announced. Modifications would make telescope most
    powerful antenna in world for radar studies of planets and satellites.
    (NSFRelease 71-178)
  Completion of arrangements for exchange of four computer programs
    between NASA and Japan’s Hitachi Central Research Laboratory was

                                   231
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
August 17

    announced by NASA. Exchange, negotiated by NASA OART and Com-
    puter Software Management and Information Center (COSMIC) oper-
    ated at Univ. of Georgia under NASA contract, would make two
    Japanese programs available to US. users in exchange for two NASA
    programs that had been available to US. public for several years.
     (NASA Release 71-148)
  OST released Final Report of the Ad Hoc Supersonic Transport Review
     Committee o the Ofice o Science and Technology, March 30, 1969.
                 f             f
    Release of previously secret report was prompted, OST said, “by con-
    tinued public interest and certain impressions that the government
    may be concealing factual data on the SST program.” Report recom-
    mended “termination of the development contracts and the withdrawal
    of Government support from the SST prototype program.” Reasons
    given were: SST operating costs would exceed those of then-available
    subsonic aircraft ; “attendant surcharge makes the airline market un-
    certain” ; program was unattractive to private financing and “sub-
    stantial government involvement is likely to be sought in the supply
    or guarantee of some $3-5 billion of capital for the certification and
    production of a U S . SST” ; there was “substantial uncertainty regard-
    ing the range and payload and the environmental effects” of SST and
    “costs and duration of the program are both likely to increase’’ in
     attempt to develop production aircraft; there was “substantial doubt
    that the present configurations of the Conmrde and the TU-144 will
    become commercially viable aircraft”; balance of payments argument
    was not sufficiently strong to warrant Government investment in SST ;
     U.S. leadership in aviation did not depend upon affirmative SST deci-
     sion in near future; and, “when the right combination of technology
    and market demand appears, the US. aircraft industry may well decide
    on its own to proceed with the development and production of an
    SST.” (Text)
  Precision stepping-drive mechanism to position scale models of spacecraft
     accurately about horizontal axis in wind tunnels and other testing
     situations had been used by clock manufacturer to replace gears and
    other continuous-drive mechanisms in electric clocks, NASA announced.
     Device, developed from NASA technology, when coupled with high-
     accuracy oscillator provided accurate time by advancing digital clock
    in increments of one second or any interval required. (NASA Release
    71-153 )
* U.S. Postal Service public relations officers had asked Astronauts Neil A.
     Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to accompany cancellation
    of lunar landing commemorative stamp on moon during Ap0110 11
    mission with dialogue from two “casual, conversational” scripts, Julian
    W. Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs,
    said in Washington Post article. “But NASA, figuring the first manned
    lunar landing was hairy enough without ceremonials, declined politely
    and, instead, Armstrong and Aldrin quietly canceled the first moon
    stamp and came home without postal fanfare.”
        Washington Post editorial commented on article: “While we have
     not cast the roles and read the script aloud, timer in hand, it is our
    definite impression that this spontaneous little exchange might have
     been good for the better part of one orbit of the moon and good also

                                    232
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 August 17

     for a veritable barrage of phone calls from a flabbergasted public.”
     ( W Post, 8/17/71, A14)
* George W. Cherry, Director of Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. in
    NASA OART, received AIAA Mechanics and Control of Flight Award in
     ceremonies at Hempstead, N.Y. Award was for “pioneering the develop-
    ment of the digital control system for space vehicles and the applica-
    tion of these techniques to the Apollo Command and Service Modules
     and the Lunar Modules.’’ (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
* Dr. James R. Schlesinger was sworn in as AEC Chairman, succeeding
     Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, whose resignation became effective Aug. 16.
     (AEC pro)
Augwt 18: NASA supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted by
    NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed ninth
     flight from FRC. Objectives of flight-to obtain pressure distribution
    data at high supersonic speeds and evaluate augmented damping char-
    acteristics at low supersonic speeds-were achieved. Flight, made at
     10 700-m (35 000-ft) altitude, was first in series to obtain data for
    performance evaluation ; previous Iflights had been for pilot familiari-
    zation. Pressure distribution data were obtained from mach 0.80 to
     0.97 and damping characteristics were evaluated at mach 1.1 and 1.6.
     (NASA Proj Off)
  NASA announced formation of Transport Experimental Programs Office in
    OART to direct experimental STOL transport research airplane program.
    RFPS for design and fabrication of STOL aircraft had been issued
    Aug. 4, requesting proposals by Oct. 15. Program would provide data
    and experience for development of environmentally acceptable, eco-
    nomical, and safe fan-jet STOL transport systems. New office, directed
    by Gerald G . Kayten, would integrate activities of STOL Technology
    Office and Supercritical Technology Office. (NASA Release 71-155)
* NASA announced it had begun joint program with USA Air Mobility
    Research and Development Laboratory to develop flight research
    vehicle to test various rotors in actual flight under controlled condi-
    tions with provision for extensive engineering measurements during
    maneuvers. L ~ R Chad issued RFPS for two parallel design studies requir-
    ing 10 mos to determine feasibility of attaining Government’s research
    goals and provide development plan for further phases of program.
    Joint NASA-Army team would base detailed specifications for vehicle
    preliminary-design competition on results of predesign studies. (NASA
    Release 71-152)
  Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. filed formal protest against
    NASA award of $500-miflion space shuttle main engine contract to NR
    Rocketdyne Div. and asked Federal Government to reverse award. In
    letter to GAO, Pratt & Whitney charged selection of Rocketdyne was
    “illegal, arbitrary and capricious, and based on unsound decisions”
    and reiterated complaints cited Aug. 3 to GAO. (W Post, 8/19/71, C12;
    SBD, 8/19/71,230)
  Special medallion to commemorate 1971 quadricentennial of Johannes
    Kepler was issued by American Museum-hay den Planetarium. Kepler
    -born Dec. 16, 1571-had founded science of optics, was first to
    ascribe tides to moon, shaped much of comet theory, and came close
    to theory of gravity. His Somnium, highly technical “dream” of voyage

                                    233
August 18                        ASTRONL4UTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    to moon, had been first work of modern science fiction. (American
   Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 8/13/71)
August 18-24: Thirteenth International Congress of the History of Science
   was held in Moscow.
       Section on History of Aircraft, Rocket, and Space Science and
    Technology was held Aug. 19. Paper “The Historiography of Rocket
   Technology and Space Exploration” submitted by Dr. Eugene M.
    Emme, NASA Historian, was summarized at meeting by Dr. Lloyd S.
   Swensen, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Paper covered features of evolution
   of rocket technology pertaining to beginning of space exploration and
   exploitation and discussed work of international pioneers like Konstan-
   tin Tsiolkovsky, Robert H. Goddard, and Hermann Oberth, who became
    interested in space exploration before deducing that liquid-propellant
    reactive thrust was the best technology.
       Dr. Swenson, coauthor of book This New Ocean: A History of
   Project Mercury, presented his own paper “On the Mixture of Science
    and Technology in the Apollo 8 Circumlunar and the Apollo 1 Lunar
                                                                  1
   Landing Missions.” Paper examined effect of internal pressures on
   overall posture and achievements of Apollo project as illustrated by
   Apollo 10 and 11.
       Anatoly A. Blagonravov and V. N. Sokolsky of Soviet Academy of
   Sciences submitted paper on “Main Lines of Research in the Field of
   the History of Aeronautics and Astronautics.” (Program ; NASA Hist
    Off)
August 19: Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Harrison H. Schmitt,
   and Ronald E. Evans held press conference at MSC. Ph.D. geologist
   Schmitt defended his selection for mission and declared his readiness
   to “compete with anybody” in flying Apollo spacecraft. Schmitt,
   selected over Astronaut Joseph E. Engle, said Engle was “one of the
   most outstandingly qualified test pilots in the business” and speculated
   that Engle, transferred to space shuttle program, would “probably . . .
                                                 .
   contribute for the next 10 or 15 years a . . lot more than maybe
   even we can contribute by a lunar mission.” Sending a “professional
   observer” like himself to moon, Schmitt explained, would significantly
   increase knowledge gained, particularly concerning early history of
   earth and sun. (Transcript; Reuters, T Post, 8/20/71, A2)
                                           V
 NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station to
   measure diurnal oxygen, density, pressure, and temperature and to
   obtain comparisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements.
   Rockets were launched during daylight hours and data would be
   compared with data from similar series to be launched during dark-
   ness Aug. 20.
      Viper Dart carried WSMR experiment to 135-km (83.9-mi) altitude
   to provide density, temperature, pressure, and wind data from 40 to
   130 km (25 to 80 mi). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfac-
   torily, with Robinette sphere ejecting and inflating as programmed.
   Nike-Cajun carried Univ. of Michigan and NOAA experiment to 126-km
    (78.3-mi) altitude to measure diurnal variation of atomic oxygen in
   80- to 120-km (50- to 75-mi) region. Rocket and instruments func-
   tioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan and
   GSFC experiment to 171-km (106.3-mi) altitude to obtain diurnal
   measurements of density, pressure, and temperature and obtain com-

                                   234
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 August 19

    parisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements. Rocket and
    instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL)
  French Centre National d’gtudes Spatiales ( CNES)announced U.S.S.R.
    would cooperate in launching two space probes from France’s Kourou
    Space Center. French Veronique rocket would launch Soviet radio-
    frequency spectrometer in mid-December in first use of Kourou facili-
    ties by U.S.S.R. France would also track Soviet MR-12 rocket carrying
    French mass spectrometer after launch in December from Soviet ship
    near Kourou.
       CNES also announced French Centaure rocket would launch Indian
    equipment Oct. 8 to test recovery system for space probe instruments.
     (Reuters, NYT, 8/22/71, 35)
* Successful completion of over 2000 hrs of testing-equivalent to 80-day
    space mission-of prototype water vapor electrolysis system was an-
    nounced by NASA. Developed at ARC, system converted moisture in air
    directly into hydrogen and oxygen and released reclaimed oxygen
    back into air. It could be used instead of heavy, bulky tanks of
    breathing oxygen on future long-duration space missions. It would
    also reduce load on humidity control equipment by removing excess
    water vapor from cabin atmosphere. (NASA Release 71-150)
  NASA and Stanford Univ. Biomedical Technology Transfer Team
     (BATEAM),   fourth BATEAM to be established and first formed at lead-
    ing medical school, would apply NASA-generated aerospace technology
    to problems in cardiology, NASA announced. Team of five medical
    consultants and five aerospace engineering consultants under Stanford
    Univ. cardiologist Dr. Donald C. Harrison would concentrate on cardio-
    vascular medicine.
       NASA had eight special teams-four    working on environmental prob-
    lems and four on biomedical activities. (NASA Release 71-154)
  Data obtained during Soviet Zond missions from September 1968 to
    October 1970 were described by Soviet scientists, including Oleg
    Gazenko of Academy of Sciences, in Moskovskaya Pravda article, Tass
    reported. Zond spacecraft had carried turtles, drosophilas, onions,
    wheat and barley seeds, chlorella strains, intestinal bacilli, and other
    objects. Total dosage of radiation had been same for all flights. After
    return to earth turtles were active and had good appetite. During
    experiments they lost 10% of weight. “Some blood tests . . . and
    electrocardiographs did not reveal essential divergencies from control
    animals.” Morphological and histochemical analyses of organs and
    tissues of turtles aboard Zurzd 5 (launched Sept. 15, 1968) had re-
    vealed changes in glycogen and iron content of liver and structural
    changes in spleen. Subsequent experiments had not confirmed findings.
    Flight conditions had given rise to “comparatively large increase in
    the number of chromosome changes in the seeds of pine and barley,
    and a rise in the mutants of chlorella strains.” (FBIS-sov-71-161,
    8/19/71, L l )
  NASA announced issuance of RFPS for eight-month study of applications
    of dual-mode nuclear rocket engine to propel spacecraft and generate
    electrical power for use on board. (NASA Release 71-157)
* Long-term commitment and definition of policy for storage and cura-
    torial handling of lunar materials had been urged by Cal Tech scien-
    tist Dr. .Gerald J. Wasaerburg, AP reported. A principal investigator

                                    235
August 19                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    of lunar material, Dr. Wasserburg had said lack of planning and
    handling could deny future generations use of moon rocks now being
    studied. ( P Bull, 8/19/71)
  Washington Evening Star editorial commented on selection of scientist-
    astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt for Apollo 17 crew: “The argu-
    ment for the scientist-astronaut has come. So far as we are concerned,
    it always made sense. Therefore, any congratulations to [NASA~ for
    finally putting one of the flying geologists to work might be accom-
    panied by a raise of eyebrows over the obvious tokenism of the
    assignment and a reproachful question as to why they waited so long
    to put a scientist into the richest geological treasure house that man
    has yet discovered.” (W Star, 8/19/71)
August 20: No viable organism and no evidence of fossil material had
    been found in Apollo 14 lunar samples, Lunar Sample Preliminary
    Examination Team reported in Science. Major findings had been :
    only 2 of 33 rocks had basaltic textures; samples differed from earlier
    lunar rocks and from their closest meteorite and terrestrial analogs in
    chemical content; chemical composition of soil resembled that of
    rocks ; rocks displayed characteristic surface features and shock
    effects similar to those of Apollo 11 and 12 samples; concentration
    of solar-wind-implanted material in soil was large, as in ApoZZo 11
    and 12 material, but solar wind contents of rocks ranged from that
    of soil “to essentially zero”; carbon content of Apollo 14 rocks was
    within range of that for ApoWo 11 and 12 rocks; four fragmental
    rocks showed surface exposure time about an order of magnitude
    less than typical exposure times of ApoZZo 11 and 12 rocks; broader
    range of soil mechanics properties had been found at Apollo 14 site
    than at Apollo 11 or 12 sites and Surveyor landing sites; and no evi-
    dence of biological material had been found in Apollo 14 samples to
    date. (Science, 8/20/71, 681-93)
  Apollo 12, 14, and 15 seismometers had located source of 80% of
    moonquakes in area 10 km (6 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) below
    lunar surface in Ocean of Storms, Dr. Gary N. Latham, Apollo pro-
    gram chief seismologist, reported in interview published in Wmhing-
    ton Post. (Brett, W Post, 8J20/71, A2)
* NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station to
    measure diurnal oxygen, density, pressure, and temperature and
     obtain comparisons of pitot and active-sphere density measurements.
     Rockets were launched during darkness and data would be compared
    with data from daylight series launched Aug. 19.
       Nike-Cajun carried Univ. of Michigan and NOAA experiment to
     132-km (82-mi) altitude to measure diurnal variation of atomic oxy-
     gen in 80- to 120-km (50- to 75-mi) region. Nike-Apache carried Univ.
     of Michigan and GSFC experiment to 180-km (111.8-mi) altitude to
     obtain diurnal measurements of density, pressure, and temperature in
     80- to 120-km (50- to 75-mi) region. Viper Dart carried WSMR experi-
     ment to l u k m (89.5-mi) altitude to provide density, temperature,
     pressure, and wind data from 40 to 130 km (25 to 80 mi). All rockets
     and instrumentation functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL)
  Three Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched by NASA from Wal-
     lops Station carrying Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. experiments to
     measure electron concentration, collision frequency, and temperature

                                   236
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




  U.S.S.R. launched Ve
     463-km (287.7-mi)
     ionospheric param
     consisted of instrument compartment and recoverable container car-
     rying scientific equipment for heliophysical research and Hungarian-
     Czechoslovakian-Soviet instruments to study micrometeors. Instru-
     ment compartment carried equipment for heliophysical and iono-
     spheric research designed by Bulgarian, East German, Czecho-
     slovakian, and Soviet scientists. Rocket and instruments functioned
     satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (Tass, FBIS-SOV-163-3,
     8/23/71, L1)
  Permanent charter for INTELSAT was signed by 54 nations-51 of whom
     were members of 80-member interim INTELSAT consortium-during
     State Dept. ceremonies. Signatures of three more original members
     were required for two-thirds majority necessary to inaugurate new
     agreement providing for gradual relaxation of U.S. control.
        Under permanent charter INTELSAT Assembly of Parties, prime
     organ of multitiered organization, would meet biennially and take
     decisions with one vote for each nation. Annual Meeting of Signa-
     tories would decide on financial, operational, and technical aspects
     of programs with one vote for each member. INTELSAT Board of
     Directors would meet at least four times a year to vote on design,
     development, construction, establishment, operation, and maintenance
     of space segment. No single Board member could cast more than 40%
     of total vote; decisions would be taken by two-thirds majority; and
     nonveto provisions had been written into charter. U.S. had agreed to
     relinquish unilateral veto power it had under interim arrangements.
     Permanent charter created new executive organ to assist Board of
     Governors, headed first by Secretary General and later by Director
     General. ComSatCorp would continue to provide technical and opera-
     tional management of INTELSAT space segment under six-year contract.
     Net investment ceiling of US. $5 million was established with dis-
     cretion in Board of Governors to increase ceiling by 10%. (Lydon,
     NYT, 8/21/71, 40; “Permanent Arrangements for the Global Com-
     mercial Communications Satellite System of Intelsat,” IAF 22nd Int’l
     Astro Congress, 9/25/71)
August 21 .- WTTGTV in Washington, D.C., carried one-hour special tele-
     cast “Giant Leap for Mankind.” Program reviewed Apollo program
     and described NASA future plans. (NASA   Special Ann, 8/18/71; NASA
     PAO)
* Appointment of Richard P. Skully, Manager of FAA’s      Miami Area Of-
     fice, as Director of FAA Office of Environmental Quality was an-
     nounced by FAAAdministrator John H. Shaffer. (FAARelease 71-134)
August 22: Use of machines, rather than men, in space after final Apollo
                        ated by Cornel1 Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold
     in New York Times Magazine article. For lunar or Martian explo-
    ration he suggested “roving vehicle with television eyes and one or
    two telefactor hands, a modern version of a centaur-half man, half
     automobile.” Vehicle could travel longer distances on lunar surface

                                  237
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
August 22

    than man and retrieve samples of different terrain. “The remote
    hands could pick up rocks and examine them under the television
    eyes, and, if desired, put them in a hopper for eventual transmission
    back to earth. The vehicle might then rendezvous with another that
    has earth-return capability and hand over the contents of the hopper
    to it. While this type of vehicle would allow us to explore almost all
    regions of the moon, manned missions have been severely limited
    both in the type of terrain for the landing and the distance that astro-
    nauts can travel from their spaceship.” Scientists had favored use of
    telefactor with sample-return capability but “the very success of the
    Apollo program had diverted attention from it.” Now that no “really
    purposeful” manned program was planned, Dr. .Gold asked, “would
    not this be the right time for really learning how to do good remote
    control ? ” (NYT Magazine, 8/22/71 )
August 23: ApoZZo 15 Astronauts James B. Irwin, Alfred M. Worden, and
    David R. Scott addressed National Press Club luncheon in Wash-
    ington, D.C., before flying to New York for official welcome by city
    and appearance at U.N. Scott called for greater cooperation in space
    and said he looked forward to flight with Soviet cosmonaut. ‘‘I know
    six cosmonauts personally, and I would be glad to fly with any one
     of them any day. And I hope we get that chance.” Scott said core
    sample 3 m (8% ft) long he had brought from moon contained 55
     separate layers of soil that illustrated last 2.4 billion yrs of lunar
    history. Layers, discovered through x-ray examination, would show
    changes occurring over billions of years in sun’s radiation as it hit
    lunar surface.
       Later, in telephone interview with Washington Post, LRL scientist
    Dr. John F. Lindsay said layers ranged in thickness from 12.7 mm
     (1/2 in) to 127 mm ( 5 in) with each stratum probably representing
    different meteorite impact on lunar surface. While no analysis of core
    could be made until it was opened by geologists in January, Dr.
    Lindsay said x-rays had indicated that Scott had not drilled through
    solid rock. (UPI, NYT, 8/24/71, 25; Auerbach, W Post, 8/24/71, A3)
* NASA had laid off approximately 740 employees effective Oct. 1 to reduce
    to authorized FY 1972 level of 28 352, Aviation Week & Space Tech-
    nology reported. MSC had dismissed 132; MSFC, 197; GSFC, 149;
    IRRC, 123; URC, 54; ARC, 78; FRC, 12; and NASA Pasadena Office, 2.
    Force reductions at Hq. and KSC had been made entirely through
    attrition. (Av Wk, 8/23/71, 21)
* U.S.S.R. had improved reliability and performance of Molniya I com-
    sat; expanded network of Orbita system ground receiving stations to
    35, including Cuban station and station at Ulan Bator in Mongolia;
    and would build six to eight additional ground stations annually for
    indefinite period, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Mon-
    golian station had been activated in February 1970. (Av Wk, 8/23/71,
    51-2)
  President Nixon sent memorandum and statement of Government patent
    policy to heads of executive departments and agencies. Improvements
    in 1963 policy statement would provide agency heads with authority
    to permit contractors greater rights to inventions where necessary to
    achieve use or where equitable circumstances justified, additional
     guidance in promoting use of Government-sponsored inventions, clari-

                                    238
                                                                 August 23
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    fication of states’ and municipal governments’ rights in Federal Gov-
    ernment-licensed inventions, and more definitive data base for evalu-
    ating patent policy’s administration and effectiveness. (PD, 8/30/71,
    1209)
August 23-24: Scientific results from Om 2 were reported during Univ.
    of Massachusetts symposium held in conjunction with AAS conference.
    GSFC, Lehigh Univ., and Univ. of Wisconsin scientists reported dis-
    covery of “black hole” in space, remnant of star that had shrunk to
    such density that no light could leave it. Black hole would be result
    of collapsing process in which material remaining from burned-out
    star was drawn in upon itself by its own gravity. Densities of black
    holes were said to be so great that globe with 3.2-km (2-mi) radius
    could collapse to size of pinhead and still retain its original mass.
     (NYT, 9/2/71,14)
August 24: Apollo 15 Astronauts Alired M. Worden, David R. Scott, and
    James B. Irwin rode in motorcade to City Hall in New York, where
    they received gold medals from Mayor John V. Lindsay. Astronauts
    presented Mayor Lindsay with flag carried on Apollo 15 mission.
    Later astronauts were welcomed to U.N. by Secretary General U
    Thant, to whom they presented replica of plaque they had placed on
    moon to commemorate astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in
    performance of duties. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 147-8; Kaufman,
    NYT, 8/25/71,1)
  Locked-on antenna control system on NASA’s 3 applications technol-
                                                 Ats
0

    ogy satellite (launched Nov. 5, 1967) had caused satellite to stop
    transmitting data temporarily, NASA announced. Officials believed
     antenna, on top and north side of spacecraft, had overheated and
     stopped spinning when sun was north of equator during summer.
    Antenna had operated sporadically during July and August, but offi-
    cials said malfunctioning was consistent with similar past problems
    and antenna would recover as sun moved south. (NASA Release 71-158)
August 25: NASA’s    M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot
    William H. Dana, reached 20 400-m (67 000ft altitude) and mach
     1.05 during ninth flight from FRC. Objectives were to determine
     aileron effectiveness at speed greater than mach 0.9, obtain stability
     and control data at mach 0.95 and 0.90, expand flight envelope, and
     evaluate speed brake. (NASA Proj Off)
  Resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man to set
     foot on moon, was announced by NASA. Armstrong, Deputy Associate
     Administrator for Aeronautics, OART, would join Univ. of Cincinnati
     as its first professor of aerospace engineering Oct. 1. He would con-
     tinue to serve NASA as consultant. Armstrong had joined NASA in 1955
     and had served as aeronautics research pilot for NACA and NASA. He
     had piloted X-15, X-1, F-100, F-101, F-102, F-104, F-5D, and
     B 4 7 aircraft and, as B-29 “drop” aircraft pilot, had participated in
     more than 100 rocket aircraft flights. Armstrong had been selected by
     NASA as astronaut in September 1962. He had served as backup com-
     mand pilot for Gemini 5; command pilot for Gemini 8 (launched
     March 16, 1966), during which he had performed first successful
     docking of two vehicles in space; backup command pilot for Gemini
     1 1 ; backup command pilot for Apollo 8; and commander of Apollo
     11. (NASA Release 71-159)

                                   239
August 25                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

         Planetary Atmosp        Experiment Test, launched June 20, was
    PAET
                                .
    adjudged successful b          Test had successfully demonstrated capa-
    bility of selected experiments to determine structure and composition
    of an unknown planetary atmosphere from probe entering atmosphere
    at high speeds. (NASA Proj Off)
e Appointment of Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris as Deputy Director of NASA
    Equal Employment Opportunity Office and Director of NASA Equal
    Employment Opportunity Program was announced by NASA. Ap-
    pointment was effective Oct. 4. Mrs. Harris had been Director of
    Dept. of Human Relations of Montgomery County (Md.) Public
    Schools. (NASA   Special Ann)
August 26: Explorer 43 (IMP-I) interplanetary monitoring platform was
    adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft, launched March 13, had
    exceeded objectives and was functioning nominally with 1 scientific
                                                                1
    instruments providing detailed information on galactic and solar
    cosmic rays, interplanetary medium, and distant magnetosphere. All
    systems and scientific instruments were functioning normally except
    GSFC plasma probe, which malfunctioned 30 days after launch, and
    Univ. of Chicago cosmic ray telescope, which partially malfunctioned
    64 days after launch. (NASA Proj Off)
  NRL’S Solrud 1 (Explorer 44) solar radiation satellite, launched by
                   0
0

    NASA July 8, was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft was func-
    tioning nominally and all 15 scientific instruments had been turned
                                                 Proj Off)
    on and were operating satisfactorily. (NASA
* Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received rear admiral stars from Sec-
    retary of the Navy John H. Chaffee during Pentagon ceremonies.
    Shepard was first astronaut to achieve rear admiral rank. ( W Post,
    8/27/71, A l )
  Immediate report from NASA on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Adminis-
    trator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shut-
    tle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep.
    William R. Cotter (D-Conn.) . In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said
    Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transporta-
    tion system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off
    Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under
    the XLR-129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United
    Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical know-
    how” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 31 on its 10-yr XLR-
    129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before
    coming to NASA in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
  Lee B. James, former Director of Program Management at MSFC, had
    joined faculty of Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute, UPI reported.
    James’ retirement from NASA had bcen announced April 30. (UPI,
    W Post, 8/27/71)
August 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 435 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    478-km (297.0-mi) apogee, 272-km (169.0-mi) perigee, 92.0-min
    period, and 70.9O inclination. Spacecraft reentered Jan. 28, 1972.
     (GSFC SSR, 8/31/71; 1/31/72; SBD, 9/14/71,27)
* NASA’s  supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A aircraft piloted by NASA test
    pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed 10th flight from
    FRC. Objectives of U-min flight were to obtain additional pressure
    distribution and performance data at high subsonic speeds and evalu-
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                        August 27




August 27: Noise tests of NASA’s      experimental, quieter jet aircraft engine were
under way in Peebles, Ohio, the Lewis Research Center announced. The project
sought to develop an engine o f 97850-newton (22000-pound) thrust that would operate
at 15 to 20 decibels quieter thun engines used in present subsonic air transports.
In the photo the engine was being checked out before the General Electric Co. noise
tests, A probe inserted in the exhaust nozzle (left) measured the smoke produced.


     ate flutter characteristics at low supersonic speeds. Aircraft reached
     12 000-m (40000-ft) altitude, with pressure distribution and per-
    formance data obtained from mach 0.80 to 0.97 and flutter characteris-
     tics evaluated at mach 1.05 and 1.10. (NASA Proj O f f)
* Experimental, quieter jet aircraft engine was undergoing noise tests at
     Peebles, Ohio, LeRC announced. Engine was being developed under
     contract by GE’s Aircraft Engine Group. (LeRC Release 71-38)
* Effects of levels of ionizing radiation on passengers and crew members
    in supersonic aircraft flying at 18 000 to 20 000 m (60 000 to 65 000
    ft) were described in Science by USN biophysicist Hermann J.
    Schaefer. Level of galactic radiation per mile for SST was smaller than
    that for conventional jet aircraft. “Even in the extreme case of some-
    one’s spending, for a full year, 10 )percent of his time at SST altitude,
    the integral dose equivalent would still not exceed 1 rem.” Increase in
    risk of shortening residual life-span was “insignificant.” (Science,
    8/27/71,780-3)
* Easier relations between Soviet and visiting foreign scientists attending
    15th International Union of Geodesy and .Geophysics in Moscow,
    Aug. 1-14, were reported in Science by Philip H. Abelson. “To an
    extent not previously possible, Americans were entertained profes-

                                       241
August 27                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    sionally and socially and were invited to visit Soviet research facili-
    ties. Only a few Russians would be so bold as to act counter to official
    policy in their contacts with foreigners; therefore, the extent of the
    hospitality reflected national policy.” (Science, 8/27/71, 797-800)
August 28: Oxford Univ. atmospheric physicist Dr. John Houghton told
    British press two-year research program at Oxford had shown “even
    with 500 SST aircraft flying, there would be no danger of ultraviolet
    radiation at ground level being increased by any significant amount.”
    Dr. Houghton said program had been similar to research that had led
    Univ. of California at Berkeley scientist Dr. Harold Johnston to pre-
    dict that exhaust from supersonic aircraft could have dangerous effect
    on stratosphere and might imperil life on earth. (London Times dis-
    patch, NYT, 8/28/71, 4<1)
  Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded honorary Doc-
    tor of Science degree by Univ. of Miami in Oxford, Ohio. (NASA
    Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
August 29: Washhgton Post editorial commented on DOT-NASA report that
    jet engine noise was high-priority problem [see May 51. Report “does
    not offer all the solutions, but it does recognize that sociological,
    economic and engineering considerations must be taken into account
    in finding them. The prescription makes good sense both for the eco-
    nomically strained industry and the exasperated potential passenger.”
     (W Post, 8/29/71, B6)
August 30: Election of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E.
    Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins to International Aerospace Hall of
    Fame was announced by Hall of Fame President Martin R. Engler, Jr.
    Awards for 1971 would be presented to astronauts in San Diego,
    Calif., Oct. 23. Astronauts had been nominated “in view of their epic
    flight and its representation as one of the greatest single scientific
    achievements in the history of man.” (Letter to NASA Historian)
  Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, MSFC Director, announced establishment of
    temporary HEAO Office in MSFC’S Program Management Directorate
    to plan High Energy Astronomy Observatory. Office would replace
    HEAO Task Team formed in spring 1971. (MSFC Release 71-148)
  FAA certification of 201 series Guppy cargo aircraft and sale of one air-
    craft to Airbus Industries of France, European cargo airline, were
    announced by aircraft’s manufacturer, Aero Spacelines, Inc. New
    aircraft was sixth in Guppy series, created to airlift space booster
    components for NASA. With fuselage 7.6 m (25 ft) in diameter, new
    Guppy could lift 24 500 kg (54 000 lbs) of cargo and fly it for 3200
    km (2000 mi) nonstop at 470 km per hr (290 mph). First 201
    series Guppy would move wing and fuselage assemblies of Concorde
    supersonic transport and 300-passenger European airbus from points
    of manufacture to Toulouse, France, for assembly. (C Trib, 9/2/71)
  Response by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin to National Space
    Club letter of condolence to Soviet government on death of Soyuz
    cosmonauts was published in NSC News Letter: “We highly appreci-
    ate your expression of respect for the heroic endeavour of the space
    explorers who died for the progress of all mankind.” (NSC News
    Letter, 8/30/71, 2 )
* Yugoslavia was urging other East European countries to participate
    actively in INTELSAT, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported.

                                    242
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 August 30

    Discussions had been held with Rom*& and Hungary on possibility
    that they would use ground termkral that Yugoslavia expected to be
    operational in 1974. ( A v Why8/30/71,11)
  Time magazine reviewed Secret Sentries in Space by Philip J. Klass.
     “No one else has written in comparable detail about spy satellites,”
    Time said. Klass had described latest US. SAMOS (satellite and mis-
    sile observations system). “Big Bird” was 10 900-kg (12-ton) space-
    craft capable of operating in orbit for several months. It could trans-
    mit high-quality pictures by radio and eject capsules of exposed film,
    which then dropped by parachute. Big Bird also included infrared
    heat-sensing equipment that allowed it to “see” through ice and snow
    to locate Soviet underground weapons. Klass had reported heaviest
    concentration of long-range Soviet missiles in Siberia and behind
    Ural mountains in Central Asia. (I’ime, 8/30/71, 26)
  Mrs. Irene Bolam, named in book Amelia Earhart Lives as being missing
    aviatrix Amelia Earhart, filed $1.5-million libel suit against authors
    Joseph Klass and Joseph Gervais. Mrs. Bolam claimed book damaged
    her reputation by depicting her as bigamist, spy, and traitor. Book
    claimed Amelia Earhart had disappeared in 1937 while ffying US.
    spy mission, was captured by Japanese, and might have been World
    War I1 Japanese propagandist Tokyo Rose. (UPI, W Post, 9/1/71, D5)
* Washington Daily News editorial commented on Aug. 25 resignation
    from NASA of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong: “Offhand, it is
    regrettable to see any of these accomplished men leave the program
    they helped make such a smashing success. But Mr. Armstrong will
     be teaching engineering and it will be no surprise if some of his
    students wind up in future space exploration. So count his ‘defection’
    to education as another spinoff benefit of the space program.” ( W
    News, 8/30/71,22)
August 31 :NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences had confirmed results of
    June 21-25 Joint Working Group meetings at MSC, NASA announced.
    Groups had considered technical requirements for compatible systems
    for space rendezvous and docking, radio and optical reference, com-
    munications, life support, crew transfer, and docking assemblies. They
    had agreed to study experiments to test technical solutions. Experi-
    ments might include docking spacecraft of Apollo type with orbital
    scientific station of Salyut type and docking spacecraft like Soyuz
    with station like Skylab. Mission models would test suitability of tech-
    nical requirements and solutions. Next working group meeting was
    scheduled for late November in MOSCOW, complete agreement on
                                                 to
    technical requirements for compatible systems. Working Groups had
    been established under Oct. 28, 1970, agreement. (NASA Release 71-
     164)
  Denver mint held preview showing of nickel alloy Eisenhower dollar
    which would be released in October. Back of coin depicted ApoZZo 11
    lunar landing. (UPI, W Post, 9/2/71)
  President Nixon, from San Clemente, Calif., issued Proclamation 4078
0

    designating Oct. 1 Columbus Day, 1971. He said, “In this present
                        1
    age of epic journeys in space, we can appreciate more than ever the
    great achievements of Christopher Columbus.” (PD, 9/4/71, 1224-5)
During August: Gabriel Board appointed June 18 to examine and re-
    evaluate philosophy, practices, and procedures in Centaur quality

                                    243
During August                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     assurance and workmanship program reported findings and recom-
     mendations to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub-
    committee on NASA Oversight: “Aggressive and creative” new policy
     with “thorough and conservative approach to the use of new hard-
     ware in flight” was needed to improve Atlas-Centaur quality and
     workmanship. Board recommended enhanced emphasis on employee
     motivation, manufacturing, engineering, and planning, quality assur-
     ance planning “with preventative aspects dominant, workmanship
    training, inspection training, quality audit, and vendor control im-
     provements.” (Review of Recent Launch Failures, Subcom Print,
     10/7 1)
  USN participation in space shuttle program was urged by L/Cdr Preston
     E. Beck (USN, Ret.), in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings. U S N expe-
     rience had shown close parallel between life support criteria and fuel
     management for nuclear submarines and that required for space shut-
    tle. USN Office of Naval Research (ONR) and USN Systems Command
    should determine feasibility of using air entrainment, hydroskis, skids,
    and hydrofoils to permit sea-level landing point for shuttle spacecraft
     with one or more engine inoperable after reentry. Sea transport and
    barge storage of fuels and oxidizers for shuttle spacecraft would
    ensure safety of flight personnel and minimize interference with
     commercial air traffic. Space shuttle orbiter and booster structures
     could be moved only by flyout or by sea because of size. “The obvious
    answer is final assembly at the launch site using a seaborne logistic
     system.” Naval Air and Material Center had facilities for develop-
    ment of space shuttle materials, testing of components and subassem-
    blies, and supporting engineering. It seemed pertinent “that the Navy
    take the initiative in starting to support the space shuttle program. The
    key to many of the problems now being subjected to resolution is the
    sea.” ( U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, 8/71, 103-5)
  Electrical power development for space was summarized by AIAA Electric
    Power Systems Committee in Astronautics & Aeronautics article :
    “Batteries have continued to be employed beyond Explorer I for
    either primary power or as an element of power subsystem. Silver-
    zinc batteries provided 13.5 kilowatt-hours (Kwh) of electrical energy
    for the Mercury spacecraft, up to 63 Kwh for the early Geminis, and
    65 Kwh for the Apollo Lunar Module. Specific energies have advanced
    to 90 watt-hours per pound (wh/lb) f198 wh per kg] in unmanned
    Agena vehicles. The continuing flight dependence on batteries was
    dramatically illustrated by the rescue phase of the Apollo-13 mission,
    which used the LM batteries for power after the failure of the cryo-
    genic supply of the Service Module fuel cell system. Undoubtedly,
    batteries will remain a vital independent power source in manned
    missions and perhaps unmanned missions for many years.” Committee
    recommended that “competitiveness of the isotope and reactor systems
    €or powers in the tens of kilowatts be encouraged rather than in-
    hibited and that the technology programs for both be kept viable,’’
    felt “that achieving acceptance of a reactor power system for manned
    Earth-orbiting missions presents a major challenge to the power com-
    munity in the 1970s: and criticized lack of resources “to pursue
    effectively all of the advanced reactor power-system options that have
    been carried along most of the 1960s.” (A&A, 8/71, 22-30)

                                    244
                            September 1971

September 1: Preliminary results of Apollo 15 scientific experiments were
     reported by principal experimenters at MSC press briefing.
        Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham reported that three-
    station seismometer network completed on moon by Apollo 15 had
     detected 39 events, including “most significant event we’ve recorded
     on the moon.” Event was moonquake 800 km (500 mi) beneath sur-
     face-greater depth than for any quake recorded on earth-about 644
     km (400 mi) west of crater Tycho. ApolZo 15 seismic data also had
     revealed that swarms of quakes occurred on moon as they did on
     earth. Most intense swarm recorded “contained 30 events over a period
     of just 2 and a half days . . . at very regular intervals, at about 2 hour
     spacing, and culminated in the largest moonquake yet recorded.”
     Dr. Latham, Apollo program’s chief seismic investigator, said data
     from missions to date had proved “that we can place long life geo-
    physical observatories on the moon and they can exist years, which
     means that we can expect to maintain a network of stations with
    larger spacing between missions.”
        Two heat probes drilled almost two meters (almost six feet) into
     surface had shown that moon was hot, with heat concentrated deep in
     interior or in pockets of radioacthe mineral 160 km (100 mi) below
    surface. Temperature of moon increased 0.56 K (1°F) each foot
     deeper into moon, indicating heat flow from interior was one fifth
    earth’s heat flow. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Marcus E. Langseth
    said this evidence showed that abundance of radioactive minerals in-
    side moon was at least comparable to abundance inside earth. It also
    suggested moon and earth were formed at same time from same
    elements.
        Cal Tech scientist Dr. Leon T. Silver and US. Geological Survey
    scientist Dr. Gordon A. Swam said Apollo 15 had discovered green
    rocks on moon composed of magnificently colored spheres of green
    glass. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences
    Div., said 75 kg (165 lbs) of ApoZZo 15 lunar rocks had been logged
    to date and would be distributed to investigators. (Transcript; O’Toole,
    W Post, 9/2/71, A l )
  NASA announced appointment of Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medi-
0

    cal Research and Operations at MSC, as NASA Director for Life Sci-
    ences. Appointment would become effective when successor for Dr.
    Berry was found. Dr. Berry would succeed Dr. James W. Humphreys,
    Jr., who became Secretary-Treasurer of American Board of Surgery.
     (NASA Ann, 9/1/71; NASA Release 71-166; Am Bd of Surgery PIO)
  Second flight model of LRV Rover was delivered by Boeing Co. to KSC
    for Apollo 16. (MSFC Release 71-144; KSC PIO) .
* MSFC had signed level-of-effort contract with NR Rocketdyne Div. for
    design of Space Shuttle main engine, NASA announced. The interim
    contract-for four months at $1million per month-had been signed

                                     245
September 1                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    pending GAO review of protest by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whit-
     ney Div. of the contract award [see Aug. 31. (NASA Release 71-165)
  Former F-14 project manager Capt. Lionel E. Ames, Jr. (USN), said in
     interview that F-14 fighters would cost $16.6 million each-almost
     $4 million more than $12.7 million announced by DOD Aug. 10. He
    said confusion over cost illustrated some of problems he had had as
    project manager before being replaced. (W Star, 9/2/71, A l l )
  Finalization of order for 175 F-4 jet fighter aircraft by Federal Republic
     of Germany was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird
     at DOD press conference. Order amounted to more than $750 million.
     (Transcript)
September 2-11 : U.S.S.R. launched Luna 18 unmanned lunar probe on
     Proton booster from Baykonur at 6:41 pm local time (4:41 pm Mos-
     cow time, 9:41 am EDT), inserting vehicle into translunar trajectory
    from earth orbit. Tass said purpose of mission was to carry out fur-
     ther scientific research of moon and near-moon space. During flight
     to moon 29 communications sessions were held with spacecraft and
     data on parameters and systems were transmitted. Midcourse maneu-
     vers were conducted Sept. 4 and 6 and on Sept. 7 Luna 18 entered
    lunar orbit with 99.8-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 59-min period, and
     35” inclination. Spacecraft made 54 revolutions of moon, testing
    methods of automatic near-moon navigation, before braking for moon
    landing.
        Luna 18 reached moon’s surface Sept. 11 near Sea of Fertility, 3 O
    34’ north latitude and 56O 30’ east longitude. Tass announced landing
    was “unlucky” and communications stopped at 10:48 am Moscow
                        .
    time (3:48 am EDT )
        Luna 18 was assumed to have crashlanded. Previous mission in
    series, Luna 17, landed successfully on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and
     released Lunokhod 1, self-propelled lunar rover designed to carry out
     scientific investigations. (FBIS-SOV-172-3, 9/3/71, L1; 174-3, 9/8/71,
    L1; 173-3,9/12/71, L1; SF, 11/71,401)
* Oao 2-launched Dec. 7, 1968, and exceeding all design specifications-
    marked its 1000th working day. (NYT, 9/2/71, 14)
September 2: Mariner 9 Mars probe had traveled 244316000 km
     (151 805 000 mi) in solar orbit since launch May 30 and was
     39424000 km (24497000 mi) from earth, traveling at 96540 km
    per hr (59 987 mph). Spacecraft was expected to reach Mars’ vicinity
     Mov. 13, collect atmospheric and surface data, and map 70% of
    Martian surface during 90 days in orbit. (NASASpecial Release,
    9/2/71 1
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research
0

    Range, Canada, carried GSFC experiment to investigate polar cap ab-
     sorption event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; pay-
    load recovery was delayed until Sept. 3 because of adverse weather.
     (NASA Rpt SRL)
* U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17,
     1970, had safely endured 10th lunar night and wis functioning satis-
    factorily, Tass announced. (FBI%-sov-172-3)
  Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, held news conference during
    first visit to LeRC. He said LeRc would play major role in development

                                    246
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               September 2

    of commercial engines geared toward reducing noise pollution by
    future jet aircraft. (Lewis News, 9/10/71, 1; LeRc PIO)
  Rep. Leonor K. Sullivan (D-Mo.), Chairman of Consumer Affairs Sub-
    committee of House Banking and Currency committee, sent to FTC
    material on Franklin Mint, private corporation that produced silver
    medallions carried on Apollo 14 mission Jan. 31-Feb. 9. She sug-
     gested FTC investigate promotional use by Franklin of medallions,
    which had been melted down into ‘minimoons’-coins advertised as
    containing silver that had been to the moon. Washington Daily News
    said Rep. Sullivan’s action had been prompted by order issued by
    ApoZZo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of Astronaut Office,
    that no more Franklin Mint medals be carried on NASA missions.
    Shepard had noted, News said, that Apollo 14 crew had carried 200
     Franklin medallions in CM (which never left lunar orbit), had dis-
    tributed 150 to friends and relatives on mission’s completion, and had
    returned 50 to Franklin with understanding they would be made into
     coins for members of Franklin Mint Collectors Society, but not used
     to promote sales. (Thomasson, Scripps-Howard, W News, 9/2/71, 24)
September 3 : Successful free-flight development test of parachute system for
     Viking Mars landers to be launched in 1975 was conducted by NASA
     at DOT Joint Parachute Test Facility in El Centro, Calif. Test was to
     verify functioning of main decelerator parachute and its deployment
     mechanism and confirm structural adequacy of system design. Deploy-
     ment mortar and p a r a c h u t e 1 6 m (53 ft) in diameter, packaged in
     instrumented drop vehicle 3 m (10 ft) long and 51 cm (20 in) in
     diameter-were dropped from NASA B-57 aircraft at altitude of 15 200
     m (50 000 ft). (NASA Release 71-162; FRC PIO)
  President Nixon released statement on dedication of new USAF Museum
0


     at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio: “The United States Air Force Museum
     demonstrates in a most compelling fashion the tremendous progress
     which American aviation has made in a remarkably brief time. It will
     afford a valuable opportunity for future generations of Americans to
     learn about the dedication and courage and skill which have made
    that progress possible.”
                                                   “.   . . the United States
        At dedication ceremonies President said,
     intends, and we resolve today, that having been first in aviation from
     the beginning, we will attempt to be first in aviation for the time to
     come. This should be our goal, and one that we can achieve.” (PD,
    9/13/71,124&2)
  MSC announced resignation of Dr. Gene M. Simmons, MSC Chief Scientist
     since 1969. Dr. Simmons would return to MIT as professor of geo-
     physics. (MSC Release 71-63)
  New York Times editorial said scientists were pressing NASA to “take
     another look at the cancelled Apollo 18 and 19 flights-flights for
     which much equipment is available. The Soviet contribution to the
     new picture of the moon is still miniscule, despite the feats of the
     Luna space vehicles. But it would make good sense for the United
     States and the Soviet Union to get together and plan joint manned
     moon flights, perhaps by making Apollo 18 and 19 the first truly
     international ventures to earth’s companion in the skies.” (NYT,
    9/3/71,26)
* International Institute for Strategic Studies published The Military
                                    247
September 3                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    Balance 1971-1972. Annual report of London-based independent re-
    search group said Communist China had entered nuclear missile race,
    U.S.S.R. had moved further ahead of US. in ICBM deployment, and
     U.S.S.R. was challenging supremacy of US. underwater nuclear strike
    force. (Reuters, B Sun, 9/3/71,1)
  Astronaut Information: American and Soviet (Revised) (71-204 SP)
    was published by Library of Congress Congressional Research Service.
     Paper provided general reference on astronauts and cosmonauts, table
     of US. and Soviet space flights, and description of highlights of each
    flight. (Text)
September 4: Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic
     transport, left Toulouse for Cayenne, French Guiana, on first leg of
     first transatlantic test flight, to Rio de Janeiro. Flight would promote
     sale of aircraft in South America and continue performance t6sting
     and long-range flying in context of commercial airports. (BAc-Ahro-
    spatiale France Release 17C/71)
September 4-5: NASA launched series of two Black Brant IIIB sounding
     rockets from Resolute Bay, Canada, carrying Univ. of California par-
     ticles and fields experiments. Flights were partially successful. (SR
    list; GSFC Proj O f f )
September 5: NATO intelligence had reported U.S.S.R. was flight-testing
     swing-wing supersonic strategic bomber designed to fly at twice speed
     of sound and equipped for low-level penetration of enemy defenses,
     New York Times said. Aircraft, christened                  by NATO, could
     become operational late in 1973. Western military intelligence special-
     ists believed Backfire marked “emergence of entirely new Soviet air
     weapons system.” (Szulc, NYT, 9/5/71,1)
* Exhibits at new 86-million Air Force Museum near Dayton, Ohio, were
     described by New York Times: DC-6 Independence used by President
     Truman; Constellation Columbine III and 47J Sioux helicopter used
     by President Eisenhower ; reproduction of Wright 1909 Military
     Flyer; B-70, only remaining ultrasonic bomber ; Douglas World
     Cruiser New Orleans, which flew around world in 1924; Soviet ~ i ~ 1 5 ;
     and relics of Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk. Museum, “first permanent
     repository of Air F o r b memorabilia,” was 244 m (800 ft) long, 91 m
      (300 ft) wide, and 24 m (80 f t ) tall and housed 150 aircraft. It was
     built with funds provided by private gifts. NYT, 9/5/71, 28; NASA
     Hist Off ’r
* MIT-“probably the world‘s greatest technological university”-had com-
     mitted itself to seeking change in current US. attitude of hostility
     toward technology, Pmhington Post reported. In series of statements
     that “can be taken jointly as a new scientists’ manifesto,” MIT leaders
     had urged change in national attitude toward “harnessing technology
     while not bowing to it,” urged end to scientists disclaiming responsi-
      bility for the effects of their work, and pledged to make profound
     changes in their own teaching and research. MIT led US. universities
     in obtaining Federal research funding, with $92 million in FY 1970,
     more than double that of its nearest rival, Stanford Univ., which had
     ;received $39 million. (Cohn, P Post, 9/5/71, D2)
September 5-12 : First US.-U.S.S.R. conference on Communication with
      Extraterrestrial Intelligence ( CETI ) was held at Byurakan Astrophysi-
      cal Observatory in Soviet Armenia. Conference was sponsored jointly

                                   24a
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                            September 5-11

    by U.S. and Soviet Academies of Science and organized by Soviet
     astronomer Dr. Yosif S. Shklovsky and Cornel1 Univ. astronomer
    Dr. Carl Sagan. Later Dr, Sagan and Cornel1 Univ. astronomer Dr.
     Frank D. Drake reported conference conclusions to NAS. Group of
     scientists had concluded that civilization in another solar system
     “a few hundred light years away” might be trying to communicate
     with other bodies, including earth. Man had acknowledged existence
     of other universes and scientific evidence had shown that amino acids
    -building blocks of life-could be made from materials and energy
    sources in space. Scientists had recommended coordinated worldwide
     effort to intercept messages by searching sky with powerful radio-
     telescopes. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/19/71, 4:8, Auerbach, W Post, 9/23/71,
    A4; NAS PIO)
September 6 : Concorde 001, French prototype of Anglo-French supersonic
     transport, landed at Rio de Janeiro after successful first transatlantic
     test flight, piloted by French test pilot Andre Turcat [see Sept. 41.
     Turcat told newsmen aircraft had flown at mach 2 for nine minutes
     during 3240-km (2015-mi) flight. (AP, NYT, 9/7/71, 62)
  US. and British space experts believed purpose of four Cosmos launches
     in past 10 mos was to test components for manned lunar landing,
    New Yorlc Times reported. Cosmos 434, launched Aug. 12, was said
    to have been test of variable-thrust, restartable rocket engine similar
    to onboard propulsion system in Apollo CSMS. Other launches identified
    by experts were Cosmos 379, Nov. 24; Cosmos 382, Dec. 2; and Cosmos
    398, Feb. 26. Crucial hardware believed to be missing from launches
    was Saturn V-size booster. Some of these spacecraft had traveled
    farther in space than previous Soviet flights testing manned spaceflight
    equipment ; at least three, including Cosmos 434, had demonstrated
    greater ability to maneuver in space than any previous Soviet manned
    flight. British space expert Geoffrey E. Perry, who had first announced
     discovery of Soviet launch site at Plesetsk in 1966, had said in tele-
    phone interview with Times that “the Russians have never made orbital
    changes to the degree that they have demonstrated on these Cosmos
    flights.” He was convinced that “the Soviet Union is testing a large
    rocket engine similar to the one aboard Apollo. Even some of the
    velocity changes made by these Cosmos flights almost exactly match
    the velocity changes of Apollo for such maneuvers as lunar orbital
    insertion and trans-earth injection.” All four Cosmos were believed to
    have been launched by Proton, D-type, or SL-4, nonmilitary boosters
    with about half the thrust of Saturn V. Some were said to have trans-
    mitted recordings of human voices as test of radio communications.
     (Lyons, NYT, 9/6/71,1)
  Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 ,flew to Bulgaria on second flight out-
9


    side U.S.S.R. Aircraft had appeared at Paris Air Show in May and
    June. (UPI, NYT, 9/7/71,62)
  Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Administrator for Planning, told
    press in Bremen, Germany, that he expected to visit 50-man US.
    research station on moon within 10 yrs, at end of 1970s or beginning
    of 1980s. He said, “1’11 have to stay there at least eight or 10 days.”
     (AP, NYT, 9/7/71,18)
  Baltimore Sun editorial praised progress of NASA-Soviet Academy of
    Sciences plans for compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking sys-

                                    249
September 6                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

      tem: “For all the impediments, actual and potential, to genuine col-
     laboration in an almost illimitable project which no single nation can
      ever claim for its own alone, America and Russia have managed, it
      seems, to come to terms on some major technical points.” Consulta-
      tions that produced agreement “indicate the growth of sensible,
     humane realism in both Washington and Moscow in looking to the
     future,” (B Sun, 9/4/71)
September 6-1 6 : Fourth U.N. International Conference on Peaceful Uses
      of Atomic Energy was held in Geneva. US. exhibit included NASA
     demonstration of applying nuclear techniques to ultra-rapid analyses
     of environmental materials and drugs, using satellites and computers.
     Signals from nuclear-powered instruments on moon were relayed to
     Geneva from CSFC via satellite. NASA also displayed lunar samples and
     SNAP-27 and SNAP-19 generators.
         Mitchell W. Sharp, Canadian External Affairs Minister, said at
     news conference following opening session that it was time for US.
     and U.S.S.R. to negotiate underground nuclear test ban.
         Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Conference Chairman and former AEC chair-
     man, said in paper that plutonium 244, heaviest element, could assist
     in determination of earth’s age. In newspaper interview, Dr. Seaborg
     said leading nuclear scientists agreed that nuclear-generated power was
     <c
        clean, safe and necessary,” but that people of world needed to be
     convinced. He felt that responsibility for ensuring safety in use of
     nuclear energy should eventually be transferred from AEC to some
     other agency but move would be “premature” at present.
         Milton Klein, manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office
     and Director of AEC Space Nuclear Systems Div., reported on NASA
     plans to send nuclear-powered space probes to outer planets in next
     five years, followed by manned missions using atomic engines in the
     1980s. First mission using nuclear reactor to provide onboard elec-
     tricity [Pioneer F Jupiter flyby] would be launched in 1972.
         U.S.S.R. withdrew from conference program paper it had intended
     to read entitled: “Development of nuclear power systems for space in
     the U.S.S.R.” and substituted paper on operation of small Topaz re-
     actor. Washington Post quoted observers as attributing substitution to
     U.S.S.R. lag in space nuclear power field. One observer had said only
     other explanation might be that they were embarrassed by failure of
     Luna 18 “to perform on the moon.” (AEC Releases 0-151, 153;
     Reuters, W Post, 9/10/71, A13; N Y T , 9/12/71, 20; Sullivan, N Y T ,
    9/16/71,14; O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/71, A21)
September 7: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 436 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     542-km (336.8-mi), apogeee, 510-km (316.9-mi) perigee, 95.1-min
    period, and 74’ inclination. (CSFC SSR, 9/30/71; SBD, 9/15/71, 32)
  France’s Eole satellite, launched by NASA Aug. 16, was functioning almost
     perfectly after 22 days in orbit. Total of 1 1 balloons had been
                                                      1
    launched from three Argentina sites for Eole to track and acquire data
     from on winds, temperatures, and pressures. Five had completed one
    revolution around earth at 11850-m (38 880-ft) altitude and had been
    tracked by Eole. Only five balloons had failed to respond to satellite
    commands and were assumed lost. Balloons would be launched at rate
     of 8 to 10 per day until about 400 to 450 balloons were launched;

                                   250
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              September 7

      another 50 to 100 balloons would be launched to fill in gaps in array
     caused by failures. (NASA Proj Off)
  Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station
     carried GCA Corp payload to 176.4-km (109.6-mi) altitude to deter-
     mine winds from vapor trail using ARC CV-990 instrumented aircraft
     as observing platforms, test narrow-band camera filters on chemical
     releases with bright sky background, and provide real-time checkout
     of observational equipment and procedures for BIC experiment with
     low-altitude barium release. Payload contained standard barium and
     sodium-lithium canisters. Cloud was photographed by both ground and
     CV-990 aircraft cameras. Flight was first of two; second rocket
     would be launched Sept. 16. (NASA Rpt SRL)
  Plans to store lunar rocks in vault-like facility at MSC to retain their
     original condition for future researchers were described by NASA offi-
     cials in AP interview published by New York Times. LRL curatorial
     and research projects would be consolidated in specially air-conditioned
     facility covering 465 sq m (5000 sq ft) of existing laboratory space
     scheduled for completion in time for March 1972 Apollo 16 mission.
     Dr. John H. Pomeroy, NASA’s       Assistant Director for Lunar Sample
     program, said project had been “a very important aim since the very
     beginning, because we realize these are unique and irreplaceable
     samples and it may be years before we go back to these places.”
     (NYT, 9/7/71)
* Patent No. 3 603 433 was granted to MSC technicians William H. Keathley
    and Clarence J. Wesselski for spacecraft emergency shock absorbers
     that might also be used in automobile bumpers. Disaster-avoidance
     device backed up cyclic deformation system in struts of Apollo CM
     couches. System, installed in spacecraft since Apollo 11 to absorb
    energy from over-propulsion at launch or unusually hard landing,
    consisted of tightly fitted washers on rod. Pressure against end washer
    pushed one after another along line as force decelerated. (Jones, NYT,
    9/11/71, 33; Patent Off PIO)
  James J. Kramer, head of Quiet Engine Program at IRRC, became Chief
    of newly formed Noise and Pollution Reduction Branch of NASA’s
    Aeronautical Propulsion Div. He would be responsible for planning
    and overseeing research at NASA Centers on ways to reduce noise and
    pollutants from jet aircraft engines. (NASA Release 71-170)
  NSF published statistics that showed Federal R&D funding was on upward
    trend. Figures were taken from soon to be published report Federal
    Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities,
    Vol. XX. Estimated 9% increase in overall Federal funding for R&D
    from 1970 to 1972 indicated upward trend after decline that began
    in 1968. Total of $15.3 billion in actual obligations for 1970 estab-
    lished low for recent years. Although 1971 Federal R&D total was
    expected to be s a m d 1 5 . 4 billion-total $16.7 billion requested in
    President Nixon’s 1972 budget marked new high.
        NASA had risen from 5% share of Federal R&D in 1960 to high of
    34% in 1965 but was expected to fall back to 19% in 1972. Final
    phase-out of Apollo and reduced NERVA engine development were
    expected to be nearly offset by increase in other NASA programs so
    that 1972 would be almost a leveling off. (NSF Highlights, 9/7/71)

                                   251
September 8                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

September 8: NASA’s   supercritical wing, flown on TF-8A jet aircraft piloted
     by NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 11th flight from
     FRC. Purposes of one-hour flight were to complete evaluation of Butter
     characteristics at high subsonic and low supersonic speeds and obtain
     additional pressure, distribution, and performance data. Aircraft
     reached 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude and all objectives were achieved.
     Flutter characteristics were evaluated at mach 0.97, 1.05, and 1.10;
     pressure distribution and performance data were obtained from mach
     0.80 to 0.95 and at mach 1.05 and 1.10. (NASA Proj O f f)
  Ats 3 applications technology satellite, which had temporarily stopped
     transmitting weather pictures because of locked-on antenna [see Aug.
     241, was operating again, NASA announced. Although spacecraft was
     still not working properly, it was transmitting cloud-cover pictures of
     Western Hemisphere during the five per cent of the time when camera
     was aimed at earth. (NASA Release 71-171)
  Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM) prototype was flown to MSC from MSFC
     for extensive thermal-vacuum-chamber testing. Tests would continue
     through early December. (MSFC Release 71-146; MSFC PIO; MSC Hist
      Off)
* US. and U.S.S.R. had agreed to replace Washington-Moscow teletype
       “hot line” with comsat capable of providing instantaneous link between
      capitals in any crisis, Washington Post reported. Diplomatic sources
      had said agreement had been worked out by US. and Soviet communi-
       cations experts meeting at SALT in Helsinki. System would use exist-
       ing comsats orbited by both countries. (Getler, W Post, 9/8/71, 3 )
    Initial results from U.S.S.R.’s Vertikal-2 rocket launched Aug. 20 were
      reported by Tass. Experiments had been conducted at altitudes between
       100 and 463 km (62 and 288 mi). Photos had registered image of sun
      in several spectral ranges and had indicated that solar flares took place
       during rocket’s flight. Data had been obtained on temperature, electron
       density, and other parameters of sun’s corona and on [flux of particles
       causing ionospheric turbulence. (FBIS-SOV-174-3, 9/8/71, L2)
*   Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko submitted memorandum to
       U.N. Secretary General U Thant expressing hope that U.N. General
       Assembly would call world disarmament conference on nuclear and
       conventional weapons. Memo also reiterated Soviet proposal for dis-
       armament conference attended by nuclear powers-China, U.K., France,
       US., and U.S.S.R. (Tanner, NYT, 9/9/71,8)
*   Senate by unanimous vote of 53 agreed to ratification of Convention for
       Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft [see April 151. (CR,
       9/8/71,13892-95)
    Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) released GAO report that showed official
*
       cost estimates for F-14 USN jet fighter aircraft had risen from $11.5
       million to $16.7 million per aircraft since March 1971. Sen. Proxmire
       said he was “drafting amendments” to military authorization bill
       before Congress “which would terminate” g5-billion F-15 project.
       ( W Post, 9/9/71,2)
    NRC released Employment of New Ph.D.’s and Postdoctozals in 1971 :
*
       Science Ph.D.s who received degrees in 1970 had found fewer jobs
       than had 1969 graduates and were more likely to remain unemployed
       or to take jobs unrelated to their training. Of 13 000 1970 Ph.D.s sur-
       veyed, 70.2% had found suitable employment, 14.3% had entered

                                      252
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                September 8

     postdoctoral training, and 2.8% were jobless or had accepted inappro-
     priate employment. In 1969, 75.3% of graduates had found appro-
     priate jobs, 9.7% had entered postdoctoral training, and 1.6% were
     unemployed or underemployed. (NRC Release)
* President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. Glenn T. Sea-
     borg, former AEC Chairman, as US. Representative to General Con-
     ference of International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, Sept. 21-27.
     Among nominees for alternate representatives was Dr. T. Keith Glen-
     nan, first NASA Administrator (1958-1961). (PD, 9/13/71,1250,1261)
  White House announced appointment of William M. Magruder, former
     Director of SST Development for DOT, as special consultant to President
     Nixon. (PD, 9/13/71,1260)
September 8-10: NASA and United Cerebral Palsy Research Foundation
     sponsored conference on neurologically handicapped at ARC. Meeting-
     attended by scientists, physicians, and engineers-discussed application
     of space age technology to neurological disorders. (NASA Release 71-
     161 ; ARC PAO)
September 9-10: NASA’s     Stratoscope I1 telescope was successfully launched
     by giant balloon from Redstone Arsenal Army Airfield at 7:33 pm
     EDT on eighth flight in series to obtain sharper astronomical pictures
     than possible with earth-based photography. Three prime scientific
     targets were Galaxies M31 (Andromeda), M32, and Planetary Nebula
     NGC 7662.
        Stratoscope 11, reused with modifications for each flight, weighed
     3800 kg (8400 lbs) and had optical system with 91-cm (36-in) aper-
     ture and photographic resolution of 0.1 arc sec-equal to ability to
     distinguish two objects 76 cm (30 in) apart at distance of 1600 km
      (1000 mi). Photographs would be made in visible region of spectrum
     (4000-6000 A ) .
        Balloon-borne telescope, 198 m (650 ft) long, reached operating
     altitude at 25200 m (82800 ft) and performed flawlessly during
     night-long flight. Stratoscope drifted westward at 32 to 40 km per hr
      (20 to 25 mph) and returned to earth 96.6 km (60 mi) northeast of
     Little Rock, Ark., Sept. 10.
        Mission objectives were accomplished and scientific results were
     being evaluated. Instrument package was damaged during landing,
     apparently striking top of oak tree, but film was reported intact.
      (MSFC Releases 71-53, 71-141 ; Huntsville Times, 9/10/71,            9;
     9/11/71)
September 9 : President Nixon honored Apollo 15 astronauts in address on
     economic program before Joint Session of Congress: “Later today, in
     this great chamber, the Congress will pay tribute to three splendid
     Americans back from the moon. Theirs was a magnificent achieve-
     ment, a stunning testament to their personal skill and courage, and
     also to what American technology can achieve.
        “Let us find the means to ensure that in this decade of challenge,
     the remarkable technology that took these Americans to the moon can
     also be applied to reaching our goals here on earth.” (PD, 9/13/71,
     1250-6)
  Senate and House met in Joint Session to receive and pay tribute to
     Apollo 15 astronauts, who reported on mission. Mission commander
     David R. Scott said of A p l b 15 lunar samples, “As I approached a

                                    253
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
September 9

    fragment freshly deposited on the slopes of the Apennine, I realized
    it had been undisturbed since befpre life came out of the sea on
    earth.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden said first thing noticed after
    launch, “particularly when we got into earth orbit, was that we had
    a further view-we were further away from earth, and our view was
     expanding. We did not see any area around Cape Kennedy. What we
                                      .
    saw were continents and oceans. . . After we left earth orbit and for
    the remainder of the flight our view was one of the earth.” Astronaut
     James B. Irwin described Hadley-Apennine campsite as “friendly,
     beautiful spot, like a valley in the high mountains of the earth; and
     it was with some reluctance that we left our valley on the moon.” He
     told Congress: “The future of man’s role in space lies in your hands.
     We realize very well the grave responsibilities in these days. The deci-
     sions you make will determine man’s travels and explorations in space.
     We think that an investment in space technology is an investment in
     America. America needs space to grow.” (CR, 9/9/71, H8224-5)
  Emergency loan of $250 million was granted to Lockheed Aircraft Corp.
     by Emergency Loan Guarantee Board. Board was established by
     President under emergency loan bill approved by Congress Aug. 2.
     (AP, B Sun, 9/10/71, A7)
  President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of representatives and
     alternates to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly. They included
     Apollo I4 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of MSC Astronaut
     Office, as alternate. (PD,
                              9/13/71,1257, 1261)
September 9-10: Sixth Annual Aerospace Mechanism Symposium was
     sponsored at ARC by ARC, Univ. of Santa Clara, and Lockheed Mis-
     siles & Space Co. Films from ApoZZo 15 LRV Rover on moon were
     shown. Soviet scientist V. S. Syromyatnikov and MSC engineer James
     C. Jones presented papers on space vehicle docking mechanisms.
     (NASA Release 71-169; ARC Astrogram, 9/16/71, 1)
September 10: USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg
    AFB by single Thorad-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 220.5-km
      (137-mi) apogee, 169-km (105-mi) perigee, 88.3-min period, and
     74.9’ inclination. It reentered Oct. 5. The other entered orbit with
     506.9-km (315-mi) apogee, 487.6-km (303-mi) perigee, 94.5-min
    period, and 75’ inclination. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 9/23/71, 64)
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 437 from Plesetsk into orbit with 545-km
     (338.7-mi) apogee, 520-km (323.1-mi) perigee, 95.2-min period, and
     74’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/71; SBD, 9/15/71, 32)
September I1 : French CNES satellite control station at Bretigny, France,
     inadvertently transmitted destruct command to balloons being tracked
     by Eole satellite (launched Aug. 16), causing 70 of 135 flying bal-
     loons to be cut down. Although error was not expected to degrade
     planned scientific accomplishments of mission significantly, it would
     delay beginning of scientific experiment by 7 to 10 days. CNES insti-
     tuted new training procedures to Eole control station personnel on
     transmitting commands to satellite and designed system which would
     alarm when certain critical commands-such          as balloon destruct,
     gravity gradient retraction, and activation of magnetic hysteris
     rods-were to be placed into Eole. (NASA Proj Off)
September 13: S-IC-511 1st stage for Saturn V launch vehicle that would
     launch Apollo 16 toward moon in 1972 was shipped by barge from

                                    254
                                                                 September 13
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    Michoud Assembly Facility, to arrive at KSC Sept. 17. (MSFC Release
    71-152)
  MSC announced contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received
    $4 364 849 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo LM con-
    tract. Agreement formally incorporated procedural changes previously
    authorized by NASA and brought total value of contract since January
    1963 to $1788 034 399.
       Boeing Go. was awarded $4.3-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee
    contract for reliability, quality assurance, and flight safety engineer-
    ing at MSC. (MSC Releases 71-67, 71-68)
  Senate by vote of 55 to 21 rejected amendment proposed by Sen. Gay-
    lord Nelson (D-Wis.) to H.R. 8687, FY 1972 military procurement
    authorization. Amendment would have frozen funds for USN F-14
    and USAF B-1 and F-15 aircraft programs until final environment
    impact statement had been made on programs. (CR, 9/13/71,
    Sl418l-14210)
  Pressure was increasing on Nixon Administration to relax aeronautical
    satellite system policy to allow first preoperational system to be
    jointly owned by ESRO and FAA, Aviation Week & Space Technology
    reported. Original decision that system should be owned by com-
    merical company with FAA leasing its service had become unpopular
    because of legal complexities. (Av Wk, 9/13/71,21)
September 14: U.S.S.R. launched Cosinos 438 from Plesetsk into orbit
    with 273-km (169.6-mi) apogee, 181-km (112.5-mi) perigee, 89-min
    period, and 65.3’ inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 27. (GSFC SSR,
    9/30/71; SBD, 9/23/71,64)
  NASA announced appointment of Lee R. Scherer, Apollo Lunar Explo-
0

    ration Director, as Director of Flight Research Center, NASA’s   facility
    for flight-testing high-performance aeronautical vehicles at Edwards,
     Calif. Appointment would be effective Oct. 1 . Until then De E.
                                                       1
    Beeler, Deputy Director, would continue as Acting FRC Director.
     Scherer had been Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and Mana-
    ger of Lunar Orbiter Program from its inception in 1963 through its
    successful completion in 1967. He had received NASA’s        Exceptional
     Service Medal in 1967 and NASA’s       Exceptional Scientific Achieve-
    ment Medal in 1969. (NASA Release 71-176)
* ApoUo 15 anomalies were discussed by Apollo Mission Director Chester
     M. Lee during NSC luncheon and Apollo 15 film showing in Washing-
                                                                         ..
     ton, D.C.: “I have been queried and have read comments that .
     we had more anomalies than we have seen in previous missions. In
     fact this is not so.” List of 40 anomalies had been compiled by NASA.
     “Twenty of these had to do with the experiments and the LRV, most of
     which were carried for the first time on this mission. This compares
     with 30 total anomalies on Apollo 14,      total anomalies on Apollo 12
     and 43 on Apollo 10. Therefore I would conclude that we are not
     retrogressing in so far as the Apollo hardware performance is con-
     cerned.” Lee said Iunar stay of 73 hrs was pIanned for Apollo 16.
     “The additional 6 hrs will not give us more EVA time than we planned
     on Apollo 15, but will allow more time €or EVA preps, sleep, eating,
     etc.” (Text)
  Nonflying test model of Lockheed G 5 A jet cargo aircraft developed
     wing crack during static testing at Lockheed’s Marietta, Ga., facilities.

                                     255
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
September 14

     Crack, near fuselage, occurred as wing was subjected to stress of
     approximately 130%. (Levine, WSJ, 9/16/71,9)
September 15: NASA successfully completed 12th and 13th flights of
     TF-8A jet aircraft equipped with supercritical wing, flown from FRC
     by NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry. TF-8A flight test program
     was being accelerated in anticipation of adverse landing conditions
     when lake bed at Edwards, Calif., became wet later in year. Purposes
     of flights were to expand flight envelope to higher dynamic pressures,
     obtain pressure distribution and performance data at higher dynamic
     pressure, evaluate unaugmented stability and control characteristics,
     and investigate buffet boundary for trim flight at design condition of
                                         .
     mach 0.99 at 14 000 m (46 000 ft) (NASA Proj Off)
* Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, described planned Skylab
     mission medical research in address before Utah State Medical Assn.:
     “. , . we will be looking far beyond the requirements of the immediate
     mission; we will be seeking answers to questions with a strong im-
     pact on the future of manned space flight during the remainder of
     this century.” Major questions as yet unanswered after Gemini and
     Apollo flights were the causes of moderate loss of weight by astro-
     nauts early in flight, moderate cardiovascular deconditioning, mod-
     erate loss of exercise capacity, and minimal loss of bone density.
     Medical results from Gemini and Apollo missions had shown that
     “1. There were no major surprises. 2. As of now, we see no reason
     why man cannot live and woik effeciively in space for a long period
     of time. 3. Man seems to adapt to space flight more easily than he
     does to Earth’s environment after returning from space.” (Text)
  Apollo 15 astronauts were honored by Chicago with parade, special
     City Council meeting, and civic luncheon. Mayor Richard J. Daley
     presented them with honorary citizenship medals. (Wolfe, C Trib,
     9/16/71)
* U.S.S.R.’s Lunolchod I lunar rover had successfully completed 11th lunar
     day of work on moon since it was landed by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970,
     Tass announced. During 11th lunar day rover had made “a detailed
     survey of the structure of the moon surface in the area” and “pano-
     ramic route survey of the surrounding locality,” traveling 100 m
      (328 f t ) before being powered down for 11th lunar night. (FEW-SOV-
     180-3,9/16/71, L1)
September 16: Discovery of six amino acids of extraterrestrial origin in
     Orgueil meteorite that fell in France in 1964 was announced by ARC
     team of scientists at annual meeting of American Chemical Society
     in Washington, D.C. Findings further supported “pattern of chemical
     evolution” theory adopted by Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and ARC
     team after their discovery, announced June 18, that identical amino
      acids and pyrimidines existed in Murray meteorite that fell in Ken-
     tucky in 1950 and Murchison meteorite that fell in Australia in 1969.
     Theory held that specific set of amino acids and other life chemicals
      found in three meteorites might be part of basic pattern leading to
      origin of life. All three meteorites were believed to have come from
      asteroid belt and to date from formation of solar system, about 4.5
     billion yrs ago. (NASA Release 71-177)
* President Nixon was host to ApoZZo 15 astronauts and families at White
      House dinner. (PD,    9/20/71,1288)

                                   256
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             September 16

 Najeeb E. Halaby, Pan American World Airways President and Chair-
    man, discussed space shuttle at Symposium of Society of Experimen-
    tal Test Pilots in Los Angeles: “NASA has already shown that it appre-
    ciates the contributions airlines can make to the program, by having
    airlines participate with space contractors in the development of the
    space shuttle” to “make the eventual space shuttle work more like a
    standard airliner than a quarterly experiment.” Since it took less
    energy to orbit objects than to fly them across U.S., “there’s no
    reason why the cost of Space Shuttle operations should not become
    as low or lower than that of jets.” Pan Am’s “most glamorous vision”
    was “Space Shuttle as an air transport, carrying passengers from
    New York to Tokyo-or Peking-in 45 minutes, or from Los Angeles
    to Rome in 40.‘’
                                                                        ..
        “We can visualize a rocket-powered vehicle with 100 passengers .
    launched vertically in a suborbital trajectory at the precise azimuth
    for its intended destination, re-entering the atmosphere without excess
    g-forces, gliding unpowered to an altitude where its conventional jet
    engines will be started, then landing on a runway like a conventional
    airliner.” (Text)
 Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station
     carried GCA Corp. experiments. Payloads ejected trail of sodium and
    lithium during ascent from 80-km (50-mi) to 170-km (105-mi) alti-
     tude and then ejected barium at 170-km altitude. Both trails pro-
    duced glowing, colored clouds over mideastern U.S. coastline. Data
     on wind conditions were obtained by photographing motion of vapor
     trails and clouds from cameras aboard ARC Convair 990 aircraft.
     (WS Release 71-18)
  Senate confirmed nominations of ApoUo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard,
    Jr., as Alternate U.S. Representative to 26th session of U.N. General
     Assembly and of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former AEC Chairman, and
     Dr. T. Keith Glennan, €ormer NASA Administrator, as U.S. Repre-
    sentative and Alternate to 15th session of General Conference of the
     International Atomic Energy Agency at Geneva. (CRY 9/16/71,
     S1433)
September 17: Age of Apollo 15 “Genesis rock” was approximately 4.15
     billion years, Dr. Liaquat Husain and Dr. John F. Sutter, State Univ.
     of New York at Stony Brook scientists, announced at press conference.
     Anorthosite sample brought back by Astronauts David R. Scott and
     James B. Irwin during July 26-Aug. 7 mission wag 150 million yrs
     older than oldest ApoZb 12 rock, Husain said. “This is the oldest lunar
     rock found on any of the missions so far.” (Fine grains of soil from
     earlier missions had been found to be nearly 4.5 billion yrs old and
     one Apollo 12 rock had contained some fragments that had crystallized
     4.5 billion yrs ago but rock itself was thought to have solidified 4
     billion yrs ago.)
         Although rock’s age was not the hoped 4.6 billion yrs-estimated
     age of solar system-it supported theory that moon was once molten
     mass. Scientists said precise age of rock could range from 3.95 to
     4.35 billion yrs. Further tests had been scheduled to narrow margin.
     Age had been determined by measuring relationship of radioactive
     potassium and argon in rock samples using rare-gas mass spectrome-
      ter and nuclear reactor. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said,

                                    257
September 17                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




September 17: The white anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on the moon by
Apollo 15 astronauts was about 4.15 billion years old, scientists announced. In the
photo the sample, oldest lunar rock collected so far, was in the nonsterile process-
ing line of the Lunar Receiving Laboratom. at the Manned Spacecraft Center.

     (6
      This is unquestionably one of the most important rocks ever returned
    from any lunar mission. It has a recording in its minerals of many
    series of events in lunar hEtory-events of high temperature and high
    pressure.” (Auerbach, W Post, 9/18/71, A3; AP, B Sun, 9/18/71,
    A10; NYT, 9/18/71,25)
  MSC announced start of series of cold weather environment tests on per-
    formance of Skylab CM postlanding and recovery systems in Climatic
    Laboratory at Eglin AFB, Fla. Objectives were to determine perform-
    ance characteristics and limitations of Skylab CM in cold weather,
    determine CM test crew response to cold and to interior environmen-
    tal conditions of CM, and determine extent of ice buildup on CM exte-
    rior and effect of ice on systems performance. Tests, conducted in
    chamber with 274 K (33’F) water temperature and 269 K (25’F)
    air temperature, were necessary because spacecraft would pass over
    areas colder than previously experienced and, in event of emergency
    landing, CM and crew limitations had to be known. (MSC Release
    7 1-70)
  Letter by Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ., responding
    to criticism of his book The Decision To Go to the Moon, was pub-
    lished in Science. Book had been reviewed by L. Vaughn Blankenship
    in Science July 23. Logsdon wrote: “Blankenship reports that I find
    the Apollo decision ‘a good one’ and ‘evidence of a political system
                                                                       .
                                                                . that ‘the
    operating at its best.’ I do no such thing. I do suggest
    decision to go to the moon was a representative American action,’ and
    was the product of a process ‘typical of the way many major decisions
    are reached.’ ” (Science, 9/17/71,1079-80)

                                        258
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             September 17

* New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial commented on failure of Soviet
    Luna 18 mission: “The Soviet’s automated designs and performances
    are not to be belittled, for they represent research and development
    toward deep-probe capability. But it is interesting that Western space
    observers think they have grounds for suspecting that the Soviets are
    in fact working up a manned lunar program. If so, more than prestige
    and technological display are involved ; it must mean agreement that
    man operates on the moon with the best cost-benefit ratio.’’ (New
    Orleans Times Picayune, 9/17/71)
* USAF’S “fly-before-you-buy” approach to procurement of new equipment
    via prototypes was described by Gen. George S. Brown, AFSC Com-
    mander, in speech before 15th Symposium of Society of Experimental
    Test Pilots: “We want the confidence of demonstrated performance
    in our acquisition programs before deciding on production” to provide
    “a backlog of promising technological approaches from which future
    requirements can be met as they develop. While this may cost more
                                                                  ..
    initially, in the long run we will have more proven technology . and
     consequently better performing weapon systems at more reasonable
     costs.” (Text)
  September 19: NASA announced it had granted Univ. of Denver limited
     exclusive patent rights to frangible-tube energy absorber conceived
    and developed at LaRC in 1961 and patented by NASA in 1964. Seven-
    year rights permitted manufacture, use, and sale of device for trailer
    support wheel structures, passenger automobile bumpers, and eleva-
     tors. DOT was considering its use on highway guard rails. Device,
     made of hard metal alloy, absorbed shock by shattering when pressed
     against suitably shaped die by downward force. (NASA Release 71-173)
September 19-22: NASA launched series of 13 Nike-Cajun sounding rockets
     from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying GSFC grenade payloads. Data
     would be correlated with data from five French Centaure vapor flights.
     Objective was to determine solar-driven first and second harmonic
     oscillations in temperature, pressure, density, and winds in upper
     atmosphere in equatorial zone between altitudes of 35 and 100 km
      (22 and 62 mi). Each Nike-Cajun carried 31 grenades to altitudes
     from 114 to 125 km (70-78 mi). All but four grenades were ejected
     and exploded as planned, and all 13 flights were rated successful.
      (NASA Rpts SRL)
September 20: Joint West German and NASA barium-ion-cloud ( BIC) probe
     was launched from Wallops Station by Scout booster at 7:31 pm EDT.
     Objectives of cooperative project were to study behavior of barium
     ion cloud released at several earth radii and to determine what broad
     features of earth’s magnetic and electric fields could be deduced.
         Barium was released into space at 11:05 pm EDT above Central
     America. Cloud was visible over North and South America and ob-
     servations were made from all prime ground-based optical sites for
     one to one and one half hours. Parameters of 4th-stage burnout were
     31 479-km (19560-mi) altitude, 6.77’ N latitude, and 74.26O W
     longitude. Barium cloud was visible to naked eye for approximately
      10 min. Cloud elongated along its local magnetic field line to length
      of about 10 000-km (6200-mi). NASA provided vehicle support neces-
      sary to accomplish mission and to make observations at NASA sites.
       (NASA Proj Off; WS Release 71-19)


                                    259
September 20                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

* Time magazine described Soviet swing-wing supersonic strategic bomber
     Backfire [see Sept. 51. Aircraft believed to have been designed by
     Andrey N. Tupolev, was 39.9 m (131 ft) long and weighed 113 400 kg
                   .
     (250 000 lbs) Aerodynamicists believed it to be made of stainless steel
     with titanium to resist heat stress. Airframe had skin bonding instead
     of riveting. Wings were in forward position and jackknifed back about
     40” for speeds of mach 2.1 at 152000 m (50000 ft) or mach 1 at
     152 m (500 ft) . Aircraft was “apparently crammed with sophisticated
     electronic aids to confuse radar tracking.” Carrying crew of three, it
     had estimated payload of 50 megatons in weaponry, including para-
     chute-dropped hydrogen bombs. “With one refueling, Backfire appears
     capable of striking the US. and returning home.” Intelligence sources
     also had reported that U.S.S.R. was “well along in the design of the
     M I G 2 5 and M I G 2 7 ; they are potential successors to the M I G 2 3
     ‘Foxbat,’ one of the most advanced fighters in the world.” (Time,
     9/20/71)
* ApoZZo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M.
     Worden received Order of Leopold from King Leopold of Belgium in
     Brussels. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
  Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) issued statement that C-SA program
0

     was expected to cost $4.9 billion, increase of $300 million over 1970
     figures: “Taking into account that the program has been reduced from
     120 planes to 81, we find an overrun of $2.2 billion. On a unit basis,
     the costs have risen from $28 million originally estimated for each
     G 5 A to $60 million, an increase of over 100%.’y (Text)
  FAA, American Airlines, and Aeronautical Radio, Inc., in October would
     begin three- to-six-month operational test and evaluation of automatic
     data link communications techniques, FAA announced. American Air-
     lines 747 aircraft equipped with data link system that would print out
     air traffic control clearances, terminal advisories, and other informa-
     tion in cockpit and automatically process pilot position and weather
     reports to ground would test whether techniques could reduce com-
     munications workload on pilots and controllers. (FAA Release 71-152)
  Office of Management and Budget had released $98.1 million in FY 1972
     funds voted for science education and institutional support, while im-
     pounding $30 million, Aviation Week & Space Technology noted.
     “The 25% holdback of funding at the basic science level is considered
     by some in Congress as highly destructive because it will tend to
     reduce the number of future scientists.” It was viewed as “direct con-
     tradiction of the pro-science policy they have been led to anticipate.”
      ( A v Wk, 9/20/71,15)
September 20-26: International Astronautical Federation held 22nd Con-
     gress in Brussels.
         Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott told opening session that analysis
     of 2.7-m (9-ft) Apollo 15 lunar core sample had disclosed 58 distinct
     layers that represented 58 “chapters in the history of the sun.” Number
     of ‘bpages in each chapter” awaited further analysis. Later Scott said
     in interview that Dr. Liaquat Husain, State Univ. of New York at
     Stony Brook scientist who had analyzed Apollo 15 “Genesis” rock, was
     concerned that alteration of rock by shock when it impacted with site
     at which it was found might have partly invalidated determination of
    rock’s age at 4.15 billion yrs.

                                     260
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                         September 20-26

            engineer John C. Arvesen described development of method for
      ARC
   monitoring biological productivity from air by detecting signs of
   chlorophyll. Monitoring device, when tested over California lakes and
   offshore areas, had produced results that conformed closely to readings
   obtained by arduous direct sampling of waters. Ultimate goal was to
   develop satellite-borne system that could monitor global productivity
   of oceans.
       Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said newly
   completed studies of medical data from ApLZo 14 had shown radiation
   exposure to crew that was more than twice that of previous Apollo
   missions. Primary reason for higher exposure was passage of ApUo 18
   spacecraft close to Van Allen radiation belts. Dr. Berry said radiation
   dose was “of no hazard or biological significance.” Soviet scientists
   said later that cosmonauts carried special antiradiation drug on all
   space flights but had never used it.
       Dr. Berry said Apollo 14 Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa had lost 27%
   of fluid within his body cells during mission. His total body water had
   dropped 18% and red cells in his bloodstream had decreased 9%.
   Losses had been far less for other Apollo 14 astronauts and no such
   dramatic losses had been recorded for Apollo 15 astronauts, indicating
   that individual responses to space varied widely. Heavy loss of
   <C
      exchangeable” potassium had been noted in astronauts during ex-
   tended missions. On Apollo 15, loss had been as great as 15%. Potas-
   sium was deemed exchangeable because it could move readily in and
   out of tissues and thus could be purged from body.
       E. 6. Johnson, Equipment and Facilities Branch Chief in NASA
   Space Nuclear Systems Office, described program for development of
   teleoperator systems in which remote-controlled devices could perform
   tasks in situations dangerous to health or safety of humans. In space,
   teleoperator could enter high radiation environment of space station’s
   nuclear power plant to change fuel elements or make repairs. Johnson
   said optical or radioastronomy observatory on moon’s far side could
   be run for 40 to 50 yrs using computer-controlledteleoperators whose
   control could be assumed from earth when necessary.
       Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium was held during
   IAF congress. Sessions discussed earth resources technology and scien-
   tific research objectives and needs of developing countries in regard
   to earth resources research.
       IAA Fifth History of Astronautics Symposium on Sept. 23 was chaired
   by JPL Historian R. Cargill Hall. Soviet Cochairman V. N. Sokolsky
   did not attend for unexplained reason. Papers read included “From the
   History of the Development of Powder Rockets in the U.S.S.R.,” by
   Soviet Academician Yu A. Pobedonostsev, which traced work on
   Soviet solid propellants leading to Katyusha rocket in current use ;
   “Comparative AnaIysis of Projects for Jet Planes Constructed up to
   the 1940’s,” by V. N. Sokolsky; “Evolution of Spacecraft Attitude
   Control Concepts before 1951,” by R. E. Robertson of Univ. of CaIi-
   fornia at San Diego; and “Memoir: The Evolution of Aerospace
   Guidance Technology at M.I.T., 1935-1951,” by Dr. C. Stark Draper.
       Fourth International Orbital Laboratory Symposium, held during
   Congress, discussed earth resources technology and scientific research
   objectives and needs of developing countries.

                                  261
September 20-26                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

         Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award
      was presented to Professor Luigi Broglio of Univ. of Rome for achieve-
     ments in experiments with floating platforms to launch sateIlites into
     equatorial orbits.
         Only cosmonaut attending IAF Congress was Boris B. Yegorov, only
     physician to travel in space (launched in Voskhod 1 Oct. 12, 1964).
      ( IAA Annual Rpt 1971; Sullivan, NYT, 9/21/71, 9/23/71, 9/27/71 ;
     Proceedings )
September 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 439 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     278-km (172.7-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.3-mi) apogee, 89.3-min period,
     and 65.4" inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 2. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/71;
     10/31/71; SBD, 10/1/71,101)
  General Dynamics Corp. released F-111 program status report. Aircraft
0


     had amassed total of 115 209 hrs on 44463 operational and test
     flights. Airframe static tests had been successfully completed with some
     standards exceeded by 20%. Tests on structural fatigue life of aircraft
     were continuing. Tactical Air Command versions of F-111 were being
     tested through 16 000 hrs, or four service lives, and would soon be
     assigned to service units. Strategic Air Command version of airframe
     had successfully passed one of four service-life tests required. To date,
      356 F-111s had passed proof tests begun in 1969 and 291 of these
     were back in service. F-111 had accumulated better safety record at
      100 000 hrs than any other Century Series fighter; 15 had been de-
     stroyed, contrasting with 4+0F-104s. USAF, Boeing Co., and Convair
     Aerospace Div. team had completed successful series of launches of
     short-range attack missile (SRAM) to be used on FB-111s and B-52
     bombers. During launches from WSMR, F-111 had demonstrated ability
     to launch five SRAMS in rapid succession at five different targets. (Text)
  Attempts by four Soviet aquanauts to break 59-day record for underwater
     isolation were terminated after 52 days. Men had been evacuated from
     oceanographic laboratory Chernomor at 15-m (50-ft) depth after vio-
     lent storm on Black Sea broke power and communications cables of
     submarine's chamber. Zzvestiu said Nov. 1 that experiment had been
                                                 1
     pronounced successful because of medical and oceanographic findings,
     although it had failed to exceed record set by US. Project Tektite I
     April 15, 1969. (Shabad, NYT, 11/12/71, 10; A&A 2969)
September 22: ARC announced completion of acceptance tests on X-14B,
     VTOL aircraft that could simulate hovering flight characteristics of
     most existing and proposed VTOLS. New NASA research aircraft, modi-
     fication of Bell X-14A, was believed to be first digital-computer-driven
     VTOL flight-simulator aircraft. X-14B would be used by NASA to deter-
     mine optimum handling qualities for any VTOL aircraft. (ARC Release
     7147)
  LeRC received its sixth IR-100 award from Industrial Research Magazine
     during ceremony at Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.
     Award, presented annually to developers of 100 most significant new
     products, was for development of radiation-chemistry method of pre-
     paring high-purity metals and chemical compounds. Method was devel-
     oped by L ~ R Cscientists Dr. Warren H. Philipp and Stanley J. Marsik.
     (Lewis News, 9/24/71,1)
  Air Force Assn.'s Schilling Trophy was presented to Apollo 15 Astro-
     nauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin and Alfred M. Worden in recog-

                                     262
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                September 22

     nition of “their unique contribution to manned spaceflight and science.”
      (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172; AFA PIO)
   Nomination of Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) for Wright Brothers
     Memorial Trophy for outstanding service to aviation was announced
     by NAA. Citation was “for his continuing energetic advocacy of and
     lasting contribution to the development and use of aviation both as a
     viable national transportation system and as an essential element in
     maintaining a strong military posture.” Trophy would be presented
     in Washington, D.C., Dec. 17. (NAA Release)
   Senate rejected proposed amendment to H.R. 8687, FY 1972 military
     procurement bill, by Sen. George S. McGovern (D3.D.). Amendment
     would have reduced funds for USAF development of B-1 bomber and
     related programs from $370 million to $31 million. (CR, 9/22/71,
     51478614847)
* Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev was quoted by Tass as saying
     Soviet designing bureau would do all it could to put Tu-144 supersonic
     transport in service as soon as possible. Aircraft had returned after
     successful visit to Bulgaria Sept. 6. During flight it had developed
     speed of 2300 km per hr (1400 mph). (FBrs-Sov-71-185,9/23/71, L1)
   NASA announced availability of Shutle Technology Program-Fiscal         Year
     1972, compilation of projects making up NASA FY 1972 Space Shuttle
     Technology Program. (NASA Release 71-183)
September 22-23: Command stored in Mariner 9 computer before May 30
     launch towards Mars switched spacecraft’s radio transmitter from
     low-gain omnidirectional antenna to high-gain antenna for increased
  ’
     signal strength. On Sept. 23 spacecraft was 14 million km (9 million
     mi) from Mars and had traveled approximately 290 million km (180
     million mi) in curving trajectory. Incroasing distance between Mari-
     ner 9 and earth required concentration of radio signals in narrow beam
     to maintain communications at required data rates during remainder
     of mission. Spacecraft was scheduled to reach Mars Nov. 13. (NASA
     Release 71-184)
September 23: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, addressed annual
     meeting of National Security Industrial Assn. in Washington, D.C. :
     “I am impressed with the soundness of this new space program for the
     Seventies and I urge you to support it. I also believe very much that
     our country needs it.” Among program’s strengths were: it had con-
     gressional backing ; it was well planned and well balanced to meet basic
     national needs, including national security; it stressed earth orbit as
     (6
        new realm of prime importance and great opportunity, where Amer-
     ica’s capacity for world leadership will be tested not only in this decade
     but in the decades to follow.” Program promoted economic progress
     based on new technology, was essential to President Nixon’s peace
     policies based on international cooperation, and was “already part of
     America’s destiny, as all of you can testify who watched the Apollo 15
     operations on international television.”
         NASA had been “impressed and encouraged” by President’s call for
     new programs to ensure maximum enlistment of technology in meeting
     challenge of peace and by President’s promises to present those pro-
     grams in next session of Congress.
         “Technology, in my judgment, has made this country great and will
     keep it great. It is certainly true that we need adequate political con-

                                     263
September 23                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     trols and, if possible, social controls to keep technology the servant of
    man, and not his master. But nevertheless new technology we abso-
    lutely need to assure jobs and a better life for all Americans in the
    decades ahead.”
        Dr. Fletcher felt recent shuttle studies had “reinforced the general
     belief that America’s future in space in the remainder of the 20th
     Century depends in large measure on our skill and our determination
     in defining and developing the shuttle.” (Edited text)
        Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said in speech that U.S.S.R.’s Foxbat
     fighter aircraft was “now operational in Egypt and cannot be matched
     in performance by anything we have in operation.” (Text)
  NASA conducted second successful test of Viking Mars lander free-flight,
     development parachute system at DOT Joint Parachute Test Facility at
     El Centro, Calif. First test had been conducted Sept. 3. (FRC PIO)
  Spencer M. Beresford, NASA General Counsel, testified before House Com-
     mittee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space
     Flight during hearing on H.R. 4545, Chapel of the Astronauts bill.
     NASA had agreed to consider request by Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc.,
     to purchase up to seven acres (three hectares) of land adjacent to
     ICSC Visitor Information Center for construction of “nondenominational,
     nonsectarian, nonprofit public facility for worship or meditation and
     a memorial to the astronauts.” NASA was then “actively engaged in
     the defense of a law suit arising from the reading of portions of the
     Bible by the crew of Apollo 8 while in space.” Wishing to avoid a
     further suit, NASA had sought assurance that Chapel of the Astronauts,
     Inc., purpose was “truly nondenominational.” Corporation had com-
     plied with NASA’s   request for assurance. “It is my professional opinion
     that . . . if present plans for the Chapel are followed and it is operated
     with sound discretion, the Chapel Corporation, NASA and the United
     States Government are as secure from successful legal attack as is
     possible.” (Proceedings)
  Izvestia published interview with Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N.
     Tupolev and Aleksey A. Tupolev, Tu-144 test pilot Mikhail V. Kozlov,
     and Tu-144 navigator Georgey N. Bazhenov on Tu-144 Sept. 6 visit to
     Bulgaria. Kozlov said aircraft had flown regular air route, “but we
     flew almost three times as fast and twice as high as the other planes.”
     Although difficulties “did not arise, we did seem to sense a dislocation,
     a lack of coordination between the future-which is what the TU-144
      represents-and the present, even the past-those principles which are
      followed by the ‘ground’ which controls (the flight of) the plane.”
     Tu-144 had flown air route on automatic pilot. Aleksey Tupolev said
      aircraft was designed for 30000 flying hrs. “This is 10 years of work
     for a supersonic aircraft. Every system and every structure is designed
                                               L1)
     for this.” (FBI+sOV-71-187,9/27/71,
* Miniature computer, the size of an automobile battery, was being devel-
     oped by Honeywell Aerospace Div. to pilot satellite to beam educa-
     tional TV to India under NASA and Indian government project to start
      in 1973, AP reported. Computer would use as much electricity as
      30-w light bulb. (NYT, 9/23/71, 14)
  US. and U.S.S.R. ended fifth round of SALT in Helsinki. New York
      Times sources said some progress had been made toward agreement
      on freeze that would maintain ICBM arsenals of both nations at about

                                     264
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               September 23

     current levels. SALT would resume in Vienna in mid-November.
     (Hamilton, NYT, 9/%/71,1)
September 23-24: Fortieth anniversary of American Institute of Physics
     was observed at AIP annual meeting Sept. 23 and at breakfast of AIP
     officers and governing board members Sept. 24. Dr. Frederick Seitz,
     Rockefeller Univ. President and former NAS President, spoke on “Four
     Decades of AIP” at annual meeting. (AIP Newsletter, 10/71)
September 24: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 440 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     789-km (490.3-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 95.2-min
     period, and 70.9’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/71; SBD, 10/1/71,
     101)
* Tenth ‘flight of M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.
     Dana, was prematurely terminated when ignition malfunction in two
     of four rocket engines caused shutdown of remaining engines. Small
     fire that started in base area of vehicle during fuel jettison was extin-
     guished when jettisoning was stopped. Vehicle made hard landing at
     emergency site on Rosamond Dry Lake. Purpose o flight was to
                                                             f
     evaluate stability and control at mach 1.0 and to evaluate reaction
     control augmentation system. (NASA Proj Off)
  White House announced President Nixon’s approval of US.-U.S.S.R.
     agreements negotiated a t SALT to reduce risk of outbreak of nuclear
     war and to improve and modernize Washington-Moscow direct com-
     munications link. Both nations would guard against accidental or un-
     authorized use of nuclear weapons, arrange for rapid communication
     should danger of nuclear war arise, and notify each other in advance
     of certain planned missile launches. Two satellite circuits would be
     established, one by each nation, as well as multiple terminals to
     increase reliability of link. U.S.S.R. would provide circuit through its
     own satellite system and US. would arrange for channel through
     INTELSAT system. Agreements were to be signed in Washington Sept. 30.
      (PD, 9/27/71,1318-9)
  Skylab payload shroud (nosecone) was delivered by McDonnell Douglas
     Astronautics Co. to MSFC. Shroud, 18.3 m (60 ft) long with 6.7-m
      (22-ft) diameter, weighed almost 12 000 kg (26 000 lbs), and was first
     major piece of Skylab hardware to be delivered to NASA. (MSFC Release
     71-162; MSFC PIO)
  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences published State-
     ments by Presidents of the United Stat& on Internatidnal Cooperation
     in Space-A Chronology: October 1957-August 1971 (Sen. Doc.
     92-40). Statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and
     Nixon had been compiled by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian.
     In letter of transmittal to Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Ander-
     son (D-N. Mex.), Committee Staff Director James J. Gehrig said state-
     ments revealed “unanimous agreement that space research and explora-
     tion should be an international undertaking.” (Text)
  Determination of crystallization ages for six Apollo 14 lunar rocks was
     described in Science by Dr. Liaquat Husain, Dr. John F. Sutter, and
     Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook
     scientists. Rocks, from Fra Mauro region, had been dated by measur-
     ing argon ratios in mass spectrometer. All six rocks gave age of 3.62
     to 3.92 billion yrs, same as that of fragmental rocks from Fra Mauro.
     Scientists had concluded that Imbrium impact-ne             of last major

                                     265
September 24                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    events in evolution of pre-mare lunar surface-and           crystallization of
    significant portion of pre-Imbrian basalts were “essentially contempo-
    raneous.” (Science, 9/24/71,1235-6)
  Senate rejected by vote of 39 to 12 modification of amendment proposed
     by Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.) to H.R. 8687, FY 1972
    military procurement bill. Amendment called for placement of funds
     for MIRV in special Treasury Dept. account to be used only when
    President and Congress jointly determined that Soviet activity in
     MIRV field necessitated further U.S. testing and deployment. (CR,
               ,
    9/24/7 1 S 15020-68 )
* Appointment of James T. Murphy as Director of FAA Office of Air Trans-
     portation Security was announced by FAA Administrator John H.
     Shaffer. Murphy, former FBI special agent, had been serving on acting
    basis since May 1971. (FAA Release 71-153)
September 24-25: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin,
     and Alfred M. Worden were honored by USAF Academy at Colorado
     Springs, Colo., with parade and special civic day. They received USAF
     Distinguished Service Medals from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secre-
     tary of the Air Force. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
September 25: New Yorlc Times editorial commented on US.-U.S.S.R.
     agreements at SALT : “Improved communications, no matter how desir-
    able, will not offset the growing danger of a nuclear holocaust unless
     followed speedily by substantive steps to check the headlong race in
    strategic nuclear arms.” ( N Y T , 9/25/71, 30)
September 26: Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Gold Medal for Aero-
     dromics was presented to L/G Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), SAMSO
     Commander and former NASA Apollo Program Director, at ceremonies
     commemorating Smithsonian’s 125th anniversary. Medal, presented
     periodically for “meritorious investigations in connection with the
     sciences of aeronautics and astronautics,” was established in memory
     of Dr. Samuel P. Langley, aviation pioneer. Among recipients had
     been Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1964 and Dr. Wernher von
     Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator €or Planning, in 1967.
      (Smithsonian Release SI-131-71)
September 2 6 3 0 : International Aeronautical Federation Annual General
     Conference was held in Lucerne, Switzerland.
        Gold Space Medal, Federation’s highest award for space achieve-
     ment, was presented to Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., for “his coura-
     geous achievements and leadership as the Commander of Apollo 13.”
     In recognition of achievements of entire ApoEEo 13 crew, Astronauts
     Lovell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., received IAF’S
     V. M. Komarov Diploma for 1970. Diploma had been created in
     memory of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov, killed during Soyuz 1
     mission April 24, 1967.
        Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov were
     awarded Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1970 for achievements as crew
     of S o p z 9, June 2-19,1970.
        Gold Air Medal, highest IAF award for aeronautics, was presented
     to Capt. Henry T. (Dick) Merrill for contributions to aviation over
     50 yrs. Capt. Merrill, civilian pilot, had flown Atlantic in 1935 and 1937.
        Concorde technical team of BAC and A6rospaciale employees received
                                                     .
     group diploma for “valuable example set by . . effective collaboration

                                       266
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             September 26-30

     developed since 1962 between the engineers of British Aircraft Corp.,
     Akospaciale, Rolls-Royce and Snecma, operating as a single industrial
     team.”
        During conference LRV was presented to Swiss Transport Museum.
      (Letter to NASA Administrator, 6/10/71; letter to NASA Historian,
     9/29/71; W News, 9/30/71, 42; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9; BAC PIO;
     NAA PIO)
September 27: Feasibility study at MSC had ruled out use of small Tv
      camera on LRV Rover while in motion during Apollo 16 mission, Los
     Angeles Times reported. Cost would exceed usefulness and pictures
     might be hazy and induce nausea in viewers because of up-and-down
     motion of Rover over lunar surface. Necessary adjustments to provide
     TV from Rover would cost almost $5 million. ( L A Times, 9/27/71)
* NASA announced assignment of Robert 0. AIler, Manager of Space Station
     Operations, Space Station Task Force for OMSF, to Skylab Program
     Office as Director of Operations. Aller would be responsible for coordi-
     nation and development of operationally related program and mission
     planning activities. (NASA Hq VB)
* Willis H. Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, testified before
     House Committee on Foreign Affairs’ Subcommittee on Africa on
     operation of NASA tracking station in South Africa. Subcommittee was
     investigating US. business involvement in South Africa. NASA station
     was manned, staffed, and operated by South African Council for Scien-
     tific and Industrial Research (CSIR). “Committed as we have been to
     attaining the important national objectives entrusted to us, we have
     thought of our stations overseas essentially in terms of their efficiency
     in supporting our flight missions. We have monitored station opera-
     tions mainly from the standpoint of technical effectiveness and sound
     financial management. While we have recognized that human factors
     can have a direct bearing on performance, we are limited in our
     ability to control these factors, particularly in societies where statutes
     and practices differ markedly from our own.” NASA wished “to do all
     we can to see that the NASA station in South Africa reflects to the
     greatest degree that local circumstances permit, the practices and ideals
     which govern employment at our domestic facilities.” (Testimony)
  AFSC announced establishment by Aeronautical Systems Div. (ASD) of
     Prototype Program Office at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. Office, headed
     by Col. Lyle W. Cameron, would manage aeronautical prototype pro-
     grams for USAF. WAF had identified as candidate aeronautical projects
     advanced STOL transport, very low radar-cross-section (RCS ) test vehicle,
     lightweight fighter aircraft, and quiet aircraft. (AFSC Release 240.71)
September 28-October 19: Luna 19, U.S.S.R.’s second unmanned lunar
     probe in less than a month, was launched from Baykonur at 3:OO pm
     local time (6:OO pm EDT). In earth orbit Luna 19 was separated from
     last stage of booster and set on trajectory toward moon. Tass said
     mission would conduct scientific investigation of moon and near-lunar
    space from lunar orbit. During flight to moon 26 communications
    sessions were held with spacecraft and data on parameters and systems
    were transmitted. Midcourse corrections were conducted Sept. 29 and
     Oct. 1, and on Oct. 3 Luna 19 entered lunar orbit with 140-km (87-mi)
    altitude, 122-min period, and 40” 35’ inclination. Tass said Oct. 19
     that all systems were operating normally and spacecraft was conduct-

                                     267
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
September &October 19

    ing geophysical research of moon’s gravitational field and taking pho-
    tographs of lunar surface.
        Previous mission in series, Lzma 18, crashed on moon while attempt-
    ing softlanding Sept. 11. (FBIS-SOV-188-3, 9/28/71, L1; FBIs-SOV-
    192-3, 10/4/71, L1; FBIS-SOV-203-3, 10/20/71, L1; SBD, 9/29/71,
    89)
September 28 : Japan successfully launched its third satellite, Shinsei
     (“New Star”), from Uchinoura Space Center at 1:00 pm Tokyo time
     (4:OO am EDT Sept. 27). The 65.8-kg (145-lb) spacecraft was
    Japan’s first scientific satellite and was launched by 22.9-m (75-ft)
    Mu rocket into orbit with 3892-km (2418.4-mi) apogee, 619-km
     (384.6-mi) perigee, 133-min period, and 3 1 . 2 O inclination. Purpose of
    mission was to study cosmic rays and solar electric waves for one year.
        Shinsei was 26-sided body, 75 cm (30 in) in diameter, equipped
    with 5184 silicone solar batteries and used “gravity-turn” device in
    lieu of conventional guidance and control techniques. Payload included
    solar radio receivers, cosmic-ray detectors, and ionospheric probes.
    Satellite functioned perfectly and relayed scientific information.
         Japan had become fourth country to orbit satellite with successful
    launch of Ohsumi Feb. 1 , 1970. (Spacewarn, 10/5/71, 2; W Post,
                                 1
    9/29/71, A14; W Post, 9/30/71, A6; GSFC SSR, 9/30/71)
* U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 441 from Baykonur into orbit with 266-km
     (165.3-mi) apogee, 207-km (128.6-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and
     6 5 O inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 10. (GSFC SSR, 9/3O/71;
     10/31/71; SBD, 10/1/71,101)
  Completion of tests to determine cause of A p o b 15 parachute failure
    was announced by NASA. Possible causes were fuel dump, which ex-
    pelled six pounds of monomethyl hydrazine (MMH) from CM reaction
    control system, and flaws in links connecting suspension lines to risers.
    Officials doubted exact cause could be determined. Dump through hot
    engine could cause tongues of flame that might reach parachute lines.
     Flaws were detected in links on one recovered chute, but the failed
    chute had not been recovered. Corrective action would be taken on
     both possible cause for Apollo 16. Dump would be eliminated and
    material for links changed. (NASA Release 71-188)
* Dr. Charles S. Sheldon 11, Chief of Science Policy Research Division of
    Library of Congress, commented in interview after Sept. 28 launch
     of unmanned lunar probe Luna 19 that Moscow still had plans to
    land men on the moon, perhaps about 1973 or 1975. Dr. Sheldon said
     five previous Soviet Zond circumlunar flights had been capable of
     carrying men and several other earth orbital flights had simulated
     manned lunar landing maneuvers. Dr. Sheldon also recalled that
     Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had
     said in 1969 that manned missions to moon were not ruled out.
     (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/29/71, A5)
  Selection of National Science Teachers Assn., Washington, D.C., for
    negotiation of $39 000, 19-mo, cost-reimbursement contract for man-
    agement and operation of Skylab Student Project was announced by
     NASA. Purpose of project was to stimulate interest in science and tech-
    nology by directly involving students in space research. NSTA would
    notify student and educational community of opportunity and method
    of participation, develop procedures for evaluation of proposals based

                                     268
                                                               September 28
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    on educational value, and develop certificates of participation and
     awards system for entrants. NSTA also would develop plans for en-
    trants whose proposal ideas had been selected by NASA and conduct
    Skylab Student Education Conference at ICSC in conjunction with
    Skylab launch. (NASA Release 71-183)
  U S . patent No. 3 608 844, for self-deploying arm to "serve as spacecraft
    boom or antenna, was granted to GSFC engineers William T. Tumulty,
    Jr., and Wayne P. Sours. Called Minimech, device could also retrieve
    objects from burning building, serve as escape chute, or erect itself as
    instant tent pole or instant plumbing. It could be made from various
    materials depending on purpose. (NYT, 10/2/71; Pat Off PIO)
September 29-30: NASA's Os0 7 (OSO-H) Orbiting Solar Observatory was
    launched from ETR at 5:45 am EDT by two-stage Thor-Delta DSV-3N
    booster to study sun and its influence on earth's atmosphere. Second-
    stage anomaly resulted in noncircular orbit of 575.7-km (357.7-mi)
     apogee, 329.1-km (204.5-mi) perigee, 93.6-min period, and 33.1'
     inclination. Primary mission objective was to obtain high-resolution
     data from solar corona in particular spectral bands in EUV and in
    visible regions during one solar rotation.
        Tetr 3 (TETR-D) Test and Training Satellite, carried pickaback on
     Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 571-km (354.8-mi)
     apogee, 391-km (243-mi) perigee, 94.3-min period, and 33.0' in-
     clination. Primary objective of 45-lb (20.4-kg) secondary payload
     was to test Manned Space Flight Network and train MSFN personnel.
        Second-stage anomaly of launch vehicle separated spacecraft at
     pitch angle outside normal sun acquisition limits. For eight hours
     following orbital insertion, ground controllers manually commanded
     spacecraft to despin. Pitch angle was then changed to place it within
     automatic acquisition range. Sail section was commanded to acqui-
     sition mode and sail acquired and locked onto sun at approximately
     2:OO pin EDT. Batteries were then charged. Orbit would permit ob-
     servations for more than a year.
        Os0 7, improved over earlier OSOS, provided for increase in experi-
     ment size and weight and power and extended capability in pointed
     mode, including stability and pointing during night portion of orbit.
      It was spin-stabilized; weighed 636 kg (1403 lbs) ; carried six sci-
     entific experiments; and had two main sections-wheel (lower) , which
     carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equip-
     ment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. Experi-
     ments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso space-
     craft, were provided by GSFC, NRL, MIT, Univ. of New Hampshire, and
     Univ. of California (San Diego).
         0 3 0 7 was 8th in series of 1 oso spacecraft designed to provide
                                        1
      direct observations of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Os0 I
      (launched March 7, 1962) and Os0 2 (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had
      passed their six-month lifetimes and together provided more than
     8600 hours of scientific information. OSO-c (launched Aug. 25, 1968)
      had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Os0 3
      (launched Mar. 8, 1967) and Oso 4 (launched Oct. 18, 1967) trans-
      mitted on command only. Os0 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both
      tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfac-
      torily after six months in orbit. Os0 6 (launched Aug. 9, 1969) was

                                    269
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
September 29-30




                                jeptember 29-30: Os0 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory
                                was launched into orbit to study the sun and its
                                influence on the earth’s atmosphere. High spatial-
                                and spectral-resolution data were obtained by the
                                pointed experiments on the sail and scanning ex-
                                periments on the wheel. First x-ray observations
                                from a spacecraft o f the beginning of a solar pare
                                and of solar ‘Lstreamers” were made Oct. 3-6.
                                The white light coronagraph above, from a Naval
                                Research Laboratory experiment on Os0 7. showed
                                three coronal streamers from the sun. The black
                                bullseye in the center was produced by a circling
                                occulting disc that caused an artificial eclipse. The
                                distance from the center of the disc to the edge of
                                the photograph was about 10 solar radii, or
                                about 6.4 million kilometers (4 million miles).


     relaying information from all seven experiments. oso program was
     managed by GSFC under OSSA direction. (NASA Proj O f NASA Re-
                                                              f;
     lease 71-163; Spacewarn, 10/5/71)
 September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 4 . from Plesetsk into orbit
                                               42
     with 272-km (169.0-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 89.7-min
     period, and 72.8’ inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 12. (GSFC SSR,
     9/30/71; 10/31/71; SBD, 10/4/71,108)
 * Fourteenth flight of TF-SA jet aircraft equipped with supercritical wing
     was completed, flown from FRC by NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry

                                    270
                                                                 September 29
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

      in accelerated TF-8A flight test program [see Sept. 151.           Proj
                                                                 (NASA
      Off)
    Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M.
      Worden visited KSC to thank personnel for their support during
      ApoZZo 15 mission. KSC Deputy Director Miles Ross told crowd of
      about 5000 that with all talent assembled in VAB “I think this is the
      real Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.” (Spaceport News,
    10/7/71,1)
  NASA and FAA announced agreement for joint participation in flight-
    simulation R&D projects at ARC. NASA would make ARC simulation
    facilities and supporting services available to FAA. FAA would pro-
    vide its own technical personnel and resident director, who would
    coordinate FAA R&D projects with ARC director. (NASA Release 71-185)
  Engine fell off USAF C-5A training aircraft preparing for takeoff from
    Altus AFB, Okla. Later, USAF officials said preliminary investigation
    had traced cause to structural problems in pylons that held engines
    to wing. Aircraft had accumulated 1300 flying hrs and more than
    3000 landings. USAF said it had grounded seven C-5A’s with similar
    flying hours until new pylons could be installed. (Getler, W Post,
     10/7/71,2)
  Senate by vote of 61 to 28 rejected amendment proposed by Sen. Wil-
    liam Proxmire (D-Wis.) to terminate usx F-14 fighter aircraft pro-
     gram by deleting $801.6 million from H.R. 8687, $51-billion FY
     1972 military procurement authorization. (CR, 9/29/71, 515329-
     15405 )
  Virginians for Dulles, citizen group representing persons living near
     flightpaths of Washington National Airport, filed suit in U S . District
     Court to prevent stretch-jet aircraft from landing or taking off at
    Washington National and to ban all jet traffic at airport after 11 pm
     because of noise pollution. ( W Post, 9/30/71, B3)
* Washington Post editorial questioned need for F-14 USN fighter air-
     craft: “The F-14, has LOO many attributes of another great defense
     turkey [F-111BI to be approved at this time by the Senate. We
     believe the Senate should send the Navy back to the drawing board
     to come up with either an improved F 4 or a new fighter plane that
     is not too costly to be purchased in adequate numbers and that has
     a reasonable chance of performing a valid function.” ( W Post,
     9/29/71, A18)
  New Orleans Times-Picayune editorial commented on US.-U.S.S.R.
0

     agreement on New York-Moscow comsat link to prevent war by
     nuclear accident: “The technology of satellite relay is beyond us,
     but we recall a treaty signing recently in Washington and Moscow
     at which the signers watched each other on satellite-relayed television.
      Yet it is reported that the link may take a lon time and require
     building ground stations near the two cities an% launching special
      satellites. Cannot the hot line be given a reserved channel on present
      facilities?” (New Orleans Times-PicGyune, 9/29/71)
September 30: Medical instructions relayed by Ats 1 (launched Dec. 6,
      1966) from equatorial orbit 35 800 km (22 300 mi) above the earth
      saved lives of two women in remote native Alaska villages. Native
      medical aide in Chalkyitsik, northeastern Alaska, and aide in Anatu-
      vuk Pass, north central Alaska, broke into satellite time reserved for

                                     271
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
September 30

     relay of educational broadcasts to Alaskan village centers to request
    advice in treating hemorrhaging pregnant Indian woman and Eskimo
     woman suffering appendicitus attack. Physician in Anchorage, Alaska,
    hearing requests, broke into broadcast with instructions and alerted
     medical personnel nearer scenes. Univ. of Alaska officials handling
     transmissions telephoned NASA satellite control station at Rosman,
     N.C., and received permission to extend reserved satellite time during
     night. Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) later said in Washington, D.C.:
     “I am grateful for the teamwork in Alaska and at NASA that so dra-
     matically saved two lives, and I am so proud of my fellow Alaskans
     who responded once again through the code of the North-but this
     time using a space satellite.” (AP, B Sun, 10/8/71, A10)
  A p o l b 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M.
     Worden thanked USAF personnel at Patrick AFB, Fla., for their sup-
     port during ApoZZo 15 mission and presented base with US. flag they
     had carried to moon. Later, astronauts thanked MSFC employees dur-
     ing six-hour visit to Center. (MSFC Release 71-164; NY News, 10/1/71,
     64; MSFC PAO)
* Formation of new Military Aircraft Programs Office within OART and
     appointment of Albert J. Evans, Director of Aerodynamics and Vehi-
      cles Systems Div. in OART, as its Director were announced by NASA.
      Office would direct ongoing support to USAF on F-15 and B-1 pro-
      grams and to USN on F-14 program; USAF/NASA Transonic Aircraft
     Technology (TACT) Program in which NASA supercritical wing would
      be flight-tested on modified F-111 aircraft; USA/NASA Tilt Rotor
      Research Aircraft Technology Program ; and other possible joint
      research, experimental, and prototype aircraft programs. William S.
      Aiken, Jr., Deputy Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems
      Div., would succeed Evans in former post. (NASA Release 71-186)
  Lunokhod 1-which landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17-
      was declared officially dead at end of lunar night because resources of
      its isotope heating system had been exhausted. (SBD, 11/3/71, 18)
  Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister
 0

      Andrey A. Gromyko signed two nuclear control agreements in formal
      ceremony at State Dept. Agreements called for improved “hotline”
      communication between Washington and Moscow via comsats and
      immediate notification of any unexplained incident involving possible
      detonation of nuclear weapon which could cause outbreak of nuclear
      war. (Smith, NYT, 10/1/71, 1)
During September: Dr. James C . Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in
      interview published by Air Force Magazine that NASA planned to let
      hardware contracts for space shuttle by spring 1972, contingent on
      White House approval. NASA had decided in summer to extend pre-
      liminary design contracts by four months to “look more intensively at
      alternative configurations,” examining phased approach for building
       reusable upper stage first and testing and using it with interim
      expendable booster, instead of developing reusable booster at same
       time. Reevaluation of design concepts was stirred by need for addi-
       tional analyses and research and by need to trim expenditures “in a
       given year.”
          NASA’s viewpoint on space in this decade was “to bring the pro-
       gram down to earth, both figuratively and literally. We must ask our-

                                     272
sion that the
limated in the conviction that they would be much slower in mastering
intercontinental ballistic missile technology. This conviction, advanced
in the teeth of evidence-after     all, the' Chinese invented the rocket-
was reinforced by reports of widespread technological disruption in
the Cultural Revolution. Their two successful launchings of space
satellites, the last one weighing around 480 pounds [218 kg], in
March 1971, should have disabused even the most skeptical or preju-
diced. In any case, there are a sufficient number of recent eyewitness
accounts by Westerners of Chinese scientific achievements in various
fields to dispell any notions of Chinese technical inferiority." (Bull of
Atomic Scientists, 9/71)




                                273
           PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FU -
                                     ldm           &    .__^




                            October 1971

October 1 : Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said strong tech-
    nology base was “absolutely vital” to US., in speech before 14th
    Annual Aerospace Luncheon of Los Angeles Area Chamber of Com-
    merce. Indications from critics of lack of confidence in advancement
    of “greatest technological evolution in the history of mankind” was
    reminder that “we must do a better job of convincing the man-on-the-
    street of the [space] program’s merits.” Public needed information
      to put its priorities in proper perspective.” There was “something
    (6

    seriously wrong” when “as a nation we pay people more not to work
    and more in farm subsidies than we do on space research, a program
    which impacts our national economy and vitally affects our national
                 .
    security. . . I am convinced that further erosion of our technological
    leadership will start us on a downhill course from which it will be
    difficult to recover.” But, ”in our zeal to forge ahead in technical and
    scientific fields, it is possible to lose sight of the debt we owe to the
    great American public that so steadfastly sustained us during the
    early years.” Average American had his priorities. “But he needs to
    be informed il he is to arrive at an intelligent decision about how to
     rank his priorities.” Burden of convincing public of necessity for
     “continuing well-balanced space program for the 1970’s and beyond”
    lay with those in program.
        Dr. Fletcher also said: “We want cooperation with the Soviets as
    well as with other nations throughout the world. We are ready to do
     our part io get it, but if we have learned the lessons of history, we
    should know that the Soviets will not be eager to cooperate with a
     second-rate power. . . . And that is what we will become if we do not
    proceed with the space shuttle in this decade. We cannot create the
    environment needed for space cooperation, or an era of enduring
     peace, by handing over a monopoly in the realm of orbital flight to
     the Soviet Union or anyone else.” (Text)
  Subcommittee on NASA Oversight transmitted report Review of Recent
     Launch Failures to House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
     Subcommittee had held hearings June 15-17 on failure of Atlas-
     Centaur launch vehicle to place Ats 4 in planned orbit Aug. 10, 1968,
                                     Nov. 30, 1970, and Mariner 8 May 8,
     and failure to orbit OAO-B
     1971.
        Subcommittee concluded that NASA’s        decision not to attempt re-
     covery program for unsuccessful Mariner 8 mission using proof-test
     model “seems justified” on grounds Mariner 9 (launched May 30)
     had been conceived as backup mission for Mariner 8 from beginning;
     to alter Atlas-Centaur for different project would have been “chal-
     lenging;” and proof-test model could better be used as Mariner 9
     backup, if necessary, or in 1973 Venus-Mercury and Viking projects.
     While NASA’s     backup mission and recovery policies after failures
     u
       seem to have been sound in the past,” decision not to have OAO-B

                                    275
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
October 1

                                 .
    recovery program “appears . , to have been an unwise exception.”
    To forego OAD-B goals “which have occupied the talents and efforts
    of many scientists and engineers for more than a decade in order to
     initiate new astronomical experiments [HEAO Project] in different
    portions of the magnetic spectrum strikes the Committee as a deci-
     sion of questionable merit.” Committee recommended future use of
    prototype spacecraft that could be reengineered and launched as part
     of flight program to extract full value from expensive hardware.
     Manufacturing and quality control procedures in Centaur program
     could be improved. “It is quite clear that a great deal can and should
     be done short of ‘man-rating’ Centaur, which would significantly
     improve its reliability.” Centaur stage problems “seem serious enough
               ..
     to justify . broad scale, independent examination by disinterested
     experts” so that Centaur, “which figures so importantly in the space
     program of the next decade, can be utilized with renewed confidence.”
      (Text)
   McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. began 14-mo, $350 000 study con-
     tinuation for system definition of reusable nuclear stage (RNS) for
     multipurpose space missions. Previous studies had determined that
     RNS could be launched by either Saturn or space shuttle booster. New
     study would focus on RNS concepts to be launched by space shuttle,
      but would consider two-stage, fully reusable shuttle, shuttle booster
      with expendable 2nd stage, and launch of RNS as complete unit or
      with components to be assembled in space. Study also would support
     NERVA program. (MSFC Release 71-174)
   Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for R&D Grant L. Hansen discussed
      space shuttle at Air Force Assn. meeting in Bethpage, N.Y. NASA and
      USAF work on shuttle engine had been helpful to shuttle program in
      areas of reusability and higher-pressure-engine technology. USAF had
      supported advanced development efforts on liquid-fuel rocket engines
      and had concluded hydrogen and oxygen high-performance-engine
      demonstration program. Work on XLR-129 reusable rocket engine
      had provided basis for shuttle’s reusable high-pressure-rocket concept.
      Residual hardware of USAF XLR-129 program had been turned over
      to NASA for shuttle engine program. Development of shuttle main
      engine was to be conducted at USAF’S Arnold Engineering Develop-
      ment Center. USAF would continue in 1972 to develop technology for
      high-energy orbit-to-orbit stages compatible with a shuttle to accom-
      plish maneuvering missions for late 1970s and early 1980s. (AI; Mug,
      12/71, 34)
 * More than 15 astronauts were taste-testing three meals daily for five
      days in MSC experiment to evaluate proposed food items for 28- and
      56-day Skylab missions in 1973, MSC announced. Tests would deter-
      mine astronauts’ preferences and each astronaut’s energy require-
      ments. They were coordinated by Technology, Inc., and conducted in
      MSC Life Systems Laboratory. (MSC Release 71-74),
   Twenty-fifth anniversary of commissioning of Naval Air Missile Test
      Center at Point Mugu, Calif. Center, later renamed Pacific Missile
      Range, conducted R B ~ Dfor Federal agencies, including NASA. (PMR
      M s i e 10/1/71,1)
       isl,
   Completion of DOT study of general-aviation safety was announced by
      Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. General-aviation industry

                                     276
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  October 1

    consisted of 133814 single-engine aircraft, 16 000 multi-engine aircraft,
    2229 jet aircraft, 33 992 flighl instructors, 2170 FAA-approved flight
    and ground schools, and 732 729 pilots, including 195 861 students.
    In 1970 general aviation had accounted for more than 25 million
    flight hours and nearly 6 billion km (nearly 4 billion mi) flown. Of 621
    fatal general-aviation accidents in 1970, 201 had been identified as
    weather-caused. Study recommended biennial flight review of pilot            ,
    competency, priority support of FAA General Aviation Accident Preven-
    tion Program, tightening of certification requirements for flight instruc-
    tors and pilots, modernization of FAA flight service stations, improvement
    of FAA reporting of real-time weather data, review of FAA general-
    aviation structure, clarification by FAA of regulations covering general
    operating and flight rules, publication of FAA regulations in separate
    parts rather than in current volume format, and adoption of standard
    traffic pattern for uncontrolled airports. (DOT Release 20271)
* Impact of “leftish student movements” was described in Science by
    Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. Harvey Brooks: “Today some believe that
           .
    the . . movements, which are worldwide, form the vanguard of a new
    revolution, the first true revolution in advanced industrial societies.
    If so, it will be the first in modern history which had not attempted
    to ally itself with science. So far as its ideology is discernible at all,
    it seems to be antiscientific and antirational, more akin to the early
    Christians than to the modern Marxists, despite the Marxist slogans.”
     (Science, 10/1/71, 21-9)
October 1-5: Fourth International Symposium on Basic Environmental
    Problems of Man in Space was held jointly in Yerevan, U S S R . , by
    rAA and Soviet Academy of Sciences. Papers dealt with medical problems
    of prolonged space missions, studies of mechanism underlying single
    and combined stress effects and methods of ameliorating deleterious
    influences, and bioastronautical contributions to general medical science
    and practice. Symposium reviewed results of Soyuz 11-Salyut 1 mission,
    June 6-30, that ended with crew’s accidental death on reentry. (IAA
    Annual Rpt, 8/31/71 ; FBIS-Sov-71-~12,11/3/71)
October 3: Poorly designed drive system controlling tilt of “world’s largest
    movable” antenna, 100 m (330 ft) in diameter-operated              by Max
    Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy in Bonn, West Germany-had set
    dish oscillating at rate of once every second, New York Times reported.
    OsciIIations endangered antenna’s structure and made observations
    “virtually impossible.” Antenna, at Effelsberg, West Germany, had been
    cited by astronomers as demonstration of why massive and costly radio
    astronomy engineering enterprises should be under professional manage-
    ment rather than scientific direction, Times said. (Sullivan, NYT,
     10/3/71,82)
October 3-6: Os0 7, launched Sept. 29, made the first x-ray observations
    from spacecraft of beginning solar flare and solar “streamers” (long,
    tapered structures observed in solar corona). Observations would lead
    to new understanding of flares not possible before. Flares had many
    effects on earth’s environment, weather, and communications. Streamers
    had been photographed before only during solar eclipses and occa-
    sionally by short sounding rocket flights. Os0 7 experiment created own
    G L eclipse” by using occulting disc.

         By Oct. 6 all six scientific experiments had been turned on. NRL

                                    277
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
October 3-6

    coronographs obtained first observations of corona in white light and
    EUV. Wheel section experiments obtained scanning data continuously.
    Only one of two tape recorders was operating but would be sufficient to
    achieve mission objectives. (NASA Release 71-193 ; Goddard Ne,ws,
    10/71, 2; NASA Proj Off)
October 4 : U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1, first self-propelled lunar vehicle, ceased
    operations after 321 days on moon, Tass announced Oct. 9. Eight-
    wheeled vehicle stopped transmitting photos and soil analyses to earth
    when its isotope heat reserves were exhausted during its 11th lunar
    night on moon. Depletion of nuclear heat source had caused tempera-
    tures on rover to drop during lunar night. Vehicle had been landed
    on moon in Sea of Rains by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970.
       Solar-powered Lunokhod 1 had successfully conducted scientific
    and technical research program with all systems functioning normally.
    It had traveled distance of 10 540 m (34 680 ft) ,exploring more than
    80 000 sq m (860 000 sq f t ) of lunar surface and had produced more
    than 500 panoramas, 20000 TV pictures, 25 chemical analyses, and
    hundreds of probes of physical-mechanical characteristics of lunar soil.
    Vehicle had been parked on level surface with French-made laser
    reflector pointing toward earth, to permit continued use of laser for
                                                     10/12/71, L1; 212-3,
    ranging experiments. (FBIS-sov-71-197-3,
    11/3/71, L5-6; NYT, 10/10/71, 68; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 17)
 NASA, FAA, and USAF began joint runway research program at Wallops
0

    Station to evaluate methods for measuring runway slipperiness at
    military and civil airports and improve techniques for estimating air-
    craft performance on runways that become slippery when wet. Tests
    would be followed by similar measurements at Houston Intercontinental
    Airport, Lubbock (Tex.) Regional Airport, Edwards AFB (Calif.) ,
    Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, and John F. Kennedy Interna-
    tional Airport in New York. FAA Boeing 727 aircraft instrumented by
    LaRC would be used for flight portions of program. USAF C-141 aircraft
    would carry personnel and equipment. Runway surface measurements
    would be made by mu-meter-friction measuring device provided by
    usm-and diagonally braked automobile developed by NASA at LaRC.
     (NASA Release 71-190)
 Award of $11640 773 addition to cost-plus-fixed-fee contract.with Chrysler
    Corp. for launch operations support for Skylab from Oct. 1, 1971, to
    June 30, 1973, was announced by KSC. Addition brought amount of
    contract to $25 016 708. ( KSC Release 226-71)
  Two prototype x-ray devices for detecting weapons and explosives in
0

    carry-on luggage of air passengers had been successfully tested at
    Dulles International Airport in Virginia, FAA announced. Low radia-
    tion x-ray units-Hying      Spot developed by American Science and
    Engineering, Inc., and Bendix Ray Inspectoscope developed by Bendix
    Aerospace Systems Div.-sent     x-ray pulse through luggage to obtain
    shadowgraph, which was displayed on TV screen. Devices did not affect
    photographic film or recording tape. (FAA Release 71-162)
October 4-5: Representatives of ELDO and European space industries met
    with NASA officials at MSFC to discuss project for space tug to operate
    in earth orbit in conjunction with space station and space shuttle.
    Tug would transfer payloads in space and perform transportation
    services in orbit. (MSFCRelease 71-168; MSFC PIO)

                                    278
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  October 5

October 5: Apollo 15 Awards Ceremony was held at MSC. Dr. James C.
     Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Exceptional Scientific
     Achievement Medal for “accomplishments in the Apollo 15 mission”
     to Dr. Larry A. Haskin, Univ. of Wisconsin; Dr. Robert 0. Pepin,
     Univ. of Minnesota; Dr. Leon T. Silver, Cal Tech; Dr. M. Gene
     Simmons, MIT; and Dr. Gordon A. Swann, US. Geological Survey.
     NASA Exceptional Service Medal was presented to 22 MSC employees
     and NASA Public Service Award to representatives of contractors
     Boeing Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Delco Electronic Div. of
     General Motors Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp.
        NASA Group Achievement Award was presented to MSC Extravehicu-
     lar Mobility Unit Team, MSC Lunar Orbit Experiments Team, MSFC
     and MSC Lunar Roving Vehicle Team, MSC Lunar Traverse Planning
     Team, NOAA Space Flight Meteorology Group at KSC, and MSC Tele-
     vision and Lunar communications Relay Unit Team.
        Dr. Fletcher read telegram from President Nixon congratulating
     Apollo 15 Team which, President said, deserved “highest praise for
     their vital contributions to man’s scientific knowledge and our nation’s
     prominence in space.” (NASA Ann, 10/1/71; MSC Roundup, 10/8/71,1)
  KSC announced award of $33 157 979 addition to cost-plus-fixed-fee con-
     tract with Bendix Corp. for support services for Apollo spacecraft and
     Skylab programs from Oct. 1, 1971, to Dec. 31, 1972. Addition
     brought total amount of contract.to $210 081 335. (KSC Release 227-71)
* Reuters said at least 12 supersonic, swing-wing FB-111 bombers armed
     with six nuclear bombs of total 4.5-metric-megaton (5 megaton) yield
     were on constant ground alert at SAC bases in northeast U S . News
     agency quoted SAC spokesman as saying portion of FB-111 force had
     been written into U.S. nuclear deterrent force. (NYT, 10/6/71, 52)
  Israel had begun to manufacture missile that could carry 450- to 680-kg
0

      (1000- to 1500-lb) warhead 480 km (300 mi) or more, according to
     Western intelligence reports quoted by New York Times. (Beecher,
     NYT, 10/5/71,1)
* Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Space Theater at American Museum-
     Hayden Planetarium was dedicated at ceremonies in New York. (Invi-
     tation)
October 5-7: Huntsville, Ala., chapter of Society of Aerospace Material &
     Process Engineers held national technical conference, attended by
     experts from five NASA centers, Redstone Arsenal, other Government
     agencies, and private industry. Papers covered composites and high-
     temperature metals, high-temperature and cryogenic insulation, reuse
     of materials, materials compatibility with space shuttle environment,
     life support materials, and special materials testing. (Marshall Star,
     10/6/71,1)
October 6: NASA test pilots successfully completed two flights of TF-8A,
     modified F-8 jet aircraft with supercritical wing, flown from FRC.
     Flight 15, flown by Thomas C. McMurtry, and flight 16, flown by
     Gary Krier, were part of accelerated series to obtain data for per-
     formance evaluation of TF-8A [see Sept. 151. (NASA Proj O f   f)
  Radiaastronomers had obtained first “picture” of distant galaxy from
     radio signals received by Synthesis radio telescope near Westerbork,
     Netherlands, New York Times reported. Picture of whirlpool galaxy
     had led astronomers to believe radio-signal photography using antenna

                                    219
October 6                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     systems under construction or planned might rival photography from
     exposures at visible wavelengths. Picture from Synthesis-1.6-km
      (1-mi) row of 12 identical dish antennas set along east-west line-
     seemed to confirm hypothesis that explosive events in core of each
     rotating galaxy sent waves spiraling outward. Success of Westerbork
     antenna array was being used to encourage congressional approval
     for very large array (VLA) proposed for construction in southwestern
     U.S. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/6/71, 43)
* Senate by vote of 82 to 4 passed H.R. 8687, t21-billion FY 1972 military
     procurement authorization bill. (CRY10/6/71, S15956-16004)
* Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) resigned from House Committee on
     Science and Astronautics to take seat on House Ways and Means
    Committee. (Off of Rep Karth)
  Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) died of heart attack in Washington, D.C.
     He had been ranking Republican member of House Committee on
    Science and Astronautics and member of House Committee on Foreign
    Affairs. In 1958 Rep. Fulton had volunteered at committee hearing
    to serve as astronaut. Wmhington Post obituary said he had fought
    hard for programs to keep US. from “dropping out of the space race.”
     (Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
October 6-8: Science fiction writer and space expert Arthur C. Clarke
    addressed Playboy International Writers Convocation in Chicago. He
    said, “Much of the criticism of space expenditure is a pure excuse-
     a deliberate or unconscious avoidance of real problems.” Politicians,
    administrators, and Government officials, “often too stupid, too lazy
    or often too corrupt to deal with the abuses of society as they should
    and could, are absolutely delighted to have the space program as a
    scapegoat.” Space was now ccalmosta dirty word.” (NYT, 10/8/71,
    25; Playboy PIO)
October 7: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 443 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    297-km (184.6-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min
    period, and 65.4’ inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 19. (GFSC SSR,
    10/13/71; SF, 4/72,132)
  Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, enumerated major factors
    relevant to NASA FY 1973 budget request in speech before AIAA
    National Capital Section: 1. “Program continuity must be main-
    tained.” NASA could not “shut down major programs for several years
    and then start them up again efficiently.” 2. NASA programs had
    helped stabilize US. aerospace industry. ‘‘This is a very significant
    reason for maintaining NASA programs up to or near current levels at
    this time.” 3. NASA would reach minimum “institutional base” require-
    ment for efficient management of approved programs in current fiscal
    year. “I will strongly resist any further reductions.” 4. Space shuttle
    was “next logical step to develop our national capabilities for using
    space more economically and more effectively with manned and un-
    manned spacecraft, for both civilian and defense purposes.” 5. U.S.
    was lagging behind in development of new technology for commercial
    and military aviation. “We killed the SST while Britain and France
    went ahead to build the Concorde, and the Soviet Union built a com-
    peting version. The Europeans-and        our Canadian neighbors-are
    ahead of us in Short Take Off and Landing Aircraft. The question
    must be asked, how long can we, as a great nation, afford to be mere

                                   280
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                   October 7

      spectators while others move ahead in aircraft technology?” NASA did
      not intend “to shift the gears of our space program into the ‘park’
      position; we are geared up for continued steady and impressive prog-
      ress in those areas of space activity which we consider most rewarding
      scientifically or most important to our national security.” Within few
      years “there will be no time of day or night, year in and year out,
      when men are not working in orbit above the earth. And it is up to us,
      in decisions to be made this year in this capital, whether these men
      in orbit will include Americans.” (Text)
    NASA announced six-month delay in development of space shuttle to give
e
      contractors more time to study in detail alternatives resulting from
      current studies. Under new schedule, North American Rockwell Corp.,
      McDonnell Douglas Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., and Grumman
      Aerospace Corp. would study designs until April 30, 1972, rather than
      concluding at end of October. Selection of sites for shuttle development
      and operational flights would be deferred until overall system charac-
      teristics were defined. (NASA Release 71-199)
    Skylab multiple docking adapter (MDA) trainer arrived at MSC from
      Martin Marietta Corp. facility at Denver, Colo. MDA trainer was flown
      to MSC aboard NASA Super Guppy aircraft. (NASA Release 71-187;
      MSC PIO)
    Dr. Wernher von Braun,        Deputy Associate Administrator for Plan-
                              NASA
e
    ning, said significance of man’s movement into space with both “auto-
    mated, unmanned spacecraft and manned vehicles,’’ ought to be grasped
    by every nation and every individual. Speaking at “Report on America”
    dinner sponsored in Washington, D.C., by Time magazine for group of
    European businessmen, he added: “Man has left Earth. There is as great
    an awesome potential in that simple statement as there is in the fact,
    man appeared on Earth. Human destiny now has another door opened
    to it that previously was firmly locked.” Satellite investigations and
    space probes had advanced human knowledge about earth, moon, and
    planets. “Astronomers now are able to view across the entire electro-
    magnetic spectrum to obtain information about the birth, evolution,
    and extinction of celestial objects previously beyond reach of the most
    powerful telescope. Space is, in fact, a vast laboratory in which to
    experiment with weightlessness, hard vacuum, solar plasmas, and
    extremely high cosmic ray particles.
       “The potential value of space technology for Earth applications
    alone, including long-range weather forecasting, earth resources surveys,
                                                      .
    and communications, has been estimated . at billions of dollars
                                                  .
                                                  )




    annually to the world.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/71, 182)
  San Francisco Bay area was being surveyed and photographed by U-2
    reconnaissance aircraft in US. Ceological Survey project to gather
    continuous information fast and accurately on urban development, UPI
    reported. Project also covered Phoenix-Tucson area in Arizona and
    Baltimore-Washington, D.C., area as basis for more thorough, nation-
    wide study of 27 urban regions. In 1972 NASA ERTS satellite would pro-
    vide constant check on urban growth patterns and development. (NYT,
    10/7/71,55)
* Small “quasi-moon” 1.6 to 3.2 km (1to 2 mi) in diameter was gravita-
    tionally linked to earth and moon in three-body team of celestial objects
    orbiting sun, Dr. Hannes 0.   Alfven of Univ. of California at San Diego

                                      281
October 7                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    said in telephone interview with New York Times. Although little
    asteroid, named Toro, was discovered in 1964, computer calculations
    showing it was locked with earth and moon had not been reported until
    September at Nobel Conference in Stockholm. Toro came within 15
    million km (9.3 million mi) of earth every eight years. Discovery was
    first indication that another celestial object was part of earth-moon
    system. (Rensberger, NYT, 10/8/71,24)
 DOD spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim announced that 22 additional C-5s
    were being grounded as safety precaution pending additional tests to
    find cause of Sept. 29 incident at Altus AFB, Okla., in which engine and
    pylon mounting fell from aircraft during engine warmup for takeoff.
     (Getler, W Post, 10/8/71, A l )
  Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner was installed as 13th President of MIT at cere-
    monies in Cambridge, Mass. Dr. Wiesner had been science adviser to
    Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. (NYT, 10/8/71, 25; MIT PIO)
 President Nixon issued statement on Oct. 6 death of Rep. James G. Fulton.
    Rep. Fulton would be “especially remembered for his unfailing support
    of our space program.” (PD, 10/11/71, 1382; Weil, W Post, 10/8/71,
    B8 1
 Mrs. Leatrice M. Pendray-early rocket experimenter, syndicated colum-
    nist, and public relations executive-died in Princeton, N.J., at age
    66 following long illness. She had been cofounder of American Inter-
    planetary Society in 1930. Society had been renamed American Rocket
    Society and was later merged with Institute of Aerospace Science to
    form American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (NYT,
    10/9/71, 30; A&A 1963)
  Charles H. Hubbell, well-known artist-hktorian of air age-who in 1930s
    began painting winners of annual Thompson Trophy Race-died at
    age 72. More than 375 “Hubbells” were painted for TRW Aviation
    Calendar series and quarter of million lithographic reproductions had
    been published. Hubbell’s pictures had hung in White House, museums,
    palaces, libraries, and homes of aviation buffs. (TRW Calendar, 1972)
October 9 : India successfully launched short-range rocket for first time from
    its new launching facility at Sriharikota Island. Indian-made Rohini
    rocket was launched to test complex at Sriharikota, near Madras, from
    which an Indian satellite was expected to be orbited in next three or
    four years. (Reuters, NYT, 10/10/71,15)
 Nobel Prize for Medicine was won by Vanderbilt Univ. physiologist
    Dr. Earl W. Sutherland, Jr., for discovery of how cyclic adenyl acid
    regulated work of hormones in human body. (Auerbach, W Post,
    10/15/71, A l )
October 10-13: Offshore Airport Center Planning Conference was held by
    AIAA and City of New York at Harriman, N.Y., to identify problems
    and determine feasibility of offshore airport construction in metro-
    politan New York area. Conference recommended major multifaceted
    study to develop data for environmental impact report and compre-
    hensive study to determine economic significance of commercial avia-
    tion to New York City and penalty of not providing adequate facilities
    to meet projected aviation demands. (AIAA Release, 10/15/71)
October 11: U.S.S.R.’s Salyut I, first manned space laboratory (launched
    April 19) , reentered earth‘s atmosphere on command and disintegrated
    over Pacific Ocean after completing its program, Tass announced.

                                    282
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                      October 11

         Flight of orbital station, lasting about six months, had consisted of
      two phases. First was station’s joint flight with Soyuz 10 spacecraft
       (launched April 23), piloted by Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov,
      Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov. Soyuz 10 linked
      up with Sdyut 1 for Sl/, hours, undocked, and reentered April 25.
         Second phase began June 6 with orbiting of Soyuz 11, carrying
      Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N. Volkov, and Viktor I.
      Patsayev. Spacecraft docked with station June 7 and Soym 1 three-   1
      man crew transferred to Salyut 1 for 23-day stay. While on board, crew
      carried out comprehensive scientific and technical studies and experi-
      ments. Upon return June 30 after record-breaking near-m days in space,
      three cosmonauts were found dead in spacecraft. Soviet authorities said
      deaths were caused by sudden loss of pressure in Soyuz capsule.
         Salyut 1 remained in orbit until Oct. 11, when braking engine was
      switched on to decelerate spacecraft ; station began descending trajec-
      tory and entered atmosphere. Lost with Salyut 1 were films, tapes,
      biological samples, and scientific experiments left on board by Soyuz 10
      cosmonauts. During entire lifetime, orbital station’s onboard equipment
      operated normally. Since spacecraft was not recoverable and might fall
      on populated area if left to deorbit naturally, it had to be destroyed.
       (FBIS-SOV-201-3,     10/18/71, L1; FBIS-SOV-205-3,         10/22/71, L1;
      Reuters, B Sun, 10/16/71, A3; A v Wk, 10/25/72, 14)
    Space program for 1970s was outlined by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA
      Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in speech before Society
      of Sigma Xi at Daytona Beach, Fla. It would be “program of transition;
      a program in which the exploration and technical pioneering of the
       Sixties will begin to pay substantive dividends; it is the logical transi-
      tion to the intensive and economic use of space in the 80’s and 90’s.
                                     .
      Strong evidence will emerge . . that will refute many of the arguments
      advanced against science and technology as embodied in the space
      program.” Program’s primary strength was “that it is balanced to meet
      the basic national needs.” Program “strikes a harmony among scientific
      exploration 2n space, the practical utilization of space, and the develop-
       ment of improved technologies for space.” (Text)
    Molniya I1 earth station in U.S. for new US.-U.S.S.R. “hotline” comsat
       would be under US. Government control but might be owned and
       operated under contract by private entity, Aviation Week & Space
       Technology reported. Hotline system would consist of two duplex
       telephone-bandwidth circuits for secondary telegraphic multiplexing
       and four ground stations for transmission and reception. ( A v Wk,
       10/11/71, 17)
    US. scientists conceded that U.S.S.R. led U.S. in many areas of basic
0

       research and space medicine largely because U.S. had “opted for an
       engineering approach to manned space flight and deliberately ignored
       some areas of theoretical research as irrelevant to the moon landing
       mission,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Scientists were
       worried that political developments in U.S.S.R. could harm free flow
       of this data. ( A v Wk, 10/11/71, 14-5)
    Satellite photos of U.S.S.R. had shown continued construction of two new
       classes of silos for large missile, construction of third class of silo, and
       doubling of production facilities for Soviet missile submarines, New
       York Times reported. (Beecher, NYT, 10/11/71,9)

                                         283
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,, 1971
October 11-14

October 11-14: Joint US.-U.S.S.R. Space Biology and Medicine Working
    Group-cochaired by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director for Life
    Sciences, and Dr. N. N. Gurovsky of Soviet Academy of Sciences-met
    in Moscow. Statement issued by American Embassy on completion of
    meetings said group had begun “exchange of data and results from the
    Soyuz and Apollo programs and developed recommendations and pro-
    cedures for expanded exchange of information in space biology and
    medicine.” Recommendations would be forwarded to Dr. George M.
    Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and to Soviet Academy of Sciences
    President Mstislav V. Keldysh. (NASA Release 71-204)
October 12: Training mockups of two Skylab spacecraft components-
    Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount-arrived at MSC aboard
    NASA barge Orion from MSFC. Shipment also included multiple docking
    adapter exterior shell and portion of airlock module mockup. Trainers
    and hardware would be used by MSC for training prospective Skylab
    crewmen for missions scheduled to begin in early 1973. (NASA Release
    71-187; MSC PIO)
* USAF grounded 18 more C-5 cargo aircraft as result of Sept. 29 incident
    at Altus AFB, Okla., in which C5 lost engine and pylon mounting at
                                     -
    start of takeoff. Action removed entire fleet of 47 aircraft from service.
     (AP, B Sun, 10/13/71, A19)
* Washington Post editorial commented on Senate’s Oct. 6 passage of $21-
    billion military procurement bill: “The new B-1 manned strategic
    bomber, the F-14 Navy fighter plane, the ABM, the main battle tank or
    XM803-these were among the controversial items that easily survived
    attempts at elimination or modification by amendment.” What had
    recently been billed as “the issue for the seventies, a great debate over
    priorities and defense spending” had “gone the way of the hula hoop.
    On the part of a number of senators who just a few years back had
    made a loud and dramatic commitment to the issue, interest was low,
    absenteeism high, and preparation for debate pitiful. Sen. Proxmire and
    those others who carried the main burden deserved much better from
    their colleagues.” (W Post, 10/12/71, A18)
October 13: U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk into
    near circular orbits with single booster. Tass reported Oct. 14 that
    equipment was functioning normally. Orbital parameters were:
       Cosmos 444, 1510-km (938.3-mi) apogee, 1323-km (822.1-mi)
    perigee, 114.1-min period, and 74’ inclination.
       Cosmos 445, 1513-km (940.1-mi) apogee, 1352-km (840.1-mi)
    perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74O inclination.
       Cosmos 446, 1513-km (940.1-mi) apogee, 1383-km (859.4-mi)
    perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74’ inclination.
       Cosmos 447, 1516-km (942-mi) apogee, 1412-km (877.4-mi)
    perigee, 115.1-min period, and 74’ inclination.
       Cosmos 448, 1518-km (943.2-mi) apogee, 1442-km (896-mi)
    perigee, 115.5-min period, and 74’ inclination.
       Cosmos 449, 1542-km (958.2-mi) apogee, 1485-km (922.7-mi)
    perigee, 116.2-min period, and 74’ inclination.
       Cosmos 450, 1531-km (951.3-km) apogee, 1464-km (909.7-mi)
    perigee, 115.9-min period, and 74O inclination.
       Cosmos 451, 1575-km (978.7-mi) apogee, 1490-km (925.8-mi)

                                     284
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                        October 13




October 12: Training models of Skylab's Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount
arrived at the Manned Spacecraft Center from fabrication at the Marshall Space Flight
Center. They would be used for training crewmen for the 1973 mission, planned to
include three separate crews of three astronauts each-the first crew to stay for
28 days and the next two for 56 duys each. The overhead view above shows crew quarters
in the 1-g trainer model of the Workshop. At the top is the general control and
working area with several experiments. At the right is the wardroom, where crewmen
would prepare and eat food and spend leisure time. At the Cower center s the waste
                                                                          .
                                                                          i
management compartment, or "space bathroom." At the left is the sleep compartment.


    perigee, 116.6-min period, and 74' inclination. (GSFC SSR, 10/31/71;
    FBIS-SOV-199-3, 10/14/71, L1; SF, 4/72, 132)
  NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from White Sands Missile
    Range, New Mexico. Nike-Cajun carried ion mass spectrometer, x-ray
    detector, ion probe, Faraday rotation counter, magnetometer, accelerom-
    eter, solar aspect sensor, telemetry, and tone-ranging system to perform
    D-region ion composition studies under subsonic conditions. Payload
    attained 80.8 km (50.2 mi) and was recovered in good condition.
       Second Nike-Cajun carried similar instrumentation for same purpose.
    Subsonic portion of flight near apogee provided principal data; payload
    reached 80.8 km (50.2 mi) and was recovered in good condition.
       Boosted Arcas I1 carried electrometer, magnetometer, solar aspect
    sensor, telemetry, and tone-ranging system to measure ion mobility at

                                       . 285
October 13                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    altitudes from 65 to 10 km (40 to 6 mi), using parachute-supported
    instrumentation package. Payload reached 63.1-km (39.2-mi) and was
    recovered in good condition. (NASA Rpts SRL)
  Completion of NASA-US.    Dept of Agriculture experiment to gather infor-
    mation on southern corn leaf blight from aircraft was announced by
    MSC. Data were being analyzed but preliminary results showed blight
    could be detected and its progress monitored by sensor-bearing aircraft.
    Although southern corn leaf blight had not been as severe as projected,
    its widespread presence had provided “unique opportunity to assess
    remote sensing as a tool for large-scale crop surveys.” NASA and USDA
    were analyzing experiment data to determine usefulness of crop
    infestation surveys and application of surveys to other agricultural
    needs. Results of analysis would be announced within few months.
     (MSC Release 71-78)
  President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia and Mrs. Tito visited MSC during
    state visit to U.S. They were shown ApoZZo 9 C M , Mercury and Gemini
    spacecraft, and LM test article. The Titos visited Mission Control and
    saw demonstration of spacesuit and Apollo 15 films. Center presented
    Tito with framed and autographed photo of earth as seen from moon’s
    vicinity by ApoZZo 8 astronauts. (MSC PAO)
* MSFC announced award of $1197 000 incentive contract to American
    Science and Engineering, Inc., for support services in Skylab ATM
    project. Contract would run from Aug. 22,1971, through June 30,1972.
     (MSFC Release 71-176)
  Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (&Mass.) introduced amendment to S. 32,
    Conversion Research, Education and Assistance Act of 1971, to establish
    New Cities Research and Experimentation Administration. Agency
    would employ defense and aerospace personnel. (CRY 10/13/71,
    S16259-63)
  Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., press con-
    ference that Soviet buildup of land- and sea-based missiles was “far
    outdistancing” estimates he had offered to Congress seven months pre-
    viously. He confirmed report that U.S.S.R. was expected to match
    U.S. strength by deploying 41 Polaris-class missile submarines by 1973.
     (Beecher, NYT, 10/14/71,5)
  Adm. Arthur W. Radford (USN, Ret.) in letter to the editor, published
    by Washington Post, defended USN F-14 fighter aircraft against sug-
    gestion by Post Sept. 29 that $800 million in funds for F-14 be elimi-
    nated from military budget: ‘9n conjunction with the full spectrum
    of conventional naval weapons and sensors, the design capabilities of
    the F-14 are credible and responsible to the perceived threat for the
    decade ahead. As in the case of the F 4 , which has now reached the
    end of its growth potential against a constantly upgraded Soviet tech-
    nology, the F-14 is conceived as an aircraft to be used for more than
    a decade into the future-it, too, will be capable of substantial per-
    formance improvement as the threat changes and as technology is
    advanced.”
       Washington Post responded to letter with editorial comment: ‘ L . . .
    there is a school of thought which holds that the heavily and expen-
    sively defended [aircraft] carrier can be rendered inoperable by
    comparatively simple Soviet weapons and thus is inadequate to the
    kind of US.-Soviet conflict that is presupposed by the design of the

                                   286.
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               October 13

     [carrier-based] F-14. It is this view which we find persuasive and
    which therefore gives us pause concerning the usefulness of the F-14.”
     (WPost, 10/13/71, A18, A19)
October 14: USAF launched unidentified satellite into orbit from Vanden-
    berg AFB by Thor-Burner I1 booster. Satellite achieved 878.7-km
     (546-mi) apogee, 795.0-km (494-mi) perigee, 101.6-min period, and
    98.9’ inclination. (Pies Rpt 72; SF7 4/72, 132)
  U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 4 . from Plesetsk into orbit with 280-km
                                      52
     (174-mi) apogee, 175-km (108.7-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and
    64.9” inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 27. (GSFC SSR, 10/31/71;
    SF, 4/72,132)
  NASA successfully completed 17th and 18th flights of TF-SA aircraft with
0

     supercritical wing, flown from FRC by NASA test pilots Thomas C.
    McMurtry and Garry Krier, and announced results in accelerated
     program to evaluate TF-SA performance in advance of adverse land-
     ing conditions. All flight objectives had been achieved in series to
     expand flight envelope to higher dynamic pressures, obtain pressure
     distribution and performance data at higher dynamic pressure, evalu-
     ate unaugmented stability and control characteristics, and investigate
     buffet boundary for trim flight at mach 0.99 design conditions at
     14000 m (46000 ft). Pressure distribution and performance data
     had been obtained over mach 0.80 to 1.00 at altitudes to 14000 m.
     Unaugmented stability and control characteristics had been evaluated
    from mach 0.70 to 0.99 at 10 700 m (35 000 ft) . Buffeting had neared
     that predicted from wind-tunnel tests and buffet boundary had been
    penetrated to 22” attack angle. Buffeting had been “intense but not
    severe.” (NASA Proj Off)
  FAA award of $229 746 planning grant-offer to New Jersey Dept. of
     Transportation for master plan of V/STOLport to serve New York
     metropolitan and northern New Jersey areas was announced by FAA
     Administrator John H. Shaffer. (FAA Release 71-168)
* Plans for establishment of International Institute of Applied Systems
    Analysis by US., U.S.S.R., U.K., France, Italy, Poland, and East and
    West Germany were described in New York Times by Walter Sullivan:
    Project, “fruit of four years of private Soviet-American negotiations”
    had culminated in eight-nation conference in Paris. Prominent among
    principals had been NAS President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Dzherman
    M. Gvishiani, Soviet specialist in American management techniques.
     (NYT, 10/14/71, 1)
  Assembly of solar radio telescope 10 m (33 ft) in diameter was nearing
    completion at Baldone, Latvia, Riga Sovetskaya Latviya reported.
    Parabolic antenna would enable Latvian Academy of Sciences Radio-
    astrophysical Observatory scientists to study all fluctuations of sun’s
                                         u)
    radiowaves. (F B I S - ~ O V - ~ ~10/22/71,
                                      ,
  Wall Street Journal editorial commented on KSC economy drive: “One of
    the first things that occurs to householders when a money pinch comes
     is to turn off all the unneeded lights to save money on electricity.”
     This had occurred to KSC officials who “came up with a real enough
    saving, an estimated $75000 a year.” KSC parking lots and some
     buildings were “a little dimmer but everything continues to function.”
     ( WSI, 10/14/71)

                                   287
October 15                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

October 15: March 7 discovery of water vapor on moon by two suprather-
    mal ion detectors left on lunar surface by Apollo 12 and 14 astronauts
    was announced by Rice Univ. scientists Dr. John W. Freeman and
    Dr. H. Kent Hills. Water bursts had been found 14 min apart at two
    lunar sites just after seismometers at sites had picked up swarm of
    moonquakes. Dr. Freeman said in Houston, “I think this proves that
    the moon is still actively quaking and venting gas and also indicates
    there is a good possibility of liquid water somewhere on the moon.”
    He said bursts were best described as “geysers,” but cautioned against
    likening them to geysers on earth. Later, Washington Post reported
    that Apollo engineers had said water could have come from burst tank
    on descent stage of Apollo 12 LM or from backpacks of Apallo 12
    crew. (O‘Toole, W Post, 10/16/71, A l ; Reuters, B Sun, 10/16/71, A3)
 Skylab airlock trainer was flown from McDonnell Douglas Astronautics
    Co. in St. Louis, Mo., to MSC aboard NASA Super Guppy aircraft.
    (NASA Release 71-187 ; MSC P I O )
 Skylab astronauts would begin extravehicular training in pressurized suits
    in MSFC Neutral Buoyancy Space Simulator later in year. Mockups of
    Skylab space laboratory modules had been submerged in water tank
    12 m (40 ft) deep and 23 m (75 ft) wide, which simulated weightless-
    ness of space environment. (NASA Release 71-205)
 Univ. of Florida was using KSC particle measurement computer system
    to analyze upper-air samples taken by aircraft at various altitudes,
    NASA Activities reported. System was only one of its kind in Florida.
    (NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 169)
 Grumman Aerospace Corp. demonstrated $500 000 Turbo-Mallard am-
    phibious aircraft in Potomac River for DOT and CAB ofiicials. Ten-seat,
    20-m (66-ft) aircraft cruised at 355 km per hr (220 mph) and could
    land on ground or in water as shallow as 1.5 m (5 ft) and at least
    3000 m (1000 ft) long. Grumman had $50000 contract with City
    of New York for feasibility study of water landings and takeoffs.
    (Levey, W Post, 10/16/71, B3 j
 NSF published Enrollment Increase in Science and Mathematics in Pu.blic
    Secondary Schools, 1948-49 to 1969-70 (NSF 71-30). Total in 1969-70
    was more than 2.5 times larger than total enrolled in 1948-49. Largest
    relative increases were reported for enrollments in psychology, eco-
    nomics, and biology. (NSF Highlights, 10/15/71)
October 16: Sleeping bag, handgun, photos, and papers carried by aviator
    Wiley Post on flight on which he lost his life Aug. 15, 1935, had been
    donated to State of Oklahoma for display by historical society, AP
    reported. Post was killed with comedian Will Rogers when aircraft
    engine failed after takeoff from Pt. Barrow, Alaska, on sector of con-
    templated flight to Siberia. ( N Y T , 10/17/71, 32)
 Lasers were finding increased applications in defense technology, New
    York Times article reported. Weapon scientists were “clearly excited
    over its possibilities as a deadly offensive weapon against nuclear mis-
    siles and aircraft.” AEC and DOD spokesmen had conceded that laser
    programs were underway but had said national security barred dis-
    cussion of subject. DOD had said lasers had been used in new rang-
    finding devices and in medical research and that, while it was pri-
    marily USAF program, “some” Army research was also going on.
    (Ripley, NYT, 10/16/71,15)

                                   288
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                October 17

October 17: USAF launched Sesp 1971-2 Space Experiments Support Pro-
     gram satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Thorad-Agena booster. Orbital
     parameters: 801.5-km (498-mi) apogee, 774.1-km (481-mi) perigee,
     100.5-min period, and 92.7O inclination. Objectives of mission were
     to test advanced development payloads-including celestial mapping
     IR scanner, 1500-w flexible roll-up solar cell array, secure command
     and control system, and energetic particles experiment. (Pres Rpt 72;
     SBD, 10/19/71,174)
* Eyewitness to Space by H. Lester Cooke with James H. Dean, published
     by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., was reviewed by Frank Getlein in Wash-
     ington Evening Star. Book contained more than 250 paintings and
     drawings by artists in NASA artist program. “What they have created
     is an extraordinary record . . . because it records more than the eye,
     even the trained eye, can see. The sketches and many of the paintings
     do indeed record what any eye can see, but the seeing is special.
     Beyond that, artist after artist at some point found himself pushed
     by the material itself into taking an abstract, symbolic view of the
     space flights themselves, painting a vision, not a view.” NASA artists
     program, “one of the most remarkable ventures in art-government
      relations,” had brought hundreds of artists to NASA facilities to
      paint or draw what they saw and they were to see whatever they
      wanted and depict it in whatever manner suited their perceptions.”
      Only requirement was that all work was to be turned over to NASA,
     which had given it to National Gallery. Coauthor Cooke was National
     Gallery Curator of Painting. It was “hard to think of anything in
      art history that quite compares with the NASA program.” Getlein re-
      called Italian TV coverage of first moon walk. “One big response to
     the event was to convene gatherings of famous Italians-non-scientists
                    .
      all-in studios . . and have them talk about the moon. But at many
      points in the protracted coverage, against a background of Beetho-
      ven, a beautiful Tuscan voice read Dante.” Qualities evoked by this
      “odd response, but an oddly perfect one,” were “precisely those that
      have eluded American television coverage of the space program. They
      are qualities that this book reaches for constantly and often attains.”
       (W Star, 10/17/71, B5)
 October 18: Heart problems encountered by Apolto 15 astronauts neces-
      sitated changes in diet and exercise regimen for Apollo 16 astronauts,
      Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said in speech
      before annual clinical meeting of American College of Surgeons in
      Atlantic City, N.J. AI1 three ApolEo 15 astronauts had experienced
      drops in potassium levels during July 26-Aug. 7 mission. Astronaut
      James B. Irwin had developed cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heart-
      beat) for one minute after he returned to CM from lunar surface and
      ventricular contractions (premature heartbeats) for following hour.
      Astronaut David R. Scott also had developed cardiac contractions
      during mission. Because of findings, first Apollo 16 EVA would be
      shortened, astronauts would rest full eight hours between moonwalks,
      and more potassium would be added to Apollo 16 diet. (McGehan,
      B Sun, 10/19/71, A5)
   Scientists and engineers at MIT described planned Apollo 17 surface
       electrical properties experiment to probe for water on moon, in tele-
      phone interview with New York Times. Experiment consisted of 68-

                                    289
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
October 18

    kg (15-lb) radio transmitter with four 35-m (115-ft) lengths of wire
    which astronaut was to unreel on lunar surface in X pattern as an-
    tenna. Radio signals at varying frequencies would be beamed into
    lunar surface. Small receiver on LRV would receive signals bounced
    back from beneath lunar surface and signals would be recorded by
    tape recorder on LRV. Pattern, timing, and strength of reflected signals
    were expected to indicate presence of water, if any, and kind of
    material in lunar subsurface. Times said experiment’s importance had
    been heightened by Oct. 15 announcement of discovery of water vapor
    on moon. (Wilford, JVYT, 10/19/71,29)
  NASA board investigating Jan. 23 helicopter crash in Indian River near
    rtsc-in which pilot, Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, escaped injury-
    had named misjudgment in estimating altitude as primary cause,
    NASA announced. Mitigating factors were lack of familiar objects on
    Indian River surface to help pilot judge altitude, possible visual
    focusing on false water surface because of water’s smoothness, change
     in sun reflection on water caused by change in course, and possi-
    bility that Cernan’s experience with high-speed aircraft might have
    contributed to altitude misjudgment in slower craft. Board said Cer-
    nan’s survival training as astronaut and naval aviator was major
    factor in his escape from submerged wreckage and burning fuel.
     (NASA Release 71-206)
  NASA announced receipt of three proposals for design and fabrication of
    two experimental, transport, STOL research aircraft with propulsive
    lift-from    McDonnell Douglas Corp., from Boeing Co. with Grum-
    man Corp., and from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. with North American
     Rockwell Corp., Bell Aerospace Co. Div of Textron, Inc., and Cornel1
    Aeronautical Laboratories, Ine. Aircraft would provide data and
     experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical,
     and safe fan-jet STOL transport systems in joint NASA-DOT-FAA-USAF
     program to relieve noise and congestion at busy airports. (NASA
     Release 7 1-207 )
  President Nixon announced appointment of Coleman duPont Donaldson
     as member of Air Quality Advisory Board to succeed William 0.
     Doub, who was appointed AEC member Aug. 10. Donaldson, President
     of Aeronautical Research Assn. of Princeton, Inc., had been head of
     aerophysics section of NACA Gas Dynamics Laboratory. He had
     worked recently on development of techniques for computing dis-
     persal of chemically reacting pollutants in atmosphere and genera-
     tion of turbulence. Work had been supported by NASA and Environ-
     mental Protection Agency. ( P D , 10/25/71,1426)
  NASA wished protocol officials who scheduled President Nixon’s trip to
     Moscow for May could be assigned to handle space cooperation talks
     as well, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Magazine quoted
     NASA official as saying, “Anyone who would schedule the summer ses-
     sion for Houston and the winter session for Moscow just can’t be
     serious about an agreement.” ( A v Wk, 10/18/71,11)
  USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization planned conceptual design
     study by industry of spaceborne system for tracking Soviet satellites
     at altitudes beyond 480-km (300-mi) range of existing ground-based
     Spacetrack system, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported.

                                    290
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                October 18

    Fivemonth study was expected to begin in 1972, magazine said. (Av
    Wk, 10/18/71,9)
 US. technological society was product of past R&D efforts, President
    Charles A. Anderson of Stanford Research Institute said in Aviation
    Week & Space Technology editorial. Current assault on U S . leader-
    ship in science and technology was “both external and internal.”
    Western Europe, Japan, and U.S.S.R. were progressing in areas tra-
    ditionally controlled by US. “In radio astronomy, high energy
    physics and conventional energy research we have already been sur-
    passed. Internally, a new national distaste for science and technology is
    undermining the national research and development effort.” (Av Wk,
    10/18/71,7)
October 18-21: Lunar Science Institute held conference on lunar geo-
    physics at MSC. Scientists said new evidence from Apollo 15 heat
    flow experiment indicated moon was hotter than expected and might
    account for melting temperatures within moon and volcanic activity
    on lunar surface. Thermometers placed in two holes near Hadley Rille
    had shown that amount of heat from moon was one half that of heat
    measured from earth. Since moon was one fourth earth’s size, relative
    abundance of radioactive isotopes which generated heat within planet
    might be greater in moon than in earth. Lunar scientists also were
     puzzled by area across Sea of Rains and Ocean of Storms several
    times more radioactive than rest of moon. Dr. James R. Arnold of
    Univ. of California at San Diego said, “It is not obvious why a whole
     geographic area on the moon would be different.”
        Dr. John W. Freeman, Jr., of Rice Univ. referred to results of
    Apollo 12 and 14 suprathermal ion detector experiments that had
     discovered water vapor on moon [see Oct. 151. Dr. Gary V. Latham,
    Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said neither he nor Dr.
     Freeman could locate source of tiny moonquakes that released gas
     from beneath lunar surface, including water vapor seen March 7.
     Dr. Latham described sudden and large surge from lunar surface
     detected by seismometer in April during series of moonquake swarms.
     Though he knew of no volcano on moon, he compared event-largest
     moonquake yet recorded-to volcanic activity on earth. (MSC Release
     72-77; Maloney, H Post, 10/19/71; Brett, W Post, 10/21/71, F2)
October 18-29: Team of 10 NASA officials attended Oct. 18 ELDO Sympo-
     sium on space shuttle technologies in Paris. Officials then divided
     into four working groups and visited industries in France, Italy,
     Germany, U.K., the Netherlands, and Belgium to review ELDO-SpOn-
     sored space shuttle research and European technological capabilities.
     Team including Adelbert 0. Tischler, Chief of Shuttle Technologies,
     OART ; william A. Summerfelt, Engineering Director, Space Shuttle
     Program Office, OMSF; and James J. Gangler, Materials Branch Chief,
     Materials and Structures Div., OART. (NASA Release 71-209)
October 19: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 453 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     492-km (305.7-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 92.1-min
     period, and 70.9’ inclination. SatelIite reentered March 19, 1972.
      (GSFC SSR, 10/31/71; 3/31/72; SBD, 12/26/71, 195)
* Saturn IB 1st stage for first manned Skylab launch vehicle was removed
     from environmentally controlled enclosure at Michoud Assembly
     Facility after three-year hibernation. Booster, one of nine IB stages

                                    291
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
October 19

    stored there in December 1968, would begin 10-mo refurbishment
    program in preparation for spring 1973 launch. (MSFCRelease 71-
    183)
* Development of surgical implement to simplify cataract removal with
    high-frequency vibration and pump to liquify and remove cataract
    and lens material was announced by LeRC. Hand-held instrument-
    developed by four-man L ~ R C team in cooperative program with Dr.
    William J. McGannon, prominent Cleveland eye surgeon-had been
    successfully tested on animals. NASA was seeking patent on instrument,
    which would reduce cataract operation time and patient’s convales-
    cent period by minimizing stitching problem in most cases. Instru-
    ment made only small puncture. (NASA Release 71-203)
  Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), in letter to President Nixon, a p
    pealed for inclusion of NERVA funding in FY 1973 budget: “It seems
             .
    to me . . that this program continues to offer the nation’s best chance
    to take the next logical step forward in space, .and that the already
    staggering $1.4 billion investment in succesful R&D would make con-
     tinuation of the program not only desirable but mandatory, since
     we are so close to a flyable engine.” As senior member of Senate
     Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Sen. Cannon was
     “greatly disturbed that the space program in recent years has been
     progressively cut back.” If US. space program was to continue “the
                                                 .
     NERVA funding issue is terribly important. . . if we are to cast aside
     our earlier desire to go forward in space and subject our investment
     to a less-than-starvation funding level, we are only deceiving our-
     selves. I believe that rather than merely giving lip service to space,
     we ought to consider a total restructuring or delegation of NASA’s   role
     to the military.” (Text)
  FCC ordered AT&T to activate transatlantic cable and satellite circuits on
     one-to-one ratio. Order reversed decision made in May to set ratio at
     five-to-one in favor of satellites. FCC said it had received “strong rep-
     resentations” protesting five-to-one ratio from European countries that
     had 50% ownership in cables but less than 30% ownership in satel-
     lites. ( 7
             I Post, 10/20/71, C10)
  Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
     GSFC payload on test and support mission. Rocket and instruments
     functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  President Nixon announced 25 appointments to new National Advisory
      Committee on Oceans and Atmosphere and designation of Dr. William
     A. Nierenberg, Director of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and
     Dr. William J. Hargis, Jr., Director of Virginia Institute of Marine
     Science, as Chairman and Vice Chairman. (PD, 10/25/71, 1429)
  ICSC announced award of $99 189, 24-mo contract to Univ. of Florida for
      research and preparation of narrative history of ICSC Apollo launch
     facilities and operations. Contract included option to extend for six
     months. (KSC Release 24t5-71)
  ComSatCorp had requested permission to build two antennas 29.5 m
      (97 ft) in diameter as backup systems for its comsat stations in
     Andover, Me., and Etam, W. Va., Washington Evening Star reported.
      (W Star, 10/19/71, A14)
  Former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had also been aquanaut in
      USN’s Sealab Project, testified before Senate Committee on Com-

                                     292
                                                                  October 19
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    merce’s Subcommittee on Oceans and Atmosphere. Carpenter, presi-
    dent of Sea Sciences Corp., said man             xplore ocean floor if he
    is to understand it, just as he had to            lunar surface to under-
    stand it. Subcommittee was examining ocean pollution. (CR, 10/18/71,
    D1039; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/19/71, A l )
 New York Times editorial commented on discovery of water on lunar
    surface [see Oct. 151: “The possibility that the water vapor that has
    now been detected on the moon was originally brought there by
    Apollo astronauts cannot yet be dismissed. Nevertheless, even before
    Drs. Freeman and Hills announced their finding it was becoming
    increasingly clear that the moon is a much more complex body than
    had been supposed. We are still in the very infancy of the era of moon
    exploration, and its development for the benefit of the human race.”
     (NYT, 10/19/71,40)
October 20: Apollo 16 preliminary timeline was announced by NASA.
    Launch was scheduled for 1:03 pm EST March 17, 1972. Translunar
    insertion would occur at 3:40 pm. Lunar landing was planned for
    5:25 pm March 21, with EVA to start at 9:18 pm. Second EVA was
    scheduled for 7:48 pm March 22, and third for 7:13 pm March 23.
    LM would leave moon at 6:23 pm March 24 and earth landing was
    scheduled for 4:14 pm March 29. (NASA Release 71-211)
 Flight path of Mariner 9, en route to Mars, was reported sufficiently
    precise f o r orbital insertion without Scheduled second midcourse cor-
    rection. Next critical event for Mariner 9 would be Mars orbit inser-
    tion Nov. 13, when spacecraft would begin to collect atmospheric and
    surface data and map 70% of Martian surface during 90 days in orbit.
                                     days in flight, Mariner 9 was 88 847 850
        At 9:OO am EDT, after 14t2.43
    km (55 207 500 mi) from earth. Spacecraft was traveling at 59 220 km
    per hr (36 800 mph) relative to earth and had traveled total distance
     of more than 349 452 100 km (217 139 500 mi) since May 30 launch.
     (NASA Proj Of€)
  NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed to rapid exchange of
     findings on Mars from U S . and U.S.S.R. probes nearing that planet,
     NASA announced. Recommendations of Joint Working Groups of U.S.
     and Soviet scientists who met in Moscow Aug. 2-6 to negotiate agree-
     ment on joint projects and exchanges in space research and applica-
     tions had all been approved. Included was telegraphic exchange of
                                              Mariner 9 (launched May 30)
     findings of special interest by NASA’s
     and Soviet Mars 2 (launched May 19) and Mars 3 (launched May 28).
     All three spacecraft were scheduled to reach Mars orbit in November.
        NASA and Soviet Academy also had agreed on joint seminars to
     facilitate analysis of data ; exploration of feasibility of transmitting
     magnetometer data from U.S.S.R. ground-based observing stations
     in real-time to US. satellite ATS-F (scheduled for mid-1972 launch)
     and retransmitting data to ground with data from onboard mag-
     netometer ; and bilateral discussions on scientific results, objectives,
     and strategy of planetary exploration. Further agreements were to
     exchange information on photography from past and future missions
     and all lunar maps, to continue exchange of lunar samples, to con-
     duct multipurpose aerospace and field experiments on environment,
     and to make joint efforts in remote sensing of ocean. Technical Note
     would be exchanged on temperature sounding from satellites to develop

                                    293
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
October 20

    joint experiment over Western Europe in 1973 and 1974. Information
    on methods oi microwave measurement and of data on cloud emissivity
    would also be exchanged. Efforts would be made to achieve similarity
    in US. and Soviet requirements for ground receiving equipment.
    NASA and Soviet Academy also had agreed to research topics for mete-
    orological sounding rocket investigations by both nations, to exchange
    alerts of stratospheric warmings, to conduct rocket system intercom-
    parison tests, and to present scientific results in regular seminars and
    symposia. (Text; NASA Release 71-210)
  GAO said USAF had not charged ComSatCorp for more than $6 million
    in launch service costs for comsats. Agency blamed $3.1 million of
    loss on USAF accounting procedures and said other $3 million was not
    charged because of DOD-NASA agreement. GAO could find no legal basis
    for changing method to determine costs chargeable to ComSatCorp
    but recommended ComSatCorp be assessed on full user-charge basis
    for future launches and Intelsat IV series that began in January.
     (UPI, W Post, 10/21/71, A15)
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton told firm’s annual
    meeting that “we are now on an upward track.” He reported net income
    for quarter ended Sept. 30 of $2.2 million, or 19 cents per share, up
    from $2 million, or 18 cents per share, in 1970 period. Sales had
    climbed from $565 million in 1970 to $667 million. Sales for all of
     1971 were estimated at close to $3 billion, although major percentage
    would be booked at no profit because of Lockheed’s settlement with
    Government on G 5 A military transport aircraft and Cheyenne heli-
    copter contracts. Haughton said 1972 sales should be at 1970 level of
    just aver $2.5 billion. (Wright, NYT, 10/21/71, 69)
  Shift in AEC’S role from promoting atomic energy to protecting public
    interest in nuclear affairs was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger,
    AEC Chairman, at annual meeting of Atomic Industrial Forum and
    American Nuclear Society in Bal Harbour, Fla. It was AEC’S respon-
    sibility to “develop new technical options and to bring those options
    to the point of commercial application,” not to “solve industry’s prob-
    lems which may crop up in the course of commercial exploitation. That
    is industry’s responsibility, to be settled among industry, Congress, and
    the public.” AEC’S role was “primarily to perform as a referee serving
    the public interest.” (Text)
* President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Albert C. Hall, Vice
    President for Engineering and Research with Martin Marietta Corp.,
    to be Assistant Secretary of Defense (Administration). Hall would
    succeed Robert F. Froehlke, who had become Secretary of the Armv
    July 1. (PD, 10/25/71, 1430, 144J; USA PIO)
  NASA signed $195 400 000 supplemental agreement to Apollo LM contract
    with Grumman Corp. for changes to increase lunar staytime, activity
    support, and other features of LM. (NASA Activities, 11/15/71, 187)
October 21 : ITOS-B Improved Tiros Operational Satellite failed to reach
    orbit after 4:32 am PDT launch by NASA for NOAA from WTR on two-
    stage longtank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-N-6) booster.
    Satellite, weighing 306 kg (675 Ibs), had been intended for sun-
    synchronous orbit to make regular, dependable, day and night cloud-
    cover observations by both direct readout and onboard storage.
       Flight appeared normal through Delta first burn. At start of last

                                    294
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 October 21

    period (approximately one hour coast), pitch and yaw altitude-control
    jets began pulsating to counteract unknown force tending to tumble
    vehicle. Pitch and yaw jets were able to maintain vehicle in proper
    altitude until gas was expended. At that time, unknown force caused
    vehicle to tumble. Planned vehicle functions remaining, including
    second Delta burn and spacecraft separation, occurred approximately
    on time. Planned circular orbit was not achieved and spacecraft and
    Delta 2nd stage impacted above Arctic Circle. Review board was being
    formed to investigate Delta 2nd-stage failure.
       ITOS-B was second Tiros spacecraft funded by NOAA and third space-
    craft in ITOS series. First, Itos 1 (Tiros-M), had been launched Jan. 23,
     1970. Second, N o m 1 (ITOS-A), was launched Dec. 11, 1970, and
     ceased operations Aug. 19, 1971. Office of Space Science and Applica-
    tions had overall responsibility for mission, with Earth Observations
    Program Ofice managing project for Headquarters. Technical and
     administrative management was assigned to GSFC. (NASA Proj Off)
  Impact of aerospace industry slump and termination of lunar excursion
    module project on Grumman Corp. and Long Island, N.Y., area was
    described by New Yorlc Times. With 26 000 employees, Grumman
    Corp., “reaches out into every corner of the economy of Nassau and
     Suffolk Counties and, as one of the nation’s largest aerospace com-
    bines, even far beyond those two counties that jointly claim Grumman
     as their own.” Nearly 1000 subcontractors depended on Grumman’s
     patronage. Firm was “largest real estate taxpayer in Nassau County,
    the largest customer for the Long Island Lighting Company and hun-
     dreds of smaller corporations. And in salaries for its employes alone
    it pumps nearly a third of a billion dollars each year into the Long
    Island economy.” Grumman figures indicated that for every person
    laid off, 4% persons somewhere in U.S. economy lost their jobs, in-
    cluding 2% in Nassau or Suffolk Counties. From December 1969 to
     December 1970 nearly 5700 persons at Grumman had lost jobs; 14 250
    elsewhere on Long Island had lost jobs as result. (Andelman, NYT,
     10/21/71,45)
* NASA director of Safety Jerome F. Lederer gave guidelines for noting and
    meeting problems of drug abuse among aerospace employees at 24th
     International Air Safety Seminar in Mexico City. Drug addiction was
    CC
      not yet a discernible problem among NASA and its contractor em-
    ployees, of which there are now about 160000. But the work force
    of the future will involve many young people who have experienced
    hard drugs.” (NASA Release 71-208)
* AFSC announced USAF development of battery-powered, expendable, re-
    mote-operating weather station ( EROWS) to gather data from inaccessi-
    ble terrain or battle fields and transmit data 320 km (200 mi). Dropped
    from cargo aircraft and helicopters, EROWS would embed itself verti-
    cally in preselected spot, turn itself on, monitor its surroundings, and
    send meteorological data to control recorder. ( AFSC Release 237.71)
October 22: Establishment of joint NASA-DOT Office of Noise Abatement was
    announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secre-
    tary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would provide overall
    leadership and focal point for national program to attack noise prob-
    lems of current and planned transportation systems. Charles R. Foster,
    head of DOT Office of Noise Abatement, would be Director of joint

                                    295
October 22                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     office. Walter F. Dankhoff, Chief of LeRc Office of Operations and
     Planning, would be Deputy Director. New office would be responsible
     to Robert H. Cannon, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for
     Systems Development and Technology, and to Roy P. Jackson, NASA
     Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. It
     would also integrate programs with other agencies through Inter-
     agency Aircraft Noise Abatement Program and was fulfillment of
     some of recommendations from Civil Aviation Research and Develop-
     ment ( CARD)    Policy Study. (NASA   Release 71-213)
October 23: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by
     Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 392.7-km (244-mi) apogee,
     133.6-km (83-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 1 1 0 . 9 O inclination.
     Satellite reentered Nov. 17, 1971. (Pres Rpt 72; SF, 4/72, 132)
  Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
     Cal Tech soft x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instruments
     functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Preliminary results of experiment in which two clocks were flown around
     the world to test Einstein theory of relativity had indicated “clock
    paradox” of theory was correct, Dr. J. C. Hafele, Washington Univ. in
     St. L u i s scientist, told meeting of American Assn. of Physics Teachers
     in Rolla, Mo. Clocks, carried in two separate aircraft, had not kept
    same time as master clock at Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C.
    Einstein theory said that as body approached speed of light, variables
     in time, size, and weight changed. (W Star, 10/24/71, A3)
  Dangers inherent in separation of science and government were discussed
    in New Yorlc Times article by Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Prize-
    winning Hungarian biochemist at Marine Biological Laboratories in
    Woods Hole, Mass. “Among our 450 representatives in Washington
    there is not a single scientist, so they do not know that problems are
    like equations which cannot be solved by trickery, blows or bombs,
    not even atomic bombs.” With different assumptions different self-
    consistent systems could be constructed ; each seemingly logical.
    “Ptolemy placed the earth at the center of the universe, Copernius the
    sun. Each system is perfectly logical and self-contained. Copernicus
    himself never dared to give preference to his own. The only way to
    decide between the two is to see where they lead. An astronaut basing
    his calculation on Ptolemy would end in the nowhere. Our present
    political system leads to poverty, inflation, unemployment, crime, drugs,
    war and the neglect of our priorities toward a final catastrophe. The
    solution is not separating science from politics . . . but making it pene-
    trate into politics.” (NYT, 10/23/71,33)
October 24: Latest edition of Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, published in
    London, listed series of Cosmos satellites that could intercept other
    spacecraft in orbit, determine their purpose, and “blow them to pieces.”
    In report of Soviet orbital interception tests during year, publication
    said Cosmos 397 (launched Feb. 25) had passed near Cosmos 394
    (launched Feb. 9 ) “and was subsequently destroyed in an explosion.”
    Cosmos 4 0 (launched March 19) had been “interceptedy’ by Cosmos
    404 on 404’s launch date, April 3. In preface, editor John W. R.
    Taylor also said US. maintained satellites in stationary orbit over
    Pacific, including one with “fantastic 11-ton reconnaissance camera,”

                                    296
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 October 24

    to monitor launches of Soviet and Red Chinese long-range missiles.
     (UPI, NYT, 10/24/71,4)
October 25: MSC engineers were studying use of liquid oxygen and propane
    as fuel combination for recoverable ballistic booster ’that was possible
    vehicle for space shuttle transportation system, Aviation Week & Space
    Technology reported. ( A v Wk, 10/25/71,12)
* Decisions on NASA’S space shuttle program might be politically timed,
    Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Four contractors would com-
    plete study contracts in spring 1972. “At this point, President Nixon-
    in the midst of his re-election campaign-might         publicly state his
    support for the project.” Selection of winners “of the biggest plum in
    space” would not be announced until after the November election,
    magazine said. ( A v Wk, 10/25/71,11)
  Execution of FAA-ESRO Memorandum of Understanding for joint aviation
0

    satellite program had been delayed from Nov. 3 to early December
    because Office of Management and Budget could not complete review
    of proposed program in time, Aviation Week & Space Technology
    reported. Final pre-bid briefings for prospective contractors also had
    been delayed. ( A v Wk, 10/25/71,23)
  French national space agency Centre National #Etudes Spatiales ( CNES)
    budget request for 1972 would be approximately $150 million, up
    from $132.7 million received for 1971, Aviation Week & Space Tech-
    noZogy reported. Budget would be augmented to cover participation in
    ELDO Europa 3 launch vehicle program if production of advanced
    launch vehicle was approved. Increase in CNES funding would be
    largely offset by inflation, French officials had said. ( A v Wk, 10/25/
    71,20)
  Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial noted “major surprises”
     from first four manned lunar explorations: Possibility of existence of
     water or ice below lunar surface; detection of heat near moon’s core
     and of seismic activity on moon; greater magnetic field than expected;
     and fact moon was “mineral storehouse of tremendous magnitude with
    some elements in combinations rarely or never found on earth.” There
    was also “sizable accumulation of other scientific data to be refined
    from the instrumentation still functioning on the moon and the nearly
    400 Ib [181 kg] of lunar rocks and soil samples. . . . The moon has
    proved to be a scientific bonanza regardless of what more material
    benefits may be realized eventualiy. All of this must be a cause for
    considerable chagrin and embarrassment to that segment of the scien-
    tific community that led the sneering section during the early stages
    of the Apollo program when flight testing of operational hardware was
     of necessity its primary concern.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 10/25/71, 7 )
  Mikhail K. Yangel, Soviet scientist and rocket expert, died of heart
     attack at age 60. Tass later quoted obituary, signed by Soviet leaders,
    as saying Academician Yangel had “made an inestimabb contribution
    to the cause of development and perfection of rocket-space engineering
    and exploration of near-earth outer space.” (FBIS-Sov-71-207, 10/27/
    71, L.3)
October 25-28: AIAA held 8th Annual Meeting and Technical Display in
    Washington, D.C. Meeting Chairman, Pan American World Airways
    President Najeeb E. Halaby, dedicated meeting “to establishing a
    rapport between supporters of technology and its critics.” In program

                                    297
October 25-28                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    introduction he said, “This is a time not for routine reading of sophisti-
     cated papers about a future that is itself in question, but for addressing
     ourselves to the basic issue of where we are headed-if         anywhere.”
       Technical display included space shuttle technology exhibits by NASA
     and major contenders for shuttle contracts and models of Grumman
     F-14A fighter aircraft, McDonnell Douglas F-15 fighter, and NR B-1
     bomber aircraft. On Oct. 25, designated by AIAA as “Aerospace Day,”
     Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott narrated NASA Apollo 15 film.
       Panel discussions included “Rocketry in the 1950’s” chaired by
     Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for
     Planning; “STOL and VToL-Where Do They Fit In?” chaired by ARC
     Director Hans Mark and transmitted by telephone link up to LeRC
    employees ; and “The Aerospace Professional-What Is His Future?”
    with Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as panel member.
       Von KBrmin Lecture, “Trends in the Field of Automatic Control in
    the Last Two Decades,’’ was given by Dr. Irmgard Flugge-Lotz of
    Stanford Univ. Automation had been penetrating nearly every field of
    engineering. Mathematical theory and large computing equipment
    allowed development and extension beyond handling of linear and
    weekly nonlinear systems. Investigation of systems with large trans-
    port time lags had been advanced.
       Major AIAA awards presented included John Jeffries Award to Rich-
    ard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director of Medical Research and
    Operations, for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of
    Manned Space Flight and aerospace medical research through your
    leadership in the development of life support systems.” Lawrence
    Sperry Award was given to Ronald L. Berry, Chief of MSC Planetary
    Missions Analysis Branch, for “many outstanding achievements in the
    field of manned space flight, particularly in lunar mission analysis
    and design development.”
       Spacecraft Design Award was presented to Anthony J. Iorillo, Man-
    ager of Special Projects for Hughes Aircraft Co., for “invention of the
    Gyrostat stabilized spacecraft which formed the basic stabilization and
    configuration for the successful Tactical Communications Satellite,
    Intelsat IV, and a series of other satellites now in design and produc-
    tion.” Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was given to Dr.
    Hubertus Strughold, Emeritus Professor of Medicine at Brooks AFB,
    Tex. Citation said, “With his prophetic foresight and exceptional
    talents he established the rational biomedical foundations for manned
    exploration of space.” DeFlorez Training Award went to Capt. Walter
    P. Moran of American Airlines for his “pioneering efforts in the utili-
    zation of flight simulation to increase safety and economy of airline
    flight training and checkout operations. . . .” Aerospace Communica-
    tions Award was presented posthumously to Siegfried H. Rieger for
    “his personal contributions over a 10 year period, in analytical work
    evolving basic concepts, and in the origination and implementation of
    the INTELSAT Program which led to the establishment of the present
    worldwide communications satellite network.”
       AIAA History Manuscript Award was presented to Dr. Richard c.
    Lukas of Tennessee Technological Univ. for “best historical manuscript
    dealing with the science, technology and impact of aeronautics and

                                     298
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             October 25-28

    astronautics on society.” Award winning manuscript was “Eagles East :
    The Army Air Force and the Soviet Union.”
       Among 23 new Fellows honored at Honors Night Banquet Oct. 28
    were George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Develop-
    ment and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dale D.
    Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr.
     Richard T. Whitcomb, Head of 8-Foot Tunnels Branch at MRC;
     Eugene S. Love, Chief of Space Systems Div. at L ~ R C ; James W.
    Plummer, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Lockheed
    Missiles & Space Co. ; Wilbur L. Pritchard, Comsat Laboratories scien-
    tist; and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Douglas Corp. designer. (Pro-
     gram; AIAA Releases; Lewis News, 10/22/71, 1)
October 25-30: Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I.
     Brezhnev paid state visit to France as guest of French President
    Georges Pompidou. Later Tass reported that they had discussed
    Soviet-French cooperation in science and technology: “They noted
    with satisfaction the successes achieved in this field since the time of
    signing the agreement of June 30, 1966, and expressed their apprecia-
    tion, in particular, of the results of the sixth session of the Mixed
    Soviet-French Standing Commission held in Moscow from July 22 to 24,
     1971. In this connection the sides referred to the important achieve-
    ments in cooperation in the fields of space exploration, peaceful uses
    of atomic energy, as well as high energy physics, in particular the
    installation of a French laser reflector on the moon surface, the com-
    missioning of the French bubble chamber Mirabelle at the Soviet
    proton accelerator in Serpukhov, the Soviet-French contact on enrich-
    ing French natural uranium in the Soviet Union.” (FBIS-SOV-71-210,
    11/1/71, F4)
October 26: Identification of molecule magnesium tetrabenzporphine in
    outer space as forerunner of chlorophyll by Dr. Fred M. Johnson,
    California State College spectroscopist, was reported in Wushington
    Post. Dr. Johnson had analyzed spectral lines taken of Milky Way
    from Lick Observatory optical telescope during 18-yr effort to identify
    nitrogen-bearing hydrocarbons among hydrogen clouds in interstellar
    space. He had succeeded after analyzing spectral line surrounding hot,
    young star in Orion constellation. Finding, Dr. Johnson believed,
    might provide clue to building blocks of life in universe. “Whatever
    mechanism occurs here occurs throughout the universe and you can
    be sure it occurs in the solar system.” (O’Toole, W Post, 10/26/71, A3)
* NAS held meeting on molecular constitutions of interstellar space.
       Dr. William J. Welch, Univ. of California at Berkeley astronomer,
    said 23 different molecules had been detected in interstellar space.
    Dr. Arno A. Penzias of Bell Telephone Laboratories said new radio-
    telescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., had detected amount of carbon monoxide
    that “covers vast regions of space.” Detected carbon seemed “to play
    a disproportionately large role.” Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of Univ.
    of Maryland said it might be possible that carbon monoxide was
    formed in shells around very young and very old stars from which it
    was ejected into space. (Lyons, NYT, 10/27/71, 51)
  Soym I 2 accident in which crew lost lives [see June 6-30] might have
    been “greatest setback in Soviet space flight activity in past several
    years,” Space Business Daily reported. October, traditionally “bumper

                                   299
October 26                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     month for Soviet flight programming” had seen “relative depression”
     this year. In October 1970 U.S.S.R. had recorded 12 missions. This
     year, “up to last week, there had been only 4 missions recorded.”
     (SBD, 10/26/71, 194)
  USAF F-111 fighter-bomber wing and wing-carry-through structures had
    withstood test loadings equivalent to 24 000 flight hrs-four times
     estimated number of hours aircraft would fly in 15 years--General
    Dynamics Convair Aerospace Div. announced. Aircraft was undergoing
    program to extend service life beyond original 15-yr requirements.
     (General Dynamics Release 71-36)
  Rolls-Royce, Ltd., and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp.
    signed agreement in London for joint development of Harrier VTOL
    aircraft’s Pegasus 1 engine. (Fairhall, Manchester Guardian, W Post,
                          1
     10/29/71, D11; P&W PIO)
  USAF Aeronautical Systems Div. was issuing letter contracts for STOL
    aircraft, DOD announced. Fairchild Industries would receive $3 771 536
    for 15 light, armed STOL aircraft; Helio Aircraft Corp. would receive
    $3 398 750 for 15 STOL aircraft. (DOD Release 911-71)
October 27: Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., DOD Director of Research and Engi-
    neering, and team of DOD scientists testified before congressional Joint
    Committee on Atomic Energy during hearings to determine whether
    treaty could safely be negotiated to ban underground tests without
    inspection. Dr. Foster and Dr. Stephen J. Lukasic, Director of DOD
    Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) , said that, while advances
    had been made in detecting underground tests, it was still impossible
    to spot some detonations of up to 100 kt. (Lyons, NYT, 10/28/71, 1 )
* Authorization by President Nixon of underground test of five-megaton
    nuclear warhead on Amchitka Island in Aleutians was announced by
    AEC Chairman, Dr. James R. Schlesinger. Announcement came shortly
    before U.S. Court of Appeals for District of Columbia met to hear
    oral argument on petition by Committee for Nuclear Responsibility
    and six other environmental organizations to delay test. Opponents of
    test feared $200-million blast, code-named “Cannikin,” could release
    radioactive gases and stimulate seismic sea wave. (AEC Release 0-193;
    Kenworthy, NYT, 10/28/71, 1 )
  Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying
0

    GSFC stellar spectra experiment. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
October 28: U.K. successfully launched 66-kg (145-lb) Prospero (X-3) , its
    first technology satellite, from Woomera Test Range, Australia, on Black
    Arrow booster. U.K. thus became sixth nation to launch its own satellite
    with its own launch vehicle. Prospero entered orbit with 1540-km
     (956.9-mi) apogee, 552-km (343-mi) perigee, 106.4-min period, and
    82O inclination. Satellite, developed for $28.8 million in six years,
    carried experiments to test satellite technology. Prospero was first and
    last U.K. satellite scheduled for launch on U.K. booster. X 4 , scheduled
    for launch in early 1974, would be launched by NASA Scout booster.
    (GSFC SSR, 10/31/71; SBD, 11/2/71, 14; Owen, KC Times, 11/26/71)
* NASA announced establishment of Delta Launch Vehicle System Review
    Board to investigate and recommend corrective action for failure of
    Thor-Delta 85 to place Os0 7 in planned orbit Sept. 29 and failure of
    Thor-Delta 86 to orbit ITOS-E Oct. 21. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate
    Administrator for Space Science and Applications, had appointed

                                    300
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                October 28

    Dr. William R. Lucas, MSFC Deputy Director, as Board Chairman.
     (NASA Release 71-217)
* Regional conference at ARC explored application of aerospace technology
    to community and public problems. Procedures for locating and obtain-
    ing technological developments were outlined to potential manufacturers
    and users. Dr. Joel A. Snow, NSF Deputy Assistant Director for Science
    and Technology, discussed technology in changing society and applica-
    tion of research to national needs. NASA Technology Utilization Program
    was described by Jeffrey T. Hamilton, Director of Technology Utiliza-
    tion Office. Dr. Donald C. Harrison, Chief of Stanford Univ. Medical
    Center Cardiology Dept., discussed NASA-Stanford biomedical technology
    transfer project. Conference officials noted that of 1200 problems sub-
    mitted to NASA biomedical and technology application teams to date,
    200 had been brought to satisfactory solution through aerospace tech-
    nology. (NASA Release 71-216; ARC P I O )
  Rotating-cylinder-flap system had been installed in wing flaps of modified
    OV-1OA Bronco aircraft provided by USN for research into STOL air-
    craft characteristics at ARC, ARC Astrogram reported. Cylinder, when
    rotated rapidly in direction of airflow, induced propeller slipstream
    to flow smoothly across wing surfaces and deflected flap. Wind-tunnel
    tests had shown that smoother airflow greatly increased lift necessary
    for STOL operations. (ARC Astrogram, 10/28/71, 1 )
  Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $4O-million
    Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were
    described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in
    interview published by Vashington Post. Plans for building, to contain
    exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and
    science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital
    Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in
    Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed
    by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would
    now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask
    Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-
    berg, W Post, 10/28/71, B1)
  Lockheed Aircraft Corn announced sale of two G l O l l TriStar iet air-
    craft to British charier airline Court Line Aviation. Carrier had made
    “second buy” commitments to purchase three additional TriStars. New
    orders, first since Lockheed received U.S. Government guarantee for
    $250-million loan, brought total TriStar sales to 105, with 49 “second
    buys.” ( W Post, 10/29/71, D11)
  Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 11487 for himself and
    cosponsors. Bill would authorize sale of up to seven acres of unim-
    proved land adjacent to KSC Visitor Information Center to Chapel of
    the Astronauts, Inc. Organization was nonprofit Florida corporation
    interested in constructing and operating nonsectarian chapel on prop-
    erty. No federal funds were involved in proposed transaction. (Text;
    H Rpt 92-600)
October 29: NASA held Mariner 9 pre-encounter news briefing at NASA Hq.
    Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and
    Applications, and Robert H. Steinbacher, Mariner Project scientist at
    JPL, described mysterious yellow dust storm-greatest      observed since
    1956-that    had developed on Mars Sept. 23 and 24 and was first

                                    301
October 29                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    detected through telescopes Sept. 26. Steinbacher said, “The question
                                ..
    as Mariner goes into orbit . is, will we be doing mapping or covering
                                                 .
    some dynamic atmospheric phenomenon. . .” It would be fortuitous
    “if, with the cameras and other instruments of Mariner 9, we catch the
    most dramatic event on Mars.” (NASA Release, 10/20/71; Haughland,
    W Post, 10/30/71, A3; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/30/71, A3)
  NASA’s13th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C.
    Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Distin-
    guished Service Medal to Charles J. Donlan, Deputy Associate Admin-
    istrator (Technical), OMSF; Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Associate
    Administrator, OSSA; Bruce T, Lundin, LeRC Director; Bernard Moritz,
    Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Organization and Manage-
    ment; Oran W. Nicks, L ~ R CDeputy Director; and John W. Townsend,
    Jr., NOAA Associate Administrator.
       Group Achievement Award was presented to Apollo Recovery Com-
    munications ATS Satellite Support Team, GSFC ; Ionospheric Studies
    Project Team; Os0 7 Recovery Team, GSFC; Planetary Atmcsphere
    Experiments Test Projects, ARC and Hq; and San Marco Project Team.
       Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 42 persons and
    Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 28. (Program; NASA
    Release 71-218)
* Technique for accurately forecasting occurrence and location of solar
    flares by inferring solar magnetic fields from hydrogen light photos
    taken by earth-based optical telescopes was announced by NOAA. Tech-
    nique, developed by NOAA scientist Patrick S. McIntosh, was alternative
    to use of magnetographs for determining solar magnetic-field data. It
    had enabled NOAA’S Space Environment Laboratory at Boulder, Colo., to
    forecast region of sun where solar flares would occur, correctly 85% of
    time for all flares and 95% of time for major flares. NASA had con-
    tracted with NOAA to refine its solar forecasting capabilities in prepara-
    tion for operating solar telescopes aboard Skylab beginning in spring
    1973. (NOM Release 71-153)
* Synthesis, without using water, of six amino acids that formed building
    blocks of life by exposing combination of formaldehyde, ammonia,
    methanol vapor, and formic acid vapor to uv light for 25 days, was
    reported in Nature by Columbia Univ. scientists Goesta Wollin and
    David €3. Ericson. Because chemicals in combination had been identified
    in ’interstellar space, findings suggested life might arise on moon or
    waterless planet. (Nature, 10/29/71,615-6)
October 30: UPI quoted MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., as
    saying in Houston that, because of success of Apollo 15, NASA was
    considering addition to Apollo program of extra mission to orbit moon
    and return to earth. (W Post, 10/31/71, A20)
* Cracks had been found in seven engine pylons on seven C-5 cargo trans-
    port aircraft, all apparently due to “improper fabrication,” USAF said
    in status report to Congress. Pylons would be replaced and aircraft
    released for flight. New pylon design was under study and might be
    installed within three to five months. Meanwhile C-5s could be expected
    to operate without difficulty with normal modifications and repairs for
    at least 6000 flight hours. Report said 23 C-5s had been returned to
    service since Oct. 12 grounding of entire fleet following Sept. 29 engine

                                     302
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 October 30

    loss at Altus AFB, Okla., and subsequent discoveries of engine cracks.
     (Witkin, NYT, 10/31/71, 95)
October 31 : Nixon Administration’s New Technology Opportunities Pro-
    gram “expected to be announced early next year” was described by
    New York Times. Basic concept was to define technologies that could
    help solve domestic problems, establish R&D priorities accordingly, and
    provide incentives for industry to pursue technological goals. Times
    said program could be major step toward making Government partner
    for first time in industries outside aerospace and defense, result in
    greater Federal R&D funding, and constitute counterattack against
    “those who increasingly criticize science and technology as disruptive
    and destructive forces in society.” (Wilford, NYT, 10/31/71, 1)
  USAF commanders believed USAF had entered “critical period in which
    American strategic and tactical air power is declining” while U.S.S.R.’s
    “is expanding,” New York Times reported. Chief elements of problem
    were that USAF’S basic weapon systems, B-52 bomber and F 4 fighter-
    bomber, were nearing obsolescence and needed to be replaced at “high
    cost” by J3-1 and F-15 ;satellite-gathered intelligence indicated U.S.S.R.
    had established lead over US. in land-based ICBMS, was building
    emplacements for larger missiles, and had deployed FOBS to bring
    missiles on target from any direction; and developments were taking
    place against “background of budgetary stringency” in US. (Middleton,
     NYT, 10/31/71,95)
  Revised NASA Policy Directive for administering Agency activities for
0

     protection and enhancement of environmental quality became effective.
     (NASA Pol Dir 8809.6A)
  New York Times editorial criticized President Nixon’s decision to hold
     nuclear warhead test Cannikin : “Multiple anxieties” had found “respon-
     sible expression in many quarters.” It was “simply not good enough”
     for Administration to make known its decision through AEC. “There was
     a time when the public accepted the father-knows-best assurance about
     ‘overriding requirements of national security.’ But that time is not
     now. Scrutiny and skepticism by Congress and the public have forced a
     healthy re-examination of many national security decisions from the
     manufacture of biological horror weapons to the defoliation of Vietnam
     to the roles of the manned bomber and the aircraft carrier. Nuclear
     weapons technology, although an arcane subject, is no exception.”
      (NYT, 10/31/71, 16)
  London Sunday Express reported U.S.S.R. was building launching sites
     for intercontinental hydrogen bomb missiles at unprecedented speed in
     rocky areas. Paper said more than 60 silos had been photographed by
     spy satellites in recent months. U.K. Defence Ministry had said article
     was speculative, Reuters reported. (NYT, 1/11/71, 48)
During October: NAS published Plans for U.S. Participation in the GARP
     Atlantic Tropical Experiment and Plan for U S . Datu Management in
     the Global Atmospheric Research Program. Reports of panels of NCR’S
     US. Committee for the Global Atmospheric Research Program called
     for increased preparation for major tropical observation experiment
     in Atlantic in summer 1974. Ad Hoc Tropical Task Group said
     experiment would require geostationary satellite “having both day and
     night imaging capability,” cIosely spaced array of ships with calibrated
     radar, upper-air wind-measuring systems, and from 10 to 12 aircraft.

                                     303
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
During October

     GARP Data Management Panel recommended international data manage-
     ment for project, with fulltime professionals appointed by US. and

                                eriment during which at least 35 meteoro-
    logical sounding rockets were launched from area near Volgograd and
    from Heuss Island in Franz Josef Archipelago in Soviet Arctic. Purpose
    of experiment was to determine effect of sunspots on magnetic storms.
    ,Ground-basedobservatories in U.S.S.R. and Antarctic had participated
    in study. Rockets were said to have collected vast amount of data on
    impact of solar flares on earth’s magnetic field, including impact on
    radio communications. (NYT, 11/5/71, 18; SBD, 11/9/71, a)




                                  304
                           November 1971

November 1 :Publication of revised patent licensing regulations to accelerate
    commercial use of space-related patented inventions or technology was
    announced by NASA. Revisions would permit granting of exclusive
    licenses as early as nine months after announcement of invention’s
    availability, granting of more meaningful exclusive licenses to qualified
    applicants to ensure prompt use of NASA inventions, and provision of
    royalty payments if appropriate. (NASA Release 71-220)
  NASA continued to receive proposals for using surplus Apollo hardware
    for “Apollo 18” lunar mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology
    reported. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, had suggested mission
    be flown in April 1974 to map moon from polar orbit. During mission,
    which would cost about $190 million, LM would be converted into
    <L
      massive scientific experiments bay.” (Av Wk, 11/1/71, 15)
  Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and 15 other aerospace firms were con-
    structing advanced comsat model to compete for contract for INTELSAT
    v series, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Hardware from
    firms in Europe, Canada, and Japan would arrive at Lockheed for
    assembly before year’s end. Frame had already been shipped from
    Contraves A. G. of Switzerland. Spacecraft would be mounted on
    platform to permit testing at 1 g in simulated space environment in
    spring 1972. (Johnsen, Av Wk, 11/1/71,21)
  Airline Pilots Assn. in letter to FAA expressed concern about “decreasing
    margin of safety in takeoff and landing at US. airports.” Union
    President John J. O 7 D o ~ e lsaid “length of time now planned by your
                                     l
    agency for installation of landing aids is so inadequate that it can
    only invite more accidents, increased inconvenience to passengers, and
    increased cost of operation for the airIines.” Letter criticized FAA’S
     10-yr plan to improve airport safety and called for accelerated 5-yr
    program. O’Donnell said ALPA studies had shown that 573 persons had
    been killed in past 10 yrs in approaches to airports not fully equipped
    with instrument landing systems. (Text)
* NSF published “Estimated Academic R&D Direct Price Trends 50 Percent
     Higher Over Decade 1961-71” in Science Resources Studies Highlights.
     Price inflation accounted for estimated 50% increase in direct costs of
     academic R&D over 10 fiscal years ending June 1971. Most of rise had
     occurred in last five years, when compounded annual increase rate was
     5.0%. Preliminary estimates for FY 1971 indicated that increase from
     FY 1970 was 5.576, equal to change over preceding year. Increases in
     salariesaccounting for 65% of academic R&D direct costs-were
     responsible for large increase in total R&D direct costs. Payments to
    personnel were estimated to have increased two thirds over decade;
    prices of equipment, expendable supplies, and miscellaneous services,
     only one fifth. (NSF Highlights, 11/1/71)
  Yugoslavian charter airline Air Yugoslavia announced in Belgrade that
     it was first foreign carrier to obtain permission from Communist China
    to organize charter flights to Peking. (AP, W Post, 11/2/71, A E L)

                                    305
November 1-2                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

November 1-2: Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, chaired
    symposium and workshop series sponsored by NAE in Washington, D.C.
    Program, “Application of Technology To Improve Productivity in the
    Service Sector of the National Economy,” explored methods of using
    technology to ease social, educational, and health care problems. (NAE
    Release)
November 2-5: USAF Titan IIIC booster launched Dscs 2-1 and Dscs 2-2
    improved Defense Satellite Communications System satellites from ETR
    at 10:09 pm EST into transfer orbits and then into separate, synchronous
    orbits over Pacific. Orbital parameters for both spacecraft: 35 816.0-km
     (22 255-mi) apogee, 35 807.9-km (22 250-mi) perigee, 1436.1-min
    period, and 2.6’ inclination. Immediately after launch telemetry diffi-
    culties were experienced during standard operational status feedback.
    By Nov. 5 malfunctions had been corrected and satellites were func-
    tioning satisfactorily.
       The two 544-kg (1200-lb), 2.7- x 4-m (9- x 13-ft), TRW-built
    comsats were designed to replace smaller IDSCS satellites launched since
    1966. First of improved system, new satellites would increase DOD
    communications volume. Each satellite had 40-w output for multichannel
    communications, including 1300 two-way voice conversations, TV, tele-
    type, and data relay and could transmit between large ground terminals
    over long distances, as well as tactical messages between small portable
    ground stations. (Pres Rpt 71; AFSC Newsreview, 1/72; SBD, 11/4/71,
    25; Detroit News, 11/3/71; UPI, M Her, 10/31/71)
November 2 : Mariner 9-launched by NASA May 30 and expected to orbit
    Mars Nov. l k x p e r i e n c e d anomolous condition at 11:OO am EST that
    caused spacecraft to lose navigational lock on guiding star Canopus and
    lock on wrong star, Sirius. Resulting unfavorable high-gain-antenna
    orientation weakened spacecraft’s radio signals. After extensive check
    showed instruments were still working and spacecraft was disoriented
    by only few degrees, Mariner 9 was commanded to search for Canopus;
    confirmation was received that lock had been acquired at 2 5 1 pm EST.
    Radio signals returned full strength and mission operations resumed
    planned schedule. JPL officials speculated that spacecraft had been
    struck glacing blow by dust particle or Canopus sensor had been
    distracted by light reflected from passing dust cloud. (NASA Proj Off;
    NYT, 11/4/71, 18; W Post, 11/3/71, A3)
 U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 454 into orbit from Plesetsk with 346-km
     (215-mi) apogee, 204-km ( 126.8-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and
    65.4O inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 16. (GSFC SSR, 11/30/71;
    SF, 7/72,179)
 Soviet scientist Boris Nepoklonov said in Tass interview that data from
0

    Lunokhod 1 (placed on moon by Luna 1 7 Nov. 17, 1970) would help
    define age of moon more precisely. Information showed that Sea of
    Rains was one of oldest lunar formations. Analysis of phototelevision
    panoramas had shown that large craters over 100 m (328 ft) in
    diameter had emerged several billion years ago, while small craters
    up to 10 m (32.8 ft) in diameter were millions of years younger. Study
    of lunar terrain showed many layers. Outer layer, from 0.2 to 0.5 mm
     (0.008 to 0.02 in), was loosest and had poor heat conductivity, which
    resulted in sharp temperature fluctuations on lunar surface within half
    hour. Denser layer beneath was strong enough to sustain weight of

                                     306
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 November 2

    Lunokhod 1. Nepoklonov, scientific leader of Lunokhod 1 control team,
    said that information received from vehicle would be published in
    multivolume monograph. First book had already appeared. (FBIS-SOV-
    71-212-3, 11/3/71, L5-6)
  Federal Government had filed $3 690 290 suit against Bechtel Corp. in
    Federal District Court in San Francisco, Wall Street Journal reported.
    Suit charged that Bechtel’s designs for space environment simulation
    chamber for MSC were “inadequate, improper and unsuited for the pur-
    pose intended.” Chamber had failed in 1964 NASA test, Government
    said. ( W J , 11/2/71)
  Nobel Prize for physics was awarded to Dr. Dennis Gabor, Hungarian-
    born British scientist with Columbia Broadcasting System laboratories,
    for invention of three-dimensional lensless photography system known
    as holography. Nobel Prize for chemistry was awarded to German-born
    National Research Council of Canada scientist Gerhard Herzberg for
    “‘contributions to knowledge of electronic structure and geometry of
    molecules, particularly free radicals.” (NYT, 11/3/71, 1 )
  House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R.
    11484, bill permitting sale of land at K S C for Chapel of the Astronauts.
     (CR, 11/2/71, D1109; H Rpt 92-600)
* Rohr Corp. President Frank E. McCreery said in statement that extensive
    investigation had produced no evidence that Rohr Corp. had delivered
    cracked jet engine mountings for USAF’S C-5A jet transport aircraft
     [see Oct. 301. (UPI, NYT, 11/4/71, C38)
  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had announced Lcvoluntary”early retirement of
    Lockheed-California Div. President Charles S. Wagner, Senior Vice
    President Dudley E. Browne, and Corporate Vice President for Manu-
    facturing W. A. Pulver, Wall Street Journal reported. Browne would
    remain a director and member of board’s executive and finance com-
    mittees. (WSJ, 11/2/71, 16)
November 2-4: NASA sponsored conference on “Vehicle Technology for Civil
    Aviation: The 70s and Beyond” at LaRC and Williamsburg, Va. Dr.
    James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in Nov. 2 address to air-
    lines and aircraft industry executives and DOT representatives that
    environmental issue of noise provided “show case for technoIogy” and
     bC
        opportunity to apply technology directly to the solution of an environ-
     mental problem of increasing public concern.” It was not enough
     “to think in terms of more power, more lift, more speed. If we wish
     the taxpayer to continue to support civil aviation, we should take as
    our motto, ‘Fly Quiet!”’ NASA could be proud of progress made in
     reducing aircraft noise. NASA was “well prepared” to develop super-
    sonic technology that would “permit supersonic flights over continents
     as well as oceans without harmful sonic boom effects and outstrip the
     current foreign models in speed, capacity, range, and profitability.”
         Dr. Fletcher described NASA STOL aircraft program as “first research
     program of this magnitude focused on the needs of civil rather than
     military aviation.” He felt US. should establish “clear national policy
        .
     . . to maintain our leading position in world aircraft markets” and
     “should resolve to achieve this goal by whatever reasonable means are
     necessary, with emphasis on an unequivocal decision to stay out front
     in aeronautical research and technology.”
         FRC engineer Marvin R. Barber said NASA study had predicted that


                                     307
November 2-4                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    by 1982 small aircraft would be “most economical mode of transporta-
    tion on trips of between 40 and 450 miles [65 and 725 kilometers].”
       B/G Gustav E. Lundquist (USAF, Ret.) said attempts to introduce
    use of STOL transport to public had been unsuccessful in Northeast
    Corridor between Boston and Washington. (NASA Release 71-222;
    Newport News Daily Press, 11/3-5/71)
November 3: NASA announced it had begun distribution of more than 2200
    samples and polished thin sections of Apollo 15 lunar material to U S .
    and foreign scientists. Total weight of largest and most varied sample
    collection was about three kilograms (six and a half pounds). Material
    would be analyzed by 700 investigators in US., Virgin Islands, 15
    foreign countries, and ESRO. (NASA Release 71-223)
  Results to date of study to determine minimum cockpit visibility required
    by space shuttle pilot to make safe horizontal ground landings were
    announced by FRC. Tests, begun in July with instrumented T-33 jet
    aircraft with radar system to judge accurate altitude to within two
    feet (0.6 meters), had shown pilots could land aircraft with greater
    visibility restrictions than expected. Visibility restriction of 5” had
    been extended to 75” on either side, or total of 150” in 225 approaches
    flown. Restrictions would be increased in future to 160”. (FRC Release
    26-71)
* Prototype water-vapor electrolysis system, developed by ARC scientist
    Dr. Theordore Wydeven, Jr., had successfully completed more than
    2000 hrs of testing-equivalent       of 80-day space mission-Valley
     [Calif.] Journal reported. System converted moisture in air into hydro-
    gen and oxygen and released reclaimed oxygen back into air. It would
    eliminate need for bulky oxygen tanks on space missions and could
    be used as onboard oxygen system in aircraft, portable oxygen gener-
    ator for hospitals and homes, and air conditioner and freshener in
    mines, air raid shelters, or other places in need of oxygenation.
    (Valley Journal, 11/3/71)
* Federal Reserve System had begun supplying banks with 62 million
    copper and nickel dollars commemorating President Eisenhower and
    Apdlo 11 lunar landing, AP reported. One side of coin carried repro-
    duction of Apollo I 1 astronauts’ emblem-eagle against moon’s sur-
    face. (B Sun, 11/3/71, A6)
  Lack of Government policy for engineering was scored by Sen. Edward
    M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech telephoned to meeting of Institute
    of Electrical and Electronic Engineers in Boston, Mass. Sen. Kennedy
    cited communications engineer who had led team that designed
    antenna for Apollo 15 LRV. Engineer had received special com-
    mendation from NASA for his leadership. “He also received a layoff
    notice from his firm shortly before he watched his antenna in action
    on the surface of the moon.” Engineers possessed great potential to
    contribute to Nation’s needs. “Engineers who can produce patents for
    their former employers can provide ideas which will benefit society.
    Engineers who can transmit data from the moon can help peet the
    data processing needs of our technological economy. And engineers
    who could have taught at our leading universities must have some
    lessons to offer of benefit to us all.” (CRY 11/10/71, S180034; Off
    of Sen Kennedy)
  Air France announced first firm order from airline for A-300B 250-

                                    308
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  November 3

    passenger airbus being built by European consortium. (Reuters,
    W Post, 11/4/71, A2)
  Dr. Dennis Gabor, winner of 1971 Nobel Prize for physics, said in
    Bridgeport, Conn., that space exploration was ‘‘stri&li a dead end
    occupation.” It was “extremely uninteresting-the          only interesting
    place is earth.” Dr. Gabor made comment during interview at Univ.
    of Bridgeport honors convocation. (UPI, W Post, 11/5/71, A7;
    W Star, 11/6/71, A7)
* Fairchild Industries, Inc., had agreed to acquire Swearingen Aircraft
    Co., Wad Street Jownal reported. Agreement called for Fairchild to
    provide up to $3 million of immediate working capital for Swearingen.
    New subsidiary would be formed. (WSJ, 11/3/71, 17)
November 4: National Capital Planning Commission approved plans for
    Smithsonian Institution’s new $4O-million National Air and Space
    Museum after hearing testimony from Museum Director Michael
    Collins, Apollo 11 astronaut. During 90-min debate, Commission mem-
    ber Paul Thiry described museum building, designed by architect
    Gyo Obata, as “industrial type” from “elevator-air conditioner school
    of architecture” lacking “classic proportions.” Collins said museum
    would possess “flavor of air and space.” Commission stipulated that
    building’s roof remain clear of mechanical equipment and that use
    of granite and marble be considered for construction. Final approval
    of plans would be considered following Nov. 17 meeting of Fine Arts
     Commission. (Combes, W Post, 11/5/71, A14)
* Successful first launch of Poseidon missile from surfaced submarine was
    observed by Soviet trawler at distance of 805 m (880 yds). Submarine
    U.S.S. Nathaniel Greene was surfaced 16 km (10 mi) east of Cocoa
     Beach, Fla. DOD later said it had not determined if Soviet vessel was
    intelligence-gathering ship. ( W Post, 11/5/71, A5)
          structural analysis computer program (NASTRAN) , designed to
  NASA’s
    analyze behavior of elastic structures in space program, was being
     used by Ford Motor Co. in predicting performance of 1973 light truck
     components, NASA announced. Ford had reported 60% improvement
     in predicting behavior of components under stress and time-saving of
     two thirds in calculations. Program also had been used in design of
    people-mover system to be used at TRANSPO ’72 exhibit planned for
    spring 1972 at Dulles International Airport, Va. (NASA Release 71-221)
  Full-size plywood model of B-1 strategic bomber, designed as replace-
     ment for USAF €-23,
                       5     was displayed for first time by North American
    Rockwell Corp. in Los Angeles. ( W Post, 11/5/71, 3)
  Soviet computer had calculated total weight of atmosphere at 5 quadrillion,
     157 trillion tons, Tass reported. News agency said calculation was
     66
      essential for research in cosmonautics, space geodesy and gravimetry.”
     Computer had, for first time, taken into account “all the peculiarities
     of the earth’s relief and the distribution of temperatures on its surface,”
    Tass said. (UPI, San Francisco Examiner, 11/5/71)
  Wall Street Journu.1 quoted Bank of America as saying California’s aero-
     space employment should stabilize near end of 1971 “and hold fairly
     steady during 1972.” Bank, in annual forecast of California economy,
     had said overall aerospace employment in state would not show marked
     improvement until early 1973 “when defense contracting and demand
     for commercial aircraft pick up.” (WSJ, 11/4/71, 42)

                                      309
November 4                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                           E. Morison
* Plans of naval historian R/A Samuel                          Ret.) to retrace
                                                        (USN,
      by air and sea 64000-km (4Q000-mi) first circumnavigation of globe
      by Ferdinand Magellan in 1519 were described by New York Times.
      Adm. Morison would begin two-month voyage with Colombian diplo-
      mat, aviator, and explorer Mauricio Obregon in December. (NYT,
      11/4/71,45)
November 5: Europa 2, ELDO (European Launcher Development Organiza-
      tion) multistage rocket, failed to launch test-satellite from Kourou,
      French Guiana, in first developmental flight. Two minutes forty sec-
      onds after liftoff, during separation of 1st stage (British Blue Streak)
      and 2nd stage (French Coralie) , rocket acceleration dropped and
      rocket fell into Atlantic. Failure was setback for European space organi-
      zation; Europa 2 was to have launched 363-kg (800-lb) satellite into
      orbit. Rocket’s 3rd stage was West German Astris unit. Belgium had
      set up ground tracking and control stations and Netherlands had sup-
      plied station equipment. Italy had contributed test satellite. (Reuters,
      NYT, 11/6/71,14; SBD, 11/8/71,36)
  First combination of modern radar data from observations of inner
      planets with existing optical observations of sun and planets made
      between 1750 and 1970 had shown that Pluto’s mass could not be
      determined reliably from existing data, MIT scientists M. E. Ash,
      Irwin I. Shapiro, and W. B. Smith reported in Science. Total 300000
      measurements had been made during experiment which also included
      available observations of asteroids Eros and Icarus. Radar data were
      from MIT’S Millstone Hill and Haystack facilities; optical data were
      from original observatory reports transformed over six years into
      machine-readable form. Results had shown “insufficient basis for the
      widespread conclusion that Pluto’s average density is greater than,
     or even comparable to, the earth’s.’’ (Science, 11/5/71, 551-6)
  Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew from San Francisco International
      Airport to Fairbanks, Alaska, in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft on
      first sector of 32 000-km (20 000-mi) , month-long journey over North
     and South Poles and prime and 180th meridians at Equator-geo-
     graphic crossroads of world. If successful, UPI said, Long would estab-
     lish eight aviation records, including first flight around the world
     landing on all seven continents, first solo flight across Antarctica, and
      first solo from Antarctica to Australia. (W Star, 11/6/71, A2)
* National Geographic Society was quoted in Chicago Tribune as saying,
     Phobos, Martian satellite, was darkest body yet observed in solar sys-
     tem, “possibly because meteoroids had scoured it clean of reflecting
     dust.” (C Trib, 11/5/71)
  Issuance by USAF’S SAMSO of $20 932 400 contract to Martin Marietta
     Corp. for launch services for Titan IIIC launch vehicle at ETR was
     announced by DOD. Initial increment was $10 701 400. (DOD Release
     942-7 1)
* Washington Post editorial commented on AEGIS test of five-megaton
     atomic device on Amchitka Island in Aleutians scheduled for Nov. 6:
     “The fact that this particular test may have some element of risk in-
     volved would not automatically foreclose the question of whether it
     should be conducted. If the test does involve a risk to the environment,
     it must then be decided whether that risk is worth taking in view of
     the knowledge to be gained. In any case, the administration would be

                                     310
                                                                 November 5
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    in far better shape if it had let the debate on the environmental
    aspect run free and then made its case for taking the risk. As it is,
    the administration is in the position of assuring Americans and
    Canadians alike that all is well-that       it knows best. We sincerely
    hope it is right. But if it is wrong, the onus on the administration
    will be far greater as a direct result of the evidence we now have of
    the suppression of high-level reservations about the ecological risks
    involved.” ( W Post, 11/5/71, A26)
November 6 : AEC detonated five-megaton hydrogen bomb on Amchitka
    Island, Alaska, at 11 am local time ( 5 pm EST). Supreme Court had
    refused to order delay in controversial $200-million Cannikin project
    to test prototype warhead for Spartan missiles of Safeguard ABM
    system. No earthquake followed detonation, but shock waves reverber-
    ating from deep earth strata rocked island severely. Dr. James R.
    Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, broadcast from control room on Amchitka
    immediately following blast: “We had fairly significant ground mo-
    tion . . . but sensation was just about what we had expected.” Tenta-
    tive indications were that blast effects were “well within the range
    of projections.” Dr. Schlesinger said test had permitted introducing
    of Spartan warhead into inventory “while minimizing the likelihood
     of a defective warhead. I believe the final results of Cannikin will
    permit the AEC to certify the Sparlan warhead for introduction into
    the stockpile within the appropriate deployment schedule.” Report
     from Palmer Observatory had indicated Richter scale reading of 7.0.
     “So it is indicated that we had a full yield test.” Control board indi-
     cated “all of our radiation activity monitoring stations are reporting
     . . . not even a trace of radioactive release to this point. We are past
     the 12-minute mark.” ( A E C Release 0-204; Turner, NYT, 11/7/71, 1 )
  Award by Communist Party Central Committee and Council of Minis-
     ters of U.S.S.R. of 1971 state prizes for achievements in science and
     technology was announced by Tass. State prize for celestial mechan-
     ics had been awarded to unidentified scientists “who have developed
     new methods of plotting the movement of natural and artificial space
     objects.” Research provided “a theoretical basis for the solution of
     engineering problems . . . in the flight of space objects and their
     orientation in orbit.” Later, Prnvda published article by Soviet Acad-
     emy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh describing prize-win-
     ning research. “A cycle of works by Ye. P. Aksenov, G. N. Duboshin,
     and others is devoted to research into the various astronomical,
     mechanical and mathematical aspects of formulating high precision
     theories of the strongly perturbed motion of artificial and natural
     satellites of the planets and also of asteroids.” (FBIS-SOV-71-217,
      11/10/71, L1; 218,11/11/71, L1)
November 7: ApoZZo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and
      Alfred M. Worden arrived in London to begin two-week, five-country
     tour of lectures and meetings with European scientists. (UPI, C Trib,
      11/8/7 1)
  Two goats had survived 30 hrs in pressure chamber at 31 atmospheres
      -equal to pressure at 300 m (1000 ft) below sea level-breathing
     same oxygen over and over, New York Times reported. Experiment,
      conducted by Dr. Jacques Chouteau, head of Laboratory of High-
      Pressure Physiology at Univ. of Marseilles, replaced bulky apparatus

                                     311
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
November 7

    normally used to remove carbon dioxide from used air with small
    cylinder of potassium superoxide. When air breathed by goats passed
    through cylinder, water and carbon dioxide in used air reacted with
    potassium to release oxygen, which was returned to chamber. Times
    said process, developed by Air Liquide under French military con-
    tract, might be used in space, sealed aircraft, and tanks. U.S.S.R. was
    believed to use a similar technique. (Hess, NYT, 11/7/71, 84)
  Maverick, airborne missile guided to surface targets by TV camera in
    nosecone, had gone into production by Hughes Aircraft Co. under
    $69.9-million contract and would be delivered to USAF in 1972, New
    York Times reported. If missile proved successful, USAF believed its
    installation on fighter aircraft in West Germany and U.K. could help
    redress U.S.S.R.’s “quantitive armored superiority in Europe.”
     (Middleton, NYT, 11/7/71, 57)
  Canadian Defence Ministry had announced intention to mothball hydro-
    foil Bras #Or, classified as world‘s fastest warship, AP reported.
    Aluminum craft 61 m (200 ft) long had been developed over 13 yrs
    at $52-million cost. Vessel had attained speed of 116 km per hr
     (72 mph) in 1969. Major reasons for decision to mothball were
    vessel’s lack of capability in Arctic waters and fact no foreign sales
    of craft were forecast, while production costs were up. (NYT, 11/7/71,
    5)
November 8 : Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, scheduled to become first scientist-
    astronaut on moon during Apollo 17 mission, addressed 41st annual
    international meeting of Society of Exploration Geophysicists in
    Houston, Tex. Dr. Schmitt said lunar exploration “is permanently
    terminating for this generation and may be for future generations.”
    Chances for collecting data from moon were “decreasing rapidly.”
     In response to questions Dr. Schmitt said mankind’s future could
    depend on scientific understanding of knowledge being gathered dur-
    ing Apollo program. (Atlanta J&C, 11/14/71)
  President Nixon announced appointment of Betty Crites Dillon as U S .
0

    Representative on International Civil Aviation Organization Council
     and submitted to Senate nomination of Mrs. Dillon for rank of
    Minister. She would succeed Charles F. Butler who had resigned Oct. 1     .
     ( P D , 11/15/71, 1498,1517)
November 9 : Apollo 15 Commander David R. Scott told press in London
    that colonization of moon was %cry practical proposition.” He pre-
    dicted eventual manned exploration of planets and said man would
    definitely explore Mars. “The Apollo missions have proved that man
    can do a worthwhile job exploring space.” Apollo 15 Astronauts Scott,
    James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were touring Europe to brief
    scientists on their mission. (Reuters, B Sun, 11/10/71, A3)
* House Armed Services Committee’s Subcommittee on Investigations
     opened hearings on unscheduled Oct. 26 landing of Cuban An-24
     transport aircraft at New Orleans International Airport. Hearings were
    to determine how Soviet-built aircraft had penetrated U.S. southern
     defense facilities so effectively that first knowledge of its presence was
     received when pilot requested permission to land, 10 min from airport.
    Aviation Week & Space Technology later said incident was second
     Cuban penetration of U.S. airspace in 25 mos. DOD witnesses at pre-

                                     312
                                                                  November 9
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    vious hearings had blanied October 1969 penetration on absence of
    radar. (CR, 11/8/71, D1140; Av Wk,11/22/71,13)
November 10-II: Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30) began taking
    preorbit science photos of Mars, showing planet as featureless, half-
    moon-like object, hazy and dust-covered. First photos, taken over 2 4 h r
    period from distances of 860 000 to 570 000 km (535 000 to 355 000
    mi) from Mars, were transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and
    then to JPL Nov. 11. They were not as clear as photos taken by
    Mariner 6 and 7 in 1969. Astronomers reported dust storm of “un-
    precedented” duration and scope ranging over much of planet, ob-
    scuring nearly all surface details. Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL
    Director, said storm could be regarded as a “premium,” since oppor-
    tunity to see dynamic, unusual event on another planet was rare. But
    protracted period of bad weather over Mars could jeopardize mapping
    of surface, Dr. Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ. said
    storm appeared to have reached its peak about Oct. 21 and there had
    been “a positive but very, very slow clearing of the dust. . . . We’re
    quite clearly seeing the south polar cap.” Polar cap, he said, was not as
    bright as expected, indicating dust had not cleared away completely
    in that region. Scientists believed they were able to see Deimos, tiny
     outer moon of Mars. Photos, made in three sequences at intervals,
     provided complete coverage of planet as it rotated about its axis.
     First two sequences each covered one Martian day; third covered
     about one third of day. Radio signals had reached Goldstone, Calif.,
     tracking station, were relayed to JPL, and were fed into computers
    that had converted signals to TV images. Mariner 9 was scheduled
     to enter Mars orbit Nov. 13. (NASA Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, 11/11-
     12/71; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/11-12/71)
November 1 I : Two USAF comsats launched Nov. 2 from ETR by Titan IIIC
     as part of improved series of Defense Satellite Communications Sys-
     tem (DSCS) satellites were in operational modes as programmed.
     After insertion into synchronous orbit over Pacific, first satellite had
     failed to turn on its telemetry system. Second satellite had turned on
     telemetry, but telemetry was sporadic. Subsequent efforts of ground
     controllers were successful and both satellites responded to ground
     commands. (SBD, 11/11/71,55)
  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory astronomers said in Cambridge
     that radio signals from Apollo I 5 CM Endeavor had passed into radio
     “dead spot” behind moon on Aug. 3, faded away, and reappeared on
     receivers of observatory’s 46-m (150-ft) radio antenna two minutes
     later. Subsequent analyses had confirmed that signals had been trans-
     mitted through moon’s body. (AP, NYT, 11/13/71)
* Political and Security Committee of U.N. General Assembly unani-
     mously approved Convention on International Liability for Damage
      Caused by Space Objects. Treaty held space powers “absolutely
     liable” to pay compensation for loss of life, injury, or property
     damage. Amount of compensation would be determined by agree-
     ment between nation responsible for damage and country or coun-
     tries suffering damage, or by three-member claims commission, whose
      decision would be recommendation not legally binding. Canada,
      Japan, Sweden, and Iran abstained from voting to signify dissatis-
      faction because treaty did not compel payment of compensation.

                                     313
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
November 11

     Convention would be open for signature in Washington, Moscow, and
     London following General Assembly approval-which          was assured,
     New York Times later said. Treaty had been completed after seven-
     year delay caused by U.S.S.R.’s contention that claims should be
     decided directly by governments through diplomatic channels and
     without arbitration. U.S.S.R. had agreed to compromise in June.
     (NYT, 11/12/71, 1; UN PIO)
* Retirement of Jerome F. Lederer as NASA Director of Safety Jan. 14,
     1972, was announced by NASA. Internationally recognized authority
     on air and space flight safety had joined NASA as Director of Flight
     Safety for OMSF June 1, 1967, after having been Director of Flight
     Safety Foundation since 1947. Lederer, who had received NASA
     Exceptional Service Medal in 1969, would return to Flight Safety
     Foundation as part time consultant. (NASA Release 71-224)
   Magellanic Premium of American Philosophical Society was presented
     to JPL mathematicians Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren at
     Society’s Annual General Meeting in Philadelphia. Muller and Sjogren
     were cited for “their discovery of lunar mascons leading to the first
     detailed gravimetric map of the moon.” Magellanic gold medal had
     been presented only 22 times since inception in 1790. Most recent
     recipient had been Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, in 1966.
      (J P L Release 604)
   Mrs. Betty J. Baldwin, ARC computer programmer, had been selected
     one of top 10 business women of the year by American Business
     Women’s Assn., for progress as NASA civil service employee and in-
     terests in educational and character-building programs, ARC Astrogram
     announced. (ARC Astrogram, 11/11/71, 1)
   Delivery of first of USAF’S 96 F-l11D supersonic jet bombers, equipped
     with Mark I1 avionics package, to 27th Tactical Fighter Wing at
     Cannon AFB, N. Mex., was announced by DOD in memorandum to cor-
     respondents. (Kelly, W Star, 11/18/71, A4)
   Future of Soviet airlines under new five-year plan being drafted by
     U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet was described by G. Ustinov in Izvestia
     article: Draft “envisages the introduction on the civil airlines of new,
     comfortable, rapid, and more economic aircraft. The operation of the
      supersonic TU-144 . . . will begin. Almost all existing aircraft will
      be modified. The network of airports will be expanded. The trans-
      portation of passengers will increase considerably, and . . . 100 mil-
      lion hectares E247 million acres] of fields and forests will be treated
      from the air.” (FBIS-SOV-71-222, 11/17/71, K4)
 November 12: Pmhington Daily News editorial said Mariner 9 had al-
      ready accomplished “enough to win plaudits from any but the most
      jaded.” It had “photographed . . . one of Mars’ moons . . . and with
      luck will go into orbit around the planet itself, taking pictures of
      surface details no bigger than a football field.
           No one can tell where the ever-expanding horizons of man’s
       66


      knowledge will lead, nor the extent to which Mariner 9 will enlarge
      our knowledge of the solar system. But jaded we are not, and we
      are frank to say that we are downright thrilled by Mariner’s exploits.”
      ( W News, 11/12/71)
 * Portrait of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, third NASA Administrator (1969-1970)
      was unveiled in NASA Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. James C.

                                    314
                                                                  November 12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Paine; and Rep. George P. Miller
    (D-Calif.) , Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astro-
    nautics. Portrait, by artist William Draper, would hang at NASA Hq.
    (Transcript)
* Cost of full operational space transportation system had been put at
    $12.7 billion, “although new cost-cutting efforts may reduce that
    figure,” Univ. of Michigan engineer T. A. Heppenheimer said in
    Science article. Shuttle’s scientific benefits “do not in themselves jus-
    tify its development. . . . Defense, commercial, and applications
    benefits combine as well to furnish the justification. Nevertheless, the
    scientific benefits should not be overlooked. For the first time,
    laboratory-type investigations may be carried out in space, not by
    scientist-astronauts, but by scientists.” (Science, 11/12/71, 646-7)
  Seattle Times quoted Dow Jones News Service as saying Italian govern-
    ment had approved funding of $320 million for joint Boeing Co. and
    Aeritalia S. P. A. development of STOL aircraft to carry 100 to 150
    passengers. Aeritalia hoped to begin production in 1974 or 1975.
     Boeing could decide to produce aircraft in U.S. if market warranted.
     (Seattle Times, 11/12/71)
  Discovery of diamonds in 1.4-kg (3-lb) .meteorite that fell through roof
    of storehouse on Finnish island of Havro Aug. 2 was announced by
     Smithsonian Center for Short-Lived Phenomena. It was sixth such
     meteorite to be found. First discovery of meteoritic diamonds had
     been made by Russian scientists in 1888 while analyzing meteorite
     found near Novoured. (UPI, NYT, 11/13/71)
  Univ. of Toronto had announced discovery by astronomer Dr. Sidney
     Van Den Bergh of three galaxies composed of thousands of stars,
     Washington Post reported. ( W Post, 11/12/71, A36)
 November 12-13: Scientists at P. N. Lebedev Physics Institute and Soviet
     Academy of Sciences’ Crimean Astrophysics Observatory experimented
     with laser to locate reflector left on moon by ApoZZo 15 astronauts
     during July 26-Aug. 7 mission. Pravda later quoted Soviet scientist
     A. Sukhanovsky as saying experiment was “continuation of research
     work on the ‘earth-moon’ system by the laser location method.” First
     successful experiment to locate French reflector on Lunokhod 1 had
     been conducted in December 1970. “The accuracy of the measurement
     of the distance to the reflector was then in the order of several meters.”
      In current experiment “for the first time we have succeeded in meas-
      uring the distance to the U.S. angular reflector.” Fact US. scientists
      had not succeeded in locating French reflector on Lunokhod 1 was
      “apparently connected with differences in the methods of calculating
      the reflector’s supposed coordinates.” (FBIS-SOV-71-266, 11/23/71,
     L1)
 November 13-15: Mariner 9, launched by NASA May 30, was inserted into
      elliptical orbit around Mars at 7:32 pm EST Nov. 13 after 15-min
      engine burn and became first spacecraft to orbit another planet in
      solar system. Orbital parameters were close to planned ones: 1398-km
       (868.7-mi) periapsis altitude, 12-hr 34-min period, and 64.5O inclina-
      tion. Spacecraft propulsion system and attitude control systems per-
      formed flawlessly after 400-million-km (248-million-mi ) journey.
      Mariner 9 would orbit Mars twice daily while photographing up to
      70% of Martian surface in next three months.

                                      315
November 13-15                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




November 13-15: Mariner 9 became the first spacecraft to orbit the planet Mars.
The first photos of the planet were obscured by a dust storm but later pictures
revealed sinuous rilles whose origin was puzzling. The valley above, 700 kilometers
 (435 miles) long, was photographed Jan. 22, 1972, in the Mars Rasena region.
Such rilles might have been produced by collapse of the roof over subsurface lava
flows. They raised the possibility of erosion by water in ancient Martian history.

                                       316
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971             November 13-15

November 13-15: Inserted into orbit
around Mars Nov. 13, Mariner 9
took man's first closeup photos of
the Martian moon Phobos Nov. 29
and 30. The computer-enhanced photo
at the right was taken 5543 kilo-
meters (3444 miles) from Phobos
Nov. 30. The profusion of craters
suggested that the moon is very old
and possesses considerable structural
strength. The Martian volcanic moun-
tain Nix Olympica (below) was
photographed in late January 1972
as the planefs dust storm subsided.
 The mountain was 500 kilometers
 (310 miles) across at the base, more
than twice as broad as the most mas-
sive volcanic pile on the earth. Steep
cliffs fell from the mountain flanks
to a great plain. The complex muL
tiple volcanic vent at the summit was
65 kilometers (40miles) in diameter.




                                         317
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTIGS, 1971
November 13-15

       First photos were obscured by dust storm but before end of month
   Mariner 9 had shown that Mars bulged at equator, was “rougher gravi-
   tationally” than expected, and probably had wide variety of rock
   compositions; instruments had detected small amounts of water vapor
   at south pole and warmer air pockets above pole [see Nov. 16-23].
   Spacecraft also made man’s first close photo of potato-shaped Martian
   moon Deimos [see Nov. 26-27] and photos of moon Phobos [see
   NOV.29-30].
       First Mariner photos from orbit were broadcast live by national TV
   network, but detail was limited by dust storms that had raged on sur-
   face since September. Dr. Robert H. Steinbacher, JPL project scien-
   tist, said “We’re hopeful that as the storm dies down we can get some
    good pictures of the dust settling to the surface. This is an unprece-
   dented chance to watch changes in the Martian weather.” He said that
   if cameras worked properly pictures would be 1000 times better than
   any earthbound telescopes had taken.
       On Nov. 14 spacecraft transmitted three sequences of TV pictures. Of
   more than 60 photos returned, only seven revealed surface features.
    Dust storm continued and atmospheric experts could see no sign of
    abatement. Dust obscuring planet was apparently very fine sand
    which high winds pushed to height of as much as 16 km (10 mi)
   above surface.
       On fourth orbit spacecraft successfully completed orbit trim ma-
   neuver at 9:44 pm EST Nov. 15. Maneuver changed orbital period of
   spacecraft to make it synchronous with Mars viewing period of Deep
    Space Station antenna at Goldstone, Calif. New orbital parameters
    were 1394-km (866.2-mi) periapsis altitude, 11-hr 57-min 12-sec
   period, and 64.34O inclination.
       Data from remote-sensing instruments confirmed earlier observa-
    tions that carbon dioxide was major constituent of Martian atmos-
    phere and also suggested possibility of “hot spots” on planet. Dr.
    Ellis D. Miner of JPL said sensor detected .average temperature rise
    of 6.7 K (12’F) in area 24 km (15 mi) square below Mars equator.
    Temperature rise might indicate hole in cloud cover exposing moun-
    tain peak or plateau reflecting residual heat or evidence of internal
    source of heat on Mars. uv spectrometer data indicated dust storm
    was made up of fairly coarse-grained, sandlike particles. (NASA Proj
    Off; Wilford, NYT, 11/14-16/71; O’Toole, W Post, 11/14-15/71;
    W Star, 11/16/71, A4)
November 13: U.S.S.R. announced Mars 2 and Mars 3 (launched May 19
    and May 28 and scheduled to encounter planet Mars within two
    weeks) would attempt to put first man-made objects on “red” planet.
     Dr. Carl Sagan, Cornell Univ. astronomer, said Soviet scientists had
    told him Mars 2 and Mars 3 were equipped to land instrument probes.
    He said he understood they contained flammable material that would
    destroy any earth bacteria when probes completed investigation. (W
    Star, 11/14/71, A6)
November 14: Gold issues of first annual United Nations Peace Medal,
     issued to coincide with U.N.’s 26th anniversary, had been presented
    to Apollo 15 astronauts, AP reported. For collectors, medals would
     be in silver and bronze. (B Sun, 11/14/71, A3)

                                   318
                                                              November 15-29
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

November 15-29: Explorer 45 (SSS-A)         Small Scientific Satellite was SUC-
     cessfully launched for NASA by Italian crew at 8:52 am local time
     (12:52 am EST) from San Marco launch platform off coast of Kenya.
     Four-stage Scout launch vehicle boosted 50-kg (110-lb) satellite into
     orbit with 27 034.5-km (16 798.5-mi) apogee, 220.8-km (137.2-mi)
  . perigee, 469-min period, and 3.57O inclination. Primary objective was
     to measure characteristics and formation of earth‘s ring current and
     development of main-phase magnetic storms ; relation between mag-
     netic storms, aurora, and acceleration of particles within inner m a g
     netosphere ; and relative importance o€ various diffusion mechanisms
     in populating radiation zones at 4- to 5-earth-radii elliptical equa-
     torial orbit.
         By Nov. 29 all satellite household €unctions were nominal but
     spacecraft was coning at higher angle than planned, which would
     make data reduction slightly more difficult. Attempts were being made
     to reduce coning angle. Five experiments had been turned on and
     were operating satisfactorily. One experiment, charged particle de-
     tector, remained to be turned on.
         Explorer 45, 26-sided polyhedral spacecraft 63.5 cm (25 in) in
     diameter, attained length of 5.8 m (19 ft) with booms deployed. It
      was second US. satellite to be launched by Italy under April 30, 1969,
      launch agreement. First was Uhuru (Explorer 4 2 ) Small Astronomy
      Satellite launched from San Marco Dec. 12, 1970. Explorer 45 was
      most innovative and compact satellite in Explorer series to date; on-
      board data handling system could he reprogrammed by ground com-
      mand to concentrate on specific sets of data.
         Under NASA and Univ. of Rome agreement, NASA provided booster
      and satellite ; Italian team conducted assembly, checkout, and launch
      services on cost-reimbursable basis. NASA OSSA was responsible for
      overall direction of program. Satellite was designed and built at CSFC,
      which managed project. Lam managed Scout launch vehicle. (NASA
      Proj Off; NASA Release 71-212)
 November 15: NASA’s       M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot Wil-
      liam H. Dana, successfully completed its 11th flight from FRC. Objec-
      tives were to check out fuel jettison system and newly installed engine
       chamber purge system. (NASA Proj Off)
   Intersputnik, international space communications organization, was
      formed under agreement signed in Moscow by U S S R . , Bulgaria,
       Hungary, East Germany, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and
       Czechoslovakia. Tass later quoted agreement as saying “organization
       is open for accession by all states of the world. It will coordinate its
       activities with the International Telecommunications Union as well as
       with other organizations whose activities are related to the use of
       communication satellites.” (UPI, NYT, 11/17/71,9)
 * FuII deployment of Satellite Early Warning System (SEWS), “possibly in
        1972,” would alert US. to attack from any point on globe in seconds
       -“time to get strategic bombers into the air and to launch a missile
       counterstrike before enemy warheads arrive on US. targets”4J.S.
       News 8 Porld Report article said. DOD was “fairly confident” that
        Pearl Harbor type of attack was “becoming almost impossible.” TWO
       SEWS satellites, launched May 5, were reported in near-stationary orbit


                                      319
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
November 15

    about 40 000 km (25 000 mi) above Indian Ocean. They could moni-
    tor Soviet and Communist Chinese missile launches and detect and
    report nuclear explosions in atmosphere. (US News, 11/15/71, 10)
* President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. H. Guyford
    Stever as NSF Director. Dr. Stever would succeed Dr. William D.
    McElroy, whose resignation would be effective Feb. 1. Dr. Stever was
    member of National Science Board and of Advisory Panel to House
     of Representatives on Science and Astronautics. He had served as
     USAF Chief Scientist and as Chairman of President Nixon’s Pre-
     Inauguration Task Force on Science and Technology. (PD, 11/22/71,
     1528, 1542)
  MSC issued RFPS to develop and test polymer seal materials for space
     shuttle propulsion systems. Proposals, €or fixed-price R&D contract,
     were due Dec. 3, with work to be concluded 12 mos after contract
     award. (MSC Release 71-52)
* House passed and sent to Senate H.R. 11487, bill to permit sale of land
     at KSC for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 11/15/71, H10998,
     D1171)
  FAA announced award of $1 59 362 contract to Northwest Environmental
     Technology Laboratories, Inc., to measure and evaluate effectiveness
     of airborne commercial seeding techniques in dissipating fog at air-
     ports. (FAA Release 71-185)
  RAND Corp. President Henry S. Rowen resigned. New York Times later
     quoted sources as saying his departure had been caused partly by
     DOD’s “dissatisfaction with Rand’s role in the release of the Pentagon
     papers [report on background of U.S. involvement in Vietnam War
     prepared at request of then Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara
     and classified by DOD].” Both Rowen and RAND Board Chairman New-
     ton N. Minow had denied relationship between Rowen retirement and
     Pentagon papers. (Roberts, NYT, 11/16/71,22)
  Hanna Reitsch, described by Washington Evening Star as “Nazi Ger-
     many’s famous daredevil woman test pilot and the only woman in
      German history ever to be given two Iron Crosses for her exploits,”
     told of her glider research during Star interview. “I am searching for
                                                                         ..  .
     the right currents over the Alps. I don’t have to worry about
      borders in the air. . . . As we enter space work more, we will realize
      how small mankind is and how necessary it is to come together in
     peace.” (Dean, W Star, 11/16/71, B7)
 November 1.5-17: AIAA 2nd Symposium on Uranium Plasmas: Research and
      Applications was held in Atlanta, Ga. Symposium Chairman Robert G.
      Ragsdale, head of Advanced Reactor Concepts Section of LeRC Nuclear
      System Div., described cumulative impact of papers delivered in
      Astronautics and Aeronautics : “Significant progress in a number of
      research areas has been achieved along the road to determining the
      feasibility of gas-core reactors . . . [which] harness and control the
      energy released from a hydrodynamically contained fissioning uranium
      plasma. The major application studied to date is a gaseous-fueled rocket
      reactor. Other possible applications, such as nuclear-MHD power gener-
      ators and breeder reactors, are also beginning to receive some atten-
      tion.” Developments detailed at symposium argued “the possibility of
                                                           .
      an engine with a 5000-sec specific impulse and . . relatively high
      thrust-to-weight ratio.” Gas-core reactors “could possibly send astro-

                                     320
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             November 15-17

    nauts to Mars and return them safely to Earth in a total round-trip
    time of 60 days.” (A&A, 11/71,6)
November 15-19: Huntsville Assn. of Technical Societies (HATS) held
    international Congress on Space for Mankind’s Benefit in Huntsville,
    Ala. Purpose of meeting was to communicate to nonaerospace public,
    in nontechnical language, practical benefits and dividends of US.
    space program.
       Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for
    Planning, in keynote address said tools and techniques originating
    from space exploration had arrived just in time to aid ecologists in
    saving planet earth. “Many benefits are now being realized, but we
    can expect far greater returns as increasingly sophisticated devices go
    into service.” (Program ; Birmingham Post-Herald, 11/17/71)
November 16-23: Photos from Mariner 9 (launched May 30) showed dust
    storm on Mars appeared to have subsided somewhat over south pole
    area Nov. 16, and by Nov. 19 photos showed dust settling to surface
    in a t least two regions of planet. Scientists believed winds might have
    died down in these areas.
        Mariner scientists reported in news conference at JPL Nov. 19 that
    instruments had shown planet was flattened at poles and bulging at
    equator and had more irregularities in its gravitational field than
    moon had. Bulge was discovered in area called Tharsis, on equator,
    making planet’s diameter 39 km (24 mi) greater at equator than
    through poles. Infrared spectrometer had measured reflected radiations
    that suggested wide range of rock compositions on Mars surface, vary-
    ing from high in silicon and oxygen to low. Spectrometer had also
     detected small amounts of water vapor at south pole, as had been
     observed on previous Mariner flights.
        On Nov. 23 Mariner 9’s infrared interferometer spectrometer (IRIS)
     detected pocket of warm air above south polar cap in same region as
     water vapor traces had been found earlier. Air pocket was about
     240 K (-30°C). (Wilford, NYT, 11/20/71, 51; O’Toole, W Post,
     11/20, 23, 24/71 ; Miles, LA Times, 11/24/71 ; JPL Hist Off)
November 16: NASA notified U.S.S.R. of Mariner 9 Mars orbit in telexed
     message to I. A. Zhulin, Soviet space expert, in Moscow. Message,
     from Dan Schneiderman, Mariner 9 Project Manager at JPL, said
     spacecraft had achieved desired orbit but ephemeris used in planning
     orbit required 60-km (37-mi) adjustment. Mars “appears brighter than
     expected by a factor of two. Surface features are almost entirely
     obscured, but the south polar cap can be seen because of its brightness.
     This is believed to be the result of a dust storm which covers the entire
     planet.” Infrared instruments on the two Mariner 9 cameras “appear
     to be seeing the [Martian] surface, but interpretation of their results
     is complicated by effects of the dust storm.
        Message invited Soviet request for additional orbit information and
     described Nov. 10 and 1 photos taken by Mariner 9 before Mars
                                  1
     arrival. Photos had shown “four distinct dark features,” one “possibly
     Nix Olympica.” Nov. 12 photos had shown streaks 1000 km (620 mi)
     long originating at fourth spot. “Changes in appearance of these four
     dark areas over the coming weeks may provide unique information
     about the dust storm.” (NASA Release 71-229)

                                     321
November 16                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  Pioneer-F, 250-kg (550-lb) spacecraft, was expected to be ready for
     launch from ETR in late February or early March 1972 and would fly
     by Jupiter in December 1973, NASA scientists announced at JPL press
     conference. Pioneer-G was to be launched in 1973 and fly past Jupiter
     in 1974. NASA Director of Planetary Programs Robert S. Kraemer said
     Pioneer flights would be “vital precursor” to future Grand Tour flights
     to outer planets. Pioneer spacecraft would be first to penetrate vast
     asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and first to study planet’s
     intense radiation belts. (Wilford, NYT, 11/17/71, 26)
  Assistant chief designer for U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 moon rover said in
     Tass interview that all goals of mission had been attained. Lunokhod I
     had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 and had ex-
     ceeded expected three-month operating time and provided valuable
     information. Mission had resulted in acquisition of new skills and
     development of new techniques and control methods. Principles of
     remote control, reliability, and durability, as well as power supply,
     might find application on earth. (FBIS-SOV-71-223-3,           11/18/71,
     L2-3 )
  NASA announced it had issued RFPS for use of space-related technology in
     solving domestic problems of air pollution, water pollution, solid
     waste management, and clinical medicine. Proposals would be reviewed
     by experts in each field at ARC, URC, and MSC. Responses were re-
     quested by Dec. 15, 1971. One or more projects in each field might
     be selected for negotiations and award of contract worth up to $75 000
     for maximum of one year. (NASA Release 71-226)
* Dr. Cyril A. Ponnamperuma-Univ.        of Maryland scientist, former Chief
     of ARC Exobiology Branch, and leading authority on chemical building
     blocks of life-commented on Oct. 29 report by Columbia Univ. scien-
     tists of “waterless” synthesis of amino acids suggesting life might arise
     on waterless planet. Dr. Ponnamperuma said chemical reactions in
     experiment were not independent of water’s role, since formic acid-
     used in experiment-contained hydroxyl which was water molecule.
     Synthesis of life building blocks, amino acids, that had been identified
     in interstellar base had thus not been waterless. (NYT, 11/17/71, 13)
  House rejected amendment to H.R. 11731, FY 1972 Defense Establish-
     ment appropriations bill, that would strike out $801.6 million for F-14
     USN jet aircraft procurement. (CR,   11/16/71, H11082-117)
* NAE issued An Assessment o Industrial Activity in the Field o BW-
                                  f                                    f
     medical Engineering. Report of Committee on Interplay of Engineering
     with Biology and Medicine recommended creation of Government-
     supported national advisory body to inform and make recommendations
     on development and marketing of biomedical products. It also recom-
     mended establishment of separate Government agency to develop and
     test prototype products, issue licenses for production, and subsidize
     production when market for product was too limited to allow profit.
     (NAE memo to press)
* Elrey B. Jeppesen, Chairman of Board of Jeppesen and Co.-world’s
     largest compiler and publisher of air navigation materials-received
     FAA% Distinguished Service Award “in recognition of his outstanding
     contributions to the progress and safety of aviation.” Award was pre-
     sented at Colorado Aviation Historical Society Dinner in Denver.
      (FAA Release 71-184)


                                     322
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              November 17

November 17: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 4455 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    487-km (302.6-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 92.1-min
    period, and 70.9’ inclination. Satellite reentered April 9, 1972. (GSFC
    SSR, 11/30/71; 4/30/72; SBD, 11/23/71,111)
  Lunar roving vehicle (LRV) which would transport astronauts John W.
    Young and Charles M. Duke, Jr., on moon during Apollo 16 mission
    had successfully completed prelaunch checks and been installed on
    lunar module for flight, KSC announced. Astronauts Young and Duke
    would make three excursions on LRV in Descartes area of moon during
    mission, scheduled for March 1972. Final approval of LRV flight readi-
    ness was given by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director,
    after installation review. LRV was managed by MSFC and was built by
    Boeing Co. (KSC Release 259-71)
  Skylab flight hardware manufacturing was nearing completion, MSFC
0

    announced. Post-manufacturing checkout would soon begin at indus-
    trial and Government installations. Major Skylab spacecraft compo-
    nents include Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM) , airlock
    module (AM ), and multiple docking adapter (MDA). (MSFC Release
    71-212)
* Appointment of David S. Gabriel as Manager of AEC-NASA Space
    Nuclear Systems Office was announced by NASA. Gabriel, Deputy
    Manager, would succeed Milton Klein, who had accepted position as
    Associate Administrator for Research, Development, and Demonstra-
    tion Activities in Federal Railway Administration. Gabriel had joined
    NACA at LeRC in 1943. (NASA Release 71-228)
  Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Kenya,
    Africa, carrying GSFC experiment to conduct stellar astronomy studies.
    Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
  Fine Arts Commission-overseer of Federal architecture in Washington,
    D.C.-endorsed dans for $400-millionNational Air and %ace Museum
    but requested architect Gyo Obata to redesign facade details. (Combes,
    W Post, 11/18/71, H3)
* FAA announced appointment of Dr. Alan J. Grobecker of Institute for
    Defense Analysis (IDA) to direct new DOT High Altitude Climatic
    Impact Assessment Program. Purpose of program was to provide basic
    data for projected operation of supersonic aircraft at altitudes ahove
    14 000 m (45 000 ft). (DOT Release R-81)
  Apollo 15 astronauts on European tour met with Pope Paul VI in Rome.
    Pope told them he hoped their voyage to moon would help men appre-
    ciate God and live in harmony. (AI’, V Post, 11/18/71, H3)
  House by vote of 342 to 51 passed H.R. 11731, $7l-billion FY 1972
9

    Defense Dept. appropriations bill, after rejecting amendment to ear-
    mark $10 million to develop two prototype, light, air-superiority
    aircraft for USN as alternate to F-14 aircraft. (CR, 11/17/71, H11162-
    203 )
* Tass quoted U.S.S.R. scientists as saying it was possible to observe long-
    life plasma as “light of blinding brightness, and freely soaring in
    space,” with optical instrument. Optical plasmatron at Physics Institute
    of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had enabled scientists to apply
    energy to plasma by light beam from quantum generator. Broad
    application of technique could be expected in physics, technology, and
    engineering. (FBIS-sov-71-223-3,     11/18/71, L2)

                                    323
November 17                       ASTRONAU’l’ICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

 Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. David Dewhirst said in Cambridge that
    irregularities in orbit of Neptune, eighth planet from sun, indicated
    possible presence of another body. “But I must emphasize that at
    present this is only a notion.” Dr. Dewhirst said US. Naval Observa-
    tory had supplied photos for study. (UPI,W News, 11/18/71, 15)
 Baltimore Sun editorial commented on quantity of new scientific data to
    be expected from U.S. Muriner 9 and U.S.S.R. Murs 2 and 3 probes
    of Mars-data     “certain to be gathered later if not now.” Whatever
    was learned, “the store of mystery held by the skies and even their
    nearest objects will remain enormous. . . . The admiration for man’s
    persistence in pitting his intelligence, skill, courage and inventiveness
    against the solar system’s magnificent teases is equaled by the folly
    of supposing we shall ever read any but a few of their overpowering
    riddles.” (B Sun, 11/17/71)
November 18: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in speech
    before National Space Club that Apollo program would end with
    Apollo 16 and 17 launches in 1972. Later, responding to question
    concerning possible cancellation of Apollo 17 because of FY 1973
    budget restraints, Dr. Fletcher said, “The fate of Apollo 17 is beyond
    my control at the present time.”
       NASA was shifting emphasis, Dr. Fletcher said in speech: “When
    Apollo ends, most of our space activities planned for this decade will
    be in Earth orbit-and       Moon exploration, for a time, will be left
    completely to the Soviets.” Continuing effort to explore planets also
    was related to earth studies. “I am sure that much of what we learn
    will have direct and valuable application to our understanding of
    Earth and our current concern with environmental protection.” Apollo
    photos of earth had helped create concern for world’s environment.
    “I am glad to say that NASA is now well prepared to take a leading role
    in defining and responding to this concern.” Apollo technology and
    equipment would be used directly in Skylab and directly or indirectly
    in space shuttle, Dr. Fletcher said. “Moreover, we gained invaluable
    experience in Earth orbital operations in the Gemini program and on
    the way to the Moon and back. We are well prepared for the next
    logical steps in near-Earth space. I wish very much we could continue
                       ...
    lunar exploration        but if we have to make hard choices in this
    decade, then the right choice is to return to Earth orbit and defer
    lunar exploration.”
       NASA hoped to keep open option of additional Apollo missions in
    earth orbit. “This would enable us to carry out additional experiments
    in our Earth resources program, and would also facilitate our planning
    for cooperative flights with the Soviet Union.”
       Worldwide demand for applications satellites could be met only by
    production of space shuttle. “The key to our ability to help our coun-
    try and to serve mankind is now the shuttle. The sooner we build it,
    the better we can serve.” (Text; Av Wk, 11/29/71, 13)
 Bochum Observatory in West Germany said it had received what appeared
    to be on and off switching signals from Soviet Mars probes, Mars 2
    and 3. (AP, W Post, 11/19/71, A3)
 Atomic Energy Commission announced Communist China had conducted
    atmospheric nuclear explosion test of low-yield (20000 tons) at 2:OO
    pm local time. Explosion was 12th Chinese nuclear test and first since

                                    324
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               November 18

     Oct. 14, 1970. Test was conducted at top of Lop Nor proving ground
    in Sinkiang Province. Dr. Ralph Lapp, physicist, later said pattern of
    Chinese nuclear tests indicated Chinese had intended to explode larger
    hydrogen device that required small atomic blast to trigger thermo-
     nuclear reaction. Dr. Lapp believed hydrogen bomb failed to go off .
     Other experts said explosion could have been test of intermediate-
     range ballistic missile. (Auerbach, W Post, 11/19/71, A3; Lyons,
    NYT, 11/19/71,1)
  AIAA Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was presented to Dr.
     Hubertus Strugbold, former chief scientist of AFSC Aerospace Medical
     Div., during ceremonies at San Antonio, Tex. Citation was for “sig-
     nificant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity
     in the art and science of space travel.” Dr. Strughold was cited for
     establishing rational biomedical functions for manned space explora-
    tion. (AFSC Newsreview, 1/72,13)
  Moscow radio reported first Soviet sounding of outer space by radio
     wave. Scientists at Univ. of Kharkov had used geophysical rockets and
     other means to explore to 5000-km (3100-mi) altitude. Uninterrupted
     picture of electronic concentration “and its temporary fluctuations at
     any point at this height and also in the horizontal plane” had been
     obtained. Findings had confirmed scientists’ model of the earth’s
     ionosphere. ( FBIS-s0v-71-237-12/9/7l7 L4)
  Senate Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 11731,
     $70.2-billion FY 1972 Defense Establishment appropriations bill, after
     decreasing House-passed figure by $805.5 million, (Sen Com Off)
  MIT had broken even financially during 1970-1971 academic year, AP
     reported, “but only by using funds that otherwise would have gone
     into endowments.” In final annual report as MIT President, Dr. Howard
     W. Johnson had said outlook was not bright if MIT had to continue
     using unrestricted funds for current costs. Another way budget was
     balanced was by increasing tuition costs. ( W Post, 11/19/71, B5)
November 19: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 456 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     287-km (178.3-mi) apogee, 175-km (108.7-mi) perigee, 89.1-min
     period, and 72.8’ inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 2. (CSFC SSR,
     11/30/71; 12/31/71; SBD, 11/23/71,111)
  Working Groups of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences on develop-
     ment of compatible space rendezvous and docking systems would meet
     jointly in Moscow Nov. 29 to Dec. 7, NASA announced. NASA represen-
     tatives headed by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, would meet
     with Soviet group led by Academician B. N. Petrov to continue joint
     efforts called for by Oct. 28, 1970, agreement. (NASA Release 71-231)
* Biostack, West German experiment to study biological effects of cosmic
     radiation during space flight, would be carried in Apollo 16 CM, NASA
     announced. Experiment, by Univ. of Frankfurt, would stack four layers
     of biological systems-spores, seeds of European watercress, bean
     embryos, and encysted eggs of brine shrimp-between different physi-
     cal detectors of heavy particle tracks (nuclear emulsions and plastics).
     Measurements of effect of particles on biologic material could be
     compared with effect of same particles on detecting layers to provide
     data on strength and other characteristics of particles. Combined
     action of heavy cosmic ions and space environment would be evalu-
     ated by comparing results with those from balloon-borne Biostacks

                                    325
November 19                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

      and with ground-based irradiation experiments. Research on biological
      effects of heavy nuclei was significant because of possible relationship
      to biological effects of space flight on man. Experiment was sponsored
      by German Ministry for Education and Science. (NASA Release 71-230)
 * AEC released summary report on effects of Nov. 6 Cannikin blast of five-
      megaton nuclear device on Amchitka Island, Alaska. Desired data had
      been obtained on performance of Spartan warhead. Analyses of radio-
      active melt, expected to be completed by spring 1972, were required
      to evaluate warhead performance fully. There had been “no detectable
      release of radioactivity to the marine or surface environment.” Meas-
      urements would “continue for a number of years.” No large earth-
      quake had been triggered although “hundreds of after-shocks” had
      been registered in vicinity until collapse of cavity created by detona-
      tion. Ground motion had been felt “strongly on Amchitka, distinctly
      at kdak, nearly 200 miles [320 km] away, and less distinctly at
      Shemya, somewhat farther away.” No large ocean wave from ocean
      floor movement had been recorded. Observed effects on living species
     on and near Amchitka Island had indicated %o permanent harm will
     result from the test to any population of mammals, birds, fish, other
     marine life, or plant life.” (AEC Release 0-221)
   On second anniversary of its emplacement on moon by Apollo 12 astro-
     nauts, atomic battery designed to power Apollo 12 experiments for
     one year was still generating at more than 70 w. Battery had been
     designed to produce 63.5-w power. Apollo 12 instruments were still
     reporting data. Identical batteries, fueled by radioactive plutonium 238
     and taken to moon by Apollo 14 and 15, were generating more than
     70 w. Apollo 16 and 17 would land similar batteries on moon during
      1972 missions, AEC reported. (UPI, V Post, 11/20/71, A3)
* O$ce of Management and Budget had asked NASA to cut FY 1973 budget
     request “quite a few million dollars’’ below $3.3-billion FY 1972
     budget according to New York Times’ sources, Times said. Dale D.
     Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, had
     said Apollo 16 and 17 “look firm,” but could “be in trouble’’ if there
     was significant cut in NASA funding. Other sources had said NASA
     had alternate plans that included elimination of one or both Apollo
     flights and curtailment, cancellation, or delay of other projects.
      (Wilford, NYT, 11/19/71)
   Daniel Guggenheim Medal was presented to Dr. Archibald E. Russell,
     Chief Designer for Bristol Aircraft Corp., during Washington, D.C.,
     ceremonies marking first William Littlewood Memorial Lecture spon-
     sored by NAC and Washington sections of AIAA and SAE. Award was
     for “personal devotion to aircraft engineering and design and par-
     ticularly for his leadership of the Bristol team in development of the
     Concorde SST.” Peter G . Masefield, Chairman of British Airports
     Authority, delivered first Littlewood lecture, “Aviation and the En-
     vironment.,’ NAC Man of Distinction Award was given posthumously
     to William Littlewood, former American Airlines Vice President and
     aviation engineering consultant. (NAC Release)
* President Nixon had asked Congress for $9.1 million to purchase new
     presidential backup aircraft to replace 13-yr-old Boeing 707 used as
     backup aircraft for Spirit of ’76, Washington Post reported. Presi-

                                    326
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              November 19

     dent’s aircraft, formerly known as Air Force One, was Boeing 707-
     320-B delivered to USAF in 1962. ( W Post, 11/19/71, B7)
  Senate Committee on Foreign Relations favorably reported Protocol to
     enlarge ICAO Council membership from 27 to 30 members. Enlarged
     Council would reflect expanding membership of ICAO due to establish-
     ment of increasing number of civil airlines throughout world. (CR,
     11/19/71, D1201; ICAO PIO)
* Mrs. E. Margaret Burbidge would become first woman director of Royal
     Greenwich Observatory in 1972, Washington Post reported. British-
     born former professor of astronomy at Univ. of California would not
     inherit title of Astronomer Royal, traditionally bestowed upon Observa-
     tory Director. She would direct staff of 200, including 25 women
     scientists. (Nossiter, W Post, 11/19/71, A26)
  FAA announced availability from GPO of FAA Statistical Handbook of
     Aviation (5007-0166). Publication contained historical and statistical
     data for 1 yrs ending Dec. 31, 1969. (FAA Release 71-183)
                 1
November 20: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 457 from Plesetsk into orbit with
     1221-km (758.7-mi) apogee, 1184-km (735.7-mi) perigee, 109.4-min
     period, and 74” inclination. (GSFC SSR, 11/30/71; SBD, 11/23/71,
     111)
  Pioneer-F, scheduled for early 1972 launch and Dec. 1973 Jupiter flyby,
     began its final test in TRW Inc. vacuum chamber. Spacecraft would
     operate for week on nuclear batteries in cold and almost total darkness
     to simulate Jupiter approach. Pioneer’s voyage would be longest space
     trip to date-an estimated 660 days-and most hazardous since Pioneer
     would attempt for first time to fly through asteroid belt. Typical
     mathematical model of asteroid belt gave Pioneer 1-in-10 chance of
     penetrating belt without serious mishap. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/21/71,
     A3 1
  NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets carrying GSFC stellar
     uv experiments from WSMR. One flight was unsuccessful. (SR list)
November 21: New York Times said Mariner 9 dust storm encounter had
     < L made possible   some unique experiments in global meteorology-
     experiments that may help us to understand the weather of our own
     planet.” Storm had lasted longer than any observed so far. “Since it
     is hoped that Mariner will continue sending pictures for at least three
     months, it seems likely that it will record the gradual dissipation of
     the storm, which seems to have already begun, and in doing so
     hopefully will reveal wind patterns on the planet. This may help
      scientists understand why the storm is global, a phenomenon never
     seen on earth, and establish the science of meteorology-now      a pro-
                                                                     a more
     vincial one based on the weather of only one planet-on
     cosmopolitan basis.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/21/71, 4:s)
   CBS commentator Walter Cronkite received Bradford Washington Award
      of Boston Museum of Science for “ooutstariding contribution toward
                                           Award, which included $5000 and
      public understanding of ~cience.’~
      gold medal, was presented by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at din-
      ner commemorating museum’s 35th anniversary. Cronkite was CBS
      anchorman for coverage of most NASA manned space flight missions.
       (AP, Denver Post, 11/22/71; Lovell Off)
 November 22: Study of telemetry from unsuccessful Europa 2 European
      launch vehicle that failed on launch Nov. 5 had shown vehicle buckled

                                    327
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
November 22

     at 1st-end stage junction 2 min 30 sec after liftoff during excessive
     pitch-over maneuver, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported.
     Vehicle’s structural limits were exceeded; 2nd stage nozzle pierced
     liquid oxygen tank atop 1st stage, causing it to explode; 2nd stage
     separated in tumbling flight and exploded 10 sec later; and 3rd stage,
     4th stage perigee motor, and payload fell into South Atlantic about
     490 km (305 mi) downrange. Failure had been attributed to loss of
     inertial-guidance-system signals between 1 min 45 sec and 1 min 47
     sec after launch. Engines on 1st stage had driven Europa 2 below
     programmed trajectory because corrective signals had not been sent
     to stage’s autopilot. Exact cause of inertial-guidance-system break-
     down had not been determined. If cause could not be established
     before Dec. 15, launch of 12th satellite in Europa 1-2 development
                         for April 13, 1972-would
     series-scheduled                                   have to be delayed.
      ( A v Wk, 11/22/71,19)
  MSC announced it had issued RFPS to 10 firms for $150000 firm-fixed-
     price R&D contract to study space walking requirements in space shut-
     tle program. Proposal called for investigation of emergency, contin-
     gency, and normal extravehicular and intravehicular activities (EVA/
     IVA) while outside earth’s atmosphere and study of protective equip-
     ment needed to perform EVA/IVA. Proposals were due Dec. 6 . (MSC
     Release 71-83)                                             \
* New $200-million international airport at Kansas City, Mo., was being
     built under NASA-developed management system, NASA announced.
     Midwest Research Institute, management consultant for project, was
     using KCI Management Information Center-fully equipped briefing
     room that resembled ICSC’S--ZS repository for reference data on air-
     port project. (NASA Release 71-232)
  It was “open secret” that USAF saw space shuttle as “broad highway
     that will lead to manned military space operations by the United
     States,” Universal Science News, Inc., said in Dallas Morning News.
     While “effort to keep NASA’s     civilian image seemed so important at
     one time that the military were allowed to start their own manned
      orbiting laboratory program, even though NASA has a similar project,”
     recent budget squeeze had “forced NASA and the Air Force closer to-
     gether in certain areas.” ( D a h s Morning News, 11/22/71)
* USAF reconnaissance satellite “Big Bird” launched in June was described
      in Newsweek article: “Streaking through its orbit, Big Bird scans
      broad land areas with one wide-angle camera, radios what it sees
      back to ground stations, and, on order, turns a giant ‘narrow angle’
      second camera on targets of special interest for closeup pictures-a
      multiple function that used to require at least two less sophisticated
      satellites.” Cameras in satellites 160 km (100 mi) above earth “can
      clearly photograph objects on the ground the size of small cars.”
      (Newsweek, 11/22/71, 18)
November 23: Four extra manned space flight missions to use four Apollo
     spacecraft and one Saturn V launch vehicle left after 1973 Skylab
     mission were proposed by MSC officials to NASA Associate Administra-
     tor for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at NASA Hq. Missions
     would include one lunar flight and three Saturn IB-launched earth-
     orbital missions. Houstun Chronicle later quoted MSC Deputy Director
     Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., who had presented proposal, as saying MSC

                                    328
                                                             November 23
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    plan called for one mission of up to nine days in lunar orbit. Astro-
    nauts could map 60% of lunar surface and place Nimbus weather
    satellite in lunar orbit to complete photography of entire moon in one
    year. (Hill, H Chron, 11/29/71)
  Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew over South Pole in twin-engine
    Piper Navajo aircraft to become first man to make solo flight over
    both North and South Poles during one journey. Long, who left San
    Francisco Nov. 5, had flown over North Pole to Stockholm, then to
    London, Africa, Brazil, and Chile before crossing South Pole. ( W
    Post, 11/23/71, B3)
  Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Plan-
    ning, was first speaker in L ~ R C Awareness Program series. Dr. Von
    Braun said at LeRC: “Our agency is at the crossroads. Our success
    story is our greatest enemy.” After four successful manned lunar
    landings, people had become complacent. If NASA fell behind U.S.S.R.
    in space, it wouId create another “Sputnik” environment. (Lewis
    News, 12/3/71, 1)
* NASA announced selection of TRW Systems Group for negotiations leading
    to $70-million contract for development of High Energy Astronomy
    Observatory ( HEAO) . Seven-year contract for two spacecraft would
    be awarded in 1972 and was expected to extend through launch and
    mission support for orbital operations. NASA planned to launch first
    HEAO unmanned scientific satellite from ETR on Titan 111 booster in
    1975 and second, 15 mos. later. (NASA Release 71-233; NYT,
    11/26/71, 30)
  Soviet defectors-writer Leonid Vladimirov, who defected in 1966, and
0

    scientist Anatoly Fedoseyev [see June 19l-said at London press con-
    ference that Soviet space technology had lagged behind that of US.
    and had produced less scientific data. Fedoseyev, not present but
    responding by tape recorder to questions put to him previously, said
    he did not think Soviet space achievements would be scientifically
    impressive for some time because Soviet space program was short of
    funds and technology level was low. Fedoseyev was said to have been
    responsible for bringing down U-2 reconnaissance aircraft pilot
    Francis Gary Powers in May 1960, Reuters later reported. (Reuters,
    B Sun, 11/24/71, A4)
* Senate by vote of 82 to 141 adopted amendment to H.R. 11731, FY 1972
    Defense Establishment appropriations bill, and passed bill by vote
    of 80 to 5. Amendment proposed by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.)
    would provide $250 million for F 4 jet aircraft for Israel. (CRY
     11/23/71, $29463-551)
  USN Naval Air Systems Command announced issuance of $3-million let-
     ter of offer and acceptance to U.K. Ministry of Defence for product
     support engineering services for Pegasus 1 engines for Harrier air-
                                                 1
    craft. Work would be performed by Hawker Siddeley Aviation, Ltd.
     (DOD Release 1191-71)
* Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space
     Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the
    proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trou-
     ble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago
     was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also
     far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” US. air and space accorn-

                                   329
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
November 23

    plishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the Ameri-
                .. .
    can people       they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s
    capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental
    aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael
    Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education
    about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social,
    cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a
                                                              .
    pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. . . If it lacks
    architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.”
       Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chair-
    man of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and
    Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the
    structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of
    aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will,
    within a decade or two, prove to be too small.” ( W Post, 11/23/71,
    A18, A19)
November 24: U.S.S.R. launched Mdniya ZZ-1 comsat from Plesetsk to
    ensure “functioning of the remote telephone-telegraph radio commu-
    nications systems in the Soviet Union, for relaying central television
    programs to stations” in Orbita network and participating interna-
    tional networks. Satellite was new comsat and part of further devel-
    opment of Soviet satellite communications system. Orbital parameters :
    39 553-km (24 577.1-mi) apogee, 516-km (320.6-mi) perigee, 712.0-
    min period, and 65.0’ inclination. ( FBIS-SOV-71-228-3, 11/26/71,
    L1; CSFC SSR, 11/30/71; UN Gen’l Assembly, A/AC.105/INF.243;
    SF, 5/72, 179)
  Tass announced that French equipment on Mars 3 (launched May 28)
    for investigating solar radio emission in one-meter-waveband experi-
    ment was functioning successiully. French instrumentation was manu-
    factured by French specialists under French-Soviet cooperative pro-
    gram. (FBIS-SOV-71-228-3,     11/26/71, L1)
  MSFC announced selection of Itek Corp. to perform large space tele-
    scope definition study under $400 000, 12-mo contract. High-resolu-
    tion optical telescope 3 m (120 in) in diameter would be placed in
    630- to 810-km (391- to 503-mi) orbit aboard research and applica-
    tions module (RAM) by reusable shuttle vehicle or Titan I11 launch
    vehicle in late 1970s as national facility for operation by many astron-
    omers. (MSFC Release 71-219)
  Merrill H. Mead, Chief of ARC Programs and Resources Office, had been
    named ARC Deputy Director of Administration, ARC Astrogram re-
    ported. (ARC  Astrogram, 11/24/71,1)
  Mariner 9 and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 race to Mars was “exciting race for
    knowledge and the fame of exploration, exemplifying the kind of
    peaceful competition the world needs,” Washington Evening Star edi-
    torial commented. “If Mariner 9 reveals half of what it was sent out
    to find, it will be worth much more than the $150 million it is cost-
    i,g.” (W Star, 11/24/71)
* Boris Sergievsky, World War I aviator with Imperial Russian Air Force
     and later leading test pilot in US., died in New York at age 83. He
    had set seaplane records with Pan American World Airways’ Brazilian
    Clipper, flown Sikorsky amphibian aircraft to Chile in 1931, and been
    vice president of Helicopter Corp. of America. (NYT, 11/26/71, 38)

                                    330
                                                                  November 25
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

November 25: The Russian Space Bluff by Leonid Vladimirov, Soviet
    engineer-journalist who had defected in 1966, had been published in
    U.K., AP reported. Book said Soviet space program had begun as
    series of publicity stunts to persuade West that U.S.S.R. had reached
    level of advanced technology equal to that of US. Vladimirov had
    said that U.S.S.R. knew ‘‘she could not beat America to the moon
    because she cannot build a moon rocket. Even today the Soviet Union
    cannot produce any significantly big jet nozzles.”
        Mid-1960 flights in Voskhod series had been short because space-
    craft were overloaded earlier Vostok type with some equipment re-
    moved. Last-minute modifications had been engineering disgrace.
     (AP, W Star, 11/25/71, H7)
November 26-27: Mariner 9 (launched toward Mars May 30) took man’s
     first close photo of Martian moon Deimos on spacecraft’s 25th revo-
     lution of Mars Nov. 26. Mariner 9 was 10 300 km (6400mi) from
     Mars and 8500 km (5300 mi) from Deimos when photo was taken.
     Picture told scientists that Deimos was almost 12.9 km (8 mi) in
     diameter and was shaped more like potato than grapefruit. Dr. Carl
     Sagan, director of Cornel1 University’s Laboratory for Planetary
     Studies, cautioned against speculation on moon’s makeup, but said
     “whatever its origins the Mariner mission represents a wonderful
     opportunity to study it.” Deimos was discovered along with other
     Martian moon Phobos in 1877 by American astronomer Asaph Hall,
     who named moons after two sons of Greek mythological god Ares-
     Mars in Roman mythology-as given by Homer in Iliad.
        On Nov. 27 Mariner 9 failed in attempt at closeup photograph of
     Martian moon Phobos. JPL ground controllers said spacecraft’s cam-
     era wasn’t pointed correctly when attempt was made. Orbit of Phobos
     was not known precisely enough to ensure getting photo. Successful
     photo of Phobos would have shown greater detail than recent picture
      of Deimos, Mars’ other moon, since Phobos was twice as large as
      Deimos and spacecraft passed 1600 km (100 mi) closer. Mariner 9
     had photographed Phobos Nov. 13 from 150 000 km (93 000 mi) out.
      (O’Toole, W Post, 11/27/71, A4; W Star, 11/28/71, A6)
 November 26: Univ. of Michigan physicist Lawrence C. Jones was quoted
      in Kansas City Times as saying use of liquid hydrogen as nonpol-
      luting automobile fuel was ‘‘not only technically and economically
      feasible” but also “desirable” and “may even be inevitable.” Hydrogen
      could be used in conventional aircraft and automobile gasoline engines
      and “has the desirable feature of burning very efficiently.” (KC Times,
      11/26/71)
   Pravda Vostoka newspaper of Tashkent, Uzbek Republic, published ac-
      count of autumn 1966 detonation by U.S.S.R. of underground nuclear
      charge of “unprecedented force” to extinguish natural gas fire that
      raged out of control for three years in Central Asia. New York Times
      said later that successful experiment was believed to be first use of
      nuclear explosion to quell gas-well fire, explosion was assumed to have
      been of low-yield, and disclosure of test had marked first Soviet pin-
      pointing of location of peaceful nuclear blast. (Shabad, N Y T , 12/2/71,
      2)
 * New initiatives in technology were discussed in Science editorial by
      Philip H. Abelson: In FY 1972, 77% of Federal R&D funding would

                                      331
November 26                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    go to atomic energy, space, and defense research. “Most citizens would
    agree that in view of our many domestic needs this proportion is out
    of line.” Most “would view favorably the prospect of engaging pres-
    ently unemployed resources of men and organizations in meeting social
    needs.” Two major factors made this di5cult. “First one cannot
    identify a single goal that has the kind of dramatic appeal that the
    moon venture had in the circumstances in which it was announced.
    Announcement of a lesser single goal would be certain to draw parti-
    san sniping and could prove to be a political liability. Second . . .
    many of the possible initiatives represent a further invasion by the
    federal government of matters that have previously been considered
    the domain of private enterprise.” Cynics would discount new initia-
    tives as election year ploy. “However, win or lose, there will remain
    after the election a residue in the form of a further penetration of
    government into the management of the nation’s life. There could
    also remain a residue of real progress. for goals once enunciated tend
    to carry with them a momentum of their own.” (Science, 11/26/71,
    895)
November 27: U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 probe (launched May 19) ejected cap-
    sule 1380 km (858 mi) above Mars on direct trajectory to planet’s
    surface. Capsule, carrying pennant bearing U.S.S.R. hammer-and-
    sickle coat of arms, became first man-made object to reach surface.
    After capsule ejection Mars 2 decelerated and entered Martian orbit
    with 25 000-km (15500-mi) apogee, 1380-km (858-mi) perigee,
    1080-min (18-hr) period, and 48.9O inclination.
       Mars 2 had traveled 470 million km (292 million mi) to reach Mars.
    During flight it had explored interplanetary space and three midcourse
    corrections had been conducted, June 17, Nov. 20, and automatically
    on Nov. 27. Spacecraft was reported operating normally in Martian
    orbit. U.S.S.R. did not indicate whether capsule softlanded or hard-
    landed or what mission was. (NYT, 12/1/71, 20; O’Toole, W Post,
    12/1/71, A23; FBIS-SOV-71-231-3,     12/1/71, L1)
  Tass reported arrival in Moscow of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director,
    and group of NASA experts “in connection with the forthcoming tech-
    nical conference of Soviet and American experts in ensuring com-
    patibility of means of approach and docking of spaceships and sta-
             Conference would take place Nov. 29 to Dec. 7. (FBIS-SOV-
    tion~.’~
    71-230,11/30/71, L1)
* US.would resurrect SST program and have “production model by 1982,”
    FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer predicted in Washington, D.C.
    Shaffer, who had recently returned from world tour of FAA installa-
    tions, said France expected to sell three Concordes to Chinese Com-
    munists and Romania was expected to attempt purchase of several
    used U.S. jetliners. (UPI, W Post, 11/27/71, A9)
* New York Times editorials commented on recent astronomical events-
    Nov. 26 Mariner 9 photographing of Martian satellite Deimos and
     Oct. 7 report by astronomer Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven of discovery of
    asteroid Toro. Deimos’ photo was “only the latest of Mariner 9’s unique
     accomplishments. This is the first man-made artificial satellite of an-
    other major planet in the solar system and it has already journeyed
    more than a million miles around Mars.” Barring Mariner 9 malfunc-
    tion, “lifting of the dust storm in the days ahead should permit even

                                    332
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               November 27

    greater revelations of the nature of this planet that has been a mystery
    to man throughout the ages.”
       Evidence suggested asteroid Tor0 might crash into earth after 200
    yrs, Times said. “Any such collision could do great damage. It may
     not be too early for space scientists to begin thinking about ways of
    nudging Tor0 out of a collision course with earth when, as and if the
    need arises. If men can send space ships across hundreds of millions
    of miles to Venus and Mars, it should be no great feat to visit Toro-
    a mere nine million miles [14 million kilometers] away at present
    closest approach-by way of performing whatever celestial engineering
    is required to prevent a mammoth cosmic traffic accident.” (NYT,
    11/27/71,30)
November 28: Italy’s Sun Marco 3 (launched April 24) reentered atmos-
    phere after more than seven months in orbit. Design lifetime had been
    six months. Satellite had produced excellent data on density, compo-
    sition, and temperature of equatorial neutral-particle atmosphere at
    altitudes of 222-723 km (137.9449.2 mi). (GSFC SSR, 11/30/71;
    NASA Proj Off)
* Senate Committee on Nutrition asked Federal Government to provide
    emergency food for highly skilled professionals in Seattle, Wash., who
    had been hit by aerospace industry unemployment. Committee, inves-
    tigating Seattle situation after Dept. of Agriculture had refused request
    from State of Washington for free distribution of surplus food in
    Seattle, said many families were going hungry. (Reuters, W Post,
    11/29/71, A6)
November 29-30: Mariner 9, orbiting Mars after May 30 launch on 400-
    million-km (248-million-mi) journey, photographed Mars moon Phobos
    from 14682- and 5543-km (9123- and 3444-mi) distances. Photos,
    released by NASA Dec. 1, clearly showed Phobos was irregular, potato
    shaped chunk of rock about 21 km (13 mi) wide and 26 km (16 mi)
    long, with at least one crater 6 km ( 4 mi) in diameter. ( L A Times,
    12/2/71; Reuters, NYT, 12/2/71,26)
November 29: Os0 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched by NASA Sept.
    29, had completed more than 850 orbits of the earth and was officially
    adjudged a success. Primary objective, to obtain high-resolution data
    from solar corona in particular spectral bands in EUV and in visible
    regions during one solar rotation, had been achieved. Fulfillment of
    secondary objective, of investigating intensity and spectrum of solar
    and cosmic x-rays from nonpointed instruments beyond one solar
    rotation, continued. All spacecraft systems, including star-tracker-
    gyro night-pointing feature new to oso-had operated satisfactorily.
    Tape recorder No. 1, inoperative when first interrogated on seventh
    orbit, had not recovered despite several attempts to operate unit. Tape
    recorder No. 2 had performed required data storage and readout
    functions satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
  U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 458
    reached 497-km (308.8-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 92.2-
    min period, and 70.0° inclination and reentered April 20, 1972.
    Cosmos 459 reached 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi)
    perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.0’ inclination and reentered Dec. 27
     [see Dec. 271. (GSFC, SSR, 11/30/71; 12/1/71; 4/30/72; SBD,
    11/30/71,129; SA, 12/13/71,15)

                                    333
November 29                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, launched May 28, was continuing its flight toward
9

    Mars. At 9:OO pm Moscow time (1:OO pm EST) spacecraft was 138.8-
    million-km (86.3-million-mi) from Mars, having traveled approxi-
    mately 472 million km (293 million mi). (NYT, 12/1/71, 20; FBIS-
    SOV-71-231-3, 12/1/71, L1)
  U.N. General Assembly adopted resolutions directing Committee on Peace-
    ful Uses of Outer Space to formulate treaty by 1972 charting inter-
    national course for space exploration, commending proposed liabilities
    convention for outer space travel [see Nov. 111, and recommending
    convention of working group on remote sensing of earth by satellites.
     (Fulton, C Trib, 11/30/71)
  FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer, in letter to Airline Pilots Assn.
0

    President John J. Q’Donnell, rejected ALPA’S Nov. 1 request for accel-
    erated five-year plan to install landing aids at U S . airports. Shaffer
    said FAA was legally unable “to accede to one limited group’s requests
    to the prejudice of other legitimate demands.” (Text)
  NASA announced publication of third annual Research and Technology
    Operating Plan Swmmary, RTQP-72. Publication described in capsule
    form hundreds of NASA research and technology efforts. (NASA Release
    71-234 )
November 29-December 7: US. and U.S.S.R. space officials met in Moscow
    in third of series of meetings to discuss design and testing of com-
    patible systems for docking and linking manned spacecraft. U S . delega-
    tion was headed by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, and U.S.S.R.
    delegation was headed by Academician Boris N. Petrov. Joint com-
    munique Dec. 7 said progress was made in working out agreed tech-
    nical requirements and planning possible joint test missions. ( NASA
    Release 71-244)
November 30: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 460 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    539-km (334.9-mi) apogee, 518-km (321.9-mi) perigee, 95.2-min
    period, and 74.0” inclination. (GSFC SSR, 11/30/71; SBD, 12/2/71,
    141)
  Assignment of MSFC as lead center within OMSF for concept verification
    testing system design and integration to verify concepts and
    hardware from NASA definition studies-was announced by Dr. Eber-
    hard F. M. Rees, MSFC Director. Primary purposes of CTV program
    were to demonstrate representative shuttle payload concepts in research
    and applications modules (RAM) and space station classes, to develop
    shuttle-payload interface requirements from viewpoint of payload and
    users, to demonstrate shuttle capabilities for research and applications,
    to support design and development of Sortie Can (payload carrier for
    space shuttle), and to investigate integration and operational tech-
    niques for long-duration mission system for advanced RAMS and for
    eventual space station. CVT program would be part of Space Station
    Task Team headed by William A. Brooksbank. CVT work would be
    headed by Konrad K. Dannenberg. (MSFC Release 71-225)
  Meeting of NASA’s   Comet and Asteroid Missions Science Panel at MSFC,
    chaired by Dr. Ernest Stuhlinger, Associate Director for Science, dis-
    cussed present and prospective efforts in planetary and interplanetary
    probes. Nine scientists from education field and Government attended.
    (MSFC Release 71-266; MSFC PAO)
* NASA and Small Business Administration announced publication of Testing

                                    334
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             November 30

    Methods and Techniqlces, summary of aerospace technology suitable for
    profitable adaptation by small industrial firms. Booklet, offered with-
    out charge, contained 34 abstracts of innovative processes and devices
    used in quality control and nondestructive testing, with emphasis on
    physical inspection and internal-flaw detection. (NASA Release 71-236)
  US. patent No. 3 624650 was granted to JPL engineers Richard L.
    Horttor and Richard M. Goldstein for method of mapping planets from
    earth station with radar and orbiting transponder. Patent was assigned
    to NASA. (Jones, NYT, 12/4/71)
* USAF had announced that 130-member review team of specialists from
    USAF, Lockheed, and other aerospace companies would make year-long
    review of USAF C-5A program, Wall Street Journal reported. Object
    of review was to “recommend operational refinements or aircraft
    modifications where necessary.” ( WSJ, 11/30/71, 3 )
  DOD signed $25-million contract with Lockheed Space & MissiIes Corp.
    for definition and development phase of new-generation submarine-
    launched ULMS (underwater long-range missile system) with maximum
    10 000-km (6200-mi) range. (Reuters, B Sun, 12/1/71, A12; W Post,
    12/1/71, A14)
November 30-December 2 : Apollo 15 investigator’s symposium was con-
    ducted at Lunar Science Institute in Houston, Tex. Apollo Photo Science
    Team members Robert D. Mercer of Dudley Observatory and Lawrence
    Dunkelman of GSFC described photos of sun and interplanetary dust
    taken by Apollo 15 CM pilot Astronaut Alfred M. Worden. Photos
    showed features of solar corona and zodiacal light never before ob-
    served. Preliminary examination of photos showed “light levels less
    than can be seen by the best telescopes on earth.” Analysis of photos
    would permit direct, comparative measurements of solar phenomena’s
    relative brightness to obtain information on mechanisms by which
    energy left sun and on distribution of particles outward from sun.
     (MSC Release 71-97)
November 30-December 3 : Joint meeting of NASA and European Space
    Conference (ESC) was held in Washington, D.C., to identify candidate
    areas for possible European participation in post-Apollo space pro-
     grams. Meeting had been proposed in Sept. 1 letter from Under Secre-
     tary of State U. Alexis Johnson to Belgian Science Minister The0
    Lefevre, ESC Chairman. (NASA Release 71-235, 71-241 ; NASA PAO)
During November: ARC research into heat shields to protect aircraft pas-
    sengers in crash fires was described in Astronazctics & Aeronautics by
    ARC and Avco Corp. scientists. Concept of surrounding passenger
    compartment by fire-retardant shell to protect occupants long enough
     for fire to burn out or be extinguished had been made possible by
     Apollo program research into fire-retardant materials polyisocyanurate
     foam and intumescent paint. “Exposed to heat . . . paint expands to
    many times its original thickness and insulates the surface underneath
    it. The thermal-protection mechanisms of these materials operate on
                                      .
     the same ablative principles . . that protect our astronauts during
     re-entry of the Apollo spacecraft.” (Neel, Parker, et al., A&A, 11/71,
     18-26)
* USAF had accepted delivery of 520-kg (1150-lb) comsat from TRW Sys-
     tems Group, AFSC Newsreview reported. Comsat was first of six being

                                   335
During November                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     built for SAMSO use in Phase I1 of US. Defense Satellite Communica-
     tions System (DSCS). (ASFC Newsreview, 11/71,4)
  AFSC Aeronautical Systems Div. had established Prototype Program Office,
     AFSC Newsreview reported. Objective of prototype program was to im-
     prove performance in development and acquisition of weapon systems
     by placing more reliance on the performance of “hardware” and less
                                         Newsreview, 11/71, 1)
     reliance on paper analysis. (AFSC
* Columbia Jouralism Review editorial criticized New York Times for
     Aug. 15 publication of “soap-opera style exclusive interviews with the
     families of Apollo 15 astronauts obtained through the newspaper’s
     Durchase of their Dersonal stories.” Times had “condemned this kind
     of exploitation, by -other publishers, only eight years ago.” (Columbia
    Journ Rev, 11/12/71,6)
  Article by Paul Dickson in The Progressive discussed “Empire of Think
     Tanks.” R&D in U S . had become “vast, powerful, and well financed
     empire . . . replete with its own priorities, powers, and pecking order.
     Atop this empire is a diverse group of institutions called think tanks,
     which as agents of applied research and policy study have a fateful
     impact on the nation. The most famous of these . . . is the RAND
     Corporation . . . a prime mover in military research.”
        R&D was “particularly critical element in the battle over national
     priorities because it not only reflects our current priorities but largely
     determines what will be technologically feasible in the future.’’ Lunar
     landings had shown “how much is possible if a great deal of thought,
     resources, and dedication are channeled into any stated goal. The vast
     majority of Project Apollo money had been pumped into space R&D
     during the decade prior to the first landing. There is, however, a catch
     in invoking the APO~~O/NASA    example, because such a new knowledge
     as is developed in such a program must be applied and directed in
     order to get anywhere. If not conscientiously applied, well-performed
     research can lead to a range of ends from a simple nonuse to a more
     insidious ruse-a way of dodging action under the guise of studying
    the problem.”
        Independent think tanks needed to be scrutinized along with Feder-
     ally sponsored ones. “Many of them receive the bulk of their funds
     from the Government, and, though not officially ‘sponsored’ like RAND,
     they bring up the same questions of power, unchecked and unanswer-
     able, evoked by the officially sponsored outfits.” (CR, 11/3/71,
    S1752-5)




                                     336
                           December 1971

December 1: NASA% M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by test pilot William H.
    Dana, reached mach 1.22 and 21 300-m (70 000-ft) altitude during
    12th flight, launched from B-52 from FRC. Objectives of powered
    flight-acquisition of stability and control data above mach 1.0, expan-
    sion of flight envelope, and evaluation of reaction control system-
    were achieved. (NASA Proj Off)
  Quarterly review of research and applications modules (RAM) study
    being conducted by General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Aerospace Div.
    was held at MSFC. Work on specific set of RAM payload carriers was
    reviewed. Preliminary design of spacecraft would be completed during
    remainder of study. (MSFC   Release 71-217; MSFC PIO)
e Approval by NASA Project Designation Committee of designation QUESTOL

    for quiet, experimental, STOL transport research aircraft was announced
    by NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly
    in memorandum to NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Re-
    search and Technology Roy P. Jackson. (Text)
December 2: U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3 probe (launched May 29) reached vicinity
    of Mars and ejected capsule which softlanded on planet. U.S.S.R. did
    not announce landing until Dec. 7 and did not release details until
    Dec. 19. After separation, capsule bearing Soviet coat of arms entered
    Mars atmosphere and parachuted to softlanding in Mars southern
    hemisphere between Hectris and Phaetonis in area 45” south latitude
    and 158” west longitude. Mars 3 continued flight into orbit with
    1500-km (930-mi) periapsis and 11-day period. Tass said signals from
    landing capsule “were received and recorded on board . . . Mars 3
                  .
    and later . . transmitted to the earth on December 2-5. The video-
    signaIs received from the surface of Mars were brief and suddenly
    discontinued.” (FBIS-SOV-71-236, 12/8/71, L1)
  U.S.S.R. launched two satellites. Intercosmos 5, launched from Kapustin-
    Yar, entered orbit with 1055-km (655.6-mi) apogee, 197-km (122.4-mi)
    perigee, 97.2-min period, and 48.4” inclination. Satellite-joint project
    of U.S.S.R. and Czechoslovakia-would continue investigation of radia-
    tion and dynamics of corpuscular flux in near-earth space and investi-
    gation of nature and spectrum of low-frequency electromagnetic oscil-
    lations in natural plasma. Intercosmos 5 reentered April 7, 1972.
       Cosmos 461, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 508-km
     (315.7-mi) apogee, 488-km (303.2-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period. and
                                             12/3/71, L1; L2; GSFC SSR,
    69.2” inclination. (FBIS-SOV-~~-Z~~,
    12/31/71; 4/30/72; SBD, 12/7/71,164)
  Thomas O’Toole described in Washington Post effects of Mariner 9 data
    on idea that life existed on Mars: “In the three weeks that it has spent
    in Martian orbit so far, Mariner 9 has found that the planet’s atmos-
    phere is even thinner than it was thought to be-about 260 times as
    thin as Earth’s atmosphere. It also found Martian surface temperatures
     to be no higher than 80 degrees below zero. To date, Mariner 9’s

                                    337
December 2                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




December 2: The U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3 probe softlanded a capsule on the planet Mars.
The capsule transmitted signals 20 seconds before falling silent. In the Tass news
service photo the descent apparatus-shown    here in descent position-carried    a
braking cone that also served as a heat shield for the capsule. The cone
fell away a the m i n parachute, stored in the container immediately above the
            s
capsule, opened to slow the fall. (Photo courtesy of United Press International)


     cameras have been frustrated by a storm that has covered almost all
     of Mars with dust for more than two months. It’s almost impossible
     to imagine a global dust storm, and when one thinks of a global storm
     lasting for two months, it’s even harder to imagine life surviving such
                                          .
     cataclysmic weather conditions. . . now the dust has begun to settle
     on the planet, revealing striking features that man has never seen
     before. Nevertheless, the idea that there might be life among those
     features is one that seems to be a dying one.” (W Post, 12/2/71, A19)
   NASA selected Douglas Aircraft Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., and
 0


     Lockheed-Georgia Co. for negotiations of three separate $1.5-million,
     six-month contracts for design phase of QUESTOL (quiet, experimental
     STOL) program. After completion of design phase one contractor
     would be selected to fabricate two experimental transport aircraft for
     flight research program. (NASA Release 71-238)
 * Description by Soviet professor of physics and mathematics M. Marov
     of Mars 2 scientific program to Soviet journalists was reported by Tass:
     “Registration of various radiations from Mars, ranging from ultra-
     violet light to radio waves, by sputniks from a comparatively short
     distance will give much more complete information about Mars. Cer-
     tain findings which are still quite inadequate are readily available.

                                       338
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              December 2

    It has been established that at least nine-tenths of the Martian atmos-
    phere consists of carbon dioxide. Nitrogen is practically absent, while
    water vapors are very scant. The thin atmosphere of Mars is extremely
    heterogeneous. Its structure varies widely with seasons, the time of
    day and night. The structure of the surface in the areas explored is
    very heterogeneous too.” (FBIS-SOV-71-233,      12/3/71, L3)
December 3: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 462 from Plesetsk into orbit with
    1782-km (1107.3-mi) apogee, 227-km (141.1-mi) perigee, 105.2-min
    period, and 65.7O inclination. Within hours after launch, Cosmos 462
    passed close to Cosmos 459 (launched Nov. 29) and exploded in
    apparent test of satellite interceptor system at low altitude. Mission
    was first satellite-intercept test using target below 258-km (160-mi)
    altitude; previous tests had occurred at altitudes between 580 and
                                         SSR, 12/31/71; AP, NYT, 1/2/71,
    885 km (360 and 550 mi). (GSFC
    25; Av Wk,12/13/71,20)
 Discovery of polar caps on sun by Dr. Werner M. Neupert and team of
0

    GSFC astronomers was announced by NASA. Measurements made by
    Os0 7 (launched Sept. 29) had shown black areas on sun’s north and
    south poles with temperature of 1000 000 K (1 800 WOOF). Hot
    areas on sun associated with solar Bares registered temperatures of
    3 000 000 to 4 000 000 K (5 400 OOOOF to 7 200 OOOOF). Data from
    sounding rocket experiments that preceded solar polar cap discovery
    indicated seasonal variations in cap sizes. If data were accurate, caps
    were largest during time of least solar activity and might disappear
    near most active times. (NASA Release 71-237; NASA Special Release
    12/6/71)
  NASA held Mariner 9 press conference at JPL. Discussion centered on dust
    storm that had covered planet since mission began and on origin of
    Martian craters.
       Dr. Bradford A. Smith of New Mexico State Univ. said storm had
    begun 10 wks earlier, had reached peak of intensity in 5th wk, and
    was gradually but continuously clearing. Project scientists disagreed,
    however, how long dust would obscure Mars; predictions ranged from
    a few weeks to months. If storm continued throughout mission, primary
    objective might have to be changed. Dr. Smith explained prime objec-
    tive “was to map 70 percent of the planet in high resolution. If the
    storm does not clear up immediately, it will not be possible to do that
    within the nominal mission. An alternative might be to focus on the
    phenomenon that we have on our hands; that is, the dust storm. And
    instead of studying it in bits and pieces and waiting for the planet to
    clear up . . . to rearrange our sequences to make an all out study of
    this atmospheric phenomenon.” Failure to complete mapping as planned
    would not significantly affect Viking Mars landing mission because,
    with only slight degradation, Viking zone could be mapped in last half
    or last third of Mariner 9 mission. ‘‘Also Viking has the capability to
    keep its landers in orbit for as long as two months while it does the
    mapping . . . [and] the capability to do some photographic site selec-
    tion even if there were no usable pictures returned from ’71.”
       Dr. Harold Masursky of US. Geological Survey described four high
    points on Mars, all with large summit craters, suggesting that they
    might be volcanic calderas. Great alignment of relatively young topo-
    graphic highs with summit craters suggested that Mars was geochemi-

                                   339
December 3                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     cally active-that in not too distant past there had been extensive vol-
    canic activity. Similar features might be found at lower elevations;
    they would be of interest because they had been, and still might be,
    hot. Such volcanic sources had, according to most opinions, produced
     terrestrial atmosphere ; that is, carbon dioxide and water had come
     from such volcanic vents. Dr. Masursky emphasized that volcanic
     theory was not agreed on; project scientists’ views ranged from
                                                    .”
    (6
       agreement, to skepticism, to outright disbelief
        Data on Mars moons Deimos and Phobos were described by Dr.
    James B. Pollack of ARC. Deimos was 12 by 13y2 km (7% by Sy2 mi)
     and Phobos was 21 by 26 km (13 by 16 mi). Moons were ‘(among the
     darkest objects in the solar system,” reflecting only about 5% of sun-
     light that fell on them. Moons’ darkness could be attributed to basalts
    or carbonaceous chondrites in soil. If scientists could determine reason
     for darkness, they would soon be able to determine whether moons
     were captured asteroids or remnants of material from which Mars was
     formed. (Transcript)
  NASA sent message to Dr. I. A. Zhulin in Moscow via telex communication
     system established for exchange of information on Mariner 9 and
     Mars 2 and Mars 3 missions to Mars. Message congratulated U.S.S.R.
     on success of Mars 2; requested Mars 2 coordinates, orbital parameters,
     doppler data, and data from uv spectrometer; and provided informa-
     tion on U S , Mariner 9 photos of Mars and moons, doppler data, and
     uv spectrometer data. (NASA Release 71-240)
* NASA announced establishment of new Office of Applications ( O A ) . Charles
     W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space
     Flight since 1968, was named Associate Administrator for Applica-
     tions. Leonard Jaffe, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science
     and Applications (Applications) since 1966, was named Deputy ASSO-
     ciate Administrator for Applications. Personnel,. programs, and func-
     tions of Earth Observations and Communications Programs Divs.
     would be transferred from OSSA to new office and OSSA would be re-
     named Office of Space Science (OSS) .
        Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator said : “The application
     of space technology to solving problems here on Earth is perhaps
     NASA’s most important new thrust. 1 believe it appropriate to centralize
     into a single office in NASA Headquarters all of the resources which
     we can muster to support space applications to Earth.” (NASA Release
     71-239)
* Joint group of NASA and European Space Conference technical experts
     completed four-day meeting at NASA Hq. to identify candidate areas
     for possible European participation in post-Apollo space programs.
     NASA announced Dec. 6 that areas identified included space shuttle
     subsystems, major responsibility for orbit-to-orbit space tug, early
     development of major payload elements like sortie cans and research
     and applications modules, and support studies in related technology.
     Group’s report would be studied by U.S. and European authorities.
     Group had proposed February 1972 meeting for further technical
     definition and consideration of programmatic, financial, and manage-
     ment implications. (NASA Release 71-241)
  US. Embassy in Moscow released statement to press about Nov. 29-
     Dec. 7 NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting on compatible space

                                    340
                                                                 December 3
ASTKONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    docking system: “The main purpose of this third working session was
    to discuss the technical details of hardware compatibility and to dis-
    cuss a joint American-Soviet space mission. It is intended to sign a
    final agreement within two months. Details will not be given out until
    then.”
        AP, in bulletin from MOSCOW,    said: “American and Soviet scien-
    tists plan to sign an agreement on a joint manned space flight within
    the next two months, a US. Embassy official disclosed today.”
        Sources later described by Washington Post as “close to” NASA
     delegation in Moscow said in response to press query that it was
    misunderstanding to think that agreement already had been reached.
    NASA spokesman in Washington, D.C., told press AP report was result
     of misunderstanding of US. Embassy report. Embassy statement had
                                              .
    stemmed from “routine programs report . . on discussions . . . now
    in progress.” Any understanding as to joint test mission would come
    after current talks had ended and been subjected to recommendations
    and approval.
        Press later commented on misundesstanding. New York Times said
                                       .
    there was “considerable confusion . . as to how firm and far-reaching
    is the apparent understanding between the American and Soviet nego-
    tiators.” Washington Post said Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev had
    said at October reception for US. governors visiting Moscow that
     astronauts and cosmonauts would work together in space: “We speak
     the common language of space.” Baltimore Sun said “the Russians
     are traditionally sensitive about any publicity before official, simul-
     taneous announcements are made on any bilateral agreement.” It
     appeared “the Americans had inadvertently talked about the agree-
     ment prematurely.’’ (AP News Service, 12/3/71; Wilford, NYT,
     12/4/71, 1 ; Kaiser, W Post, 12/4/71, A l ; Mills, B Sun, 12/4/71,
     A12)
  First transatlantic picture telephone call was made successfully between
     U S . and Sweden via Zntelsat-ZV F-2 orbiting over Atlantic. One-hour
     transmission was part of ceremonies in Sweden and at ComSatCorp
     headquarters in Washington, D.C., formally inaugurating new Nordic
     earth station at Tanum, Sweden, jointly owned by Denmark, Finland,
     Norway, and Sweden. (ComSatCorp Release 71-67)
* USAF announced issuance by Aeronautical Systems Div. of $1781 382
     fixed-price-incentive contract to General Dynamics Corp. for aero-
     space ground equipment for F-111 aircraft. (DOD Release 1020-71)
* Senate confirmed nomination of H. Guyford Stever as NSF Director.
      (CR, 12/3/71, S20397)
December 4 : Unidentified USAF satellite and its Atlas-Agena booster were
     exploded by radio command when booster malfunctioned and veered
     off course shortly after launch from ETR. ( W Post, 12/7/71, A7)
* U.S.S.R.’s Mars 3, approaching Mars, had detected possible evidence of
      earth‘s magnetic tail farther out in space than previously reported,
     Pravda article said. Both Mars 2 and Mars 3 had passed through area
      19 million km (12 million mi) from earth, where they had detected
     magnetic field. When Mars 3 passed through area it recorded streams
      of charged particles whose velocities differed from those observed in
      solar wind. Soviet scientists speculated that particles of solar wind
      were mixed with those of earth’s magnetic tail. (NYT, 12/5/71, 9)

                                    341
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
December 5

December 5: France’s 90-kg (200-lb) Polaire scientific satellite, launched
    from Kourou Space Center, failed to enter orbit when 2nd stage of
    Diamant-B booster malfunctioned. { FBIS-~ov-71-234, 12/6/71, T2 ;
    SBD, 12/7/71, 163)
  Launch of Intelsat-1V F-3 comsat, scheduled for Dec. 6 by Atlas-Centaur
    booster, would be postponed indefinitely pending review of Dec. 4
    failure of USAF Atlas-Agena mission, NASA announced. (NYT, 12/7/71,
    181
  Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Plan-
0


    ning, described future benefit of space program spinoff in Parade
    article on applications of space technology to social problems. “On the
    1973 flights in the Skylab experimental space station, a medical doc-
    tor will go into space with the astronauts. He will carry out a com-
                                            .
    prehensive program of experiments . . to establish how well men live
    and work in weightless conditions in an enclosed space as big as a
    three-bedroom house.” With data obtained, space benefits could be
    achieved in a few years and made available to people everywhere.
     (Parade, 12/5/71, 8,12)
  Remaining “puzzles” of solar system pattern were discussed by Walter
    Sullivan in New York Times article: General assumption was that
    sun, planets, and moons had been formed from “swirling, flattened
    cloud of material.” But: “Why does Mars have two tiny moons, each
    only a few miles in diameter, yet our moon is a quarter the diameter
     of the earth? Why do some of the outer moons of Jupiter go the
    ‘wrong way’-counter       clockwise-around that huge planet? Why is
    the earth‘s moon formed of a different mix of elements from that con-
     stituting the earth?” Recent information had “illuminated these
    questions though it had not resolved them.” Earth’s moon was giving
     off “far more heat than had been predicted on the basis of assump-
    tions of how it was formed.’’ Mariner 9 photos of the two Mars moons
     had shown both to be irregular chunks “rather than systematically
     spherical bodies in the manner normally attributed to moons and
     planets.” George Washington Univ. scientist J. Martyn Bailey had
    proposed that all seven of Jupiter’s outer moons were asteroids cap-
    tured by that planet’s powerful gravity and that Jupiter’s clockwise
    moons had been captured when planet was farthest from sun, while
     counter-clockwise moons had been captured when Jupiter was nearest
     sun. Lunar Science Institute scientists had agreed there had been
     sufficient sorting and layering on earth‘s moon to produce radioactive
     crust that could account for heat flow. Information on two Martian
     moons had indicated that Phobos and Deimos looked much like
     asteroidal fragments but that did not prove that they were captured
     asteroids. They could have been formed as spherical moons from
     material left when Mars was being created and later “battered into
     their irregular shapes.” (NYT, 12/5/71, 4:s)
* New York Times editorial praised results of Apollo lunar exploration and
     noted there was “much more that men have to learn about this puz-
     zling neighbor in space.” It had been reported that NASA might have
     to cancel Apollo 16 and 17 for budgetary reasons. “Such action would
     confirm the widespread suspicion that the United States was less inter-
     ested in the scientific results of lunar exploration than in the prestige
     of being the first nation to land men on the moon.’’ Announcement that

                                     342
                                                                 December 5
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    Soviet flag had been dropped on Mars might, however, “impel the
    Administration to decide that this is not the time for the United States
    to end its scientific bridgehead on the moon. It is the promising re-
    search prospects from continued lunar study, not Soviet space compe-
    tition, that give the really valid motivation for continuing the Apollo
    program to the extent that existing hardware, including the already-
    manufactured equipment for Apollos 16 and 17, permits.” (NYT,
    12/5/71,4:10)
* Travel writer Morris D, Rosenberg described his visit to KSC in New
    York Times article: Visit had provided “whole new point of reference,
    more understanding of the complex drama you see on TV and read
    about in the newspapers, and a better appreciation of the US. role in
    space.” Those opposed to space funding might be unimpressed by
    “avalanche of facts and figures” but it was doubtful that they could
    “walk away from this 2-hour and 15-minute bus tour without a strong
    feeling of pride.” (NYT, 12/5/71,1)
* Contract with NR that was expected to set pattern for aerospace indus-
    try settlements under negotiation was approved by Long Beach, Calif.,
    Local 887 of United Automobile Workers. Proposed contract called
     for increases of 30% in salary over 34-mo period. (Wright, NYT,
     12/6/71,25)
December 5-6: NASA launched series of eight sounding rockets from Point
    Barrow, Alaska, to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind
     data in upper atmosphere. Eight payloads consisted of four Nike-
     Apache pitot density probes, two Nike-Cajun grenade payloads, one
     Nike-Cajun pitot atomic oxygen, and one Nike-Cajun ozone experi-
     ment. All launches were successful except one; first Nike-Apache failed
     when rocket motor apparently malfunctioned and payload broke off.
     (NASA Rpts SRL; Proj engineer)
December 6 - 1 1 : U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 463 from Baykonur into
     orbit with 285-km (17‘7.1-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee,
     89.2-min period, and 64.9’ inclination. On Dec. 7 satellite passed over
     East Pakistan at perigee on 14th revolution, British Royal Aircraft
     Establishment at Farnborough and British Interplanetary Society
     sources reported. On 16th revolution, perigee was lowered to 188 km
      (116.8 mi), reducing period to 89.0 min. Revolutions 30 and 46
     crossed East Pakistan Dec. 8 and 9 and on revolution 48 apogee was
     raised, returning to original period. Satellite reentered Dec. 1 .    1
     SpacejZight magazine reported telemetry had revealed that some con-
     sumables were used at twice normal rate for a 13-day mis-’  cion.
        Changes in orbit supported earlier reports of U.S.S.R.’s ability to
    maneuver satellites for precise target coverage. Flights of Cosmos 463
     and Cosmos 464 [see Dec. 10-161 were made during time of Indo-
     Pakistan war. Paths would permit observation of events in Pakistan
     before early reentry; any film cassettes could have been recovered
     within four hours of last pass over East Pakistan on each flight.
                                                                     W Post,
     (GSFC SSR, 12/31/71; SBD, 12/7/71, 160; SF, 9/9/72,351;
     1/7/72, A16)
December 6 : NASA was “in search of new, clearly defined goals, and
     the search is not going well,” John N. Wilford said in New York
     Times article. “Self-preservation” was believed to be factor in em-
     phasis NASA placed on current “efforts in Moscow to reach an agree-

                                    343
                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
December 6

      ment with the Soviet Union that could lead to joint Soviet-American
      manned space missions.” If NASA could establish opportunity for im-
      proved relations with U.S.S.R. through space cooperation, “this would
      probably create the need for a series of post-Apollo missions of his-
      toric proportions.” It would be “hard” for Administration or Con-
      gress to refuse funds for such an effort. Soviet motives in current
      negotiations might be saving in space funds through cooperative ven-
      tures or “that the Soviet Union looks to cooperation as a way of shar-
      ing some of the advanced technologies developed by NASA.” (NYT,
      12/6/71,30)
* J P L announced selection of Motorola, Inc., Government Electronics Div.
      for negotiation of $2.8-millionYcost-plus-fixed-fee contract for design
      and manufacture of two communications subsystems-modulation de-
      modulation subsystem (MDS) and relay telemetry subsystem (RTS) -
      for Viking Orbiter ’75 project. (JPL Release 606)
* Dish-shaped 305-m ( 1000-ft) radiotelescope at Cornel1 Univ.’s Arecibo
      Observatory near San Juan, Puerto Rico, was undergoing $7-million
      modification program that would increase telescope’s sensitivity 2000
      times, Dr. Frank D. Drake, Cornel1 Univ. astronomer and former
      Arecibo Observatory Director, told San Juan meeting of American
      Astronomical Society. Modified telescope would search skies for un-
      usual features and objects “we cannot even begin to predict” and
      organic molecules in intergalactic space that were clues to evolution
      of life and evidence of possible distant civilizations. “We expect to
      devote about 1 per cent of our time to just listening. If any civiliza-
      tion is advanced enough to communicate with other civilizations in
      the universe, we might get the message.” (Goodwin, W Post, 12/16/71,
      E91
* USAF aircraft procurement in FY 1973 would reach “historic low of fewer
      than 100,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. DOD pre-
      liminary budget estimates had indicated cyclical dip reflecting com-
      pletion of procurement of LTV Aerospace Corp. A-7D and General
      Dynamics Corp. F-111 aircraft. Magazine said USAF procurement
      might rise in FY 1974 when McDonnell Douglas F-15 fighter aircraft
      and NR‘s B-1 bomber had passed development milestones. ( A v Wk,
      12/6/71, 13)
  House defeatgd by vote of 203 to 172 H.R. 11624, “to amend the Mili-
      tary Construction Authorization Act, 1970, to authorize additional
      funds for the conduct of an international aeronautical exposition.”
       (CR,  12/6/71, H11830-1)
  Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Administration’s New
9

      Technologies Oppo5tunities Program [see Oct. 311 : Much was worth-
      while, “especially the attempt to mount a genuine program of conver-
      sion from defense and space-related to socially useful technological
       emphasis.” But “purely economic objectives of the program are
       murkier, at least at present. Granted that this nation may be on its
       way, in a number of industrial fields, to losing the technological lead
      that for so long has been a mainstay of our economic strength. Does
      it follow that the answer, in high-technology fields like electronics and
      commercial aviation, is what one Presidential adviser has called ‘an
      unaccustomed set’ of supports and subsidies to industry?” Question
      contained “all the elements of explosive controversy, and the adminis-

                                     344
                  1
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 December 6

    tration will be hard-pressed to make a convincing case.” ( W Star,
    12/6/71, A10)
December 6-9: American Geophysical Union held annual meeting in San
    Francisco. MIT seismologist Dr. Mehmet Nafi Toksoz presented find-
    ings of seismic team from MIT, Columbia Univ., Univ. of Hawaii,
    and General Dynamics Corp. that moon had been subdivided into
    layers by process somewhat similar to that which produced layering
    within earth. Conclusion had been reached after analysis of tremors
    induced in moon by spacecraft impacts. Report was released simul-
    taneously at MIT, where Dr. Frank Press, coauthor of report, told press
    that separation into layers, some 3.3 billion yrs ago, had brought SO
    much radioactive material close to lunar surface that there was not
    enough left at depth to keep lunar interior hot. He believed deep lunar
    interior cooled and was quiescent compared with earth. Dr. Press said
    energy released in form of moonquakes was 100 million times less
    than in earthquakes.
        Scientist Steve Korn of TRW Inc. Viking biological instrument team
    described instruments being developed for $11-million experiments to
    be conducted by two Viking l a d e r s scheduled for 1976 Mars landing.
    Sophisticated units for four experiments to search for microdyopic
    life on Mars would be among most complex systems ever flown aboard
    unmanned spacecraft. Experiments included heat release experiment
    to analyze Martian soil for photosynthetic life similar to plant life on
    earth; experiment that would add nutrient to solid sample and measure
    metabolic conversion ; gas exchange experiment to monitor environment
    surrounding sample for changes in gaseous makeup that would indi-
    cate presence of living organisms ; and light-scattering experiment to
    provide nutrient to soil sample and detect any increases in scattering
     attributable to growth of microorganisms. Also, three-legged probes
    would snap photos ; study Martian atmosphere; return meteorological
     data, pressures, temperatures, wind, and humidity ; report on Mars’
    magnetic and physical properties ; and check seismic events. Probes
     would be lowered by parachute and retrorocket after landers had
     obtained orbit in procedure designed to land them accurately in areas
     deemed most likely to be habitats for life. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/10/71,
    29; Miles, LATNS, W Post, 12/19/71, A41)
December 7 : Retirement of Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., from NASA
     and USN, effective Jan. 1, 1972, was announced by NASA. Gordon,
    pilot of Gemini 12 (Sept. 12-15, 1966) and CM pilot for ApoZZo 12
                        .
     (Nov. 18-24, 1969), would join John W. Mecom, Jr., organization in
     New Orleans, La. Retirement would reduce number of astronauts to
     46. (NASA Release 71-243)
  FRC announced award of $211 260, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to LTV
     Aerospace Corp. for design and construction of side fairings for
     NASA7s supercritical wing test aircraft, modified F-8 jet. Installation of
     side fairings would improve overall aircraft with area ruling, an
     aerodynamic design feature that would permit aircraft to fly more
     efficiently, and provide more desirable test environment for evaluating
     aerodynamic characteristics of supercritical wing near speed of sound.
     (FRC Release 29-71)
  NASA award of two contracts for feasibility studies of pressure-fed engine
     for water-recoverable space shuttle booster was announced by MSFC.

                                     345
December 7                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

          Inc. would receive $400 000 and Aerojet-General Corp. $367 595,
    TRW
    for studies ending Feb. 29, 1972. (MSFC Release 71-230)
* Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, announced major reorganiza-
    tion of AEC operating staff to “provide a coherent management struc-
    ture and to improve program effectiveness.” Major program areas-
    national security, energy and development, research, and production-
    would be directed by assistant general managers. New Div. of Con-
    trolled Thermonuclear Research would deal with development of fusion
    as new energy source. New position of Assistant General Manager for
    Environment and Safety would increase emphasis on environmental
    matters and safety research. New Div. of International Security Affairs
    and Div. of Applied Technology were being established. (AEC Release
    0-258)
  RAND Corp. specialists Robert L. Perry and Arthur J. Alexander testified
    before Senate Committee on Armed Services that France, Sweden,
    U.K., and U.S.S.R. had been turning out excellent fighter aircraft for
    fraction of what U.S. paid in money and manpower. Cost difference
    was largely due to simpler design, strict “fly before you buy” policy,
    and reliance on small teams of experts rather than on huge number
    of men and machines. Perry said government 05ces monitoring devel-
    opment of new aircraft in France, Sweden, and U.K. rarely contained
    more than 30 specialists. In US., figure was normally five times that.
    Within European countries developing aircraft, skilled workers com-
    mitted to program rarely exceeded 700. In U.S. “from two to ten
    times as many comparable specialists are employed,” Perry said.
     (Getler, W Post, 12/8/71, A25)
* U.K. and French governments agreed on undisclosed pricing policy for
    Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde. New York Times later
    said policy favored 16 airlines that had taken options on 74 Con-
    cordes. (Giniger, NYT, 12/8/71, 5)
  AFSC announced development of optical aimpoint guidance (OPTAG)
    system, to enable bomb or missile to pinpoint specific target within
    large complex. System used a correlatron to compare previously made
    photos with actual scenery. By turning photographic and optical scenes
    into electronic images, system cued control fins to keep bomb or
    missile on course during flight. (AFSC Release 245.71)
December 7-9: Skylab multiple docking adapter Crew Compartment Fit
    and Function Review was held at Martin Marietta Corp. facility in
    Denver, Colo. Purpose of review was to familiarize astronauts with
    MDA equipment and storage requirements. (Marshall Star, 12/1/71, 2 ;
    MSFC PAO)
December 8: NASA’s   TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing, piloted by
    NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed 25th and
    26th flights from FRC. Objectives of flights were to investigate buffet
    boundary further at low supersonic speeds and to determine effects of
    aileron position and angle of attack on wing pressure distributions.
    Buffet boundary was penetrated at mach 1.15 and 15 200-m (50 000-ft)
    altitude. Pressure distribution data were obtained from mach 0.9 to 1.0
    at 14 000-m (46 000-ft) altitude. (NASA Proj Off)
 Apolto 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B.
0


    Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President
    Spiro T . Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for

                                   346
                                                                    December 8
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

      most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the his-
    <C

    tory of exploration.” (NASA   Release 71-242)
  Portrait of Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer, was unveiled
     by artist Peter Stevens and Mrs. Goddard and presented to Rep. George
     P. Miller (D-Calif., Chairman of House Committee on Science and
     Astronautics, by National Space Club. Ceremonies were held in Com-
     mittee’s main hearing room, where portrait would hang. (NSCNews
    Letter, 11/23/71)
  Spartan ABM intercepted one of several reentry vehicles in successful test
     of Spartan’s ability to distinguish actual nuclear warhead from flock
     of dummies. DOD later said test, above atmosphere over Pacific, was
     first in which Spartan, its associated radar, and its computerized radar
     guidance system were required to make this distinction. (Farrar,
    C Trib, 12/10/71,12)
* Fiftieth anniversary of first transatlantic transmissions by American
     amateur radio “hams” on 200-m frequency. Bouncing radio transmis-
     sions off ionosphere over long distances was later to prove seminal in
     evolution of concepts for passive reflector satellites. (QST, 12/71, 54-7)
  Baltimore Sun editorial commented on softlanding on Mars of instru-
     mented capsule by Soviet Mars 3 : “For the first time man has been
     able to reach Mars with implements that have proved capabIe both of
     surviving a landing and of working, for a time at least, after they have
     been landed. This of course is only one approach to the new studies
     of brother objects in space. The United States Mariner 9 may by
     photographic means add valuable pictorial knowledge to that which
     Mars 3 has reported by signal. And even if neither of these latest raids
     on the unknown returns as much information as men want, they have
     together shown that the means by which more and more can be
     learned are now in our hands, even if in only a primitive and imper-
     fect state so far.” (B Sun, 12/8/71, A18)
  Kansas City Times editorial commented on “ambiguous” announcement
0

     of progress in NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings to develop
     compatible space docking system [see Dec. 31: “The first interpre-
     tation was that agreement soon would be reached on a joint mission
     involving astronauts of the two countries in an orbital linkup. In hasty
     clarification, NASA explained that the mooted accord covered only the
     technical matters which could make such a mission possible. . . . Either
     way, the conclusion is obvious: The two space powers are moving at
     last, and seriously, toward the sort of shared space planning that logic
     and economics have long indicated but which competition and secret-
     iveness have prevented.” (KC Times, 12/8/71)
December 9 : ESRO Council meeting in Paris agreed on future program
     based on applications satellites. Priority would be given to use of ELDO
     launch vehicles provided ELDO’S price did not exceed that of launch
     vehicles available elsewhere. ESRO budget would be equivalent of
     $283.6 million from 1972 to 1974 and $300 million for following three
     years. From 1974 to 1980 at least $70 million would be spent on con-
     struction of applications satellites. (AP, NYT, 12/12/71, 9 )
December 10-16: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 464 from Plesetsk into orbit
     with 311-km (193.3-mi) apogee, 180-km (111.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min
     period, and 72’ inclination. British Royal Aircraft Establishment and
     British InterpIanetary Society sources reported that drift of about 5’

                                     347
Decemher 10-16                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    per day brought satellite over East Pakistan on revolution 44 Dec. 13
    at height of 230 km (142.9 mi). On revolution 46, two-impulse
    maneuver lowered both apogee and perigee, with 89.0-min period and
    182-km (113.1-mi) perigee. Westerly drift rate was reduced to less
    than ' per day, permitting three further daylight passes over Pakis-
           1
    tan area before reentry Dec. 16.
        Orbital changes supported earlier reports of Soviet maneuvering
    capability. Cosmos 463 [see Dec. 6-11] and Cosmos 464 were launched
    during Indo-Pakistan war ; altered paths permitted observation of
    Pakistan before early reentry. (GSFC SSR, 12/31/71 ; SBD, 12/14/71,
    199; SF, 9/9/72,351; W Post, 1/7/72, A16)
December 10: MSFC announced completion of study of offshore oil and gas
    operations by team of MSFC, MTF, and Michoud Assembly Facility
    experts. Study, made for US. Geological Survey, was confined to
     fkderally managed outer continental shelf in Gulf of Mexico but team's
     recommendations, in report to USGS, applied to all outer shelf opera-
    tions. Team had suggested measures to produce offshore resources with
    safety and protection from pollution of marine and coastal environ-
    ment. (MSFC Release 71-232)
* Development of lift-distribution system to alleviate stress problems in
    C-5A aircraft by spreading aerodynamic loads through wings rather
    than concentrating stress on small areas was announced by Lockheed-
    Georgia Co. Vice President Robert B. Ormsby. Modification could be
    installed during regular modification and inspection periods and would
     not affect aircraft's handling. (AP, W Post, 12/12/71, A3)
  U.K. successfully tested experimental hovertrain in 805-m (880-yd) run
     at 32 km per hr (20 mph) near Cambridge. Train, developed by
    Tracked Hovercraft, Ltd., to reach maximum 483-km-per-hr (300-mph )
    speed, traveled on air cushion astride concrete track and was controlled
    from trackside. (Scott, NYT, 12/11/71,54)
December 11 : U.K.'s Ariel 4 ( U K 4 ) satellite was successfully launched by
    NASA on Scout booster from WTR at 12:47 pm PST. Orbital parameters:
     apogee, 587 km (364.8 mi); perigee, 472 km (293.3 mi) ; period,
     95.2 min; and inclination, 83". Primary objective was to investigate
     interactions between electromagnetic waves, plasmas, and energetic
     particles in upper ionosphere. Ariel 4 weighed 99.6 kg (220 lbs) and
     carried five experiments-four provided by U.K. groups and one by
     Univ. of Iowa-to study radio noise and low-frequency radio waves,
     measure electron temperature, and count low-energy charged particles.
        Ariel 4 was fourth in series of U.S.-U.K. cooperative launches that
    began with Ariel 1 April 26, 1962. British Science Research Council
     (SRC) was responsible for satellite design, fabrication, and tests in-
    cluding all but one experiment. NASA was responsible for low-energy
    proton and electron analyzer, technical support, Scout booster, launch
    operations, and tracking and data acquisition. Ariel 2 had been
    launched March 27, 1964, and Ariel 3, May 5, 1967. (NASA Proj Off;
    NASA Release 71-277)
  President Nixon accepted resignation, for personal reasons, of David
    Packard as Deputy Secretary of Defense effective Dec. 13. President
    also redesignated Secor D. Browne as CAB Chairman for term expiring
    Dec. 31, 1972, and announced intention to nominate Whitney Gillilland
    for reappointment as CAB member for six-year term and, upon Senate

                                    348
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  December 11

     confirmation, as Vice Chairman of CAB for term expiring Dec. 31, 1972.
    Gillilland appointment was submitted to Senate Dec. 13 and confirmed
    Feb. 29, 1972. (PD, 12/13/71, 1640-1; 12/20/71, 1672; CR, 2/29/
    72, S2916)
* U S . Senate approved Protocol enlarging ICAO Council membership from
    27 to 30. (CR, 12/11/71, S21400-2)
December 12: USN manned spacecraft recovery forces in Atlantic and
     Pacific would cachet and cancel philatelic mail for March 17 launch
    of Apollo 16, Washington Sunday Star reported. Covers would be
    processed through coordinators at Norfolk, Va., and Honolulu. From
     Hawaii covers would be forwarded to recovery ship. Since Atlantic
     Recovery Force would not include ship with post office, covers would
     be processed by Norfolk post office. (W Star, 12/12/71, C l l )
  NOAA, after one year of functioning, was “hardly a wet NASA,” Thomas
     OToole said in Washington Post article. While it had been predicted
     that Government would spend up to $2 billion a year on NOAA by
     1970, spending “never went higher than $500 million and it’s almost
     all spent on surface vessels.” NOAA expected to spend no more than
     $700 000 for undersea research in 1972. ( W Post, 12/12/71, A l )
  David Sarnoff, honorary board chairman and former president of RCA
     Corp., died at age 80 after long illness. Sarnoff, often called “electronics
     prophet,” had played major role in development of radio and TV.
     (NYT, 12/13/71,1)
December 13: Apollo 16 spacecraft was rolled out from ICSC Vehicle
     Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, in preparation for
     manned lunar landing mission scheduled for launch March 17, 1972.
     Rollout was watched by about 10000 persons at KSC. (UPI, NYT,
     12/14/71, 12; KSC Release 263-71)
  First photos of solar flare spouting from far side of sun were taken by
     Os0 7 (launched Sept. 29, 1971). Photos also showed for first time
     effects of massive eruption of sun traveling through its outer corona.
     Tongues of ionized gases were shown shooting up to 6% million km
      (4 million mi) from solar surface. NRL Director Capt. Earle W. Sapp
     said later that osos were increasingly helpful in forecasting sun’s
     weather to predict effect of solar storms on navigation and communi-
     cations equipment. (Lyons, NYT, 1/11/72, 26)
           TF-8A jet aircraft equipped with supercritical wing, flown by
  NASA’s
     NASA test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry, successfully completed 27th
     flight from FRC. Purposes of flight were to obtain wing pressure distri-
     butions at low angles of attack and to obtain stability and control
     characteristics at design conditions. Pressure distributions were ob-
     tained from mach 0.90 to 0.99 at 14 000-m (46 000-ft) altitude. sta-
     bility and control data were obtained at mach 0.99 at 14000-m alti-
     tude. (NASA Pkoj Off)
  NASA announced establishment of two new positions in OART. Dr. Sey-
     mour C. Himmel, LeRC Director of Rockets and Vehicles, was ap-
     pointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology. George W.
     Cherry, Director of OART’S Aeronautical Operating Systems Div., was
     appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs. (NASA Re-
     lease 71-246; NASA Ann, 12/15/71)
  President Nixon referred to Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner
     at dinner with Prime Minister Marcello Caetano of Portugal and

                                      349
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
December 13

    President Georges Pompidou of France during meetings of French
    and US. heads of state at Angra do Heroisimo, The Azores: “When I
    arrived at the airport on the Spirit of ’76, a Boeing 707, I saw parked
    in front of me a Concorde which had carried the President of France.
    Our Ambassador to France, Mr. Watson, pointed out that he had come
    from France at a speed three times as fast as we had come from the
    United States. I do not speak in envy; I only wish we had made the
    plane ourselves.” (PD, 12/20/71, 1 6 6 1 4 )
* Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard, whose resignation had
    been accepted by President Nixon on Dec. 11, said at DOD news con-
    ference that new orders for military equipment were “leveling off ,’
    after declining sharply following 1967-1968 peak period due to Viet-
    nam war. Total defense spending, Packard said, was less than 7% of
    current GNP and probably would remain so for several years. Wall
    Street Journal said later that Packard would become Chairman of
    Hewlett Packard Co., electronics firm he had helped to found in 1941.
     (Transcript; VSJ, 12/14/71,14)
  U.S.S.R.’s largest and most advanced space tracking ship, 40 800 000-kg
     (45 000-ton), 230-m (760-ft) Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, had been
     unveiled in Odessa Harbor, New York Times reported. Ship was
    equipped with 100 antennas, including four large parabolic antennas
    for deep space communications, and could operate at sea for up to
     one year. (Shabad, NYT, 12/14/71,11)
December 14: USAF launched four unidentified satellites from Vandenberg
     AFB by Thorad-Agena booster. Orbital parameters : 999.4-km (621-mi)
     apogee, 983.3-km (611-mi) perigee, 104+.9-minperiod, and 70° in-
    clination. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 12/16/71,210)
  Team of ARC astronomers headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett had found
     evidence that sun’s spin rate 4.6 billion yrs ago was one revolution
     every three hours rather than current one rotation every 27 days,
     ARC announced. Study of melting histories of meteorites recovered on
     earth and observations of young stars in constellation Taurus led
     astronomers to believe high rotation rate and other mechanisms typi-
     cal of newly formed suns had forced flow of electric gases from sun,
     causing sun to lose one third of its original mass in a few million
     years and stripping away primordial atmosphere of Mercury, earth,
     and Mars. Complete melting could have occurred in asteroids. Radio-
     active dating had established that many meteorites were melted about
     4.6 billion yrs ago. ARC astronomers believed inertia of gas molecules
     thrown out by sun and tied to sun by solar magnetic field, with inter-
     planetary magnetic field itself, would have slowed sun’s rotation over
     4.6 billion yrs. (ARC Release 71-71)
* House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit
     of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns From Space Invest-
     ment. Report updated and expanded study of tangible benefits and
     practical returns from space investment based on material from Govern-
     ment, industry, and press-including extensive NASA research in tech-
     nology utilization at Committee’s request. Committee concluded that
     illustrations in report were “extra dividends which are a fallout of
     ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, com-
     merce, science, government, the medical profession and the academic
     community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight

                                   350
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                               December 14

     for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human con-
     venience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return
     on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.”
     (H Rpt 92-748)
  FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer, in speech before Aviation/Space
     Writers Assn. in Washington, D.C., said Anglo-French Concorde
     supersonic jet transport would be quiet enough to land at U.S. air-
     ports. Concorde would be used over North Atlantic and would not
     cause potentially destructive sonic booms over U S . Shaffer predicted
     US. would build SST eventually. (Reuters, W Post 12/15/71, E10)
* President Nixon inspected Concorde Anglo-French supersonic airliner at
     Lajes Field, The Azores, before departing for U.S. aboard Presiden-
     tial aircraft Spirit of ’76 after meeting with French heads of state.
      (PD, 12/20/71,1670)
  DOD Project MAST (military assistance to safety and traffic) was exam-
     ple of “major role” of transfer of technical knowledge from DOD
     laboratories to civilian scientific community in “technological revo-
     lution,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said at meeting of
     Domestic Action Council in Washington, D.C. Since July 1970 incep-
     tion of program, military helicopters had flown 767 missions and
     evacuated 983 civilian patients for civilian agencies. (Text)
December 15: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 465 .from Plesetsk into orbit with
      1011-km (628.2-mi) apogee, 969-km (602.1-mi) perigee, 104.8-min
     period, and 74’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 12/31/71 ; SBD, 12/16/71,
     210)
  U.S.S.R.’s M a r s 2 and Mars 3 satellites were “successfully continuing the
      scientific exploration of Mars and the space near the planet in sub-
      stantially different orbits,” Tass announced. To date, 153 radio com-
      munication sessions had been held with M a r s 2 and 159, with M a r s 3
     FBIS-SOV-71-241)
  USAF’S X-24A lifting body was shipped by air from FRC to Martin Mari-
      etta Corp.’s Denver plant, where it would be modified and redesignated
      X-24B. Modified vehicle, of new shape with improved hypersonic lift-
      to-drag ratio, would be delivered to FRC in early fall 1972. X-24A had
      completed 28 flights in joint NASA-USAF research program, reaching
      1676 km per hr (1048 mph) and 21 600-m (71 000-ft) altitude. (FRC
      Release 30-71 ;SBD, 12/17/71,215)
  Purchase price of $31.2 million for Concorde supersonic transport was
      announced at Paris press conference by Henri Ziegler, head of French
      government-owned ABrospatiale. Announcement was made on behalf of
      AQospatiale and BAC, manufacturers of Anglo-French aircraft. Zieg-
      ler said first six Concordes would be ready for service by October 1974.
      New York Times later said price was record for civilian aircraft.
       (Hess, NYT, 12/16/71,93)
   List of Federal agencies using MTF for scientific activities was inserted
      in Congressional Record by Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.). Agencies
      included Environmental Protection Agedcy, US. Geological Survey
      and other Interior Dept. activities, USA Corps of Engineers, NOAA and
      NASA. Mississippi State Univ. and Louisiana State Univ. had programs
      at MTF; state governments of Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas had
      established full-time liaison with MTF; and Dept. of Agriculture and

                                     351
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
December 15

    other Federal agencies were investigating possible use of facility. (CR,
    12/15/71)
* Conversation between Mary Ann Harbert, U.S. citizen released Dec. 14
    after nearly four-year internment by Chinese Communists, and escort
    Col. Leonard W. Johnson, Jr., Commander of 9th Aeromedical Evacua-
    tion Group at Clark AFB in Philippines, was reported by AP. Miss
    Harbert had asked, “Have you put any men on the moon yet?” Col.
    Johnson had responded with description of U S . space program that
    had put eight men on moon. Miss Harbert had said, “I really don’t
    know, I hadn’t heard about it. Many people in China don’t know that.
    The last thing we knew about space was that Russia had something
    circling the moon.” (B Sun, 12/15/71, A9)
* NSF published Industrial R&D Spending, 1970 (NSF 71-39). In 1970
    total R&D performance in industry amounted to $17.9 billion-3%
    below 1969 level of $18.3 billion but more than double 1958 amount.
    In constant dollars, 1969-1970 decrease was nearly 8%. Entire drop
    in industrial R&D spending between 1969 and 1970 was accounted for
    by decrease in Federal R&D funds to industry from $8.4 billion to $7.8
    billion. Decline of 8% represented lowest level of Federal R&D dollars
    in industry since 1965. (NSF Highlights, 12/10/71, 1 )
December 15-1 6: Space Shuttle Aerothermodynamics Technology Confer-
    ence at ARC discussed technology for manned spacecraft that could fly
    to aircraftlike landing. More than 30 papers were presented on space
    shuttle design, operation flight mechanics, flow fields, and heat trans-
    fer. (ARC Astrogram, 12/23/71,3)
  European Launcher Development Organization ( ELDO ) Council, meeting
    in Paris, adopted $79.3-million budget to cover Europa I and I1 de-
    velopment, studies and preliminary work on Europa 111, construction
    of F-15 and subsequent launchers, and launchers for Symphonie. Gen.
    R. Aubiniere of France succeeded Ambassador R. di Carroba of Italy
    as Secretary General. Gen. H. Hoffman was appointed Technical
    Director, G. Van Reeth Administrative Direetor, and J. P. Causse
    Deputy Director General, to act for ELDO in preliminary talks with
    U.S. on European participation in post-Apollo program. (SF, 2/72, 8;
     ELDO PAO)
December 16: Cosmos 466 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Baykonur into
    orbit with 375-km (233-mi) apogee, 175-km (108.7-mi) perigee,
    90-min period, and 6 4 O inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 27.
     ( GSFC SSR, 12/31/71 ; SBD, 12/17/71,217)
          M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, reached
 NASA’s
    mach 0.8 and 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude during 13th flight, air-
    launched from B-52 from FRC. Objectives of powered flight were to
    obtain stability and control data at speeds above mach 1.0, expand
    flight envelope, and evaluate reaction control system. Evaluation of
    reaction control system was only objective achieved because engine
    shut down prematurely. (NASA Proj Ofj f
  Launch of Intelsat-IV F+ by NASA for ComSatCorp, postponed from
    Dec. 6 following failure of USAF Atlas-Agena booster, had been re-
    scheduled for Dec. 18, KSC announced. NASA project officials recom-
    mended that sensor probe be added to Atlas sustainer system to pro-
    vide information on engine temperature between gas generator and

                                    352
                                                                 December I6
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    turbine inlet and that temperature readouts be monitored during Atlas
    ignition sequence before liftoff. (KSC Release 274-71)
* AP quoted NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P.
    Donnelly as saying NASA was not releasing some information on Soviet
    space program received through official channels. Clampdown was
    being made at USSR’s request and through “bilateral agreement.”
    AP said Donnelly had forbidden NASA engineers who had returned
    from NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting on compatible dock-
    ing system Nov. 29-Dec. 7 in Moscow to talk to press. Text of mes-
    sage telexed by Soviet scientists to NASA at J P L during exchange of
    Mars 2 and 3 and Mariner 9 information would be withheld at
    Soviet request. Soviet scientists had sent three such messages. ( N Y T ,
     12/16/71, 27)
  Australia’s decision to accept delivery of 24 US. F-111C aircraft was
    announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force,
    at USAF news briefing. Matter had “been under discussion” for some
     time, Seamans said. “I am very gratified that the decision has finally
     been made and we can put the aircraft in shape for them and get them
     over to Australia.” (Transcript)
December 16-18: IGC added new displays to outdoor exhibit of space hard-
     ware at Visitor Information Center. Spacecraft facility verification
     vehicle-Apollo spacecraft mockup 25 m (82 ft) tall used to check out
     assembly and test facilities for early Apollo missions-was placed on
     temporary display with Juno 2 and Jupiter C rockets, Gemini Titan and
     Mercury spacecraft, Apollo LM mockup, and three kinds of rocket en-
     gines. Full-scale model of ApoZZo 15 LRV would remain on display for
     several weeks. Scale model of Mariner 9 spacecraft had been added to
     indoor exhibits. (KSC Release 273-71)
December 17: U.S.S.R. launched two satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 467
     entered orbit with 465-km (288.9-mi) apogee, 266-km (165.3-mi)
     perigee, 91.8-min period, and 71° inclination and reentered April 18,
     1972.
        Cosmos 468 entered orbit with 808-km (502.1-mi) apogee, 786-km
      (488.4-mi) perigee, 100.7-min period, and 74O inclination. (CSFC
     SSR, 12/31/71 ; 4/30/72; SBD, 12/20/71, 226; 12/21/71, 230)
  Mariner 9 photographed Martian plateau from 6500-km (4000-mi) alti-
     tude. Photo, released by JPL Dec. 29, showed area 120 km (75 mi)
     square in Phoenicis Lacus region, covered with fault lines and resem-
     bling wrinkled elephant hide. Faults and scarcity of craters suggested
     region was volcanic and relatively young geologically. (AP, B Sun,
     12/30/71, A5 ; Miles, LA Times, 12/30/71)
  Flight version of multiple docking adapter (MDA)for Skylab was ac-
     cepted by MSFC at Martin Marietta Corp.’s Denver facility. M D A - ~
     major Skylab module being readied for 1973 launch-had been de-
      signed and fabricated by MSFC. Martin Marietta had installed, inte-
      grated, and tested MDA subassemblies and functional equipment.
      (MSFC Release 71-241 )
  Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Colin.) said in release to press that preliminary
      GAO audit of NR Rocketdyne Div. $24-million Saturn contract had
                                        .
      shown “as much as $5 million . . was diverted to underwrite crucial
      research on Rocketdyne’s winning design in the $500 million space
      shuttle main engine contract [awarded Sept. 11.” Cotter said audit,

                                    353
December 17                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    performed at his request, showed “that work performed under the
    Saturn contract influenced NASA’s Source Selection Board, the group
    which evaluated the space shuttle designs submitted by Rocketdyne,
    Pratt 81 Whitney and Aerojet General.” NASA Assistant Administrator
    for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization Daniel J. Harnett later
    told press NASA audit of space shuttle engine contract had shown “no
    unfair competition advantage was given to Rocketdyne.” (Text; AP,
    W Star, 12/19/71, E3)
* Aviation Hall of Fame installed 1971 honorees in ceremony at Dayton,
    Ohio : Aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran for “outstanding achievements in
    modern aviation”; Boeing Co. Board Chairman William M. Allen, who
    had backed R&D that led to Boeing production of B 4 7 , B-52, 707,
    and 747 aircraft; Gen. George C. Kenney (USAF, Ret.), who had or-
    ganized and commanded SAC from 1946 to 1948, commanded Air Univ.
    at Maxwell AFB, Ala., and been World War I combat pilot in France;
    and late Harry F. Guggenheim, who had helped establish schools of
    aeronautical engineering at US. universities and had supported Dr.
    Robert H. Goddard in rocket development and jet propulsion develop-
    ment. (AF Mag, 1/72, 15-16)
December 18: President Nixon signed H.R. 11731, $70.5-billion7 FY 1972
    DOD defense establishment appropriation bill. Bill became P.L. 92-204.
     (CR, 12/17/71, D1339)
December 19-20: Intelsat-IV F-3 comsat was launched by NASA for Com-
    SatCorp on behalf of INTELSAT. Satellite, launched from ETR at 8 : l O
    pm EST by Atlas-Centaur booster, entered elliptical transfer orbit. Pri-
    mary objective was to place satellite into transfer orbit accurate enough
    for spacecraft onboard propulsion systems to place it in planned syn-
    chronous orbit.
       Apogee kick motor was fired at 12:49 pm EST Dec. 20, and Intelsat-
    IV F-3 entered orbit with 36 052.9-km (22 402.2-mi) apogee, 35 745.5-
    km (22 211.2-mi) perigee, 1442-min period, and 0.47’ inclination.
    Satellite would drift from position at 284.2’ east longitude to perma-
    nent station over Atlantic at 19.5O west longitude by end of January
    1972.
       Zntelsat-ZV F-3 was second comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite
    was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and
    weighed 1412 kg (3090 Ibs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, provid-
    ing 12 TV channels and 3000-9000 telephone circuits, and was capa-
    ble of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected life-
    time was seven years. Intelsat-lV F-2 had been launched Jan. 25 and
    was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA Proj Off; ComSat-
    Corp Release 71-66)
December 19: Detailed Tass description of Mars 2 and 3 missions with dia-
    grams of spacecraft and landing procedures appeared in Soviet news-
    papers. Enroute to Mars, spacecraft had measured solar wind particle
    streams, measured parameters of interplanetary magnetic fields, de-
    termined electron concentrations in interplanetary medium, studied
    solar radio emissions with Soviet-French Stereo-1 experiment, and
    studied spacial structure, directivity, and mechanism of radiation
    processes. In Mars orbit spacecraft had investigated Mars solar wind
    flow and its interaction with Mars ionosphere, recorded spectrum of

                                    354
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                December 19

     charged particles and variations in magnetic field, and measured re-
     fraction of radiowaves.
        Mars 3 descent package had transmitted pictures only briefly after
     landing on Mars surface Dec. 2, Tass said: “At the computed time, the
     transmission of video pictures was begun and continued for about 20
     sec. During that period a small part of a panorama was transmitted in
     which no discernible details were detected because of [the lack of]
     contrast. Now, it is still difficult to say what caused the termination of
     the transmission. It is possible that it was associated with the local
     peculiarities in the landing area, which are completely unknown, or
     with the dust storm raging at the time. Apparently the dust storm
     acted as a ‘veil’ covering the surface details during the panoramic
     exposure. The sudden cessation of signals made it impossible to obtain
     information from the scientific equipment.”
         Orbiting vehicle carried infrared radiometer, two TV cameras,
     photometer, and instruments to measure COZ and determine water
     vapor content, surface radio-brightness temperature, and atmospheric
     density. (Sou Rpt, 12/31/71,1-14)
December 20: U.S.S.R. launched Molniya I-19 comsat from Plesetsk into
     orbit with 39 146-km (24 324.2-mi) apogee, 493-km (306.3-mi)
     perigee, 703.3-min period, and 65.4’ inclination. Satellite would trans-
     mit telephone, telegraph, radio, and TV signals to link far north,
     Siberia, Central Asia, and Far East. (GSFC Operations Off; Space-
     warn, 12/28/71, 1 ; SBD, 12/21/71,230)
  Italy’s Sun Marco 3 (launched April 24! by NASA) was adjudged suc-
     cessful. Satellite had transmitted excellent data on density, composition,
     and neutral-particle atmosphere at altitudes of 222-723 km (127.9-
     449.2 mi). Only failure had been in sun sensors, which were not
     essential to mission success. Sun Marco 3 had reentered Nov. 28 after
     more than seven months in orbit and had taken good measurements
     during reentry phase. (NASA Proj Off)
December 21: First complete details on Mars 2 and 3 instruments were tel-
     exed by Soviet scientists to NASA scientists at JPL over direct line in-
     stalled for exchange of Mariner 9 and Mars 2 and 3 data. Message
     said Soviet Mars spacecraft each had two radiometers, four photome-
     ters, one magnetometer, one ion trap, one spectrometer, and device to
     measure cosmic radiation. Analysis of data from Mars probes had been
     delayed while Soviet scientists investigated interruption of TV trans-
     mission from capsule dropped on Mars by Mars 3 Dec. 2. Message did
     not state cause of interruption or whether transmission had resumed.
      JPL officials later said Soviet message had given location of Mars 2
     spacecraft but Soviet scientisis had asked that information not be
     publicized. (AP, Long Beach, Calif, Independent-Press Telegram,
      12/22/71 )
* Flight version of multiple docking adapter (MDA) for Skylab was trans-
     ported from Denver to St. Louis, Mo., aboard Super Guppy aircraft
      for mating with airlock module ( A M) being manufactured by McDon-
      ne11 Douglas Astronautics Co. After mating, all systems would be tested
      and mated modules would be placed in large altitude chamber where
      manned and unmanned simulated missions would be conducted. (MSFC
      Release 71-241)

                                     355
December 21                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

* Gunman disarmed and held captive four Univ. of Maryland security
     guards outside chemistry building during alleged attempt to break
     into laboratories where lunar samples were kept. Later Dr. Cyril A.
     Ponnamperuma, former ARC scientist, said he believed unsuccessful
     attempt had been made to steal lunar samples. Dr. Ponnamperuma was
     analyzing samples at Univ. of Maryland for traces of amino acid,
     hydrocarbons, or other building blocks of life. (Meyer, W Post,
     12/22[71, C l )
  Identification of galactic x-ray source GX3+ 1 with known star by British
     astronomers using lunar occulation-new         technique ‘employing co-
     ordinated observations from two sounding rockets-had been reported
     by U.K. Science Research Council, New York Times said. Observa-
    tions-from Skylark rockets launched from Woomera, Australia, Sept.
     27 and Oct. 24, when GX3+l’s approximate position was known-
    had indicated two times during which x-ray source had disappeared
     behind moon. Data had enabled Royal Greenwich Observatory astron-
     omer L. V. Morrison to pinpoint area in which x-ray source lay by
     using photographic plate of region that contained star. Attempts to
     confirm identification would be made in next two months but report
    conceded possibility that x-ray source could be associated with fainter
    star not visible on existing plates. (NYT, 12/21/71, 22)
December 22: NASA announced flight schedule for 1972. Apollo 16 manned
    lunar landing mission would be launched in March and Apollo 17 in
    December. Pioneer-F would be launched in February on two-year mis-
     sion to Jupiter, and ERTS would be launched into polar orbit during
     the first half of 1972 to obtain earth surface imagery. Other launches
    would include Intelsat-IV F-4, F-5, and F-6 comsats for ComSat-
    Corp; HEOS-A2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite for ESRO; MTS Meteo-
    roid Technology Satellite; TD-1 scientific satellite for ESRO ; ITOS-C, -D,
     and -E Improved Tiros Operational meteorological satellites for
    NOAA; OAO-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory; IMP-H Interplane-
    tary Monitoring Platform; ESRO-4 scientific satellite for ESRO ; Aeros
    scientific satellite in cooperation with West Germany; SAS-B Small
    Astronomy Satellite; Telesat-A comsat for Canada; Nimbus-E R&D
    satellite ; and SMS-A Synchronous Meteorological Satellite.
        In addition, NASA schedule would include broad range of aeronau-
     tical research and cooperative exploration with other countries. Air-
     craft noise abatement would be high-priority goal, with development
    of QUESTOL aircraft, construction of noise-reduction laboratory at LaRC,
     and mating of acoustically treated nacelle to quieter jet engine. Super-
     critical wing test aircraft would be fitted with side fairings to increase
     flight efficiency and wing would be fitted to modified F-111 aircraft
    for tests in 1973. X-24A lifting body would be modified and redesig-
    nated X-24B and would begin flight tests in fall 1972. (NASA Feature
    Release)                               -
 NASA announced it had authorized MSFC to extend for one month the
    level-of-effort contract with NR Rocketdyne Div. for design of Space
    Shuttle main engine. Action had been taken pending completion of
    GAO review of United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div.’s protest of
    contract award to Rocketdyne [see Aug. 31. (NASA Release 71-249)
December 23: Zrztelsat-IV F-2, launched by NASA for ComSatCorp on behalf
    of INTELSAT Jan. 25, was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite had

                                     356
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 December 23

     been placed in desired synchronous orbit Jan. 27 and was now in
    service at 24’ west longitude over Atlantic. (NASA Proj Off)
  France’s Eole Cooperative Applications Satellite, launched by NASA Aug.
     16, was adjudged successful by NASA. Initial data tape had been
     received by GSFC from CNES for reduction and analysis of balloon-
     temperature, .pressure-sensor, and wind-velocity information. Prelimi-
     nary results indicated that balloon sensors, interrogation method, and
     range-rate system for position-locating balloons had been operating
     within design Iimits. Satellite position-location technique had been able
     to locate fixed balloon electronics package to within 1.2 km (0.8 mi)
     of its surveyed position. Location of free moving balloons had been
     within 3 km (1.9 mi). (NASA Proj Off)
  Joint West German and NASA barium-ion-cloud ( BIC)       probe launched Sept.
     20 was adjudged successful by NASA. Barium had been released at
     planned altitude, latitude, and longitude, and cloud generated had been
     recorded by special cameras for about 75 min. Cloud elongated to
     12 000 km (7500 mi) during observation period and good data were
     obtained during cloud‘s deceleration. Striations observed would provide
     information on plasma instabilities and on electric and magnetic fields
     in magnetosphere. (NASA Proj Off)
  NASA announced appointment of John W. King, KSC Chief of Public
9

     Information, as MSC Public Affairs Officer. Appointment would be
     effective in late January 1972. King had participated in more than
     200 launches; voice of “Jack King” was well known to Apollo launch
     viewers. (NASA Release 71-250)
  GSA had said it would take bids on towers and equipment from two Saturn
     launch complexes at ICSC, AP reported. Equipment from Complexes 34
     and 37, to be sold in one lot, included cranes, boom hoists, 298 km
      (185 mi) of copper and steel cable, and five towers weighing total of
     more than 8.2 million kg (9000 tons). NASA had said complexes, which
     cost $147 million to build, were obsolete. Complex 34 was scene of
     Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire that took the lives of Astronauts Virgil I.
     Grissom, Roger B. Chaffee, and Edward H. White 11. It was also launch
     site of Apollo 7 (Oct. 11-22, 1968), first manned mission in Apollo
     program. Complex 37 had been used for pre-Apollo unmanned missions.
     NYT, 12/24/71, C7; ICSC Hist Off)
  Discovery of new planetoid by Soviet astrophysicist N. Chernykh was
     reported by Moscow publication Sotsialisticheskaya Zndmtriya. Plan-
     etoid had been described as celestial body of 16th magnitude but had
     not been identified by permanent number and name. Preliminary calcu-
     lations of planetoid’s orbit had been made by F. Khanina of Soviet
     Academy of Sciences. Chernykh and M. Diritis of Latvian State Univ.
     had called planetoid “Riga.” ( FBISSOV-71-231, 12/30/71, u)
* DOD had decided to postpone production decision on Lockheed Aircraft
     Corp’s Cheyenne attack helicopter while USA flight-tested aircraft
     against two competitors, Wall Street Journal reported. Competitors were
     United Aircraft Corp. Sikorskv Aircraft Div.’s Blackhawk and Textron,
     Inc., Bell Helicopter Co.’s ’helicopter, Kingcobra. (Levine, WSJ,
     12/23/71,5)
* Chinese Communists were building missile tracking ship that could be
     used in Pacific for tracking and analyzing test-firing of ICBMS capable
     of application against European portion of U.S.S.R.and U S ,Christian
                                                                  ..
                                     357
December 23                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    Science Monitor reported. Monitor’s sources in Washington, D.C., had
    said ship could be used to spy on U S . and Soviet missile work and
    to expand Chinese satellite program into wider areas. (Ashworth, CSM,
    12/23/71,1)
December 25: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 469 from Baykonur into orbit with
    262-km (162.8-mi) apogee, 252-km (156.6-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period,
    and 64.9’ inclination. (GSFC SSR, 12/31/71; Sou Aero, 1/17/71, 15)
* U.S.S.R. and France had successfully completed joint program of
    sounding rocket launches from Soviet ship Professor ZuboV off coast of
    Kourou, French Guiana, Tass announced. Purpose of launches was to
    study upper atmosphere. (FBIS-SOV-71-251,        12/30/71, L2)
* U.S.S.R. would transfer to new system of world coordinated time at mid-
    night Dec. 31, Tass reported. (FBIS-SOV-71-251, 12/30/71, L1)
December 26: NASA was studying method of obtaining samples of comets by
    sending spacecraft to rendezvous with comet to fly through comet’s
    head or tail, Washington Post reported. oss Planetary Programs
     Director Robert S. Kraemer, had said that “best shot of all might be
     going right through the middle of a comet, to find out what’s going on
    inside the comet.” Not all comets were reachable by spacecraft, but
    some would come close enough to earth in next 20 yrs to make
    rendezvous feasible, Post said. Comet $Arrest would fly by in 1976 and
    and 1982, comet Encke in 1983, comet Giacobini-Zinner in 1985. Comet
    “most astronomers would like to probe” was Halley’s, due close to sun
    in February 1986. (O’Toole, W Post, 12/26/71, C5)
* USAF had ordered new flying procedures to reduce structural wear and
    tear on C-5A cargo aircraft, New York Times reported. “Highly
    unusual program for extending a plane’s useful life” was additional
    to “more routine work of beefing up the wings in areas that show signs
    of being the least durable.” There were indications that C-5A’s struc-
    tural needs could grow beyond usual level for new aircraft. “If so,
    huge new outlays could be added to the already massive costs that have
    made the aircraft a focus of debate.” C-5A had already overrun initial
    total cost estimates by $1.2 billion. Latest figure of $4<.6billion was for
    diminished fleet of 81 instead of 120 aircraft, which were to have
    cost $3.4 billion. (Witkin, NYT, 12/26/71,46)
December 26-31 :AAAS held 138th Annual Meeting in Philadelphia. Activists
    protesting US. policy in Vietnam war tossed tomato at former Vice
    President Hubert H. Humphrey and interrupted speech of William
    P. Bundy, former State Dept. Assistant Secretary in charge of East
    Asian affairs. Science reported later that despite “well publicized”
    incidents, observers agreed level of intensity of disruptions was lower
    than in recent years. New York Times attributed relative mildness of
    meeting to fact proceedings were not televised, thus providing “less
    tempting platform for confrontations.”’
       Symposium on “Astronomy from a Space Platform” held Dec. 27-28
    included papers by astronomers, space program planners, electronics
    specialists, optical designers, and researchers. NASA Skylab Program
    Director William C. Schneider, presented plans for Skylab solar astron-
    omy experiments. Dr. George H. Ludwig, Chief of GSFC Information
    Processing Div., analyzed tradeoff between earth-based and space-based
    data processing in astronomy missions. Dr. William F. Hoffman of
    NASA Institute for Space Studies discussed next-generation infrared
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                              December 26-31

    space astronomical instruments and discoveries already made in infra-
    red region. Panel chaired by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate
    Administrator for Space Science, reviewed symposium on Dec. 28.
    Panel also included Dr. Karl Henize, astronaut-astronomer. (Program;
    Science, 10/15/71, 11/19/71; 1/7/72; NYT, 1/2/72, 3:9; NASA
    Hist Off)
December 27: U.S.S.R. launched two satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 470
    entered orbit with 2572km (159.7-mi) apogee, 190-km (118.1-mi)
    perigee, 88.9-min period, and 65.4O inclination. It reentered Jan. 6,
    1972.
       Oreol, joint Soviet-French experiment in Arcade program to study
    upper atmosphere at high latitudes and determine nature of polar
    lights, entered orbit with 2477-km (1539.2-mi) apogee, 400-km (248.6-
    mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 73.9O inclination. Satellite carried
    instruments to study spectrum of proirons and electrons, to measure
    integral intensity of protons, and to determine ionic composition of
    atmosphere. (GSFC SSR, 12/31/71 ; 1/31/72 ; Tass, FBIS-SOV-71-249,
    12/28/71, L1; Sow Aero, 1/17/72,15)
* U.S.S.R.’s Mars 2 and Mars 3 had discovered presence of oxygen and
    atomic hydrogen in Mars’ upper atmosphere, Tass announced. Hydrogen
    corona was located at altitude of 10 000-20 000 km (6200-12 400 mi)
    above surface, and oxygen at 700-1000 kin (435-620 mi). Spacecraft
    also measured temperature changes on Martian surface. Individual areas
    on diurnal side did not exceed 258 K (-lS”C, or 5OF). On nocturnal
    side, temperature in some regions exceeded that of environment by
    20-25 K (20-25OC, or 68-77’F). (FBIS-SOV-71-249, 12/28/71, L2)
* NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences had agreed on substance and
    mechanics of future exchanges of medical and biological data on
    their experience in manned space flight, NASA announced. Agree-
     ment’s details were contained in recommendations of joint working
    group on space biology and medicine which met in Moscow Oct. 9-13.
    Group-cochaired by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director for Life
    Sciences, and Dr. N. N. Gurovsky of U.S.S.R. Ministry of Health and
    Academy of Sciences-recommended that meetings be held at least
    once annually, with next meeting held in U S . during May 1972;
     working sessions be held to consider ways io predict state of human
     organism during and after space flights, response of certain body sys-
    tems to space environment, techniques of dysbarism prevention,
    methods of preflight and postflight medical observations, and methods
     and results of biological experiments ; and cochairmen explore possi-
     bility of an exchange of one or two specialists to work in laboratories
     doing similar biomedical research in space programs of U.S. and
    U.S.S.R. (NASA   Release 71-251)
* NSF interdisciplinary conference at Franklin Institute in Philadelphia
     celebrated 400th anniversary of birth of Johannes Kepler. Kepler-
     astronomer, mathematician, and physicist-had         devised laws of plan-
     etary motions in early 17th century. Laws were “just as valid today
     as at the time of their announcement,” Science said. (Science, 10/
     15/71, 325; NSF PIO)
* Rising volume in aerospace industry production was predicted by David
     A. Loehwing in Burrons magazine: “NASA is readying some new pro-
     grams, notably the space shuttle. . . , Airline revenues are climbing, and

                                     359
December 27                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     some pick-up in orders for transports is anticipated.” DOD procurement
     policies “which nearly threw a few companies into bankruptcy” had
     been revised. “Most important there is a growing awareness that the
     Soviet arms buildup poses a real threat to US. security, which new
     weapons must be developed to counter.” Persuasive but “cynical”
     argument for lift in aerospace business in 1972 was political expediency.
     “Over half-a-million people have been laid off in the industry since
     1968, some 200,000 in California,” state with largest number of
     electoral votes. Barrons quoted political observer as saying, “Starting
     pretty early next spring, you’re going to see a massive injection of
     funds into aerospace.” (Barrons, 12/27/71 )
December 28: U S . Patent No. 3 631 294 was awarded to Steven R. Hofstein,
     President of Princeton Electronics, Inc., for Lithicon, first electronic
    storage tube to record on silicon and silicon dioxide. Tube, with target
     area consisting of more than 10 million silicon storage elements, had
     been used by JPL to record Mariner 9 Mars photos, by airlines and
     Federal agencies to inspect parcels that might contain bombs; by hos-
     pitals for brief x-ray and sonar exposures, and by libraries to retrieve
    microfilmed publications. (Jones, NYT, 1/1/72,25)
* International Institute for Strategic Studies was quoted as saying in Lon-
     don that 30 to 70 new Soviet Sukhoi Su-11 delta-wing advanced fighter
     aircraft had been delivered to Soviet Air Force in Egypt. Aircraft were
    believed to be capable of mach 2.5 speed and were armed with air-to-
    air missiles. (Reuters, CSM, 12/28/71, 2)
December 29: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 10 from Plesetsk to “obtain mete-
     orological information necessary for an efficient weather forecasting
    service.” Orbital parameters: apogee, 890 km (553 mi) ; perigee, 876
    km (544.3 m i ) ; period, 102.6 min; and inclination, 81.2O. (GSFC
    SSR, 12/31/71; Tass, FBIS-sov-71-251, 2/30/71, L1; sou Aero
     1/17/72,15)
  NASA telexed thanks to Soviet scientist Dr. I. A. Zhulin for “very informa-
    tive transmission” of Mars 2 and 3 data that included description of
    instruments [see Dec. 211 and forwarded Mariner 9 uv spectrometer
     results. Message, signed by Mariner 9 Program Manager Dan
    Schneiderman, continued exchange between JPL and Moscow of in-
    formation from U S . and Soviet Mars probes. NASA requested more
                                                                           .
    information on Soviet experiments and spacecraft on “detailed level . .
    described in our ICARUS publication previously transmitted to you,”
    and said Mariner 9 photo of Mars 3 lander site area was being dis-
    patched by diplomatic pouch. New value for direction of Mars polar
    axis baaed on dynamic considerations was included in NASA message
    to Moscow. NASA noted, “Although this will probably cause a revision
    of the Mars coordinate system at a later date, we will continue to
    observe the existing convention in describing the positions of visible
    surface features.” (NASA Release 71-254)
* Failure Review Board appointed to study malfunction of Delta 85 and
    Delta 86 launch vehicles had completed report, NASA announced. Fail-
    ure of Delta 86, which had failed to orbit ITOS-B Oct. 21, had appar-
    ently been caused by leak in oxidizer system’s vent valve, which caused
    2nd stage to move from correct attitude. To compensate for disturb-
    ance, attitude thrusters using stored nitrogen gas fired continuously to

                                    360
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             December 29

    keep rocket properly oriented, depleting nitrogen gas and causing
    rocket to tumble and crashland after reignilion.
       Apparent cause of Delta 85 malfunction while orbiting Os0 7
    Sept. 29 had been nitrogen gas leak in 2nd-stage hydraulic reservoir
    system. Although control of spacecraft had been lost before spacecraft
    separation, satellite had entered slightly elliptical orbit and had ac-
    complished its mission objectives. (NASA Release 71-253)
* In 21 major tests since April 1970, Safeguard ABM system had had 17
    successes, two partial successes, and two failures, Vashington Daily
    News reported. USA officials had termed record highly successful for
    complex weapon system during testing phase. Tests had included inter-
    cepts of missiles fired against Safeguard test network and firing of
    ABMS at predetermined points in space. Most significant test had been
    firing of long-range Spartan ABM from USA’s    Meck Island test complex
    in Pacific. Missile had intercepted incoming enemy warhead after
    picking it out of group of decoys. Spartan had been designed to knock
    down incoming warheads outside atmosphere at 322 km (200 mi) from
    launch site. Superfast Sprint missile was being developed to intercept
    warheads penetrating atmosphere at 40-km (25-mi) distance. About
    35 more major Safeguard iests were planned through mid-1974,
    including tests of missile’s ability to launch and guide large numbers
    of ABMS simultaneously against clusters of simulated warheads, decoys,
    electric jamming devices, and other missile penetration aids. ( PNews,
     12/29/71)
December 30: Mars orbit of Mariner 9 was changed by 17-sec engine
    firing to compensate for effects of dust storm on mission objectives.
    Periapsis was raised from 1388 km (862 mi) to 1650 km (1025 mi) to
    expand area covered in mapping photos and to provide required over-
    lapping of pictures. Mapping would be completed in three 20-day
    cycles with fourth cycle available to fill in open areas where photos
     did not overlap. Period was increased by 1 min 19 sec to place
    periapsis in middle of Goldstone viewing period for maximum data
    return. (NASA Release 71-252; Pasadena Star-News, 12/31/71)
  Two new clean rooms for checkout of Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM) in
9

    Skylab program were being constructed at KSC. Control of tempera-
    ture, humidity, and air in rooms would help prevent contamination of
    delicate lenses and other critical components of ATM experiments.
     (KSC Release 279-71)
  NASA announced award of $1.6-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to
    Aerospace Corp. for studies of advanced space programs. Studies,
    which would advance work performed under previous contract, would
    include space shuttle mission and payload capture analysis, payload
    analysis for space shuttle applications, analysis of advanced program
    operations and logistics analysis, and advanced missions safety.
     (NASA Release 71-255)
During December: U S . manned lunar missions Apollo 14 and 15 were
    voted fifth most important news story of 1971 in AP poll of member
    newspapers. Communist China was voted number one newsmaker for
    admission to U.N., changed diplomatic relations with U.S., and
    emerging position in world affairs. (W Star, 12/27/71, C9)
  Bell Aerospace Rendezvous articles described csFc-devised position-
    location and aircraft communications experiment ( PLACE) to test

                                   361
During December                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     feasibility of transoceanic air traffic control system that would use
     earth-orbit satellites. Experiment was designed following earlier mis-
    sion analyses by ERC. “Scheduled for 1973, the year-long experiment
    will determine the technical and operational feasibility of using com-
    munications satellites to give ground control centers precise and un-
     interrupted readings and control of air traffic over the North Atlantic
                                                                           5
    24 hours a day.” Experiment would employ two satellites-Ats
    launched Aug. 12, 1969) and ATS-F (to be launched in 1973)-and
    three ground stations. PLACE would be able automatically to pinpoint
     to within one mile [1.6 km] actual positions of up to 250 aircraft,
    update information once a minute, and predict locations between up-
    dates. Operational PLACE system could reduce flight-corridor widths
    to 48 km (30 mi) and aircraft spacings from 15- to 5-min intervals,
    permitting same corridors to accommodate 12 times as much traffic
    without affecting flight safety. In bad weather, PLACE could simul-
    taneously reroute every aircraft within flight corridor. Although
     PLACE was geared only to North Atlantic air traffic, “it is the fore-
    runner of what could become a worldwide satellite air traffic and sur-
    face control network.” (Rendezvous, Summer/Fall, 71, 9-11 ; Aero-
    space Technology, 2/26/68,33)
* Dr. Charles S. Sheldon 11, Chief of Science Policy Research Div. of
    Library of Congress’ Congressional Research Service, reviewed Soviet
    space program in AIAA Student Journal. Soviet program’s physical
    size and upward pace “suggests it exceeds in real terms the U.S. pro-
    gram at its previous maximum.” In contrast to U.S. program-
    which had been eroded as programs ended and technical man-
    power teams broke up-Soviet        “application of resources to a broad
    program of space flight has continued fairly steadily upward toward
    an ultimate level which has not yet been publicly defined.”
       Soviet program began its space flights with adaptation of its first
    ICBM, SS-6 Sapwood. “This vehicle, with improved upper staging, is
    still the mainstay of the present program while our corresponding, but
    very small, Redstone and Vanguard first stages have long since dis-
    appeared into history.”
       Largest single element in total U.S.S.R. program was Cosmos
    reconnnaisance satellite, which stayed in low-circular orbit a few days
    and was then recovered and which represented “rather passive military
    support flights.” Other elements with direct weapon implications were
    special uses of SS-9 Scarp ballistic missile carrier with space versions
    F-1-r carrying fractional orbital bombardment system (FOBS) and
    F-1-m      carrying highly maneuverable payloads. Some payloads
    launched by F-1-m “seem almost certainly aimed at developing the
    techniques of rendezvous with uncooperative spacecraft to inspect
                                                                   ..
    them and, if need be, destroy them. In a series of flights .       such
    inspectors have made close passes on other Soviet payloads and then
    have themselves been blown into clouds of debris. At least one, instead
    of being destroyed . . . was deliberately redirected to plunge into the
    atmosphere and ocean.” (AZAA Stu J , 12/71, 14-28)
  Safety problems of space shuttle were discussed by Director I. Irving
    Pinkel of LeRC Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute, in
    Astronautics & Aeronautics article. “The rocket engine must have an
    airplane-like endurance of 10 years (100 missions). The airplane

                                    362
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             During December

    systems must operate where rockets do, subject to space vacuum, space
    radiation, and reentry heating, and still carry a fan engine with high
    cycle temperature.” (A&A, 12/71,28-35)
* Attributes of Q-fan engine for STOL propulsion were described in Aero-
    nautics & Astronautics article by George Rosen, United Aircraft Corp.
    Hamilton Standard Div. engineer: “Q-Fan, with its lightly loaded
     rotor, operating at low tip speeds and incorporating controllable-pitch
     blading, is now essentially available as a new propulsor uniquely
    matched to the stringent performance, noise, and operational require-
     ments of the advanced STOL transport. It offers the aircraft designer
     flexibility in meeting the specific requirements of a given aircraft with
     a limited number of available core engines. By varying the size of the
     Q-Fan, the bypass ratios available . . . could range from 15:l to 30:1,
    or more if needed.” (A&A, 12/71,50-5)
  Slackening of US. R&D was scored by Eberhardt Rechtin, Principal
     Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering in DOD, in
    Astronautics & Aerowutics article: “The image of world technical
    leadership earned by our electronics and aerospace industries in the
     1960s will predictably be eroded in the 1970s by our own lack of
    planned ‘firsts’ in contrast with the continuing achievements of the
     Soviet Union, France, and probably Germany and Japan.” Major
    source of future wealth “must be the special skills of our population-
     yet we are presently pricing ourselves out of the world markets, in-
    cluding our own. We are also disseminating our science, our inventions,
    our management expertise, and our manufacturing technologies around
     the world in a way which, though it raises the standards of living
     elsewhere, also diminishes the competitive advantages of our own peo-
     ple.” While U S . had been world leader in R&D less than 25 yrs, “you
     hear discussions about reordering national priorities as if we could
     make unilateral decisions, independent o€ the international competition
     -as if international int$ractions were not a significant, much less a
     driving, €actor-concerning defense R&D, the NASA space program, tax
     incentives to industry, or a wage/price freeze.” (A&A, 12/71, 22-7)
  Gods and Means in the Conquest o Space by Soviet author R. G.
                                            f
     Perel’man (NASA Technical Translation F-595) was reviewed in Aero-
     space Historian by Clarke G. Reynolds of Univ. of Maine. Reynolds
     quoted Perel’man conclusion : after “ c o n q ~ e r i n gSolar System, Com-
                                                              ~~
     munist society “will take a further bold step, Le., to the stars of our
     galaxy, and then other galaxies; to visit and study the planetary sys-
     tems and civilizations of other worlds in order to bring other islands
     of intelligence into the system of the grand circle that is characteristic
     of the space age in the evolution of intelligent life.” (Aerospace His-
    torian, 12/71,216-7)
During Winter: Only “small fraction” of defense, space, and atomic energy
     funding during 1950s and 1960s had been spent on science and tech-
     nology per se, Gabor Strasser, former technical assistant to Presiden-
     tial Science Adviser Edward E. David, Jr., said in Science Policy
     Reviews. DOD, NASA, and AEC funding had accounted for “about two-
     thirds of our entire Federal budget” but bulk of “these huge expendi-
     tures,, had gone for “such ‘unscientific’ things” as plants, materials,
     labor, tooling, and production. With approach of mid-1970s “emphasis
     is shifting . . . toward alleviation of domestic social and environmental

                                      363
                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
During Winter

                   .
    problems, or . . improvement of our ‘quality of life.’ These goals are
    not so science-and-technology sensitive as going to the moon, as
    MIRV’s as phased-array radars have been.” Major change affecting
            or
    current scientific and technical activities was “approach required to
    tackle today’s emerging problems.” Advancement of state of the art
    was less important than “integration of existing science and technol-
    ogy with what is already known and yet to be found out in sociology,
    economics, politics, management and institutional arrangements.”
    (Battelle Sei Pol Rev, Fourth Quarter 71,3-12)
  NASA published Mariner-Venm 1967, Final Project Report (NASA
    SP-190). In €oreword, Project Manager Glenn A. Reiff said Muriner 5
     (launched June 14, 1967, toward Oct. 19, 1967, flyby of planet Venus),
    apart from significant contributions to knowledge of deep space, had
    achieved secondary objeciive, “to gain engineering experience by con-
    verting a spare Mariner-Mars 1964 spacecraft into one that could be
    flown to Venus,” with substantial savings. Cost of mission had been
    10% less than anticipated. (Text)




                                   364
                             Summary
During 1971: U S . orbited 51 spacecraft in 29 launches-including Apollo
    14 and 15 CSMS Kitty Hawk and Endeavor with LMS Antares and
    Falcon and their S-IVB stages intentionally crashed onto moon.
    U.S.S.R. orbited 97 payloads in 83 launches; Japan, 2; U.K., 1;
    France, 1; Italy, 2 ( 1 for US. on US. booster) ; and Communist
    China, 1. US. total included 33 orbited by DOD in 17 launches and 19
    by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’S total included 1 launched for USAF on
    behalf of NATO, 1for France, and 1for U.K.
       NASA’s manned space flight program contiiiued with launches of
    Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 manned lunar landing missions. Mobile equip-
    ment transporter, used for first time on ApoZlo 14 to carry equipment
    and samples, allowed astronauts to explore 3.5 km (2.2 mi) of lunar
    surface and collect 43 kg (94.8 Ibs) of samples. On Apollo 15, astro-
    nauts traveled 28 km (17.41 mi) over lunar surface on four-wheeled,
    battery-powered lunar roving vehicle (LRV)Rover and collected 77 kg
     (170 lbs) of lunar samples, including one white anorthosite rock about
    4 billion yrs old.
       Unmanned program was highlighted by Mariner 9 Mars probe, which
    traveled 400 million km (248 million mi) to Mars and began trans-
    mitting photos of major Mars dust storm and, later, of details of
    Martian surface and moons Deimos and Phobos. Mariner 8 launch vehi-
    cle malfunctioned at launch. Os0 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory-res-
    cued from initially incorrect orbit by ground command-made          first
    x-ray observations of beginning solar flare and revealed that sun had
    CL
      polar caps.” Other unmanned missions included Intelsat-IV F-2 and
    Intelsat-IV F-3 for ComSatCorp and Explorer 43, Explorer 44, and
    Explorer 45 (the last launched for NASA by Italy). Launched as sec-
    ondary payloads were Subsatellite on Apollo 15 and Tetr 3 on Os0 7.
    All elements of Skylab flight system reached final manufacturing and
    checkout in preparation for 1973 launch and intensive engineering
    studies on Space Shuttle were conducted throughout year.
       In joint NASA-USAF lifting-body program, M2-F3 and X-24A lifting
    bodies made 17 flights, including first supersonic flight by M2-F3.
    X-24A reached 1687 km per hr (1048 mph) before completing pro-
    gram and beginning modification for new flight program as X-24B.
       In aeronautics NASA TF-SA jet aircraft with supercritical wing
    made 27 successful flights. USN F-14 fighter aircraft successfully dem-
  I




    onstrated first automatically programmable variable sweep wing. USA
    CH-aB helicopter set new world altitude record of 5120 m (16 798
    ft) while carrying 10 000-kg (22 000-lb) payload. New V/STOL Wind
    Tunnel at LaRC became operational, providing greatly improved testing
    capability for scaled models. GE quiet experimental engine success-
    fully completed initial tests in NASA program to reduce jet engine
    noise, and NASA let competitive design contracts for development of
    quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (QUESTOL) transport

                                    365
During 1971                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

              US.-U.S.S.R. Space Activity, 1957 -1971
                Successful Launches to Earth Orbit or Beyond




                               r
                       u. 5.




                                I    l     l    1                1
                                                      I    I          i     t    1
       1957     1959     1961       1963       1965       1967       1969       1971



    aircraft. SST program ended, with Congress voting to terminate pro-
    gram.
        In sounding rocket program, 126 successful flights were made to
    study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms,
    meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations and to make astro-
    nomical observations in x-ray, UV, and radio regions of electromagnetic
    spectrum.
       DOD’S 33 payloads included orbiting of 2 Defense Satellite Commu-
    nications System (DSCS-2) military comsats, 2 OV-I scientific satel-
    lites, and Cannonball 2 and Musketball.
       U.S.S.R.’s 83 launches set an all-time record in number of flights.
    The 97 payloads included 81 Cosmos satellites, 2 Luna, 2 Soyuz, 1
    Salyut, 2 Mars, 1 Intercosmos, 4 Meteor, 2 Molniya I, 1 Molniya 11,
    and Oreol (launched for France). Soyuz 11, carrying three-man crew,

                                     366
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                                   During 1971
            -0mQIv)t-
            qlnwae4-c
                                                      ..
                                          . - c. .... .. . m a *: . .
                                                    .
                         ..
                                          . . ... .. . . .. :
                         ::               1              .
                                                         .f.          .
                                     I-*                                   :T'
            WOW*
                         ..               ......... . . .
            -d
             I

                         ..               .....
                                          .....                 ...
                                                                .
                         .   I



                         ..               . : : : + e a .. ... . .
                                          .....                       .
                                                                ....
                                                                   ...
                                     can
                                                      .. .
                                            :Lo
            cFFlWLn-l-4
                                          .....
                                          .....
                                                                             e   .




                                          . . . . . ....        ....
                                                                ....
                                          .....
                                          . .. . . . . .. .. . ..
                                     pfz .m . :- .: :. . :m ;
                                                            m:
                                          :
                                          ........
                                          ........
                                          . . . . . . .. ..
                                          ........  .
                                          .....
                                     SI- . . . . . m m - c :. .
                                          . . .. . .. ..
                                          :u
                                                                   ..
                                                                    .        :T'
                                               ....                ..
                                          .....                    ..
                                          .....
                                          .....                    ..
                                          . .. . :-c .w l 4. :-
                                          ..             .:         -
                                      at- .
                                          .cv
                                          .....  ....
                                     rn                :I+

                                          .....
                                          . .....

                                                                 ...:
                                                                    .
                                     gs . . ~
                                      a ii                  :
                                                       m m m :m
                                                                 . .. . .
                                                                        .  :v)


                                                                 ....
                                                                 .
                                        ..                                 *

                                        ..                       ....
                                            0     .




                                                                ...
                                            ..                  ..
                                            . :.. r             .:.
                                                                .
                                            -
                                            :    m f a - :me4 :
                                     mcJ
             m    .am*
                                            :                   ..
                                     03-
                                            ..                  ..
                                            ...
                                            ..
                                            . .FJIne-lom . . .. . .
                                            ..                    .
                                            ..           ....
                                     cnl
                                     m- o                                    *
                                                                     .?I
                                                         . . . .. .
                                                         ...
                                            .            ..
                                            ..           .
                                            ..
                                 :
                  :*ea
             v)




              ......                   ..                ...
              ......
              ......      .                               . .. .
                                                          ...
              . . . . . ..
                  ...
                    ..                 ..                 ...
                                        .. .
              ...
                .                                            I   .



              ......                    .                                                    *
              ......                                      ..
                                                    .....
                                                       ....
                                                                                     *   .
              . . . . .. ..             .. .
              . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .
                                                               .
              ....
              . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .. .
              ......
              .
              ......




                                                367
During 1971                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    successfully rendezvoused and docked with unmanned Salyut 1 to form
    first orbital scientific station, but cosmonauts died during earth re-
    entry because of improperly sealed hatch. Murs 2 and Murs 3 dropped
    instrumented capsules on Mars surface. Mars 2 capsule crashlanded
    and Mars 3 capsule transmitted 20 sec. Lunokhod 1 lunar rover carried
    to moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, continued to explore lunar
    surface until October 1971, when isotope heat reserves were exhausted
    during its 11th lunar night.
       Japan launched two satellites-Tansei and Shinsei. China launched
    Chicom 2, France launched Tournesol, U.K. launched Prospero, and
    Italy launched Sun Murco 3. (NASA Release 71-245; NASA Lifting Body
    Off; GSFC Sounding Rocket Br; NASA Exec Secretariat; Sheldon,
    United States and Soviet Progress in Space, Library of Cong, 1/22/72)
  NASA’s scientific and societal achievements advanced national goal of
    alleviating environmental problems and expanding basic research on
    behalf of humanity, as public pressed for immediate, usable returns
    from research in all fields. Apollo manned missions swelled storehouse
    of lunar information. Unmanned astronomical missions gathered
    unique data, including new clues to Martian atmosphere. NASA-devel-
    oped inventions saw increased use beyond space exploration-in envi-
    ronmental sciences, communications, medicine, industry, and agricul-
    ture. US.-U.S.S.R. space meetings set stage for future joint space
    missions. And balanced program of space and ,aeronautics, despite
    low funding level, continued to raise US. prestige as aerospace pio-
    neer while it worked to improve man’s future. Some observers, how-
    ever, warned of higher rate of technological advances abroad than in
    U S . and of ever-growing U.S.S.R. space program and technological
    capability. Soviet expenditures on space were estimated at level about
    double U S . peak expenditure of 1% of GXP when combined NASA-DOD
    space program was at highest level and four times present level.
       Dr. James C . Fletcher was nominated new NASA Administrator by
    President Nixon. President of Univ. of Utah and former aerospace
    executive, Dr. Fletcher took office April 27. He succeeded NASA’s  third
    Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, who had resigned Sept. 15, 1970,
    to return to industry. Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator,
    had served as Acting NASA Administrator in the interim.
       Operating at lowest budget level since 1962, NASA in 1971 continued
    phase-out of Apollo program with successful completion of Apollo 14
    and 15. Man’s fourth landing on moon, in Apollo 15 mission, proved
    to many that man had an effective scientific role in space. At year’s
    end, Apollo 16 had been scheduled for March 1972, with Apollo 1 7
    to complete program later in year.
       Reduced funding forced additional reduction of personnel as well
    as program cutbacks, stretching out remaining Apollo missions, de-
    laying first Skylab flight, and slowing studies of space shuttle. NERVA
    nuclear rocket engine program was reduced to holding action. Bio-
    science funding was eliminated. Aerospace employment in industry
    throughout nation also fell, reflecting cuts in DOD spending as well as
    in NASA’s.
       During year, however, Skylab hardware manufacture neared com-
    pletion and space shuttle work continued. Shuttle preliminary design
    contracts were extended so that NASA could examine alternative con-

                                   368
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                             During 1971

    figurations, contingent on Administration approval of shuttle devel-
    opment. In ERTS program, aircraft tested remote sensing devices for
    gathering earth resources data and first satellite for global monitor-
    ing of resources was scheduled for 1972. During 1971, instrumented
    aircraft measured air pollution, investigated corn blight infestation,
    and sought hidden natural resources. Pioneer-F spacecraft for planned
     1972 launch and December 1973 Jupiter flyby went into final manu-
    facturer’s tests. Increased emphasis on aeronautics included research
    into aircraft noise reduction, increased air transport efficiency with
    use of supercritical wing, and STOL aircraft for transportation.
        To emphasize practical goals of space science, NASA established new
    Office of Applications, increased technology utilization budget from
    $1 million to $5 million, and issued request for proposals for addi-
    tional uses of space-developed technology to solve problems of society.
    Among NASA projects were NSF contract to investigate use of solar
    cells to electrify homes and buildings and HUD contract to study appli-
    cation of space technology to sewage recycling. Joint NASA-DOT study
    resulted in recommendations for civil aviation R&D policy (CARD).
        Research achievements at NASA centers included ARC discovery of
    amino acids-building blocks of life-in      second meteorite. Discovery
    strengthened case for chemical evolution of life elsewhere in universe.
       NASA FY 1972 appropriation of $3.298 billion was $27 million more
    than requested $3.271 billion and $29 mi€lion above FY 1971 appro-
    priation of $3.269 billion-ha1 ting downward trend but far below
    1965 peak of $5.250 billion. (A&A 1971; O’Toole, W Post, 1/2/72,
    A1 ; Sheldon, Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70, Senate Doc 92-51)
* In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched NATO’s
    Natosat 2 military comsat for USAF and NATO, Eole Cooperative Appli-
    cations Satellite for France, Isis 2 cooperative U.S.-Canada iono-
    spheric satellite, and Ariel 4 ionospheric satellite for U.K. Italian crew
                                        Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite
    trained by NASA launched NASA’s
    and Italy’s Sun Marco 3 from Italian platform off coast of Kenya.
       Joint NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings on compati-
    ble spacecraft rendezvous and docking system progressed to discus-
                                                                    Mariner 9
    sion of possible joint test missions. Data obtained by NASA’s
    and Soviet Mars 2 and 3 probes were exchanged under agreement that
    covered broad range of U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space science
    and applications. Agreement on future exchanges of medical and bio-
    logical manned space flight data called for meetings between U.S. and
    Soviet experts at least annually.
       U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged Apollo 11 and 12 and Soviet Lrcrua 16
    lunar samples and Soviet scientists were among 750 experts attending
    Second Annual Lunar Science Conference at Lunar Science Institute
    in Houston. First U.S.-U.S.S.R. Conference on Communications with
    Extraterrestrial Intelligence was held in Soviet Armenia.
       Joint meeting of NASA and European Space Conference (ESC) iden-
    tified candidate areas for possible European participation in U.S.
    post-Apollo space programs, including design and development of
    space shuttle subsystems.
       International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey at Univ. of
    Michigan was cosponsored by NASA, Dept. of State, USN, and AID to
    inform representatives of 51 countries and international organizations

                                   369
During 1971                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    of latest techniques for interpreting earth resources data acquired by
    aircraft and satellite remote sensing systems.
                C-130 aircraft equipped with remote-sensing devices par-
       NASA’s
    ticipated in U.S. survey of Jamaica’s natural resources undertaken at
    request of U.N. and Jamaican government. NASA signed agreement
    with West Germany for series oi barium-ion-cloud (BIC) probe
    launches, and new sounding rocket agreement was signed with France.
    Under sounding rocket agreement, 20 French Centaure and NASA
    Nike-Cajun rockets would be launched from Kourou Center, French
    Guiana, in cooperative France-U.S. upper-atmosphere research project.
       By end of year NASA had entered into cooperative agreements with
    39 countries, including agreements on lunar samples, tracking and
    data acquisition, and geodetic satellite program. Scientists of 87 coun-
    tries besides U.S. were participating in cooperative ground-based pro-
    grams and personnel exchanges and 62 countries were exchanging
    scientific and technical information. Since the beginning of 1962,
    NASA had launched 21 satellites under international agreements, in
    addition to flying 21 international experiments on NASA satellites.
    Since the beginning of the sounding rocket program, 683 cooperative
    rockets had been launched for research. (NASA Release 71-245; NASA
    Int Aff; “Selected Statistics on Int’l Affairs,” 2/17/72; A&A, 1971)
  Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1971, to $23.3
    billion from $24.9 billion-decrease of 6.3%. Commercial aerospace
    sales, primarily jet transports, increased 7.1% in 1971, from $4.578
    in 1970 to $4.903 billion. Increase reflected increased deliveries of
    wide-bodied jet transports.
       Space sales continued decline, to $3.220 billion from $3.580 billion
    in 1970. Aerospace industry remained nation’s largest manufacturing
    employer during 1971, despite continuing drop in employment from
    1069 000 workers in December 1970 to estimated 931 000 in Decem-
    ber 1971. (Aerospace, 12/72, 3-5)
* Number of aircraft landing facilities in U.S. passed 12 000 for first time,
    with 12 070 airports, heliports, and seaplane bases in operation by
    Dec. 31 despite abandonment of 354. Figure at end of 1970 had been
    261. Texas kept lead with 1128 landing facilities, Alaska was second
    with 762, and California was third with 746. Of national total, 4418
    facilities were classified as publicly owned and 7652 as privately owned.
    (FAA Release 72-50)




                                    370
                          Appendix A
      SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED
                   SPACE J%IGHTS
                    A CHRONICLE FOR 1971

   The following tabulation was compiled from open sources by Leonard C.
Bruno of the Science and Technology Division of the Library of Congress.
Sources included the United Nations Public Registry; the Satellite Situa-
tion Report issued by the Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight
Center; public information releases of the Department of Defense, NASA,
NOAA, and other agencies, as well as those of the Communications Satellite
Corporation. Russian data are from the U.N. Public Registry, the SateZZite
Situation Report, translations from the Tass News Agency, statements in
the Soviet press, and international news services reports. Data on satellites
of other foreign nations are from the U.N. Public Registry, the Satellite
Sitwtion Report, governmental announcements, and international news
services reports.
   This tabulation lists payloads that have (a) orbited; (b) as probes,
ascended to at least the 4000-mile altitude that traditionally has distin-
guished probes from sounding rockets, etc.; or (c) conveyed one or more
human beings into space, whether orbit was attained or not. Furthermore,
only flights that have succeeded-or at least can be shown by tracking data
to have fulfilled our definition of satellite or probe or manned flight-are
listed. Date of launch is referenced to local time at the launch site. An
asterisk by the date marks dates that are one day earlier in this tabulation
than in listings which are referenced to Greenwich Mean Time. A double
asterisk by the date marks dates of Soviet launches which are a day later
in this compilation than in listings which are referenced to Greenwich Mean
Time.
   World space activity increased for the second straight year. There was
an increase in the total succesful launches-120 against 114 in 1970-and
a marked increase in total payloads orbited-151 against 130 in 1970. The
difference between launches and payloads is of course accounted for by the
multiple-payload launches (DOD, the principal user of this system in the
past, made 5 multiple launches in 1971, orbiting 21 payloads; NASA made
only 2 multiple launches, totaling 4 payloads; the U.S.S.R. made 2 multiple
launches, orbiting 16 payloads).
   Of the 1971 world total, the United States launched 29 boosters carrying
47 payloads-up from 28 and 36 in 1970 and marking the first U.S. in-
crease of both categories in one year since 1966. Of the 1971 totals, DOD
was responsible for 17 launches and 33 payloads. Five of NASA’s 12 launches
were non-NASA missions-Intelsat-IV F-2 and Intelsat-IV F d for ComSat-

                                    371
                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Corp, Natosat 2 for the USAF and NATO, Eole Cooperative Applications Satel-
lite for France, and Ariel 4 ionospheric research satellite for the U.K. The
Soviet Union again dominated world totals, launching 97 payloads (a high
for the U.S.S.R.) with a record 83 launches. It had launched 88 payloads
with 81 launches in 1970.
   The year was marked by success and tragedy. The US. accomplished two
spectacular manned Apollo lunar flights, but the Soviet record flight of the
world’s first manned earth orbiting laboratory returned to earth with its
crew dead. Apollo 14 made the third successful U.S. manned lunar landing
and returned with 43 kg (94.8 lbs) of lunar samples. Apollo 15 returned
with 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar material and employed the lunar roving
vehicle for the first time on the moon. The US. also successfully photo-
graphed Mars and its moons with Mariner 9 and made the first x-ray
observations from a spacecraft of a beginning solar ‘flare and of solar
streamers with Os0 7 .
   Early in the year, the Soviet Union orbited Sulyut 1, a large unmanned
station. The three-man crew of Soyuz 10 docked with the station but en-
countered some difficulties and returned quickly to earth. More than a
month later the three-man crew oi Soyuz 11 docked with Salyut 1, trans-
ferred to it, and conducted experiments from the linked spacecraft before
undocking and returning in the Soyuz 11. Although the Soyuz 11 mission
set a new world endurance record for the longest manned space flight-
nearly 24 days-the three Soviet cosmonauts died just before reentry when
an imperfect hatch seal vented their air supply. Mars 2 orbited the planet
Mars and placed the first man-made object-a capsule bearing the Soviet
coat-of-arms-on the surface. A capsule ejected five days later from Mars 3
sent back video signals for 20 seconds from the planet’s surface before
shutting down. Luna 18 orbited the moon but crashed on its landing attempt.
Luna 19 went into lunar orbit and remained there to conduct research
and take photographs.
   Also during 1971, the United Kingdom became the sixth nation to orbit
a satellite (Prospero) with its own launch vehicle. Japan launched two of
its own satellites (Tamei and Shinsei), and the People’s Republic of China
launched its second satellite ( M a 0 2). In addition to launching its own
satellite (Tournesol), France participated in a cooperative launch with the
                                                            Explorer 45 and
Soviet Union, which orbited Oreol. Italy launched NASA’s
its own San Marco 3 on NASA vehicles from its facility off the coast of
Kenya.
      As we have cautioned in previous years, the “Remarks” column of
these appendixes is never complete, because of the inescapable lag behind
each flight of the analysis and interpretation of results.




                                    372
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                        z                      w
                        h
                                               3


                          m
                        %oh
                        ‘3




                        P6
                        “2.




                                               %
                                     a    a
                                          d    d
                                     d
                 d       d
          d
          -.                              c,   c,
                                     c,
                        c,
                 c,



                              373
    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




a




      374
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                         E
                                     f
                                     W




                          N
                          I



                          2
                               375
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




             E
             m




             t
             z

                 h
                 h
             2%
             -2.




  376
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                        5
                        n

                        .s.
                        V
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                     2
                                2
                                :
                                :    m




                                         -*
                                     N        h


                                         a
                                 L       L
                                     k
                                4             4
                                     4   a:

                              379
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                       h
                       e?
          c?
         mrn          Ss;
         mm
         "2           NC




  380
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                               -
                               1
                              XL
                              Nd




                                k
                         P     u)



                               it     m   F
                                          .
                                          N
                                      N
                         N

                                ,
                                .         I
                                      2
                                2
                         P                4
                         4


                                381
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




            L

           4j
           -a
           .
           I

           .
           I

           v1




           9
           R


           4
           z
            -
           --   1
           El
           rth




           m9




                P
                8
                U




 382
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                             "             "
                             f             f
                  ...                      .E
                                            .
                  -.         -
                  E          E
                  .
                             u

                             .             ..
                                           I


                  d          L             L




                                 -
                              o!
                             moa
                             fB

                        z8       *
                                                P8
                                 I
                                 B
                                                u
                                 u
                      U




t-



i
                                     383
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




384
ASTKONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




     0:    o!
           m
In         m
z    0%
     r(




                              385
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




c
gs
%B                         W
cl                         a



      386
ASTRORAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                     p!
                                     P




                                     .&
                                     "2


                                          b
                                          1




                              387
        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911




          -
          1
                       R
          m




c?        c?           Y
I        .I            d
          m            m



               T!     \4-
          2I          PB
          "2          -2


    -
mc:                   4-
0-                    0-
                      Wv1
mm
"2                    -2




?


        388
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                     4




                             389
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




              h
0
S             v)




              m
              o\




m

-
N



-.
x
a
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
                                          ..
                             a       L
                             e            4
                                     B
                             L            0
                             I            ."
                                     U    U
                             P




                                     3    2
                                     eo   a



                                     o!
                             CI      "
                             N
                             h
                                     B




                E
               %I
               19
               I"
               I
               0




                              391
              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




         71
     8   m
 I   h
Nm
8"
z
cl




               392
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                           0:
                                                w   w
"
2                          oh              2



2
3




                                           N
                            h
                            N
                                           L
                                pb
                            z              3
                                           u)



                                     393
          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                         m
:
:                           Lo
                     d

                                         .
     d
             i:      N      N
     r(

                     L
L             L
     1

                     e
e                                        e
             5
     5       m
     m                      '
                            a
u)                                       u)




           394
     \
ASTRO AUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




    M
    r(




                              5
                              B

                 0
                 d
                 m
    m            N
    N
     c           L

                 ?i
     3           v1



                              395
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUT~CS, i i
                                                    w
                                                  I

i
.I



d
.I

%.
      .s
-0
$2
2 .f!
00


      -    .         .                                .
                     p                                9
                                         e
                                I

                                         f
I

=i
ww


                                -
4.-




                                                      -
                                         .-
           -
63         U                                          CI
                     I                   U

                     -;                               M
                                .I
           .I        I*



                                         ."
4%: G                3
                                .I
                     .I                  I
           .I                                         .I

           6i
@                                        6
                     3                                v1
                                v)




                                         x
x                                                     w
                                c
           8         h




      H8        H8                   8        8            8
                          t          I        I            I
                                     s       s
                          8
                                                           s
      u                   u
                u




                          396
ASTROh4UTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                     h
                                     N
                                     m




                             397
                              i
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUT CS, 1911
                          I




 398
ASTRONXUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




               s
       h
       0
               *
               4
               Y
               ,
               c(




                                       B
                                       4
                t
       N


        ;          ;
       .f:      z"
                               399
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




        o!
        i
        ?




         4
        CB
        Nd




  400
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS. 1971




                             5
                     x
             3
     ?
     i


                             z
             4
     2               3
             8       h       h
     h




                                                 m
                             c
                             4'             N         W
         I   I           0
                         0


                                                 Li
                                            Li        ti
                 d
         3               3       ti
                         z                  d    d
         2   2                                        a"
                             d
                                      401
    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




E
m




                                  s
                                 0-
                                 ON
                                 ow
                                 ,I
                                 --




                                 P


     402
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




    1
   m0




                                     8
                              B      I
                              B      s
                              u
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




   ."
    fi




   4
   8


   2
   ?
   i




   :
   :
    R                        N
                     I
                     n
                     N       h


    d                G       G
                     d       d
   a"

 404
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
                                   E
                      ING


                           Appendix €5
  CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR NASA LAUNCHES, 1971

   This chronology of major NASA launches in 1971 is intended to provide an
accurate and ready historical reference, compiling and verifying information
previously scattered in several sources. It includes launches of all rocket
vehicles larger than sounding rockets launched either by NASA or under
“NASA direction” (e.g., in 1971 NASA provided vehicles and launch facilities
and launched ComSatCorp’s two Intelsat IV satellites and NATO’s     Natosat 2,
as well as Isis 2 in a joint US.-Canadian program, Eole in a cooperative
US.-France program, and Ariel 4 in a cooperative US.-U.K. program; also,
under a NASA and University of Rome agreement, an Italian team launched
a NASA satellite, Explorer 45, from Italy’s San Marco platform off the coast
                     Scout booster; an Italian-built spacecraft, Sun Marco 3,
of Kenya, on NASA’s
also was launched by the same team from the same site using a NASA Scout).
   An attempt has been made to classify performance of both the launch
vehicle and the payload and to summarize total results in terms of primary
mission. Three categories have been used for evaluating vehicle performance
and mission results-successful (S), partially successful ( P ), and unsuc-
cessful (U). A fourth category, unknown (Unk), has been added for pay-
loads when vehicle malfunctions did not give the payload a chance to exercise
its main experiments. These divisions are necessarily arbitrary; many of the
results cannot be neatly categorized. Also they ignore the fact that a great
deal is learned from missions that may have been classified as unsuccessful.
   Date of launch is referenced to local time at the launch site. Open sources
were used, verified when in doubt with the project offices in NASA Head-
quarters and with NASA Centers. For further information on each item, see
Appendix A of this volume and the entries in the main chronology as
referenced in the index. The information was compiled in May 1972 by
Leonard C. Bruno of the Science and Technology Division of the Library
of Congress.




                                       407
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                     m   m       m
                                             m
m       m       m    m



                                     m   m   m   m
m       m       m    m



                                         m   m
                m    m
m       m                                        L4




                                     0
                                     w
                              a      w
                                     g
                              9
                                     F




                             409
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




 410
                           Appendix C
  CHRONOLOGY OF MANNED SPAclE FLIGHT, 1971
   This chronology contains basic information on all manned space flights
during 1971 and, taken with Appendix C to the 1965, 1966, 1968, 1969,
and 1970 volumes of this publication, provides a summary record of manned
exploration of the space environment through 1971. The information was
compiled by Leonard C. Bruno of the Science and Technology Division of
the Library of Congress.
   The year 1971 saw a moderate increase in manned space flight activity.
Contrasting with 1970, in which one US. Apollo flight and one Soviet Soyuz
flight placed only 5 men in space, 1971 saw two Apollo and two Soyuz
flights place a total of 12 men in space.
   After last year’s Apollo 13 mission failure, the 1971 success of Apollo 14
demonstrated again the viability of the Apollo system. Two of its astronauts
spent nearly 9+” hours exploring the moon’s surface and returned with
43 kg (95 lbs) of lunar material. These accomplishments were virtually
doubled six months later when Apollo 15’s lunar crew spent more than 181/2
hours exploring the moon’s surface and employed the lunar roving vehicle
for the first time. The crew returned to earth with about 77 kg (170 Ibs) of
lunar samples.
   The Soviet three-man Soyuz 10 docked with Salyut 1, a huge unmanned
space station launched four days earlier. Some difficulties were encountered,
for no crew transfer was effected and Soyuz 10 returned to earth 14 minutes
short of a two-day flight. Soyuz 11 initially met with better luck. It docked
with Salyut 1 and transferred its three-man crew to inhabit the station.
After conducting many successful experiments and setting a new world
record for the longest manned space flight, the three Soviet cosmonauts
returned to Soyuz 11 but died just before reentry when an imperfect hatch
seal vented their air supply.
   By the end of 1971, the United States had conducted a total of 25 manned
space flights-2 suborbital, 16 in earth orbit, 3 in lunar orbit, and 4 lunar
                  a total of 30 different crewmen. Of the 30 American
landings-with
astronauts, 10 had participated in two flights each, 5 had flown three
times, and 1 had flown four times. The Soviet Union had conducted 18
manned flights, all in earth orbit, with 25 cosmonauts. Three had participated
in two flights each and two had flown three times. Cumulative totals for
manned spacecraft hours in flight had reached 2958 hours 45 minutes for
the United States and 2097 hours 16 minutes for the Soviet Union. Cumula-
tive total man-hours in space were 7796 hours 24 minutes for the United
States and 4403 hours 12 minutes for the U.S.S.R.
   Data on US. flights are the latest available to date within NASA, although
minor details are subject to modification as data are refined. Major aspects
of all US. manned flights remain subject to direct observation by interested
citizens of the world, with a significant portion of recent missions seen live
on worldwide coIor teIevision.

                                    411
     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




 -
 I                             rn
                               N
tE
 -
 c
 0




      412
AS'I'KONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




               -.
                                       h




                                413
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971
                           Appendix D
                 ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES

   Listed here are abbreviations for sources cited in the text. The list does
not include all sources provided in the chronology, for some of the references
cited are not abbreviated; only references that appear in abbreviated form
are listed below. Abbreviations used i the chronology entries themselves are
                                       n
cross-referenced in the Index.

                                       magazine, Astronautics & Aeronautics
A&A                           AiAA’s
                                  Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1971 [this pub-
A&A 1971                      NASA’s
                                lication]
                              American Broadcasting Company
ABC
      Release                 Atomic Energy Commission News Release
AEC
Aero Daily                    Aerospace Daily newsletter
Aero Med                      Aerospace Medicine magazine
AF Mag                        Air Force Association’s Air Force Magazine
AFFTC Release                 Air Force Flight Test Center News Release
AFHF Newsletter               Air Force Historical Foundation Newsletter
                              Armed Forces Journal magazine
AFJ
AFNS Release                  Air Force News Service Release
AFOSR Release                 Air Force Office of Scientific Research News Release
AFRPL Release                 Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory News Release
AFSC Newsreview               Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview
AFSC Release                  Air Force Systems Command News Release
AF&SD                         Air Force and Space Digest magazine
AFSSD Release                 Air Force Space Systems Division News Release
A I A Release                 Aerospace Industries Association News Release
AIAA Facts                    American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’
                                Facts
                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’
       News
AIAA
                                 News
                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
       ReIease
AIAA
                                News Release
                              American Institute of Physics Newsletter
AIP Newsletter
                              American Aviation magazine (formerly Aerospace
Amer Av
                                 Technology)
                              Association Press news service
AP
                              NASA Ames Research Center’s Astrogram
ARC Astrogram
Atlanta J&C                   Atlanta Journal and Constitution newspaper
A v Daily                     Aviation Daily newsletter
                              Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine
Av W k
B News                        Birmingham News newspaper
B Sun                         Baltimore Sun newspaper
Battelle Sci Pol Rev          Battelle Memorial Institute’s Science Policy Reviews
Bull Atomic Sci               Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
Bus W k                       Business Week magazine
C Daily News                  Chicago Daily News newspaper
C Trib                        Chicago Tribune newspaper
Can Press                     Canadian Press news service
                              Columbia Broadcasting System
CBS
C&E News                      Chemical & Engineering News magazine

                                       415
                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19il

                     Cleveland Press newspaper
C1 Press
Columbia J Rev       Columbia Journalism Review Magazine
                     Communications Satellite Corporation News Release
ComSatCorp Release
E$                   Congressional Quarterly
                     Congressional Record
                     Christian Science Monitor newspaper
CSM
                     Chicago Tribune News Service
CTNS
    Release          Defense Atomic Support Agency News Release
DASA
D News               Detroit News newspaper
D Post               Denver Post newspaper
DJ                   Dow Jones news service
                     Department of Commerce Public Information Office
DOC PI0
DOD Release          Department of Defense News Release
DOT Release          Department of Transportation News Release
EOP Release          Executive Office of the President News Release
FAA Release          Federal Aviation Administration News Release
FBIS-SOV             Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet number
FonF                 Facts on File
FRC Release          NASA Flight Research Center News Release
FRC X-Press          NASA Flight Research Center’s FRC X-Press
GE Forum             General k e c t r i c Forum magazine
Goddard News         NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News
GSFC Release         NASA Goddard Space Flight Center News Release
GSFC SSR             NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situa-
                        tion Report
                     General Telephone & Electronics News Release
    Release
GT&E
H Chron              Houston Chronicle newspaper
H Post               Houston Post newspaper
JA                   Journal of Aircraft magazine
JPL Lab-Oratory      Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory
J P L Release        Jet Propulsion Laboratory News Release
                     Department of Commerce Joint Publications Research
JPRS
                        Service
                     American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’
JSR
                       Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets magazine
KC Star              Kansas City Star newspaper
KC Times             Kansas City Times newspaper
                     NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center News Release
KSC Release
LA Her-Exam          Los Angeles Herald-Examiner newspaper
LA Times             Los Angeles Times newspaper
Langley Researcher   NASA Langley Research Center’s Langley Researcher
LaRC Release         NASA Langley Research Center News Release
                     Los Angeles Times News Service
LATNS
LC Info Bull         Library of Congress Information Bulletin
LeRC Release         NASA Lewis Research Center News Release
Lewis News           NASA Lewis Research Center’s Lewis News
M Her                Miami Herald newspaper
M News               Miami News newspaper
M Trib               Minneapolis Tribune newspaper
                     NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center’s
Marshall Star
                        Marshall Star
MJ                   Milwaukee Journal newspaper
       Release       NASA Manned Spacecraft Center News Release
MSC
       Roundup       NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Space News
MSC
                        Roundup
        Release       NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center News
MSFC
                        Release
N Hav Reg            New Haven Register newspaper
N News               Newark News newspaper
N Vu Sun              Northern Virginia Sun newspaper
       News          National Aeronautic Association News
NAA
       Release       National Aviation Club News Release
NAC
       Release       National Academy of Engineering News Release
NAE
                     North American Newspaper Alliance
NANA
NAS Release          National Academy of Sciences News Release

                            416
ASTKONAUTICS AM> AERONAUTICS, 1971

                               National Academy of Sciences-National Research
          Release
NSR
ANC
 -
                                 Council News Release
                   Net61 Rpt   National Academy of Sciences-National Research
                       s
NAS-NRC-NAE
                                 Council-National Academy of Engineering News
                                 Report
                               NASA Announcement
       Ann
NASA
              Of
               f               NASA Historical Office
       Hist
NASA
NASAHQ B
     W                         NASA Headquarters Weekly Bulletin
                               NASA Office of International Affairs
NASA Int Aff
                               NASA Legislative Activities Report, Vol. X, No. 8
       Lar, X/8
NASA
       Proj Of
             f                 NASA Project Office (for project reported)
NASA
                               NASA Headquarters News Release
       Release
NASA
                               NASA Report of Sounding Rocket Launching
       Rpt SRL
NASA
       SP4014                  NASA Special Publication #4014
NASA
                               National Aeronautics and Space Council News Release
     Release
NASC
                               National Observer magazine
Natl 0 6 s
                               National Broadcasting Company
NBC
                               National Geographic Society News Release
      Release
NGS
                               NASA Management Instruction
NMI
                               NASA Notice
NN
                               National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
       Release
NOAA
                                 News Release
                               North American Rockwell Corp. News
NR News
                               North American Rockwell Corp. News Release
NR Release
                               North American Rockwell Corp. Skywriter
NR Skywriter
                               National Space Club News Letter
NSC News Letter
                               National Space Club News Release
NSC Release
                               National Science Foundation’s Science Resources
NSF Highlights
                                 Studies Highlights
                               National Science Foundation News Release
   Release
NSF
                               New York Daily News newspaper
NY News
                               New York Times newspaper, section 5 page 4
NYT, 5:4
                               New York Times News Service
NYTNS
                               Orlando Sentinel newspaper
0 Sen
Oakland Trib                   Oakland Tribune newspaper
                               Omaha Todd-Herald newspaper
Omaha W-H
                               Office of Science and Technology News Release
OST Release
P Bull                         Philadelphia Evening and Sunday Bulletin newspaper
P Inq                          Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper
                               Public Affairs O5ce
PA0
                               National Archives and Records Service’s Weekly
PD
                                 Compilation of Presidential Documents
                               Public Information Office
PI0
                               USN Pacific Missile Range’s Missile
     Missile
PMR
     Release                   USN Pacific Missile Range News Release
PMR
Pres Rpt 72                    Aeronautics and Space Report of the President; 1971
                                 Activities, March 1972
SBD                            Space Business Daily newsletter
SAO Release                    Smithsonian Astrophysical ObSeNatOrY News Release
Sci Amer                       Scientific American magazine
SciServ                        Science Service news service
SI)                            Space Digest magazine
SD Union                       Sun Diego Union newspaper
SF                             Spaceflight magazine
SF Chron                       Sun Francisco Chronicle newspaper
SF Exam                        Sun Francisco Examiner newspaper
Sou Aero                       Soviet Aerospace newsletter
Sov Rpt                        Center for Foreign Technology’s Soviet Report (trans-
                                 lations )
SP                             Space Propulsion newsletter
                               NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport
Spaceport News
                                 News
                               IUWDS World Data Center A for Rockets and Satel-
Spacewarn
                                 lites’ Spacewarn Bulletin
SR                             Saturday Reoiew magazine

                                      417
                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                 NASA compendium of sounding rocket launches
SR list
SSN              Soviet Sciences in the News, publication of Electro-
                   Optical Systems, Inc.
St Louis G-D     St. Louis Globe-Democrat newspaper
St Louis P-D     St. Louis Post-Dispatch newspaper
                 Congressional testimony, prepared statement
Testimony
                 Prepared report or speech text
Text
                 Official transcript of news conference or Congressional
Transcript
                   hearing
                 United Press International news service
UP1
                 U.S. Geological Survey News Release
       Release
USGS
                 US.News & World Report magazine
US News
W News           Washington Daily News newspaper
w Post           Washington Post newspaper
                 Washington Evening Star/Sunday Star newspaper
W Star
WH Release       White House News Release
                 World Joorsrnal Tribune newspaper
WJT
WS Release       NASA Wallops Station News Release
                 Wall Street Journal newspaper
WSJ




                        418
          INDEX AND LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
                  AND ACRONYMS

                     A                             Aeronautical Radio, Inc., 260
                                                   Aeronautical Research Associates, 15
                                                   Aeronautical Research Assn. of Prince-
 A 3 0 0 B (European consortium airbus),
                                                     ton, Inc., 290
    308-309
                                                   Aeronautical Satellite Meeting, Second,
 AAAS. See American Assn. for the Ad-
                                                     165
   vancement of Science,
                                                   Aeronautics (see also Federal Aviation
 AAS. See American Astronautical So-
                                                       Administration), 37, 52, 101
    ciety.
                                                    aerospace industry. See Aerospace in-
 ABC. See American Broadcasting Co.
                                                       dustry.
 Abelson, Dr. Philip H., 241, 331
                                                    air pollution. See Air pollution.
ABM. See Antiballistic missile system.
                                                    aircraft. See Aircraft.
 Accident
                                                    anniversary, 196
   aircraft, 277, 288, 305
                                                    awards and honors, 15, 75, 101, 115,
       C-5, 271, 282, 284, 302-303
                                                       131, 135, 139, 263, 266, 298-299,
       Concorde. 48
                                                       322. 326. 354
       F-14, 11, b6-47, 112, 141
                                                    beneits-7i
       F-111, 108
                                                    cooperation, 39, 53, 70, 122, 132, 138,
       YF-12, 174
                                                       165, 168. 170. 171. 174. 187. 188. 218.
   helicopter, 13, 14, 290
                                                       224, 242, 272, 2f8, 286, 290, i95
   lunar landing trainer, 22-23
                                                    employment, 44, 81, 94, 125, 170, 295,
   spacecraft, 357
                                                       --_,- _
                                                           -
                                                       309 349
       SOYUZ,156, 180-181, 185, 186, 191-
                                                     exhibit, 147, 150, 196, 198, 214, 248,
              192. 196-197, 277. 283. 299-300
                                                        301
                            I     ,


          cause,' 187, 192
                                                     facilities, 195, 365
Achernar (star ) , 149
                                                     funds, 20,53,94,221
Ad Hoc Tropical Task Force, 303
                                                     general aviation. See General aviation.
Adak, Alaska, 326
                                                     history, 234,261, 282,301
Advanced Research Projects Agency
                                                     meeting, 122, 266, 307
   ( A R P A ) , 23, 300
                                                     military (see also U.S. Air Force,
AE. See Atmosphere Explorer.
                                                       aircraft), 37, 70, 165, 174, 267, 272,
AEC. See Atomic Energy Commission.
                                                       278, 303, 312, 349
AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Of-
                                                     NASA program. See National Aeronau-
  fice, 52, 96, 167,250, 323
                                                       tics and Space Administration, pro-
Aeritalia S.P. A., 315
                                                       grams.
Aero Spacelines, Inc., 242
                                                     noise abatement. See Noise, aircraft.
Aerobee (sounding rocket)
                                                    research (see also Aircraft, research;
   150
                                                       Lifting body; and TF-8A, X-15,
      micrometeorite study, 54
                                                       YF-12, etc.), 23, 71, 73, 163, 171,
      solar astronomy, 161
                                                       189, 193, 287, 393
      stellar data, 13
                                                    space technology use in,
      ultraviolet astronomy, 14, 23, 119
                                                       73,120, 151,187, 219, 256, 297
      upper-atmosphere data, 117
                                                    statistics, 105, 134, 371-372
      x-ray astronomy, 132
  170,                                            Aeronautics and Space Report of the
      airglow experiment, 14, 41,209                President, 37
      solar astronomy, 228                        Aeros (scientific satellite), 356
      stellar data, 227, 300                      Aerospace Corp., 1, 361
      test and support mission, 292
                                                  Aerospace Industries Assn. of America,
     ultraviolet astronomy, 60, 327
                                                    Inc. (AIA), 116, 125
     x-ray astronomy, 79, 119, 226,296
                                                  AerosDace industrv. 79. 82. 213. 232. 346
  170B. 190
                                                   employment, 3, -21, 41, i6, 81, 85, 94,
  350,52, 159, 174
Aerojet-General Corp., 57, 346,354                     118, 125, 130, 141, 170, 295, 309,
  Aerojet-General Liquid Rocket Co., 60                333, 360,368

                                            419
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    financial problems, 124, 132, 216, 359-     NASA role, 121, 187
         360                                    satellite use, 3, 219,362
    NASA role, 280, 370                       Air University, 354
    union contract, 343                       Air Yugoslavia, 305
 Aerospace Mechanism Symposium, Sixth,        Airborne Warning and Control System
    254                                          (AWACS), 21
 Aerospace Medical Assn., 114                 Airbus Industries, 242
 Aerospace Research Pilot School, 11, 186     Aircraft (see also individual aircraft,
 Aerospace Safety Research and Data In-            such as C-5A, F-14, F-111, X-15),
    stitute (LBRC), 362                            56, 239
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Ninth an-           accident, 11, 13, 46, 48, 108, 112,
    nual AIAA, 15                                  141, 174, 271, 277, 282, 284, 288,
 ABrospatiale, 266, 351                            290, 302, 305
 AFCRL. See Air Force Cambridge Re-             air pollution. See Air pollution, air-
    search Laboratories.                           craft.
AFETR. See Eastern Test Range.                  amphibious, 288, 330
 Africa, 329                                    antisubmarine, 12, 17, 21, 38
AFSC. See Air Force Systems Command.            award, 101, 131,135,139, 326
Agena (booster upper stage), 11, 79, 80,        bomber, 21, 70, 87, 101, 119, 122, 224,
    107,195, 227,254, 289,296, 350                 239, 248, 255, 260, 262, 263, 272,
Agency for International Development               279, 284, 298, 303, 309, 314, 337,
     ( A I D ) , 120, 369                          344, 348, 358
Agnew, Vice President Spiro T., 24-25,          cargo, 141, 242, 260, 288
    31, 135, 139,264, 346                       carrier, 219, 224, 286, 303
 Agreement. See International coopera-          close-support, 21, 70, 80
    tion; International cooperation, space;     collision study, 10, 107, 219-220
                                                contract dispute, 2, 36, 38, 147, 294
    and Treaty.
Agriculture, Dept. of, 58, 98, 120, 132,        cost, 54, 152, 210, 246, 252, 260, 351
    168, 286, 333,351                          exhibit. 147. 214. 248
AIA. See Aerospace Industries Assn. of          fighter; 46,’70, 87, 101, 140, 152, 170,
    America, Inc.                                  171, 210, 212, 239, 246, 248, 255,
AIA Aerospace Research Center, 116                 260, 262, 264, 271, 300, 323. 329.
AIAA. See American Institute of Aero-              341, 344, 345, 352, 360.
   nautics and Astronautics.                   flying boat, 197, 330
AIAA Space Shuttle Development, Test-           foreign, 12, 140, 171, 211, 214, 224,
   ing, and Operations Conference, 75              248, 260, 264, 286, 312, 329, 346,
AID. See Agency for International Devel-           360
   opment.                                      general-aviation, 56, 276
Aiken, William S., Jr., 272                     helicopter, 13, 21, 30, 74, 80, 147,
Air-cushion railroad, 82                           248, 290, 294, 295, 351, 357, 365
Air-cushion research vehicle, 182              hijacking. See Hijacking of aircraft.
Air Defense Command, 166,209                   industry, 36, 44, 54, 60, 94, 132, 232,
Air Force Academy, 150, 266                        294, 346, 370
Air Force Assn., 262, 276                      instruments, 12
Air Force Cambridge Research Labora-           interceptor, 101
   tories (AFCRL), 153, 199                    noise. See Noise, aircraft.
Air Force Museum, 247,248                      pilotless, 1
Air Force One (Presidential aircraft),         private, 147, 226, 310, 329
   212, 326-327                                race, 282
Air Force Science Advisory Board, 57           reconnaissance, 94-95, 101, 120, 168,
                                                   281, 329
Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), 8,
        12, 94, 95,259, 267, 346               record, 12, 17, 38, 226, 310, 330, 366
   Aeronautical Systems Div., 300, 336         research (see also Aeronautics, re-
Air Force Two (Presidential aircraft),            search; and TF-8A, x-15, x-24,
   212                                            YF-12, etc.), 53-54, 70-71, 104, 120,
Air France, 308                                   133, 138, 165, 224, 239, 245, 256-
1’Air Liquide, 312                                257, 278, 303, 307, 337, 338, 356, 370
Air pollution, 2-3, 70, 122, 150, 231,         safety, 122, 262, 276, 305, 314
  242, 251, 290, 322, 331                      sensor bearing, 120,231,286
Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., 89           sonic boom. See Sonic boom.
                                               statistics. 54. 277
Air Quality Advisory Board, 290                            -   -
                                               SZL 19, 21, 22, 39, 71, 97, 122, 127,
                                                       -7   -1

Air traffic control
  automation, 9, 80, 121, 187                     173, 187, 218, 233, 267, 280, 298, 300,
  contract, 85, 187                               315. 337. 338. 363. 365. 369
  FAA regulation, 107,139,193,277              supertritical wing. Bee Wing, aircraft,
   funds, 40                                      supercritical.
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 7
                               91

                                              Allegheny Airlines, 128
  supersonic. See Supersonic transport,
     Concorde, F-l4A, F 1 1 Tu-144,
                           -1,                Allen. loseoh. 2 2
                                                              2
     C-15, YF-12,etc.                         Allen; William M., 131,139,354
                                              Aller, Robert O., 267
  tanker, 1 92
                                              Alouette 1 (Canadian satellite). 88, 1 6
                                                                                    0
  traffic, 271
  traffic control. See Air traffic control.   Alouette 2 88
                                                        .
                                              Alper, Dr.’Marshall E., 55
  training, 101,2 17
                                              Alps, 320
  transport (see also Supersonic trans-
                                              ALSEP. See Apollo lunar surface experi-
        port), 101,109,129,308-309
                                                ments package.
     jet, 47, 88, 124, 130, 132, 141, 147,
                                              Altimeter, 11
       1 4 192, 211, 212, 216, 220, 278,
        7,
                                              Altman, Dr. Manfred, 1 92
       301, 312, 332, 370
                                              Altus AFB, Okla., 271, 282, 284, 303
  V,/STOL, 18,65, 329,365
                                              AM. See Airlock module.
  VTOL, 135,262,298,300
                                              Amchitka Island, 300,310,3 6
                                                                         2
Airglow, 14, 41, 108, 130, 131, 159, 209
                                              Amelia Earhart Lives, 243
Airline Pilots Assn., 305,334
                                              American Airlines, 19, 211, 220, 260,
Airlines (see also Air pollution; Air
                                                   298,326
     traffic control; Airports; Noise, air-
                                              American Assn. for the Advancement of
     craft; and Supersonic transport)
                                               Science ( A A A S ) , 1, 102, 177, 187, 358
  aircraft, 44, 54, 124, 211, 220, 301,
                                              American Astronautical Society ( A A S ) ,
    307,314
                                                   68,89, 178,2 9
                                                         103,  3
  fares, 3 6
                                                           Board of Surgery, 2 5
                                                                              4
                                              American
  finances, 54,359-360
                                                           Broadcasting Co. (ABC) , 88
                                              American
  hijacking. See Hijacking of aircraft.
                                                            Business Women’s Assn., 314
                                              American
  safety, 305
                                                           Chemical Society, 256
                                              American
  services, 129,305
                                                           College of Surgeons, 2 9
                                                                                 8
                                              American
  statistics, 104
                                              American      Federation of Labor ( A F L ) ,
  supersonic transport, 84-85, 88, 109,
    129, 137, 148, 157, 211, 226, 232,             11
                                                    3
                                              American Geophysical Union, 3 5
                                                                           4
    36
     4
                                              American Institute of Aeronautics and
Airlock module ( A M ) (Skylab compo-
                                                 Astronautics ( AIAA), 282
  nent), 183,284,   288,323, 355
                                               Aerospace Sciences Meeting, 15
Airports (see also Air pollution; Air
                                               Annual Meeting and Technical Dis-
     traffic control; Noise, aircraft; and
     individual airports such as Wash-           play, 8th, 297
     ington National Airport), 312, 328        awards, 15,75,233,298,325
  environmental problems, 49, 248, 271,        Board of Governors conference, 1 6
                                                                               3
    320                                        Electric Power Systems Committee,
  facilities, 334,370                                244
  offshore, 137,152,182,282                       National Capitol Section, 280,3 6
                                                                                  2
  regulation, 194                                 officers. 15
  runway research, 278                            Offshore Airport Center Planning
  safety, 276-277,305                                Conference, 282
  statistics, 134,370                             Propulsion Joint Specialist Confer-
  supersonic transport (SST), 314                   ence, Seventh, 161-
  V/STOLpOrt, 2 78                                Space Shuttle Development, Testing,
  weapon detection devices, 133                      and Operations Conference, 75
                                                  The Supersonic Transport: A Fac-
AirResearch Manufacturing Go., 147
Airways, 80                                          tual Basis for Decision, 60
Akazawa, Shoichi, 82                              Symposium on Uranium Plasmas: Re-
Aksenov, Ye. P., 3 1
                   1                                 search and Applications, 2nd, 320
Alabama A ~ ; MUniv., 128                        American Institute of Physics ( A P I ) , 2 5
                                                                                            6
Alabama Regional Council of Govern-              American Interplanetary Society, 282
  ments, 128                                     American Museum-Hayden Planetarium,
Alabama Soace and Rocket Center. 182               233,279
Alaska, 96,101,   271,370                        American Newspaper Publishers Assn.,
Alaska, Univ. of, 76,79,272                        17
                                                    0
Albert, Col. john 6. (USAF), 75                  American Nuclear Society, 63, 294
Aldrin, Col. Edwin E., Jr. (USAP), 11,           American Ordnance Assn., 1  8
  63, 111, 135, 186, 198, 214, 232, 242          American Philosophical Society, 314
Aleksandrov, L. A., 217                          American Physical Society, 36,113
Aleutian Islands, 300,310                        American Revolution Bicentennial Com-
Alexander, Dr. Calvin, 102                        mission, 212
Alexandria, Va., 1 6
                   7                             American Rocket Society, 13,2 2
                                                                               8
Alfven, Dr. Hannes O., 281,332                   American Science and Engineering, Inc.,
Alibrando, Alfred P., 200                          89,113,278,8
                                                             26

                                           421
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS. 1971

American Society of Mechanical Engi-            Antenna, 69, 74, 95, 102, 231, 277, 279-
  neers, 84                                        280.~92.308 3sn
                                                Antibhlis&-&iGe        ( A B M ) , 4, 43, 77,
American Society of Newspaper Editors,
                                                   137,152, 194, 284,347, 361
  103
                                                A
                                                >
                                                n
                                                p
                                                :i
                                                 e
                                                 :         Mountains (moon), 145, 183,
American Telephone & Telegraph Go.
                                                  LL 1
   (AT&T), 170, 292
                                                      See American Institute of Physics.
                                                API.
Ames, Capt. Lionel E., Jr. ( U S N ) , 124,     Applications Technology Satellite. See
  246                                             Ats 1, etc.
Ames Research Center (ARC) (NASA),              Apollo (program), 212, 230, 284, 328
     39, 64, 251, 262, 340                         achievements, 44, 47, 76, 113, 183, 197,
  air pollution research, 170                        208, 217, 223, 312, 342, 361, 368
  Airborne Science Office, 219                    anniversary, 196, 198, 326
  aircraft research, 70, 271,335                   astronaut. See Astronaut.
  biomedical research, 167, 199, 210,             award, 57, 70, 179, 279
     253, 256, 257, 261, 369                      criticism, 133
  employment, 238                                 funds, 17, 20-21, 161, 173, 229, 324, 342
  Exobiology Branch, 322                          history, 30, 50, 215
  ILLIAC IV computer, 23                           launch
  meeting, 253, 254, 301, 352                         Apollo 14 (AS-5091, 24-30
  micrometeorite research, 54                        Ap0110 15 (AS-510), 202-208
  oil spills measurement, 81                       management, 70
  personnel, 216, 297,314, 330, 356               news coverage. 215-216
  sun, rotation of, 350                           plans, 4, 21z22, 35, 61, 63-64, 68, 86-
  water vapor electrolysis system, 235,              87, 89, 98, 108, 141, 142-145, 154-
     308                                             156, 215-216, 302. 305. 312. 324
                                                  policy, 38, 50, 201, 258
Amino acids, 167, 249, 256, 302, 322, 369
                                                   press comment (see also Apollo mis-
An-10 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 140
                                                     sions), 17, 161, 197, 223-224, 229
An-24 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 312
                                                Apollo (spacecraft)
Anacostia River, 129
                                                   anomalies, 255
Analysis of Apollo 10 Photography and
  Visual 0 bservations (NASA SP-232 ) ,            command and service module. See Com-
                                                        mand and service module.
  193
                                                  command module. See Command mod-
Anatuvuk Pass, Alaska, 271
                                                     ule.
Anchorage, Alaska, 271
                                                  contamination, 56
Anders, L/C William A. (USAF, R.), 68
                                                   design, 17, 43-44, 86-87
Anderson, Charles A., 291
                                                  equipment, 55-56, 86-87, 247, 252
Anderson, Sen. Clinton P., 19, 42, 44,
                                                  exhibit, 353
  132, 265
                                                  heat shield, 335
Anderson, Rep. Glenn M., 141
                                                  instrumentation, 35, 86-87, 223
Anderson, Jack, 124
                                                  launch
Andoeya, Norway, 12
                                                     Apollo 14 (AS-5091, 24-30
Andover, Me., 69, 292
                                                     A D O ~15 O
                                                              ~ (AS-510). 202-208
Andreyanov, V., 162
                                                  launch vehicle. See Saturn.
Andromeda (galaxy), 1
                                                  life support system, 156, 196, 205
Angra do Heroisimo, The Azores, 350
                                                  lunar module. See Lunar module.
Anik (Canadian comsat), 128
                                                  lunar roving vehicle. See Lunar roving
Animal experiments, space, 127, 182, 235
                                                        vehicle.
Anniversary
                                                  record, 30, 35, 207-208
  AEC, 215
                                                  safety methods, 215
  aeronautics, 165
                                                  scientific instrument module, 202-203,
 American Institute of Physics, 265
                                                        206-207, 223
 atomic battery, 326
                                                  service module. See Service module.
  computer, 218
                                                  test, 90, 268
 Kepler, Johannes, 359
                                                Apollo Day, 199
 manned space flight, 100, 122, 142,
                                                Apollo 8 mission, 239, 264
     152, 167, 197, 198
                                                Apollo 10 mission, 193,255
 NASA, 32, 122, 196, 197, 198, 215
                                                Apollo 11 mission,
 nuclear power, space, 180
                                                  commemorative dollar, 243, 308
  radio, 347
                                                  commemorative stamu. 232-233
  satellite. 98                                                          .*
                                                  crew, 239
 Smithsakian Institution, 266
                                                  light flashes, 64
  U.N., 318
  USN, 276                                        lunar samples, 5-7, 12-13, 16, 23, 30,
                                                        39, 45, 46, 83, 115, 236
 U.S.S.R., 100, 152, 167
                                                  exchange of, 159, 190, 369
Antarctic, 304

                                          422
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  Ofa Fire on the Moon (book about), 4            results, 30, 42, 44, 47, 51, 60, 183, 212,
  press comment, 232-233                                365, 368
  quarantine, 115                                 splashdown, 30
                                                  TV broadcasts, 25, 30
  Robert Hutchings Goddard-Father of
       the Space Age (book carried), 214          U.S.S.R., reaction to, 35, 43
  significance, 47, 76                           Apollo 14 Preliminary Science Report
  viewers, 43, 80                                  (NASA SP-272), 183
                                                 Apollo 15 (spacecraft), 96, 98, 110
Apollo 1 Mission Report (NASA SP-238),
         1
                                                 Apollo 15 mission, 44, 61, 128, 139, 201-
  130
Apollo 12 (spacecraft), 152                          208, 253, 271, 272, 313
Apollo 12 mission, 57, 69, 345                    anomalies, 203, 207, 255
  atomic battery, 326                             atomic battery, 326
  ion detector, 288                               awards, 239, 279, 345
                                                  biological aspects, 188, 196-197, 208,
  lightning strike, 199
  lunar samples, 5-7, 12-13, 16, 23, 30,                222, 225, 228, 261
                                                   celebration, 222, 238, 239, 256, 266
       39, 45, 46, 83, 115, 236, 257
     exchange of, 159, 190, 369                      seismometer, 142-143, 202, 207, 223,
  quarantine, 115                                       236,245
                                                     solar wind spectrometer, 144
  results, 44, 51, 255
  seismometer, 203, 207, 236                         suprathermal ion detector, 144
  significance, 47, 76                             extravehicular activity, 141, 201-202,
Apollo 13 mission, 30, 57, 59, 69, 75, 146,             204-205, 207, 217, 222, 225, 227,
  244, 266                                              228, 229, 255
Apollo 14 (spacecraft), 4, 35, 43-44, 46,          foreign reaction, 215, 216, 222, 225, 226
                                                  launch, 201
  56
Ap%lo 14 mission, 24-30, 80, 122, 208,            launch schedule, 108
       361, 368                                   lunar landing, 202, 203, 212
  anomalies. 24. 25. 30. 35. 43. 255
                        ,,.                       lunar liftoff. 205. 217
  atomic hatter;, 326                              Iunar roving vehicle, 24, 51, 55, 108,
  award, 57,59, 106                                     110, 115, 120, 128, 141, 142, 144,
  Bible carried, 214                                    202, 204-206, 213, 215, 227, 256,
  biological aspects, 5, 14. 17, 30, 35, 44,             365
                                                   lunar samdes.
       63, 261
  computer, 25, 30                                 core sampies,'227, 238, 260
  Congress, report to, 61                         rock samples, 142, 205, 206, 217, 223,
  cost, 209                                          225. 226. 228. 229. 230, 253, 308, 365
                                                                                  .    .
  docking, 25, 29, 30, 35, 38                      commemorative stamp, 215
  exhibit, 153                                     Congress, report to, 253
  experiments, 27,69                              cost, 209
    ALSEP, 27-30                                   countdown, 193, 194, 200
     cold-cathode gauge, 64                        criticism, 219
    extrasensory perception test, 46, 170          docking, 202, 206
    laser, 27                                     exhaust plume measurement, 199
    magnetometer, 27, 51                          experiments, 86-87, 202, 223, 225
    seismometer, 25-27, 44, 63, 64, 113,             ALSEP, 142, 1 U , 205
       203, 207,236, 245                             cold cathode gauge, 142, 144
    solar wind, 27                                   heat flow, 142, 144, 205, 245, 291
    suprathermal ion detector, 288                   laser, 315
     thumper shots, 27                                magnetometer, 142, 144, 207
  extravehicular activity, 27, 29, 41, 47,        NASA film. 227.255. 298
    48, 51, 86                                     New York Time's Special Features
  foreign reaction, 35, 43                              agreement, 200, 211, 336
                                                  Nixon, President Richard M., messages
  golf shot, 29, 106
  launch, 24                                            and statements, 201, 208, 212, 213,
  lunar landing, 25                                     221-222, 253, 279
  lunar samples, 24, 27-30, 41, 45, 59, 98,       photographs, 35, 142, 205, 206, 207, 223,
       236,265, 365                                      226
                                                   preparations for, 96, 110, 115, 156, 193,
  medallions carried, 247
  Nixon, President Richard M., messages                 194
       and statements, 24, 31, 39, 42, 59         press comment, 213, 215-216, 217-218,
  photographs, 27, 29, 30, 47, 48, 59                   222, 223-224, 225-226, 230
  preparations, 4, 10, 17                          press conference, 120, 141, 142-145,
  press comment, 17, 35, 38, 40, 43, 44, 47             156, 217, 227, 228, 245, 312
  press conference, 4, 35, 41, 59, 170            press coverage, 215, 361
  quarantine, 5, 30, 115                           quarantine, 188, 222
  records, 30                                      records, 207-208

                                               423
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   rendezvous, 206                                awards and honors, 121, 135, 209, 242
  results, 207-208,213, 217, 218, 222, 223,       resignation, 239, 243
        226-227, 245, 365, 368                  Armstrong. Neil, Airport (proposed), 209
  splashdown, 207, 221, 268                     Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA), 5
  subsatellite, 87, 207, 225                    Army Corps of Engineers, 122
  test, 200                                     Arnold Engineering Development Center,
  TV broadcasts, 197, 202, 204, 206, 237,         60, 276
        264                                     Arnold, Dr. James R., 291
   U.S.S.R. reaction, 222                       ARPA. See Advanced Research Projects
Apollo 16 mission, 44, 69, 216, 251, 324,         Agency.
     342                                        ARTS III. See Automated radar terminal
  atomic battery, 326                             system.
   crew, 61                                     AGeson, John C., 81, 261
  extravehicular activity, 228, 289, 293        Ash, M. E., 310
  launch schedule, 293, 356, 368                Assateague National Seashore Park, 105
  launch vehicle, 254                           An Assessment of Industrial Actiuity in
  lunar landing site, 166                         the Field of Biomedical Engineering,
  lunar roving vehicle, 128, 245, 267, 323        322
  medical asuects. 289                          Assn; of Bay Area Governments, 170
  preparatioik for; 349                         Asteroid, 282, 310, 327, 332, 334
  space flight data analysis, 35                Astrachan, Anthony, 111
Apollo 17 mission, 44, 61, 209, 216, 324,       Astris (West German booster), 310
     342                                        Astronaut (see also Cosmonaut; Extrave-
  crew, 228-229, 234, 236, 312                       hicular activity; Space biology), 35,
  experiments, 21, 98, 289, 326                      96, 191, 279, 341, 342
  launch schedule, 21, 356, 368                   accident, 13, 290
  photographs, 35                                 anniversary, 122, 198
  press comment, 236                              Apollo mission. See Apollo missions.
  press conference, 234                           appointment, 11, 47, 176, 253
  subsatellite, 87                                astronaut-astronomer. ,759
Apollo 18 mission, 20, 21, 247, 305               awards and bonors:57,-59,      65, 70, 72,
Apollo 19 mission, 20, 22, 247                       78, 106, 121, 239, 240, 242, 256, 260,
Apollo Lunar Landing Commemorative                   262-263. 266. 346-347
  Trust Fund, 63                                  celebrations for, 222, 239, 240, 256, 266
Apollo lunar surface experiments package          colleges, visits to, 68
   (ALSEP), 27-30, 142, 144, 205, 209              commemorative coin, 308
Applications Technology Satellite (ATS) ,         commemorative stamp, 215
  61                                              Congress, report to, 61, 253
Apollo Telescope Mount ( A T M ) (Skylab          crew assignment, 61, 108
  component), 8, 11, 183, 252, 284, 286,          damage suit, 10, 131
  323. 361                                        European tour, 125, 150, 152, 311, 312,
APS. See Auxiliary propulsion system.                323
Aquanaut, 262, 292                                former, 292, 301, 309, 330
Arbator, Georgy, 129                              hazards, 63, 99, 115, 163, 181, 185, 261,
ARC. See Ames Research Center.                       325
Arcas (sounding rocket), 54, 63, 64, 218,         memorial, 227, 264, 301, 307, 320
     222,225, 230                                 memorial ceremony, 199
  Boosted Arcas I, 50, 63                         Nixon, President Richard M., messages
  Boosted Arcas 1 . 22. 226. 285
                   1                                 and statements, 24, 31, 39, 42, 197,
Arecibo (Puerto Ricoj Observatory, 178,              201, 208, 212, 221, 253
  231,344                                         physiology, 14, 17, 44, 197, 225, 228,
Arenosillo, Spain, 112                               256, 261, 276, 277, 289
Ares (Greek mythological god), 331                press conference, 4, 41, 59, 141,227,312
Argentina, 230                                    promotion, 240
Ariel 1 (U.K. satellite), 348                     public image of, 4-5, 32
Ariel 2, 2 8                                      quarantine, 5, 30, 35, 188, 222
Ariel 3, 348                                      record, 35, 208
Ariel 4, 348, 369                                 religion, 49, 65
Arizona, 281                                     resignation, 52, 166, 239, 243
Arkansas, 351                                     retirement. 186. 345
Arking, Dr. Albert, 50                            scientist-astronaut, 87, 90, 133, 138, 201,
Arlington County (Va.) Board, 165-166                217,229, 230, 312
Armenia, U.S.S.R., 369                           Skylab, 10, 87, 132, 133, 288, 346
Armstrong, Neil A.                               svace center visits. 271. 272
  aircraft materials, lecture on, 71             space rescue, 64, 65      '
  Apollo 11 mission, 111, 162, 198               syndicated article agreement, 200,230

                                          424
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

   training. 115. 189                                   and NERVA and SNAP programs), 219,
   tribute-to, 42, 76, 253                              324
   U.N. visit, 239                                   anniversary, 215
   White House dinner and visit, 59. 256             Brookhaven National Laboratory, 113
 Astronaut-astronomer,                               budget, 20-21, 58, 198-199, 363
 Astronaut Information: American and                 cooperation, 180, 197, 250
   Soviet (Revised) (71-204 SP), 248                 criticism, 303
 Astronautics Engineer Award, 70                     laser, 288
 Astronomy (see also individual observa-             nuclear reactor, 180,209
       tories, planets, probes, sounding             nuclear rocket engine, 52
      rockets, and satellites, such as As-           Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 99
      teroid; Comet; Extraterrestrial life;          organization, 346
      Galaxv: Mariner 9: Moon: Oao 2:                personnel, 65, 194, 199, 213, 222, 233,
      Pulsa;;    Quasar; ‘Radioastronomy               253, 290
      Star; Telescope), 40, 161, 253, 281,           policy, 294
      310,342,347                                    reorganization, proposed, 69, 82, 153-
   award, 15, 17, 102                                   154
   gamma ray, 181                                    Space Nuclear Systems Div., 250
   infrared, 1, 54, 219, 321, 358-359                undersea nuclear test, 300, 303, 310,
   international cooperation, 10, 13, 16,              326
      88-89, 159, 190, 216-217, 293, 321,           water recovery and waste management
      340, 355, 360, 369                               system, 95-96
   meeting, 6, 178, 248-249, 291, 334, 344,       Atomic Industrial Forum, 294
      369                                         Ats I (Applications Technology Satel-
   NASA program, 2-3, 9, 20-21, 21-22,              lite), 271
      57, 67, 69, 74-75, 90, 94-95, 96-97,
                                                  Ats 3, 239, 252
      98, 103, 121, 127, 148, 174, 178-179,
                                                  Ats 4, 163, 275
      286, 189, 211, 219, 231, 240, 334,
                                                  Ats 5, 362
      34-5,356, 365-366, 368
                                                  ATS-F, 22, 161,293,362
  solar. 56, 67. 68. 73. 83. 113. 121. 161,
                                                  ATS--G, 22
      167, 237, 240,252; 268, 269, 277, 287,
      302, 333, 335, 339, 349, 350                Atsugi Naval Air Station, Japan, 12
  stellar, 13, 36, 38, 60, 113, 194. 226,         Aubiniere, Gen. R. (France), 352
      239, 299, 300                               Auburn, Mass., 17
   ultraviolet. See Ultraviolet.                  Aurora, 12, 47, 76, 79, 89
  U.K., 356                                       Australia, 15, 102, 220, 226, 358
  U.S.S.R., 101, 190, 218, 357, 362               Automated radar terminal system (ARTS
  x-ray. See X-ray.                                 III),9
AT&T. See American Telephone & Tele-              Automation, 295
  graph Co.                                       Auxiliary propulsion system (APS), 175
Ataka and Co., 8485, 138                          Avco Corp., 335
Atlanta, Ga., 130, 320                            Aviation Hall of Fame, 354
Atlantic City, N.J., 289                          AviatiodSpace Writers Assn., 54, 121,
Atlantic Ocean, 3, 13, 37, 103, 137, 165,           147, 351
  180, 219, 303, 310, 349, 354, 357, 362          AVL 802 (satellite), 221
Atlantic Tropical Experiment, 303                 AWACS. See Airborne Warning and Con-
Atlas (booster), 220                                trol System.
  Atlas-Agena (booster), 341, 352
                                                  Awards, 106, 262, 307
  Atlas-Centaur (booster), 14, 126-127,
                                                    civic, 239, 256
      136, 146, 163, 164, 168, 244, 275, 342,
                                                    foreign, 180, 191, 320
      354
                                                    Government, 17, 38-39, 49, 138, 165,
Atlas (missile), 199
                                                        322
Atlas, geographical, 11
                                                            See National Aeronautics and
                                                      NASA-
ATM. See Apollo Telescope Mount.
                                                       Space Administration.
Atmosphere
                                                  institutions, 79, 84, 266, 318, 327
  stellar, 168
                                                  military, 72, 121, 150, 266
  upper (earth), 3, 5 8, 9, 78, 107, 109,
                        ,
                                                  society
     168, 171, 187, 192, 213, 220, 236, 324,
                                                    achievement, 60,242, 314
     333,343,370
                                                    aeronautics, 15, 101, 131, 135, 139,
  weight, 309
                                                       263, 266, 298, 326-327
Atmosphere Explorer C (AE-C) satellite,
                                                    astronautics, 13, 14, 70, 85, 179, 266-
  81
                                                       267, 298
Atmosphere Explorer D, 81
                                                    science, 102, 314
Atmosphere Explorer E, 81
                                                AX (close-support aircraft), 21, 70, 80
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) (see
     also AEC-NASA Space Nuclear O5ce;          Axford, William I., 15

                                            425
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                    B                            Beggs, James M., 88
                                                 Bell, Rep. Alphonzo, 38
                                                 Belgium, 291, 310
B-1 (advanced strategic bomber), 70,             Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 305
  121, 122, 255, 263,‘272, 284, 298, 303,
                                                 Bell Aerospace Co. See Textron, Inc.
  309.344
                                                 Bell Helicopter Co. See Textron, Inc.
E 2 9 (bomber 1,239
                                                 Bell Telephone Laboratories, 78, 299
B-47 (bomber 1, 239,354                          Bellcom, Inc., 41
B-52 (Stratofortress), 42, 56, 87, 142,
                                                 Bellis, B/G Benjamin N. (USAF), 212
  303, 337, 354                                  Belson, Judge James A., 114
B-57 (NASA research aircfaft 1, 247
                                                 Bendix Corp., 278
B-70 (supersonic bomber), 248                      Aerospace Systems Div., 278
Babakin, Dr. Georgy N., 218
                                                   Instrument and Life Support Div., 12
BAC. See British Aircraft Corp.
                                                 Beregovoy, Georgy T., 16
Back contamination, 115
                                                 Beresford, Spencer M., 264
Backfire (U.S.S.R. supersonic strategic
                                                 Berkner, Lloyd V., Award, 179
  bomber), 248, 260
                                                 Berlin, West, 142
Bahamas, 2
                                                 Bermuda, 46
Bailey, J. Martyn, 242
                                                 Berry Aviation Co., 77
Baker, Miss (space monkey), 182
                                                 Berry, Dr. Charles A., 114
Bal Harbour, Fla., 294
                                                   Apollo 14 mission, 14, 44, 261
Baldeschwieler, John D., 197
                                                   Apollo 1 mission, 225, 228
                                                            .5
Baldone, Latvia, 287
                                                   appointment, 245
Baldwin. Mrs. Bettv .I.. 314
                                                   Soyuz I1 mission, 180
Ball Brothers Research‘ Corp., 8
                                                   US.-U.S.S.R. Joint Space Biology and
Balloon, 121, 127, 167, 236, 250, 254
                                                       Medicine Working Group, 284, 359
Baltimore, Md., 281
                                                 Berry, Doyle G., 77
Bank of America. 162
                                                 Berry, Ronald L., 298
Bankers Trust Co., 162
                                                 Beryllium, 70
Barbados, 3
                                                 Bethpage, N.Y., 276
Barber, Marvin R., 307
                                                 Bhandari, Dr. Narenda, 6
Barium-ion-cloud (BIC) probe, 145, 251,
                                                 Bible (carried on Apollo 14 mission), 214
  259. 357. 370
                                                 BIC. See Barium-ion-cloud probe.
Barking SHnds, Kauai, Hawaii, 54, 63, 64
                                                 “Big Bird” (USAF reconnaissance satel-
Barstow, Calif., 108
                                                   lite), 328
Barth, Dr. Charles A,, 148, 195
                                                 Bikle, Paul F., 114
Bartlett, Gov. Dewey H., 2
                                                 Binsack, J. H., 64
Baryon particle, 36
                                                 Biomedical Technology Transfer Team
Batavia, Ill., 181
                                                    ( BATEAM ) , 235
            See Biomedical Technology
BATEAM.
                                                 Biosatellite, 21
  Transfer Team.
                                                 Biostack (cosmic radiation experiment),
Baton Rouge, La., 89
                                                   325-326
Battelle Memorial Institute, 86
                                                 Birds, migration of, experiment, 160
Baum, Dr. William A., 174
                                                 Bisplinghoff, Dr. Raymond L., 170
Baur, Dr. Paul, Jr., 111
                                                 Black Arrow (U.K. booster), 211, 300
Baykonur, U.S.S.R., 8, 66, 115, 135
                                                 Black Brant (sounding rocket), 63
  launch
                                                 Black Brant IIIB, 248
     Cosmos, 7, 61, 93, 124, 128, 133, 174,
                                                 Black Brant VB, 54
       197, 212, 219, 222, 227, 343, 352,
                                                 Black Brant VC, 199
       358
                                                 Black hole (space phenomenon), 239
     Luna 18,246
                                                 Black Sea, 262
     Luna 19, 267
                                                 Blackhawk (helicopter), 357
     Mars 2, 134
                                                 Blagonravov, Dr. Anatoly A., 9, 234
    Mars 3, 147
                                                 Btamont, Jaques E., 93
    Salyut 1, 105, 107
                                                 Blankenship, L. Vaughn, 201, 258
     Soyuz 10, 107
                                                 Blue Streak (U.K. booster 1st stage), 310
     Soyui 11, 154, 226
                                                 Bochum Observatory (West Germany),
BayIor Univ., 193
                                                   81, 324
  School of Medicine, 138
Bazhenov, Georgey N., 264                        Bodenschatz, Dr. Manfred, 142
Beattie, Donald A., 144                          Boeing 707 (jet passenger transport), 130,
Bechtel Corp., 307                                 192, 212, 326-327, 350, 354
Beck, WCdr Preston E. (USN, Ret.), 244           Boeing 727 (jet passenger transport), 278
Beechcraft 99 (transport aircraft), 128          Boeing 747 (jet passenger transport), 139,
Beechcraft Baron (light aircraft), 226               %A.
Beeler, De E., 115, 255                          Boeing 767 (subsonic jet transport), 192

                                              4126
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Boeing Co., 1, 79                              Buckley, Sen. James L., 24
                                               Budinger, Dr. Thomas F., 63
   award, 131, 139, 279, 299, 354
   Commercial Airplane Group, 101              Bulgaria, 237, 249, 263, 319
   contract, 8, 24, 71, 115, 198, 255, 290     Bundy, William P., 358
  employment, 82                               Burch, Dean, 60
  jet passenger transport. See Boeing 707,     Burroughs Corp., 23
                                               Bush, George, Ambassador to U.N., 70,
      727,747, and 767.
  lunar roving vehicle, 24, 51, 245, 323         120
  Mariner Venus-Mercury spacecraft, 115        Butler, Charles F., 312
  missile, 8, 262                              Byurakan Astrophysical       Observatory,
  personnel, 57, 131                             U.S.S.R., 248
  Space Center, 68
  STOL aircraft. 290. 315
                                                                  C
  supersonic transport, 56, 81, 82, 129,
      135, 139, 192
  Vertol Div., 188-189
                                               C-5 (military cargo transport aircraft),
Boileau. 0. C.. 68
                                               282, 284, 302-303
Bolam, Mrs. Irene, 243
                                             C-5A, 335
Bolane, Rep. Edward P., 222
                                               accident, 271, 307
Bombay, India, 6
                                               contract, 2, 36, 294
Bonn, West Germany, 277
                                               cost, 260, 359
Boosted Arcas. See Arcas.
                                               modification, 348, 359
Borman, CoI. Frank (USAF, Ret.), 194
                                               Paris Air Show exhibit, 147
Boston, Mass., 102, 209, 308
                                             C-8 (Buffalo) ) (jet STOL aircraft), 187
Boston Museum of Science, 327
                                             C-47 (research transport aircraft, 120
Boulder, Colo., 302
                                             C-130 (Hercules) (NASA research trans-
Bower, Robert E., 191
                                               port aircraft), 104, 138-139, 171, 370
Brandt, Dr. John C., 36
                                             C-l30B, 120
Bras d’Or (Canadian hydrofoil warship ) ,
                                             C-141 (research aircraft), 278
  312
                                             CAR. See Civil Aeronautics Board.
Brauer, Dr. Richard D., 18
                                             Cabell, Gen. Charles P. (USAF, Ret.), 145
Brayton cycle, 147
                                             Cabell, Rep. Earle, 38
Brazil, 329
                                             Caetano, Prime Minister Marcello (Por-
Bremen, West Germany, 249
                                               tugal 1, 349-350
Brennwald, Louis H., 216
                                             Cafferty, Michael, 107
Bretigny, France, 150, 254
                                             Cairns, Robert W., 170
Brevard County, Fla., 65
                                             California, 81, 112, 360, 370
  Circuit Court, 10
                                             California Institute of Technology (Cal
Brezhnev, Leonid I., 102, 299
                                               Tech), 1, 7, 13, 102, 151, 170, 235, 245,
Bridgeport, Conn., 309
                                               279, 296
Bridgeport, Univ. of, 309
                                             California State Air Resources Board, 170
A Briefe and True Report of the New
                                             California State College, 299
  Found Land of Virginia, 97
                                             California Statewide Air Pollution Re-
Bristol Aircraft Corp., 326
                                               search Center, 170
British Aircraft Corp. (BAC), 37, 48, 267,
                                             California, Univ. of, 6, 15, 23, 109, 281,
  351
                                                  327
British Airports Authority, 326
                                               Berkeley, 1, 36, 63,’102, 145, 242, 248,
British Astronomical Society, 202
                                                  299
British Interplanetary Society, 85
                                               Los Angeles ( U C L A ) , 18, 212, 231
Broglio, Prof. Luigi, 262
                                               San Diego, 261,269
Brooke, Sen. Edward W., 124
Brookhaven National Laboratory, 113          Calisphere 3 (calibration satellite), 48
Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, 17           Caliphere 4, 48
Brooks AFB, Tex., 298                        Culisphere 5, 48
Brooks, Dr. Harvey, 277                      Calverton, N.Y., 112, 141
Brooksbank, William A., 334                  Calvin, Prof. Melvin, 36
Brougham, Trevor, 226                        Cambridge, Mass., 313
Brown, B. Porter, 84                         Cambridge, U.K., 348
Brown, Geu. George S. (USAF), 259            Cambridge Univ., 324
Brown Engineering Co., 158, 180              Camera, 27, 35, 38, 56, 85, 128
Brown Univ., 151                               underwater, 131
Browne, Dudley E., 307                       Cameron, Col. Lyle W. (USAF), 267
                                             Camp, Rep. John N. Happy, 38
Browne, Secor D., 348-349
Broyhill, Rep. Joel T., 209                  Canada, 311, 313-314
Brussels, Belgium, 48, 168, 260                aircraft, 280-281
Buccaneer (U.K.strike aircraft), 224           award, 102

                                         427
                                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  cooperation, 3, 15, 63, 88, 96, 104, 106,                 See Communication with Extrater-
                                                     CETI.
    220, 305,369                                       restrial Intelligence.
  Defence Ministry, 312                              CH-54B (helicopter), 365
                                                     Chafee, Secretary of the Navy John H.,
  Dept. of Communications, 106
  satellite, 88, 105, 369                              72,240
Canadian Centre of Inland Waters, 104                Chaffee, L/Cdr Roger B. (USN), 10, 357
Canadian Domestic Communications Sys-                Chalkyitsik, Alaska, 271
  tem, 128                                           Chang, Sherwood, 39
Canberra V-8 (U.K. bomber), 224                      Chanute, Octave, Award, 75
Caneel Bay, Virgin Islands, 24, 31                   Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc. (pro-
Cannikin (underground nuclear test),                   posed), 264, 301, 307, 320
  300, 303, 311, 326                                 Charyk, Dr. Joseph V., 60
Cannon AFB, N. Mex., 314                             Chatham, George N., 56
Cannon Ball 2 (USAF satellite), 220-221              Chauncev. Dr. David L.. 102
Cannon, Sen. Howard W., 19, 213, 263,                Chavkin;Jerold M., 65 ’
  292                                                Chelson, Paul O., 179
Cannon, Dr. Robert H., Jr., 296                                                     --
                                                     Chernomor (U.S.S.R. oceanographic lab-
Canopus (star), 149, 306                               oratory submarine), 262
Cape Kennedy, Fla., 65, 217                          Chernykh, N., 357
Carbon, 39                                           Cherry, George W., 233, 349
Carbon monoxide, 299                                 Chesapeake Bay, 97
                                                     Cheyenne (helicopter 1, 80, 294
CARD. See Civil Aviation Research and
  Development (CARD) Policy Study.                   Chicago, Ill., 1, 9, 46, 65, 220, 236, 262,
                                                       -- -
Cardiovascular medicine, 235                           280
Career Service Award, 60                             Chicago, Univ. of, 117,240
CARETS. See Central Atlantic Regional                Chicorn 1 (People’s Republic of China
  Ecological Test Site Project.                        satellite), 53, 61
Carey General Contractors, Inc., 195                 Chicom 2, 61, 368
Cargo, David F., 42                                  Chien Wei-chang, 111
Caribbean Sea, 171                                   Chile, 178, 329, 330
Carlos, Prince Juan, 25                              Chiles, Sen. Lawton, 145
Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1, 18            China, Communist. See People’s Repuh-
Carolinas, 2                                           lic of China.
Carpenter, Cdr. M. Scott (USN, Ret.), 292            China Lake, Calif., 115
Carroll, Thomas E.. 13                               Chincoteague Coast Guard Station, 105
CAS. See Cooperative Applications Satel-             Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge,
                                                       ins
  lite.                                                _._
Case Western Reserve Univ., 151, 181                 Chinghua Univ., 111
Cassiopeia (constellation), 1                        Chou En-lai, 84
Caste1 Gondolfo, Italy, 215                          Chouteau, Dr. Jacques, 311-312
CATS. See Computer-aided telemetry sys-              Chrysler Corp., 99
  tem.                                               Church of Good Shepherd, Maitland,
Cause, J. P., 352                                      Fla.. 5
Cayenne, French Guiana, 248                          Chrysler Corp., 278
CBS. See Columbia Broadcasting System.               Churchill Research Range, Canada, 5, 9,
Centaur (booster upper stage), 14, 96, 98,             14, 50, 63, 89, 174, 187, 192, 246
  148, 354                                           CIA. See Central Intelligence Agency.
Centaur Quality and Workmanship Re-                  Cincinnati. Univ. of. 239
  view Board, 168, 243-244                           Citizen’s Advisory Committee on Environ-
Centaure (French sounding rocket), 83,                 mental Quality, 194
  235,259, 370                                       Citizens Bank and Trust Go. of Maryland,
Centaurus X-3 (pulsar), 113, 131                       53
Centerville, Iowa, 213                               Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB), 124, 288,
Central Atlantic Regional Test Site                    348-349
                                                     Civil Aviation. See Aeronautics.
  (CARETS) project, 281
Central Intelligence Agency ( C I A ) , 117,         Civil Aviation Research and Development
  124                                                            Policy Study, 122-123, 218,
                                                        (CARD)
Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales                     296, 369
  (CNES), 83, 230, 235, 254, 291, 357,               CL2 1 5 (Air Tanker), 129
Century Development Corp., 166                       Clark AFB, Philippines, 352
Cernan, Capt. Eugene A. (USN), 13, 14,               Clark, Adm. John E. (USN), 159
  228. 234                                           Clark Univ., 214
  ~~.
Cerro’ Tololo Inter-American Observatory,            Clarke, Arthur C., 280
  -.”
  178                                                Clarke, Gilmore D., 330
                                                     Clauser, Francis H., 170
Cessna 401 (light aircraft), 81
Cessna Aircraft Co., 1                               Clements, Henry E., 197

                                               428
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Cleveland, Ohio, 2, 18, 106, 292                       earth station. 238. 283
Cloud study, 105, 112, 213, 251, 257                   FCC regulations, 65, 71, 74, 88, 176, 292
cM. See Command module.                                launch
CNES. See Centre National d’Etudes Spa-                  DSCS   2-1, 306
  tiales.                                                       2-2, 306
                                                         DSCS
Cochran, Jacqueline, 354                                  Intelsat-IV F-2. 14
Cocoa Beach, Ra., 122, 309                                Intelsat-IV F-3; 354
Cokeley, Ralph C., 47                                    Molniya 2-18, 210
Cold cathode gauge experiment, 144                       Molniya 1-19, 355
College of Eastern Utah, 57                              Molniya 11-1, 330
College Park. Md.. 69                                    Natosat 2 (Nato 2 ) , 36
Colli&, Rob& J.; Trophy, 131                           military, 36, 79, 94, 306, 313, 336, 366,
Collins, Col. Michael (USAF, R.), 52, 101,                369
  135, 195, 242. 301. 309. 330                         NASA program, 21-22,        41, 106, 128,
Collision avoidance, aircraft, 10, 107, 219-              173. 356
  220                                                  use, 83,-98, 117, 197, 219, 252, 265, 271,
Colorado Aviation Historical Society, 322                 272, 283, 341, 357, 362
                                                       US. policy, 3, 17, 48
Colorado Springs, Colo., 266
Colorado, Univ. of, 2, 93, 108, 148, 195             Communications Satellite Corp. (ComSat
Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory, 52                      Corp), 294
Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 88,                contract, 138
                                                       Early Bird. See lntelsat 1.
  307, 327
Columbia, Mo., 78                                      earth station, 60, 69, 82, 292
Columbia Univ., 144, 245, 302, 322, 345                FCC regulation, 176
Columbine 111 (presidential aircraft), 248             INTELSAT, 138, 237
                                                       Intelsat I (Early Bird), 14
Columbus, Christopher, 31, 243
Columbus Day, 243                                      Intelsat-I11 series, 14, 69
Coma (galaxy), 132                                     Intelsat-IV series, 14, 294
                                                       Intelsat-IV F-2, 14, 82, 294, 341, 354,
Comecon. See Council of Mutual Eco-
  nomic Assistance.                                      356-357, 365
                                                       Intelsat-IV F-3, 342, 352, 354, 365
Comet, 93, 334, 358
                                                       Intelsat-IV F 4 , 356
Command module ( C M )
  Apollo 9, 286                                        Intelsat-IV F-5, 356
                                                       Intelsat-IV F-6, 356
  Apollo I4 (Kitty Hawk), 24-30,40, 247
  Apollo 15 (Endeavor), 96, 141, 201-                  revenues, 50,69, 104
     202, 207-208, 268, 313                            satellite program, 60, 69, 294, 356
  Apollo 16, 326                                       services, 82
  Skylab, 64, 258                                    Community Development, Dept. of (pro-
                                                       posed !,81
  Soyuz, 152
                                                     Comparison of MiZitary Research and De-
Command and service module ( C S M) ,
  153. 233                                             velopment Expenditures of the United
  Apollo 14 (Kitty Hawk) (CSM-1101,                    States and the Soviet Union, 201
     24-30, 35, 365                                  Computer, 127
  Apollo I5 (Endeavor) (CSM-1121,                      anniversary, 218
     201-202, 206-207, 211, 229, 365                   automated transit system, 47
                                                       ILLIAC IV, 23
  Skylab, 164, 183
                                                       industry use, 309
Command Pilot Astronaut Badge (USAF),
  72                                                   medical use, 106-107
Commerce, Dept. of, 212                                NASA, 32, 98, 135, 162, 174, 309
Committee for Nuclear Responsibility, 300                Apollo 14, 25, 30
committee for the Future, 219                            contract, 187, 264
Committee on Space Research (COSPAR),                    program exchange, 231
  166-167                                              pollution research use, 103, 288
Common Market, 58                                      U.S.S.R., 122, 309
Communication with Extraterrestrial In-                weapon detection system, 212
  telligence ( CETI) conference, 248                 Computer-aided telemetry system (CATS),
Communications satellite (see also indi-               179
     vidual satellies: Echo I, lntelsat I,           Computer Software Management and In-
                                                       formation Center (COSMIC), 81, 232
     Intersat-IV F-2, Molniya I-18, etc.)
                                                     Comstock, G. M., 83
  agreement, 106, 138, 219, 252, 272, 319
  anniversary, 98                                    Concept verification testing (CVT), 334
  award, 298                                         Concorde ( Anglo-French sunersonic trans-
  contract. 128. 173                                     port), 12& 127, 148, 314, 232, 242,
  cooperation, ’ international, 17, 18, 58,              266, 280, 332, 349-350, 351
        106, 128, 138, 219-220, 252, 265,              cost, 73
        271, 272, 283, 319, 352, 356                   environmental problems, 150

                                               429
                                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    flights, 47, 125, 248, 249                         Committee on Interstate and Foreign
    Paris Air Show exhibit, 147, 214                      Commerce, 209
   sales price, 157, 346                               Committee on Science and Astronau-
 Cone (lunar crater), 27, 41, 48                          tics, 42, 94, 280, 307, 315, 347, 350
 Conference on Remote Sensing of Chesa-                 Advisory Panel, 318
   peake Bay, 97                                        International Science Panel, 18
 Congress, 260, 296                                     membership, 38, 153
   antiballistic missile system, 4                      NASA budget, 107
   atomic energy,                                         testimony, 61-62, 63, 66-67, 69,
    business enterprises emergency loan                      70-71, 75-76
         guarantee, 254                                 Subcommittee on International Co-
   c-5 cargo transport, 302                                  operation in Science and Space,
                                                              -- -
Defense Dept. of, 87, 152, 286                                1.14
   Government Accounting Office report                    Subcommittee on Manned Space
         to, 1                                                  Flight. 264
   Joint Committee on Atomic Energy,                      Subcommikee on NASA Oversight,
         52, 300                                                163-164, 244, 275
   Joint Committee on the Environment                  Committee on Ways and Means. 280
         and Technology, 77                            resolutions passed,. 38
   Joint DOT-NASA Civil Aviation Re-                   Select Committee on Small Business,
         search and Development Policy                    Subcommittee on Small Business
                                                          Problems in Small Towns and Ur-
         Study Report, 122-123
   Kennedy, President John F., message                    ban Areas, 166
         to, 142, 215                                Congress, Senate, 85, 308, 320, 349
   metric system, 212                                  astronauts report to, 61, 253
   national security, 303                              bills defeated, 80-81
   Presidential aircraft request, 326-327              bills introduced, 17, 44, 69, 71-72,
   President’s messages                                   76-77, 82, 124, 134, 197
      Aeronautics and Space Report of the              bills passed, 77, 78, 135, 178, 180, 198,
         President, 37                                   210, 216, 280, 284
      budget, 20-21                                    Committee on Aeronautical and Space
      business enterprises emergency loan                Sciences, 132, 265
         guarantee, 124, 201                             committee members, 24, 38
      economic program, 253                              Fletcher, James C., nomination, 68
      foreign policy, 55                                 NASA budget, 41,44,157
      hijacking of aircraft, 36                              testimony, 52-53, 77, 85-86, 93-
      marine resources and engineering de-                      94, 96-97
        velopment, 99                                  Committee on Appropriations, 131, 195,
      National Science Board, 180                            325
  Smithsonian Institution. 301                           Subcommittee on Appropriations for
  space program, 14, 60, 64, 162, 344                       Dept. of Interior and Related
  supersonic transport (SST), 365-366                       Agencies, 79
Congress, House of Representatives, 130,                 Subcommittee on HUD-SpaCe-SCienCe,
      137, 142, 165, 178, 195, 198, 209, 211,                80
                                                       Committee on Armed Services, 124,
     212, 222
                                                            219, 346
  astronauts report to, 61, 253
                                                      Committee on Banking and Currency,
  bills defeated, 78, 79, 344
  bills introduced. 42. 44. 63. 94. 142.                     158, 194
                            I   ,    ,     I



                                                      Committee on Commerce. Subcommit-
        173, 209, 221, 301
  bills passed, 152, 157, 175, 210, 211,                    tee on Oceans and’ Atmosphere,
        212, 320, 323                                       292-293
  Committee of the Whole. 130                         Committee on Foreign Relations, 327
  Committee on Appropriations, 74, 173                   Subcommittee on Arms Control, 195
                                                      Committee on Interior and Insular
     Subcommittee on Department of In-
                                                            Affairs, 17
        terior and Related Agencies, 112
                                                      Committee on Nutrition, 333
     Subcommittee on HUD-SpaCe-SCienCe,
                                                      Committee on Rules and Administra-
        80, 172
  Committee on Armed Services, 68, 163                      tion, 80
                                                      conventions ratified, 252
     Subcommittee on Investigations,. 112,
                                                      military procurement, 255, 266, 271
        312
 Committee on Banking and Currency,                   NASA budget, 171, 178, 198-199, 209,
        63                                                 216
                                                      nominations approved and confirmed,
     Subcommittee on Consumer Affairs,
        247                                                69, 221, 257,341
                                                      nominations submitted to, 11, 4 , 57,
                                                                                         5
 Committee on Foreign Affairs, 280
     Subcommittee on Arms Control, 194                     152, 199,254, 312

                                               430
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  President’s messages, 103                         space cooperation, 100,238,340
  resolutions passed, 19, 24, 170                   training, 16
  space shuttle, 177-178,218                      Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin (U.S.S.R. track-
  supersonic transport (SST), 80-81, 137,           ing ship), 350
        138, 211                                  Cosmonautics (U.S.S.R. space encyclope-
Connally, Secretary of the Treasury John            dia). 91
  B.. 124                                         COSMOS (consortium), 18
Constellation (transport aircraft),               Cosmos 379 (U.S.S.R. satellite), 249
Contamination, space, 56                          Cosmos 382. 249
Contract (see also under agencies, such           Cosmos 390, 7
  as NASA, USAF).                                 Cosmos 391, 9
  cost-plus-award-fee, 49, 71, 80, 81, 98,        Cosmos 392, 11
     115, 126, 131, 135, 175, 191, 193, 211       Cosmos 393, 15
  cost-plus-fixed-fee, 19, 49, 105, 147, 171,     Cosmos 394, 42, 66, 296
     188, 255, 279, 344, 361                      Cosmos 395, 49
  fixed-price, 132, 171, 186, 195, 328            Cosmos 396, 49
  fixed-price-incentive-fee, 341                  Cosmos 397, 54, 66, 296
  incentive, 69, 153, 286                         Cosmos 398, 56, 249
  level-of-effort, 245, 356                       Cosmos 399, 61
  study, 85, 101, 132, 174, 190, 276, 330,        Cosmos 400, 78, 116,296
     345-346                                      Cosmos 401, 84
Contraves, A. G., 305                             Cosmos 402, 93
Convair 990 (Galileo) (jet research air-          Cosmos 403, 94
  craft), 219, 251, 257                           Cosmos 404, 96, 116, 296
Convention for the Suppression of Un-             Cosmos 405, 98
  lawful Seizure of Aircraft, 252                 Cosmos 406, 102
Convention on International Liability for         Cosmos 407, 108
  Damage Caused by Space Objects, 313             Cosmos 408, 110
Conversion Research, Education and As-            Cosmos 409, 115
  sistance Act of 1971, 286                       Cosmos 410, 124
Cook, Don, 190                                    Cosmos 411, 125
Cooke, H. Lester, 289                             Cosmos 412, 125
Cooperative Applications Satellite C              Cosmos 413, 125
   (CAS-c), 106                                   Cosmos 414, 125
Copernicus !lunar crater), 39                     Cosmos 415, 125
Coralie (French booster), 310                     Cosmos 41b, 125
Corfield, Aerospace Minister Frederick            Cosmos 417, 125
   (1J.K.). 211                                   Cosmos 418, 125
Corn Blight Watch Experiment, 98, 134,            Cosmos 419, 128
  168, 286                                        Cosmos 420, 133
Cornell Aeronautical Laboratorv. Inc..            Cosmos 421, 135
                                    -   I



  131, 194, 290                                   Cosmos 422, 139
Cornell Univ., 5, 102, 160, 194, 237, 249,        Cosmos 423, 146
     318, 344                                     Cosmos 424, 148
  Laboratory for Planetary Studies, 331           Cosmos 425, 148
Corp. for Public Broadcasting ( C P B ) ,         Cosmos 426, 153
  161                                             Cosmos 427, 160
Corps of Engineers, 351-352                       Cosmos 428, 174
Cortright, Edgar M., 179, 191, 192                Cosmos 429, 197
COSMIC. See Computer Software Man-                Cosmos 430, 200
  agement and Information Center.                 Cosmos 431, 212
Cosmic ray, 6-7, 63, 73, 83, 99, 148              Cosmos 432, 219
Cosmonaut, 175, 247                               Cosmos 433, 222
  anniversary, 152, 167                           Cosmos 434,227, 249
  awards and honors, 180, 266                     Cosmos 435, 240
  death, 156, 180-181, 185, 186, 188,             Cosmos 436, 250
     191,192, 196-197,242                         Cosmos 437, 254
  memorials to, 200, 227, 239                     Cosmos 438, 255
  Nixon, President Richard M., message,           Cosmos 439, 262
     226                                          Cosmos 440, 265
  Sajyut I-Soyuz 10 mission, 119,283              Cosmos 441, 268
  Salyut I-Soyuz 11 mission, 154156,              Cosmos 442, 270
     177, 180,181, 283, 366                       Cosmos 443, 280
 Soyuz 9 mission, 167                             Cosmos 444, 284
  Soyuz 10 mission, 107, 110                      cosmos 445, 284
 Soyuz I1 mission, 154                            Cosmos 446,284

                                            431
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Cosmos 447, 284                               Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foun-
Cosmos 448, 284                                  dation, 13
Cosmos 449, 284                               Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Inter-
Cosmos 450, 284                                  national Astronautical Award, 262
Cosmos 451, 284                               Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Space
Cosmos 452, 287                                  Theater, 279
Cosmos 453, 291                               Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Pro-
Cosmos 454, 306                                 motion of Aeronautics, Inc., 13
Cosmos 455, 323                               Dankhoff, Walter F., 296
Cosmos 456, 325                               Dannenberg, Konrad K., 334
Cosmos 457,327                                $Arrest (comet) 358   ~




Cosmos 458, 333                               Dartmouth College, 151
Cosmos 459, 333                               Darwin, Australia, 226
Cosmos 460, 334                               David, Dr. Edward E., Jr., 18, 63, 94,
Cosmos 461, 337                                  119, 363
Cosmos 462, 339                               Davis, L/G Benjamin O., Jr. (USAF,
Cosmos 463, 343                                 Ret.), 193
Cosmos 464, 347-348                           Davis, Rep. John W., 38
Cosmos 465, 351                               Davis, Rep. Mendel J., 153
Cosmos 466, 352                               Davis, Dr. Raymond, Jr., 113
Cosmos 467, 353                               Dayton, Ohio, 248
Cosmos 468, 353                               Daytona Beach, Fla., 283
Cosmos 469, 358                               DC-8 (jet transport), 130
Cosmos 470, 359                               DC-10 (jet transport), 211, 220
COSPAR. See Committee on Space Re-            Dean, James H., 289
  search.                                     DebrB, D e f e n s e M i n i s t e r M i c h e l
Cotter, Rep. William R., 38, 240, 353-           (France), 168
  354                                         The Decision To Go to the Moon, 201,
Coughlin, Rep. R. Lawrence, 38                  258
Council for Advancement of Science
                                              Deckert, Wallace H., 70
  Writing Seminar on Science and Pub-
                                              Deep Space Network ( D S N ) , 69, 313, 318
  lic Policy, 53
                                              Defence Research Board (ORB) (Can-
Council for Scientific and Industrial Re-
                                                ada), 88
  search (CSIR), South Africa, 267
                                              Defense, Dept. of (DOD) (see also US.
Council of Mutual Economic Assistance
                                                   Air Force, U.S. Army, and U.S.
     (Comecon), 110
                                                   Navy, 39, 117, 124, 146, 246, 286
  Transport Commission, 79
                                                aircraft. See Aircraft.
Counterbudget-A BLueprint for Chang-
                                                award, 57
  ing National Priorities, 1971-1976, 50
                                                budget, 20-21, 37, 58, 124, 180, 212,
Court Line Aviation, 301
                                                      286, 322, 323, 325, 329, 3U, 354,
Courten, Dr. Henry C., 167
                                                      364
CPB. See Corp. for Public Broadcasting.
                                                communications satellite system, 74, 95,
Crab Nebula, 131
                                                   153, 306, 366
Crawford, David L., 36
                                                computer programs, 23
Crater, 27, 39, 41, 48, 203
                                                contract, 8, 52, 310
Crimea. U.S.S.R.. 190
                                                cooperation, 123
Crimean Astrophysics Observatory, 315
                                                   NASA, 69,75, 87,224,368
Cronkite, Walter, 327
                                                cooperation, international, 36-37
Crozaz, G., 83
                                                criticism, 78
CSM. See Command and service module.
                                                MAST. Project. 351
CTOL (conventional take off and land-                 I    -    I



                                                missile program, 4, 8-9, 21, 43, 52,
  ing aircraft), 130
                                                      125, 347
Cuba, 215,238, 312-313,319
                                                nuclear tests, underground. 300
Cunningham, R. Walter, 166
                                                Pentagon papers, 320
Curtis, Sen. Carl T., 24
                                                personnel, 49-50,246,294,350
CVT: concept vertical testing.
                                                procurement, 360
Cyclic adenyl acid, 282
                                                R&D, 40,118, 363
Cygnus (constellation1, 89
Cygnus x-1 (pulsar), 131                        space program, 95, 306, 310, 366, 368
                                                weapon systems, 78, 288
Czechoslovakia, 237, 319, 337
                                              Defense Intelligence Agency, 95
                   D                          Defense Navigation Satellite System
                                                (DNSS), 95
Daley, Mayor Richard J., 256                  Defense Satellite Communications Sys-
Dana, William H., 56, 200, 225, 239, 265,      tem (DSCS ) ,95, 306,366
  319, 337, 352                               DeFlorez Training Award, 298

                                            432
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Deimos (Martian moon), 314, 331, 332,            Donnelly, John P., 200, 230, 337, 353
                                                 Donner, Frederic G., 152
  340,342, 365
                                                 Doppler Geodetic Satellite Program, 95
Delaware, 97
                                                 DOT. See Transportation, Dept. of.
Delta (booster upper stage) (see also
                                                 Doub, William O., 221, 290
  Thor-Delta), 37, 164, 186, 269, 360-
                                                 Douglas Aircraft Co., 338
   361
Delta Launch Vehicle System Review               DOVAP (ground transmitter), 187
   Board, 300                                    Dowling College, 167
                                                 Downing, Rep. Thomas N., 38,152
Dementyev, Pavel, 140, 148
Denmark, 96, 341                                 Drake, Dr. Frank D., 249,344
                                                 Draley, Eugene C., 85
Denver, Colo., 281, 322, 346, 351, 353,
   355                                           Draper, Dr. Charles Stark, 261
Denver mint, 243                                 Draper, William, 315
Denver, Univ. of, 259                            DRB. See Defence Research Board (Can-
Descartes (lunar landing site), 29, 166,           ada).
   323                                         Drug-addiction, 215
De Sirnone, Herbert F., 45                     Dryden, Dr. Hugh L., 106,112-113
Dewhirst, Dr. David, 324                       Dryden, Hugh L., Memorial FelIowship,
DGLR. See German Society for Aviation              70
                                               Dryden, Hugh L., Memorial Fund, 112
   and Astronautics.
Dial-a-plane system, 121                       Dryden, Hugh, Research Lecture, 15
Diamant-B (French booster), 103, 342           DSCS. See Defense Satellite Communica-
di Carroba, R., 352                              tions System.
Dicke, Dr. Robert H., I8                            2-1, 306, 313
                                               DSCS
Dickeson, Bob., 226                            DSCS 2-2, 306, 313
Dicksou, Paul, 336                             DSN. See Deep Space Network.
Dickstein, Morris, 5                           Duboshin, G. N., 311
                                               DuBridge, Dr. Lee A.., 16
Digital Equipment Corp., 16
Dijon, France, 150                             Dudley Observatory (Albany, N.Y.), 107,
Dillon, Mrs. Betty Crites, 312                   108, 335
Diritis, M., 357                               Duffy, B/G Robert A. (USAF), 178
Disarmament, 55, 137, 148, 189, 190,           Duke, L/C Charles M., Jr. (USAF), 61,
   194, 195, 218, 252, 264-265, 266              323
Distinguished Public Service Medal             Dulles International Airport, Va., 212,
   ( N A S A ) , 57                              278
Distinguished Service Medal ( N A S A ) ,      Dune Crater (moon), 205
  57.59, 72,302,346-347                        Dunkelman, Lawrence, 335
Distinguished Service Medal (USAF), 72,        Dupik, Dr. Vladimir, 177
   266                                         Duuree. Dr. A. Hunter. 151
Distinguished Service Medal ( USN), 72         Durham, N.C., 170     ’
District of Columbia, 99                       Dutourd, Jean, 216
Dixon, Mrs. Jeane L., 189                      Dynalectron Corp., Land-Air Div., 13
DNSS. See Defense Navigation Satellite
   System.
                                                                      E
Dohrovolsky, Georgy T., 154, 180, 181,
  186, 192,200, 226, 283
Dobrovolsky, Maria, 226                          Earhart, Amelia, 243
Dobrovolsky, Natasha, 226                        Earth
                   Ambassador Anatoly R.
Dobrynin,                                          atmosphere. See Atmosphere, upper.
   (U.S.S.R.), 70, 191, 194, 242                   crater, 39, 41,48
Docking                                            density, 310
  Apollo 14, 25, 29, 30, 35, 38                    Earth Awareness Foundation, 137
  Apollo 15. 203                                   earthquake, 64
  multiple .docking adapter, 284, 323,             energy resources, 154
                                                   environmental problems (see also Air
      346, 353, 355
  S w u z IO-Salyut I, 108, 110, 283                 pollution ; Noise, aircraft ; Pollu-
  SOYUZ Il-SaZyUt I , 154, 158, 191, 283,            tion), 10, 17, 20, 42, 49, 96, 147, 160,
  366                                                 162,172, 178, 191, 215, 3 8
                                                                               6
  trainer, 16, 77                                  Environmental Science: Challenge for
                                                      the Seventies, 180
  U.S.-U.S.S.R.       cooperation, 117, 177,
      244, 249, 325, 332, 334, 340-341,            magnetic field, 104
      347, 353, 369                                marine research and development, 99,
DOD. See Defense, Dept. of.                           104
Domestic Action Council, 351                       oceans. See Oceanography.
Donaldson, Dr. Coleman D., 15, 290                 origin of, 345
Donlan, Charles J., 75, 302                        photographs, 286

                                           433
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  resources measurement (see also Earth            Emergency loan guarantee, 194, 201, 212,
                                                     ---
                                                     316
     Resources Technology Satellite), 10-
                                               Emergency Loan Guarantee Board, 2%
     11, 33, 44, 67, 97, 119-120, 132-133,
                                               Emme, Dr. Eugene M., 234,265
     133-134, 138-139, 139-140, 174-175,
     224, 324                                  Emory Univ., 221
                                               Employment of New Ph.D.'s and Post-
  This Island Earth (NASASP-2501, 48
                                                 doctorals in 1971 (NRCstudy), 252
Earth Awareness Foundation, 137
Earth Observations Aircraft Program,           Eucke (comet), 358
                                               Endeavor (Apollo 15 command and serv-
  104, 139, 171
                                                 ice module). See Command and serv-
Earth Resources Aircraft Program
                                                 ice module.
  (ERAP),    120
                                               Energy absorber, 251,259
Earth resources experiment package
                                               Energy sources, 129, 154
  (EREP), 107, 173, 175
            10,
                                               Eneyev, Timur M., 127
Earth Resources Laboratory, 19,49
                                               Engine (see also individual engines, such
Earth Resources Technology Satellite
                                                    as F-1, H-1)
  (ERTS),19, 22, 61, 67, 87, 95, 97, 119-
                                                 aircraft, 271, 302, 307
  120, 135, 173, 198, 281, 356, 369, 370
                                                    CTOL, 130
Eastern Airlines, Inc., 54, 124, 133, 165
                                                    jet, 38, 44, 88, 124, 125, 173-174,
Eastern Test Range (ETR) (see also                     212, 221
     Cape Kennedy and Kennedy Space                 noise, 61, 83, 130, 241, 247, 251, 290,
     Center).                                          295-296
  contract, 98, 310                                 quiet, 83, 96, 130, 241
  launch                                            STOL, 97
     Atlas-Agena, 341                               supersonic transport, 61,126,174
     Atlas-Centaur, 14                              VTOL, 300, 329
     DSCS  2-1, 306, 313                         electric, 244
     DSCS  2-2, 306, 313                                                    , 235, 250, 320
                                                 nuclear (see also NERVA)
     Explorer 43 (IMP-I), 72                     rocket, 96, 136, 158
     failure, 126-127                               cooperation, 87
     High Energy Astronomy Observa-                 space shuttle, 80, 87, 98, 160, 161,
                     ,
       tory ( HEAO) 329                                193, 218, 233, 240, 245, 276, 320,
     Intelsat-IV F-2, 14                               356
     Mariner 8 (Mariner-H), 126-127                 testing
     Mariner 9 (Mariner-I), 148                        liquid, 87
     Nato 2 ( NATO-R)3 6,                              hydrogen, 87
     Os0 7 (OSO-H) ,269                                hydrogen/oxygen, 161
     Pioneer-F, 322                            Engineers, 107, 119, 308
     unidentified satellite, 122, 341            employment, 77,104-105,117-118
Easton, Richard A., 179                        Engle, Caut. Joseph H (USAF),234
                                                                      ,
Echo 1 (comsat), 157                           Engler, Martin, Jr., 242
Eckert, Dr. John P., 218                       Enrollment Increase in Science and
Eclipse, lunar, 44                               Mathematics in Public Secondary
Eclipse, solar, 68, 167                          Schools, 1948-49 to 1969-70 (NSF 71-
Economic Affairs, Dept. of (proposed),           30), 288
  81                                           Envirmmental Data Service. 219
EoPTechnology, Inc., 131, 194                  Environmental program, US.,42
Edwards AFB, Calif., 11, 108, 131, 174,        Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
  186, 255, 256                                  104, 290, 351
Effelsberg, W. Germany, 277                    Environmental Science: Challenge for the
Eggers, Dr. Alfred J., 61                        Seventies, 180
Eglin AFB., Fla., Climatic Laboratory,         Environmental Science Services Adminis-
  258                                                              19
                                                 tration (ESSA),
Egypt, 124, 360                                Eole (CAS-1) (French Cooperative Ap-
Eisenhower, President Dwight D., 59,             plications Satellite), 230, 250, 254, 357,
  243,248,265, 308                               369
El Centro, Calif., 247, 264                    Eole Data Interpretation Group, 231
ELDO. See European Launcher Develop-                    See Environmental Protection
                                               EPA.
  ment Organization.                             Agency.
Electric field, 74, 78, 79                     epndb: effective perceived noise in deci-
                                                 bels.
Electric propulsion, 244
                                               ERAP. See Earth Resources Aircraft Pro-
Electris (Mars). 337
                                                 gram.
Electronics Research Center (EBC), 362
Ellington AFB, Tex., 22,207, 222               ERC. See Electronics Research Center.
                                               EREP. See Earth resources experiment
Embolism. 187
                                                 package.
Emergency Conversion Loan Act, 141

                                             434
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Ericson, David B., 302                               Explorer 45 (Small Scientific Satellite),
ERNo-RaumfahrttechnikGmbH, 3,19                        319,365,369
Eros (asteroid), 310                                 Extrasensory perception (ESP), 46, 170
EROWS. See Expendable remote-operating               Extraterrestrial life, 167, 248, 338, 345,
   weather station.                                    368, 370
                                                     Extravehicular activity (EVA),  153, 328
ERTS. See Earth Resources Technology
                                                       Apollo 14, 25-26, 41, 47, 48, 51
  Satellite.
                                                       Apollo 15, 115, 141, 142, 156, 201
ERTS-A, 97, 135, 173
                                                         203-207, 217, 221, 225, 227, 228, 229
ERTS-B, 135, 173
                                                       Apollo 16, 61, 289, 293, 323
ESC. See European Space Conference.
                                                       Skylab, 288
Esch, Rep. Marvin L., 38
                                                     Eyewitness to Space, 289
ESP. See Extrasensory perception.
                                                     Eyles, Donald E., 57
            (European Sounding Rocket
ESRANGE
  Range), Kiruna, Sweden, 213
        See European Space Research
ESRO.
                                                                         F
  Organization.
        (scientific satellite), 356
ESRO~
ESSA. See Environmental Science Serv-                F-1 (rocket engine), 1, 158
  ices Administration.                               F-1-m (U.S.S.R. launch vehicle), 362
“Estimated Academic RBD Direct Price                 F-I-r (U.S.S.R. launch vehicle), 362
  Trends 50 Percent Higher Over Dec-                 F-4 (Phantom (fighter aircraft), 124,
  ade 1961-71,” 305                                    246, 286, 303
Etam, W. Va., 292                                    F-5D (fighter aircraft), 239
ETR. See Eastern Test Range.                         F-9 (People’s Republic of China super-
Europa I ( ELDO booster), 328, 352                      sonic fighter aircraft), 140
Europa 11, 310, 327-328,352                          F-14 (Tom Cat) (supersonic fighter air-
Europa 1 1 297,352
         1,                                             craft), 46, 70, 112, 124, 141, 152, 210,
European Broadcasting Union, 23                        211, 212, 246, 252, 255, 271, 272, 284,
European Launcher Development Organ-                   286-287, 323,365
  ization ( E L D O ) , 278, 291, 297, 310, 347,     F-l4A, 11, 165,298
  352                                                F-l4B, 210,211,212
                                                     F-15 (fighter aircraft, 70, 170, 212, 255,
European Organization for Nuclear Re-
  search, 19                                           272,298,303, 344
European Space Conference (ESC), 16,                 F-15 (ELDO launcher), 352
                                                     F-90 (fighter aircraft), 115
  45. 48. 75. 165. 335. 340. 369
                                                     F-100 (supersonic fighter), 239
                                                     F-101 (supersonic fighter), 239
                                                     F-102 (supersonic fighter), 239
                                                     F-104 (fighter aircraft), 239
                                                     F-111 (supersonic fighter aircraft), 87,
Eutrophication, 104                                     108, 116, 131, 165, 212, 262, 272, 300,
       See Extravehicular activity.                    341, 344,356
EVA.
Evans, Albert J., 272                                F-IllA, 14
Evans, L/Cdr Ronald E. (USN),228-229,                F-11lC, 353
                                                     F-IllD, 314
  234
Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal             F-147 (fighter aircraft), 219
                                                     FAA. See Federal Aviation Administra-
  ( N A S A ) , 255, 279, 302
Exceptional Service Medal (NASA).188,                  tion.
                                                     FAA Statistical Handbook of Aviation,
  255, 279, 302, 314
                                                         327
Exhibit, 152, 153, 345
                                                           See InternationaI Aeronautical Fed-
Expendable remote-operating weather sta-             FA;.-
  tion (EROWS),      295                                eration.
                                                     Fairbanks, Alaska, 47, 76, 77, 310
Explorer (spacecraft), 186
                                                     Fairchild Hiller Corp., 74, 85, 98, 115
Explorer I (satellite), 5
                                                     Fairchild Industries, Inc., 115, 300, 308
Explorer 30 (Solrad 8 ) (Solar Radiation
                                                     Fairchild, Sherman M., 85
  Satellite), 190
                                                     Falcon (ApoZZo 15 L M ) . See Lunar
Explorer 35 (Interplanetary Monitoring
                                                       module.
  Satellite (IMP-E1, 64
                                                     Faller, Dr. James E., 144
Explorer 37 (Solrad 9 ) , 190
                                                     Fanale, Dr. Fraser P., 12
Explorer 41, 73
                                                     Farley, Clare F ,197
                                                                    .
Explorer 42 (Uhuru) (Small Astronomy
                                                     FB-111 (supersonic fighter), 262, 279
  Satellite), 89, 113, 131, 319
Explorer 43 (IMP-I), 240, 365                        FBI. See Federal Bureau of Investigation.
                                                     FCC. See Federal Communications Com-
Explorer 44 (Solrad l o ) , 189-190, 240,
                                                       mission.
  365

                                               435
                                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)                   awards and honors presented by, 279,
  air traffic control, 85, 107, 121, 139,                 302
      193,219-220, 260                                 budget, 57, 172, 280, 324
  aircraft certification, 218-219                      international cooperation, space, 275
  airports, 134, 165, 182, 194, 305, 320,              Langley Research Center visit, 152
      334                                              Lewis Research Center visit, 246-247
  airwavs. 80                                           Lunar module (LM) presentation to
                                                          National Air and Space Museum, 195
  award, i65
  collision prevention, 10, 107, 193                   Manned Spacecraft Center visit, 146-
  contract. 85, 182. 198, 320                              147
  cooperation, 3, 71, 122, 187, 218-219,               Mariner 9 (Mariner-I), 146
      219-220, 255, 271, 297                           noise prevention, aircraft, 307
                                                        Paine, Dr. Thomas O., portrait unveil-
  General Aviation Accident Prevention
      Program, 277                                        ing, 314-315
  landing system, 305, 334                             Dress conference. 57. 127. 246
  noise, aircraft, 83, 198                             space program, national, -57, 127, 172,
  organization, 65, 82                                    256, 263-264, 272, 275, 280
  personnel, 2, 239, 266, 323                          space shuttle, 172. 218.. 272, 275. 280
                                                                          .
  satellite communications systems, 3,                 space station, 172
                                                        technology utilization, 160, 172, 272-
      165,255,297
  statistics, 104-105, 134, 255, 277, 327                 273, 340
                                                       U.S.S.R. space program, 191-192
  transport, supersonic (see also Super-
     sonic transport), 332, 351                      Flight Achievement Award (AAS), 179
                                                     Flight Research Center (FRC) (NASA)
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
                                                       aircraft electronic control system, 73
  266
                                                        contract, 345
Federal Communications Commission
                                                       employment, 238
   (FCC), 60, 65, 69, 71, 74, 176, 293
                                                       liftingbody flight
Federal Electric Corp., 158
                                                          M2-F3, 42, 200, 225, 239, 337
Federal Funds for Academic Science,
                                                          X-24A, 11, 39, 49, 65, 85, 142, 210,
  Fiscal Year 1969 (NSF 71-7), 58
                                                             351
Federal Funds for Research, Develop
                                                       personnel, 339
  ment, and Other Scientific Activities,
                                                       space shuttle pilot study, 308
  251
                                                       supercritical wing. See Wing, aircraft,
Federal R&D Expenditures Related to
                                                          supercritical.
  Budget Functions, 1960-72, 175
                                                     Flight Safety Foundation, 314
Federal Railway Administration, 323
                                                     Florida. 2. 301
Federal Reserve System, 308
                                                     Florida; Legislature, 145
Federal Support to Universities and Col-
                                                     Florida, Univ. of, 18, 288, 292
  leges, Fiscal Year 1970, 161
                                                     Flowers, Rep. Walter, 38
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 247
                                                     Flugge-Lotz, Dr. Irmgard, 298
Federal Women's Award, 38
                                                     Flying Spot (x-ray unit), 278
FBdBration ABronautique Internationale
                                                     FOBS. See Fractional orbiting bombard-
  ( F A I ) . See International Aeronautical
                                                       ment system.
  Federation.
                                                     Fsod and Agricultural Organization, 104,
Federation of American Scientists, 124
                                                        171
Fedoseyev, Anatoly, 147, 168, 171, 176,
                                                     For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Sur-
  190, 329
                                                       vey of the Practical Returns from
Feld, Bernard T., 273                                  Space Znvestment (House report), 350-
Feoktistov, Konstantin P., 111, 119                    351
Fiat, 3                                              Ford Foundation, 177
Final Report of the Ad Hoc Supersonic                Ford, Rep. Gerald R., 131
  Transport Review Committee of the                  Ford Motor Co., 309
  Ofice of Science and Technology,                   Ft. Greely, Alaska, 222, 225, 230
  March 30,1969, 232                                 Fort Pierce, Ha., 24
Fine Arts Commission, 309, 323, 330                  Fort Worth, Tex., 212
Finerman, Dr. Aaron, 192                             475 Sioux (helicopter), 248
Fink, Daniel J., 133                                 Foster, Charles R., 295
Finland, 341                                         Foster, Dr. John S., Jr., 95, 300
Flandro, Dr. Gary A., 85                             Foundation for Research on the Nature
Fleischer, R. L., 83                                   of Man, 170
Fletcher, Dr. James C., 139, 298                     Fox, Dr. Leo, 44
  aeronautics, 280, 307                              Fox Main, Dew Line Station, Alaska, 74,
  Apollo program, 324.                                 78. 79
  appointment, 49-50, 57, 59, 64, 68, 69,            Fra 'Mauro (lunar crater), 24, 27, 47,
     72, 114, 368                                      64,98, 167,265

                                               436
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                        ( GARP Atlantic Tropical Experi-
Fractional orbiting bombardment system              GATE
   (FOBS), 303, 362                               ment), 180
                                                Gates Learjet Corp., Aircraft Div., 44
France, 242, 252
  air-cushion railroad, 82                      Gatland, Kenneth, 115
                                                Gault, Donald E., 39
  aircraft (see also Concorde), 224, 346
                                                Gavin, James J., Jr., 57
  Apollo 14 mission, reaction, 43
  Apollo 15 mission, reaction, 216              Gazenko, Prof. Oleg G., 36, 235
  award, 191                                    GCA Corp., 236, 251,257
                                                GE. See General Electric Co.
  booster, 310
  Concorde       (U.K.-France    sunersonic     Gebben, Vernon D., 106
                                                Gehrig, James J., 265
     transport), 48, 147, 214, 248, 249,
     280, 332, 346                              Gemini (program), 324
  international cooperation, 50, 287. 299       Gemini (spacecraft), 286
  international cooperation, space, 16, 18,     Gemini 5 mission, 240
     57-58, 96-97, 148, 230, 235, 259, 291,     Gemini 7 mission, 153
     297, 299, 310, 330, 358, 359, 370          Gemini 8 mission, 240
  launch, satellite, 103, 230, 342, 368         Gemini 11 mission, 240, 345
  missile program, 224                          General Accounting Office (GAO), 1, 78,
  National Assembly, 73                           201, 218, 233, 246, 252, 294, 353, 356
  satellite, 57-58, 230, 342, 357, 365          General aviation, 105, 122, 276-277
  space program, 58, 230, 234, 254, 311-        General Dynamics Corp.
     312, 330, 358, 362                           Aerospace Div., 262, 300
  uv panorama (5-138) experiment, 38              award, 17
Frankfurt, Univ. of, 325                          CL-215 Air Tanker, 129
Franklin Institute, 359                           contract, 98, 101, 341
Franklin Mint, 247                                Convair Aerospace Div., 337
Franklin Mint Collectors Society, 247             Convair Div., 101, 127, 136, 150
Franz Josef Archipelago, 304                      F-111, 165, 212, 262, 300, 341, 344
FRC. See Flight Research Center.                  research and applications module
Freedona 7 (spacecraft), 122                         ( R A M ) , 3,337
Freedom 7 mission, 42                           General Electric Co. (GE), 83, 133
Freeman, Dr. John W., Jr., 288, 291, 293          Aerospace Group, 195
Freitag, Capt. Robert F. (USN, Ret.), 12          Aircraft Engine Group, 83, 241
Frey, Rep. Louis, Jr., 38                         contract, 82, 174
Friedheim, Jerry W., 146, 152, 211, 212           GE Houston Operations, 171
Friedman, Dr. Herbert, 16, 73                     quiet jet engine, 83, 130, 241, 365
Froehlke, Secretary of the Army Robert            R&D Center, 99
  F., 186, 294                                    research and applications module
Frog experiment, 127                                 (RAM), 3
Frontier Airlines, 128                            space shuttle, 195
Frost. Dr. Tames D.. 19.7                         supersonic transport engine, 82, 135
FRUSA (flexible Tolied-up solar array), 8       General Motors Corp., 24
                                                General Services Administration (GSA) ,
Frutkin, Arnold W., 133, 198
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission.                357
Fulton, Rep. James G., 38, 280, 282             Geneva, Switzerland, 19, 23, 88, 132,
Fuqua, Rep. Don., 38                              173, 177, 182, 199, 250, 257
                                                Gentry, Maj. Jerauld R. ( U S A F ) , 42
                                                George Washington Univ., 176, 258, 342
                    G                           Georgia Institute of Technology, 13
                                                Georgia, Univ. of, 81, 232
Gabor, Dr. Dennis, 307, 309                     German Society for Aviation and Astro-
Gabriel, David S., 167, 243, 323                  nautics (Deutsche Gesellschaft fuer
Gagarin, Yuri, Gold Medal, 266                    Luft- und Raumfahrt E. V.) (DGLR),
Gagarin, Col. Yuri A. (U.S.S.R.), 16,                 142
  100. 152. 167                                     Germantown, Md., 115
Galmy, 1,’201, 253, 279, 315                        Germany, East, 237, 287, 319
Galilei, Galileo, 97                                Germany, West, 81, 84-85,312
Gambrel]. Sen. David H.. 37                           aircraft, 246
Gamma ray, 181                                       Apollo 14 mission, reaction to, 43
Gangler, James J., 291                                computer program, 122
GAO. See General Accounting Office.                  cooDeration. 287
GARP. See Global Atmospheric Research                 cooperation; space, 19, 58, 96, 145, 259,
  Program.                                              310, 352, 356, 357, 370
Garrett Corp., 147                                   R&D, 362
Gast, Dr. Paul W., 7, 45, 190, 226, 228,             space program, 3, 16, 325
  245                                                space shuttle, 291

                                              437
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Gervais, Joseph, 243                              test and support miFsion, 292
       ground elapsed time                        x-ray studies, 226
GET:
Getlein, Frank, 289                          Goland, Martin, 15, 75
Giacobini-Zinner comet, 358                  Gold, Dr. Thomas, 5, 237
Giaconni, Dr. Riccardo, 89, 113              Goldhaber, Dr. Gerson, 36
Gilbert, B/G William W. (USAF),193           Goldich, S S., 83
                                                         .
Gillilland, Whitney, 348-349                 Goldstein, Richard M., 335
Gilruth, Dr. Robert R., 14, 84, 171, 177,    Goldstone, Calif., tracking antenna, 69,
  181, 305, 325, 332, 334                      102, 313, 318
Glenn, Col. John H., Jr. (USMC,Ret.),        Goldwater, Sen. Barry M., 24, 79
  198                                        Goldwater, Rep. Barry M., Jr., 38
Glennan, Dr. T. Keith, 253, 257              Golf Magazine, All-America Award, 106
Glider research, 320                         Golovine Award, 85
Global Associates. 191                       Gordon, Capt. Richard J., Jr. (USN,Ret.),
Global Atmospheric Research Program            345
      (GARP), 103, 178, 303-304
                                             Gossick, M/G Lee V. (USAF),193
  Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE),
                                             Gotlieb, Alan, 106
       iRn
                                             Government-Industry System Safety Con-
       CY"


  Data Management Panel, 303
                                               ference, 146
Glushko, Petrovich, 91
                                             Government Printing Office (GPO),327
Goals and Means in the Conquest of
                                             Grants, N. Mex., 39
  Space, 183, 363
                                             Gravel, Sen. Mike, 272
Goat experiment, 311
                                             Greeley, Ronald, 39
Goddard Institute for Space Studies
                                             Green, Constance McLaughlin, 75
  (GSFC),32, 45, 50, 35&359
                                             Greenville, S.C., 140
Goddard, Mrs. Esther, 69, 214, 347
                                             Griffin, Sen. Robert P., 134
Goddard Memorial Dinner, 69
                                             Grissom, L/C Virgil I. (USAF), 10, 199,
Goddard Memorial Lecture Award, 13
                                               357
Goddard Memorial Trophy, 69
                                             Grissom, Mrs. Virgil I., 10, 131
Goddard, Dr. Robert H., 13, 17, 234, 347
                                             Griswold, Solicitor Gen. Erwin, 49
Goddard, Robert H., Library, 214
                                             Grobecker, Dr. Alan J., 323
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC)
                                             Gromyko, Foreign Minister Andrey A.
     (NASA),  250, 335
                                                ( U S S R . ) , 153, 252, 272
  Apollo 15 tracking, 207
                                             Grumman Corp., 290, 294, 295
  astronomical research, 35-36, 49-50,
                                               Grumman Aerosuace Corm. 167. 191
     102, 339
                                                  aircraft, 128, 219, 288,'290, 338
  award, 302
                                                     F-14, 46, 112, 141, 152, 163
  contract, 134-135, 356
                                                     F-14A, 11, 112
  cooperation, 102-103
                                                  award. 15.57.279
  employment, 238
                                                  contra&, 253,' 288, 294, 338
  Laser Data Systems Branch, 154
                                                  space shuttle, 281
  meeting, 129, 146, 297
                                             GSA. See General Services Administration.
  patent, 269
                                             GSFC. See Goddard Space Flight Center.
  position-location and aircraft communi-
                                             Gudkov, Oleg, 211
       cations experiment (PLACE),  362
                                             Guerney, Sen. Edward J., 134
  satellite monitoring
    Explorer 43 (IMP-I), 72, 240             Guggenheim, Daniel, 13
    Explorer 45 (SSS-A), 319                 Guggenheim, Daniel, Medal, 326
    ITOS-B, 294                              Guggenheim, Daniel and Florence, Inter-
    Os0 7, 269                                 national Astronautics Award, 262
                                             Guggenheim, Harry F., 13, 534
  Scientific Colloquium, 154
  sounding rocket experiments (see also      Gulf of Mexico, 200
                                             Gum Nebula. 36
       Sounding rockets)
                                             Guppy (cargo aircraft 1, 242
    airglow, 108
                                             Gurovsky, Dr. N. N , 284, 359
                                                                    .
    atmospheric data, 2, 5, 8, 78, 174-
       175, 187                              Gvishiani. Dzherman M.. 287
                                             GX3+1 '(x-ray source); 356
    electric field, 78, 79
    energetic particles and fields, 14
    grenade experiment, 259
                                                                H
    ionosphere, 22, 31, 115-116
    magnetic field, 78, 79
                                             H-1 (rocket engine), 158
    micrometeoroid collection, 108
    ozone, 54, 63, 64-65, 74-75, 222, 225,   Hadley-Apennine region (lunar landing
       230                                     site), 202, 203, 254
                                             Hadley Delta (lunar mountain), 120, 223
    polar cap ahsorption, 246
    stellar astronomy, 13, 119, 323          Hadley Plains (moon), 203

                                         438
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Hadley Rille (lunar landing site), 153,       Heffner, Dr. Hubert, 197
  144,183,219,226,291                         Helicopter, 295
Hafele, Dr. Joseph C., 296                      accident, 13, 14,290
Hage, George H., 299                            astronaut piekup, 30
Hagen, Dr. John P., 135                         comsat communication, 74
Haggerty, James J., 58, 90                      military, 101, 294, 351, 357, 365
Haglund, Howard H., 47, 55                      record, 365
The Hague, Netherlands, 103                     U.S.S.R., 147
                                              Helicopter Corp. of America, 330
Haise, Fred W., Jr., 61, 75, 171, 266
                                              Helio Aircraft Corn.. 300
Halaby, Najeeb E., 109, 148, 257, 297
                                              Helms, Richard, lk'
Haley Astronautical Award, 75
                                              Helsinki, Finland, 148, 189, 252
Hall, Albert C., 294
                                              Hempstead, N.Y., 233
Hall, Asaph, 331
                                              Henize, Dr. Karl, 359
Hall, Floyd D., 54
                                              HEOS-AB (Highly Eccentric Orbit Satel-
Hall, R. Cargill, 261
                                                lite 1, 356
Halley's comet, 358
                                              Heppenheimer, T. A., 315
Ham (chimpanzee), 32
                                              Hercules (constellation), 93
Hanbury, Una, 106
Hamilton, Jeffrey T., 192, 301                Hercules, Inc., 170
                                              Hero of Socialist Labor, 218
Hammarskjold, Knut, 177
                                              Hero of the Soviet Union, 180
Handler, Dr. Philip, 106, 287
                                              Herzberg, Gerhard, 307
Hanna, Rep. Richard T., 38, 222
                                              Heuss Island, Arctic Ocean, 304
Hansen, Grant L., 186, 276
                                              HEW, See Health, Education, and Welfare
Hansen, James E., 50
                                                          Dept. of.
Haramura, Hiroshi, 83                            (HEW),
                                              Hewlett Packard Co., 350
Harbert, Wary Ann, 352
                                              Hibbs, Dr. Albert R., 47
Hardsite Defense, 43
                                              Hickam AFB, Hawaii, 207, 219
Hardy, Dr. James P., 90
Hargis, Dr. William J., Jr., 292              High Energy Astronomy Observatory
                                                 (HEAO), 67, 85, 189, 276
Harmon International Aviator's Trophy,
                                              Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite. See
  135
Harnett, Daniel J., 76, 354                         HEOS-AB.
                                                  High Speed Test Center, 182
Harr, Dr. Karl G., Jr., 125
Harrier (U.K. V/STOL aircraft), 80, 300,          Hijacking of aircraft
                                                    Congress, 103
  329
                                                    ICAO consideration of, 55
Harriot, Thomas, 97
                                                    Nixon, President Richard M., 36, 54,
Harris, Louis, survey, 220
                                                      ___
                                                      1n3
Harrison, Dr. Donald C., 235, 301
                                                    protective measures against, 133, 212-
Hart, H. R., Jr., 83
Hartzog, George B., 112                                213, 278
                                                    statistics. 157
Harvard Univ., 18, 277
                                                    treaty, 55, 103
Harvest Moon (proposed lunar mission
                                                    U.S., 36,55, 103, 157
  314
                                                  Hill, Louis W., Space Transportation
H i i L y Mudd College, 152
                                                    Award. 298. 323
Haskin, Dr. Larry A., 279
                                                  Hillier, James, 170
HATS. See Huntsville Assn. of Technical
                                                  Hills, Dr. H. Kent, 144, 288, 293
  Writers.
Haughton, Daniel J., 2, 36, 161, 221, 294         Himmel, Dr. Seymour C., 349
                                                  Bines, William, 192
Hawaii. 98. 222
Hawaii; Univ. of, 161, 345                        Hiroshima, Japan, 224
                                                  Hirsch, Richard, 9
Hawker Siddeley Group Ltd., 3
                                                  Hirten, John E., 107
  Hawker Siddeley Aviation, Ltd., 329
  Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd, 19                History Manuscript Award (AIAA), 75
                                                  History of Astronautics Symposium, Fifth,
Hawkins, Howard R., 71
                                                    261
Hayes International Corp., 158
                                                  H&hi      Central Research Laboratory,
Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW),
                                                    231-232
  Dept. of, 38, 58, 161
                                                  Hitt, Patricia R., 38
HEAO. See High Energy Astronomy Ob-
                                                  Hodgson, Secretary of Labor James D., 94
  servatory.
                                                  Hoff, Dr. Nicholas J., 15
Heat flow experiment, 142, 144, 205, 245,
                                                  Hoffman, Gen. H., 352
  291.294. 295
                                                  Hoffman, Dr. William F., 358
Heat shield, 335
Hebert, Rep. F. Edward, 112, 163                  Hofstein, Steven R., 360
                                                  Hogan, Joseph M., 49
Hechler, Rep. Ken, 38
                                                  Hogarth, Laurence T.,161
Heckscher, John L., 199
                                                  Holloway, Frederic A. L., 170
Hedrick, Ira G., 15

                                            439
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Holmes, Jay E., 58                                   See International Aeronautical Fed-
                                                 IAF.
Holmfeld, John D., 126                           eration and International Astronautical
Holmauest. Dr. Donald. 138                       Federation.
Hologiaphy, 142, 307 ‘                        IATA. See International Air Transport
Homestake Gold Mine, South Dakota, 113            Assn.
Honeywell, Inc Aerospace Div., 2 M            IBM. See International Business Machines
Honolulu, H a w k , 349                          Corp.
Hood, Robert H., 231                          ICAO. See International Civil Aviation
Hope, Bob, 70                                     Organization.
Hord, Dr. Charles W., 195                     Icarus (asteroid), 310
Horowitz. Dr. Norman H.. 90                   ICBM. See Intercontinental ballistic mis-
Horttor, Richard L., 335 ’                       sile.
Hotz, Robert B., 119                          IEEE. See Institute of Electrical and Elec-
Houghton, Dr. John, 242                           tronic Engineers.
Housing and Urban Development (HUD),          IFR: instrument flight rules.
    Dept. of, 3, 135, 198, 209, 211, 216,    11-18 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 12, 17, 38, 140
    226                                      11-62 (U.S.S.R. airliner), 140
  funding,                                   ILLIAC IV (computer), 23
Houston Intercontinental Airnort. 278         Illinois, Univ. of, 236
Houston, Tex., 138, 166, 288;290              ILS: instrument landing system.
  Apollo 14 mission, 25, 30                   IMP. See Interplanetary Monitoring Plat-
  Apollo 15 mission, 203, 222, 225-226,          form.
    302, 335                                            (Interplanetary Monitoring Plat-
                                              IMP-E
  Lunar Receiving Laboratory, 30, 226            form), 64
  meeting, 5, 114, 312, 369                   IMP-H, 356
Houston, Univ. of, 50, 63                     Implantable Biotelemetry Systems (NASA
Hovertrain, 348                                   SP-5094), 193
Hubbard, Dr. Jerry S., 90                     Improved Tiros Operational Satel!ite.
Hubbel, Charles H., 282                          See Itos 1, etc.
HUD. See Housing and Urban Develop-          Independence (presidential aircraft), 248
  ment, Dept. of.                            India, 19, 105, 111, 115, 235, 264, 282
Huddle, Franklin P., 56                      Indian Ocean, 109, 150, 319-320
Hudson (bomber aircraft), 115                Indian River, Ha.. 13, 290
Hughes Aircraft Co., 298, 312                Indiana, 199
Hughes, Howard, 44, 197                       Industrial R&D Spending, 1970 (NSF
Hughes Tool Co., 197                             71-39) 352
                                                        ~




Human Resources, Dept. of (proposed),        Industrial Research Magazine award, 262
  81
  __                                         Information retrieval. 32. 81
Humphrey, Sen. Hubert H., 162, 195,          Informatics Tisco, Inc., 69
  266,358                                    Ingersoll-Rand Co., 78
Humphreys, Dr. James W., Jr., 12, 245        Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Hungary, 43, 237, 242-243                        Engineers (IE EE ), 308
Hunn, Spencer S., 3                          Institute of Planners of California, 107
Huntington Beach, Calif., 38                 Institute of Rehahilitation Medicine, 189
Huntington Institute of Applied Medical      Institution of Mechanical Engineers
  Research, 112                                   (London), 84
Huntsville, Ala., 5, 142, 279, 321           INTELSAT. See International Telecommuni-
Huntsville Assn. o f Technical Writers           cations Satellite Consortium.
  IHATS ). 321                               Intelsat (communications satellite series),
Hurricane Camille, 172                           198
Husain, Dr. Liaquat, 257, 260, 265           Intelsat I (Early Bird). 14. 98
Hvde. Flovd H.. 3                            Intelsat 111 series, 14, 69
Hidrofoil craft.’ 18                         lntelsat IV series, 14, 294
Hidrofoil warship, 312                       Intelsat-IV F-2, 14, 82, 341, 354. 356-
Hydrogen, 60, 89, 93, 175, 359                   357, 365
Hvdrogen bomb. 260.273                       Intelsat-IV F-3, 342, 352, 354, 365
                                             Intelsat-IV F-4, 356
Hydrogen gas cloud,’2
                                             Intelsat-TV F-5, 356
Hydroxyl, 194
Hypo, Project, 104                           Intelsat-IV F-6, 356
                                             Interagency Aircraft Noise Abatement
                   I                             Program, 295
                                             Interagency Committee on Back Con-
                                                 tamination, 115
     See International Academy of Astro-
IAA.
                                             Intercontinental ballistic missile (ICMB),
  nautics.
                                                 4, 68, 77, 84, 103, 107, 117, 135, 146,
IAEA. See International Atomic Energy
                                                 150, 248, 264-265, 303, 357-358, 362
  Agency.

                                           440
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                                  36-37-41.369
lntercosmos 5 (U.S.S.R.      satellite), 337,             -NATO.           I-

  366                                                     -U.K.,’ 348, 369
Interdisciplinary research relevant to                  U.S.S.R.-Czechoslovakia, 337
  problems of our society (IRPOS), 178                       -France, 358-359
                                                      sounding rocket. See Sounding rocket,
Interferometry, 102
Interior, Dept. of, 81, 82, 351-352                          international programs.
                                                      space research, 16
International Academy of Astronautics
   (IAA), 261, 277                                       Europe, 16, 141-142, 237, 347, 352
                                                         France-U.S.S.R., 147, 235, 330, 358,
International Aeronautical Federation
                                                                359
        ( I A F ) , 262
                                                         U.S.-A&tralia, 15
  awards, 262-263
International Aerospace Hall of Fame,                        -Canada, 15-16, 96
  242                                                        -Denmark. 96
International Air Safety Seminar, 295                        -Europe, 15,16,335
International Air Transport Assn. (IATA),                    -France, 96
   177                                                       -Germany, West, 96, 145, 259, 325,
International Assn. of Fire Fighters, 23                       370
International Astronautical Federation                       -Japan, 15-16
   ( IAF 1, 260-261                                          -Sweden, 96
                                                             -U.K., 96
InternationaI Atomic Energy Agency
   ( I A E A ) , 253, 257                                U.S.S.R., 7, 10, 16, 20, 43, 68, 77,
International Business Machines Corp.                        100. 133. 139. 159. 171. 176-177.
        ( I B M ) , 78                                       185; 191; 197,’
  Federal Systems Div., 85                                   249, 275, 283,
International City Management Assn., 177                     325, 330, 332,
International Civil Aviation Organization                    353. 358. 369
   ( I C A O ) , 55, 312, 327, 349                     space shuttle, 3, 16, 45, 291
International Conference on Peaceful                  space station, 3, 45
   Uses of Atomic Energy, 250                         space tug, 278
International Congress of the History of              Statements by Presidents of the United
  Science, Thirteenth, 234                                   States on International Cooperation
International cooperation (see also Dis-                     in Space-A Chronology: October
                                                             1957-August 1971 (Sen. D c      o.
       armament and Treaty)
  astronomy, 102, 190, 248-249                               92401, 265
  computer programs, 230-232                           tracking
  ecology, 17                                             France-U.S.S.R., 235
                                                    International Coordinating Center of
  natural resources, 164
                                                      Marine Exploration in U.S.S.R., 110
   nuclear power, 50, 197, 250
                                                    International Decade of Ocean Explora-
  science and technology, 17, 55, 177, 299
  systems analysis, 287                               tion, 99
International cooperation, space (see also          International Galabert Prize, 191
       European Launcher Development Or-            International Institute for Strategic
                                                      Studies, 247-248, 360
       ganization; European Space Research
                                                    International Institute of Applied Sys-
       Organization ; Global Atmospherics
                                                      tems Analysis (proposed), 287
       Research Program ; International
                                                    International Orbital Laboratory Sympo-
        Telecommunications Satellite Con-
       sortium), 15-16, 17, 37, 44, 45, 55,           sium, 261
                                                    International Solar Energy Society, 129
       69-70, 77, 101, 119-120, 127, 275,
       311                                          International Symposium on Basic En-
                                                      vironmental Problems of Man in Space,
  International Cooperation in Outer
            Space: A Symposium, 132                    Fourth, 277
  lunar surface samples, 6, 10, 13, 16, 58,         International Symposium on Space Tech-
             159. 190. 308. 369                       nology, Ninth, 133
                          -, - -
  military; 36-37, 41, 369                          International Telecommunications Satel-
                                                          lite Consortium (INTELSAT), 14, 45,
   satellite, 15, 18, 57-58, 219-220
       communications. See Communications                 48, 102, 138, 242-243. 265
            satellite. cooneration.                   charter. 237
        earth resources; 10, 119, 132, 198, 369     International Telecommunications Union,
       Europe, 15-16, 19, 57-58, 297, 310,            319
            319                                     International Union of Geodesy and Geo-
                                                       physics, 241-242
     NASA-
        -Canada, 88, 356,369                        International Workshop on Earth Re-
        -Europe, 75                                   sources Survey, 119, 369-370
        -France, 230, 357,369                       Interplanetary       Monitoring    Platform
        -Germany, West, 356                            (IMP),64, 356
        -Italy, 109, 369                            Intersputnik (international space com-

                                                  441
                                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    munications organization), 319                   launch, satellite, 48, 161, 200, 268, 368
  Intravehicular activity (IVA), 328                 science and technology, 122, 291, 363
 Ionosphere, 19, 22, 31-32, 88, 111, 115,            space objects liability treaty, 313-314
     176, 193, 218, 236-237, 369                     space program, 9, 220, 305
 Iorilla, Anthony J., 298                             supersonic transport, 82, 84-85, 138
 Iowa, Univ. of, 348                              Japanese Space Development Committee,
 Iran, 313                                            161
 Ireland, 43, 220                                 Jastrow, Dr. Robert, 32, 45
            See Interdisciplinary research
 IRPOS.                                           Javelin (sounding rocket), 176
    relevant to problems of our society.          Javits, Sen. Jacob K., 171, 177
 Irwin, Col. James B. (USAP)                      Jeffries, John, Award, 298
    Apollo 15 mission                                Jeppesen and Co., 322
       celebrations for, 222, 238                 Jeppesen, Elrey B., 322
       Congress, report to, 254                   Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL) (Cal
       flight, 202-208                                  Tech), 191-192, 211, 353, 355
       lunar rock samples, 226                       astronomical research, 102
       medical aspects, 188, 225, 228, 289           award, 85, 314
       preparations for, 141, 188                    computer, 179
       press comment, 222                            contract, 47, 175, 211, 344
       press conference, 120-121, 227                Deep Space Network, 318
      report, 223                                    Goldstone Tracking Station, 102, 313,
       splashdown, 207                                  318
       syndicated article agreement, 200-           Jupiter (planet) research, 178
          201                                        Mariner program, 175
    Apollo 17 mission, 228-229                       Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) failure investi-
    awards and honors, 239, 260, 262-263,               gation, 126127, 136
      266, 346-347                                  Mariner 9 (Mariner-I), 148, 301-302,
    goodwill tour, 311                                 306, 313, 321, 331, 339, 353
    space center visits, 271, 272                   Mars (planet) research, 90
 Is There an R&U Gap? (report), 124                 patent, 335
Isayev, Aleksey, 176                                 personnel, 4647, 55, 159-160, 191-
Isis I (International Satellite for Iono-               192. 261
    spheric Studies), 88                            Pioneer spacecraft, 178, 322
Isis 2 (ISIS-B) , 88, 369                           Surveyor 3 camera, 57
Israel, 124, 279, 329                               Thermoelectric Outer Planet Space-
Israel, David R., 2                                    craft (TOPS), 179
Italy, 3, 43, 291, 310, 315, 333, 355               transit system, 47, 55
   launch, satellite, 109-110, 319, 365, 368,       Viking, Project, 211, 344
      369                                        JetStar (jet transport), 115
Itek Corp., 330                                  Jha, Ambassador Lakshmi Kant (India),
ltos I (Tiros-M) (Improved Tiros Opera-             70
   tional Satellite ), 295                       Johns Hopkins Univ., 10, 14, 132, 159
ITOS-B, 294, 295, 300                           Johnson, Dr. Clarence L., 115
ITOS-C, 356                                      Johnson, David S., 217
ITOS-V, 356                                     Johnson, E. G., 261
ITOS-E, 356                                     Johnson, Dr. Francis S., 144
IVA. See Intravehicular activity.               Johnson, Dr. Fred M., 299
                                                 Johnson, Harry W., 44
                                                Johnson, Dr. Howard W., 325
                     J                          Johnson, Col. Leonard W., Jr. (USAF),
                                                    352
J-2 (rocket engine), 60, 158                    Johnson, President Lyndon B., 162, 265,
Jackson, Sen. Henry M., 85, 103, 329                282
Jackson, Roy P., 39, 96, 130, 296, 337          Johnson, U. Alexis, 335
Jaffe, Leonard, 179, 211, 340                   Johnson, Vincent L., 136, 164, 302
Jaffe, Dr. Leonard D., 57                       Johnson-Sea-Link (submersible research
Jamaica, 104, 138, 171, 370                         vessel), 24
Jamaica Bay and Kennedy Airport: A              Johnsson, Olof, 170
   Multidisciplinary Environmental Study,       Johnston, Richard S., 298
  49                                            Joint Dot-NASA Civil Aviation Research
Jamaica Geological Survey, 104, 171                and Development Policy Study Report,
James, Lee B., 116, 240                             122
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, 296            Joint Working Group (NASA-Soviet Acad-
Japan, 243                                         emy of Sciences), 243
  international cooperation, 231-232            Jones, R/A Don A. (USN),12
  international cooperation, space, 15, 111     Jones, James C., 254
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Jones, Lawrence C., 331                          personnel, 57, 122, 357
Jordan, Sen. B. Everett, 197                     press conference, 120
JPL. See Jet Propulsion Laboratory.              space shuttle, 2, 145
JT3D (turbofan engine), 130, 198                 Visitor Information Center, 264
JT8D (turbofan engine), 198                      visits to, 343
                                                    Agnew, Vice President Spiro T., 31
Jupiter (missile), 182
                                               Kennev. Dr. V. Paul. 114
Jupiter (planet)
                                               Kent, Wash., 55, 68, '128
  atmosphere, 179
  exploration                                  Kentucky, 167, 256
                                               Kenya, Africa, 109, 323, 369
     spacecraft, 22, 74, 179, 322, 327, 367
                                               Kepler, Johannes, 97, 233, 359
     unmanned, 22, 67, 148, 322, 327, 356
  gravity, 178                                 Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site ( KRLS),
                                                 22, 31
  magnetic field, 178
                                               Key Biscayne, Fla., 74
  moon, 97
                                               Khanina, F., 357
  photographs, 174
                                               Kharkov, Univ. of, 325
  radiation belt, 178, 322
  rotation, 178                                King, Gov. Bruce, 42
                                               King, John W., 357
                                               King, Robert E., 49
                    K                          Kingcobra (helicopter), 357
                                               Kingston, Ontario, 10
Kahurin, L. I., 167                            Kirilenko, Andrey P., 186
Kansas City, Mo., 328                          Kitt Peak National Observatory, 36, 40,
Kaplan, Dr. Ian R., 39                           178,299
Kappa 9-M (Japanese rocket), 9                 Kitty Hawk (aircraft), 248
Kapryan, Walter J., 57                         Kitty Hawk (Apollo 14 command and
Kapustin-Yar, U.S.S.R., 337                      service module). See Command and
Karaganda, Kazakhstan, U.S.S.R., 108             service module.
Karth, Rep. Joseph E., 38, 280                 Klass, Joseph, 243
                                               Klass, Philip J., 243
Katys, G., 174
Katyusha (U.S.S.R. rocket), 261                Klein, Milton, 52, 71, 96, 250, 323
Kayten, Gerald G., 233                         KLM Roval Dutch Airlines. 88
Kazakhstan. U.S.S.R.. 135                      Knight of St. Patrick Award, 78
                                               Komarov, Vol. Vladimir M. (U.S.S.R.),
Keathley, William H.: 251
Keldysh, Prof. Mstislav V., 10, 89, 94, 100,     266
                                               Komarov, V. M., Diploma. 266
  140. 145. 217. 268. 284. 311
                    I    ,



Kelly,' K. K., 148                             Korn, Steve, 345
Kelly, Dr. Marvin J., 78                       Kourou Space Center, French Guiana,
Kendall, Dr. Henry W., 183                       64, 74, 78, 83, 103, 235, 259, 310, 342,
Kennecott Copper Corp., 78                       358, 370
Kennedy, Sen. Edward M., 17, 76, 166,          Kozlov, Mikhail V., 264
  286.308                                      Kraemar, Robert S., 322, 358
Kennedy,- President John F., 142, 162,         Kraft, Christopher C., Jr., 23, 96, 302,
  201, 215, 265, 282                             328
Kennedy, John F., International Airport,       Kraft, Joseph, 129
                                               Kramer. .Tames .T.. 251
  2. 49. ~-
          139
   7   7

                                               Kranz, Eigene F.; 57
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) (NASA),
                                               Kranzberg, Dr. Melvin, 151
     126, 301, 320, 328
                                               Kremlin Wall. Moscow. 186
  anniversary, 180
                                               Krier, Gary, 114, 279, 287
  Apollo/Satnrn. See Apollo missions.
                                               KRLS. See Keweenaw Rocket Launch Site.
  astronauts at, 5, 13, 17, 120, 188-189,
                                               Kronauer, M/G Clifford J. (USAF), 193
     271
  award, 57                                    Kushiro, Ikuo, 83
                                               Kuznetsov NK-144 (U.S.S.R. turbofan
  computer, 287
  contract, 71, 278, 279, 292                    engine), 126
  economy program, 287                         Kvenvolden, Keith A., 39
  employment, 65                               Kwajalein Missile Range, 125
  exhibit, 122, 353
  facilities, 361
                                                                   L
  launch operations (see also Launch
     Complex 17, 34, 39 and 40; and
     Apollo missions), 7, 24, 30, 46, 95,      GlOll (TriStar) (jet transport), 36, 38,
                                                 44, 47, 88, 124, 132, 147, 173-174, 190,
     98, 110, 128, 160, 200-201, 245,
     254-255, 347                                216, 221, 301
  lightning study, 201                         Labor, Dept. of, 141
  meeting, 162, 269                              Manpower Administration, 119
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

LaGarde, Jean Bernard, 75                       air-pollution study, 2
Laird, Secretary of Defense Melvin R ,    .     anniversary, 196
  68, 107, 124, 264, 286, 351                   Atlas-Centaur, 127, 136, 150
Lajes Field, The Azores, 351                    award, 262, 302
Lake Pontchartrain, La., 200                    Awareness Program, 329
Land-Air Div., Dynalectron Corp., 131           Centaur launch failure investigation,
Lane, A. L., 148                                   127, 136
Langley Gold Medal for Aerodromics, 266         computer, 106-107
Langley Research Center (LaRC) (NASA)           contract, 96, 98, 147
  award, 179, 302                               cooperation, 292
  brake, diagonal, studies, 51, 278             Mariner 9, 150
  camera, underwater, 104                       noise abatement, 295, 296
  conference on aircraft safety and oper-       personnel, 349
     ating problems, 122                        Quiet Engine Project, 83, 96, 130, 241,
  contract, 49                                     246-247
  cooperation, 104, 210                         research, 56, 72, 262, 292, 320
  8-Foot Tunnels Branch, 299                    solar cell, 12
  emdovment. 238                              Library of Congress
  enefgy absorber, frangible-tube, 259          Congressional Research Service, 248
  exhibit, 152                                     Science Policy Research Div., 7, 56.
  flight research vehicle. 233                       368
  meeting, 231                                Lick Observatorv. Calif.. 1. 299
                                              Life, origin of, f i 7
  patent, 259
                                              Life support system, 96, 105, 156, 181,
  personnel, 107, 186, 191
  Scout launch vehicle, 319                     193, 196, 206, 235, 308, 311-312
  Space systems Div., 299                     Lifting bodv
                                                M21F2,b
  Visitor Information Center, 152
  V/STOL Wind Tunnel, 365                       M2-F3, 42, 56, 200, 225, 237, 265, 319,
Langley, Dr. Samuel P., 266                        337, 352, 365
Langseth, Dr. Marcus E., 144, 245               X-24A, 11, 39, 49, 65, 85, 130, 142,
Lapp, Dr. Ralph, 325                                153, 210, 351, 356, 365
LLRC. See Langley Research Center.            Lightning, 199, 201
Large Space Telescope (LST), 67, 330          Lightning Strikes to In-Flight Missiles
Las Vegas, Nev., 63, 196                         program, 199
                                              Lilienthal, Cdr. Donald H. (WSN), 12, 17,
Laser., 88. 288
          ,
  lunar experiments, 27, 63, 144, 278,          41
                                              Lillie, Dr. Charles, 93
     299, 315
Latham, Dr. Gary V., 7, 64, 213, 142-         Lindbergh, B/C Charles A. (USAF, Ret.),
  143. 236. 245. 291                             13
                                              Lindner, Clarence H., 170
Latvian Academy of Sciences Radioastro-
  physical Observatory, 287                   Lindsay, John C., Memorial Award, 154
                                              Lindsay, Dr. John F., 238
Latvian State Univ., 357
Launch Complex 36, 30, 126                    Lindsay, Mayor John V., 239
Launch Complex 37, 30, 357                    Liquid hydrogen, 60,89,219,331
Launch Complex 39, 202, 349                   Liquid oxygen, 60, 219, 297
Launch platform, floating, 262                Lithicon, 360
                                              Littlewood, William, 326
Lawless, James G., 39
                                              Littlewood, William, Memorial Lecture,
Lawrence, Lovell, Jr., 13
Le Bourget Airport, France, 147, 168            326
Lebedev, P. N., Physics Institute, 315        Litton Industries, 182
Lecky-Thompson, Squadron Leader Les-            Environetics Div., 137
                                                Guidance and Control Systems Div.,
  lie, 135
Lederberg, Dr. Joshua, 91                           175
Lederer, Jerome F., 295, 314                  LLTV. See Lunar landing training vehicle.
                                              LM. See Lunar module.
Lee, Capt. Chester M. ( U S N ) , 35, 156
                                              Lockheed Aircraft Corp., 65, 307
Lefevre, Theo, 45, 48, 335
                                                    AH-56A (Cheyenne) (helicopter),
Lehigh Univ., 239
                                                      294. 357
Leonov, L/C Aleksey A. (U.S.S.R.), 16
                                                   award, 115
Leopold, King of Belgium, 260
                                                    C-5A (cargo transport), 2, 36, 147,
LeRc. See Lewis Research Center.
                                                      260, 271, 294, 307, 335, 348, 358
Lerner, Lawrence, 137
Lessing, Lawrence P., 89                           contract, 2, 36, 52, 147, 186
Lewis, Dr. George W., 196                          financial problems, 44-45, 124, 132,
                                                      147, 161, 173-174, 194, 201, 212,
Lewis Research Center (LeRc) (NASA),
                                                      216, 254, 294
  238, 298,320, 362
                                                   L-loll (TriStar jet transport), 36,
  Aerospace Environment Branch, 56
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

       38, 44, 47, 88, 124, 132, 147, 173-       US.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation, 10, 16,
       174, 190, 216, 221, 301                      76-77, 88-89, 216, 283-284
     patent, 171                              Lowell Observatory, Ariz., 174
     Poseidon missile, 52                     LPM. See Lunar portable magnetometer.
     sounding rocket experiment, 174          LRL. See Lunar Receiving Laboratory.
     STOL aircraft, 290                       LRV. See Lunar roving vehicle.
     T-33 (jet trainer), 115                  LSI. See Lunar Science Institute.
     U-2 (high-altitude aircraft), 95, 115    LST. See Large Space Telescope.
  Lockheed Aircraft Service Co., 126          LTTAT. See Thor-Delta, long-tank thrust-
  Lockheed Electronics Co., 19, 49, 190          augmented.
  Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., 12,          LTV Aerospace Corp., 344, 345
     195, 281, 299, 305, 335                  Lubbock (Tex.) Regional Airport, 278
                                              Lucas, Dr. William R., 46, 300-301
  Lockheed-Georgia Co., 101, 338, 348
Loehwing, David A., 359-360                   Lucerne, Switzerland, 266
Loftin, Laurence K., Jr., 186, 191            Ludwig, Dr. George H., 358
Logsdon, Dr. John M., 50, 201, 258            Lukas, Dr. Richard C., 298
                                              Lukasic, Dr. Stephen J., 300
Logunov, Anatoly, 168
                                              Luna 16 (U.S.S.R. lunar probe), 4, 6,
LOI: lunar orbit insertion.
Lomask, Milton, 75                               145. 152. 159. 190. 369
                                              Luna’l7, 4, 9, ‘41, 66, 98, 188, 217, 220,
London Airport, U.K., 220
London, U.K., 45, 48, 84, 85, 126, 300,          231, 246, 256, 272, 306, 322, 368
                                              Luna 18. 246. 250.. 259,. 268
  311, 312, 314, 329, 360
Long Beach, Calif., 211, 343                  Luna 19; 267
Long Beach, Calif., Harbor Commission,        Lunar and Planetary Laboratory (Tucson,
                                                 Ariz.) ,40
  44
Long Beach, N.Y., 137                         Lunar landing training vehicle (LLTV),
Long Island Lighting Company, 295                22-23
                                                                     ,
Long, Elgin L., 310, 329                      Lunar module (LM) 55-56, 57, 171, 233,
Long, James E., 178                                 24.4 -- -
                                                          294
                                                     ---I

Loosbrock, John F., 214                          Apollo 9, 286
                                                 ApoUo 11, 13S131, 198
Los Angeles, Calif., 80, 220, 257, 309
                                                 A110110 12. 130. 288
Los Angeles Air Pollution Control Dis-
                                                 Ab0110 1% 244
  trict, 170
                                                 Apollo I4 (Antares), 24-30, 35, 40,
Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, 275
Los Angeles Harbor Commission, 197                     47, 130, 365
Losey, Robert M., Award, 15                      Apollo 15 (Falcon), 98, 108, 110, 120,
Louis. Virtor. 187                                     199, 201-203, 213, 216218, 229,
Louisiana, 351-352                                     365
Louisiana State Univ., 351-352                   Apollo 16, 293
                                                 Apollo 17, 228
Lousma, Mai. Jack R. (USMC). 68
Love, Eugene S , . 299                           Apollo 18, 305
                                                    contract, 102-103, 255
Lovell, Capt. James A., Jr. (USN), 14,
                                              Lunar Orbiter (program), 212, 253, 294
  75, 137, 266, 327
Low, Dr. George M.. 306. 368                  Lunar portable magnetometer (LPM), 27
                                              Lunar roving vehicle (LRV) (Rover)
  aeronauticalresearch, 52-53, 54
                                                    (see also Lunokhod I ) , 42
  aerospace unemployment, 85-86, 87
                                                 Apollo 15, 24, 51, 55-56, 108, 110,
  Apollo 14 mission, 43, 44, 80
                                                       115, 120, 128, 141, 142, 144, 201,
  awards by, 57
                                                       203. 213. 215. 245. 289., 308., 353
  backup capability in space missions,
     163-164                                        lunar‘ excursion; 20k206, 213, 226,
  cooperation, 52-53, 54                               254,365
  international cooperation, space, 15, 16,      Apollo 16, 128, 245, 267, 289, 323
     76-77, 105-106, 216-217                     Aoollo 17. 289
  Mariner H. 136                                 cost., 24
                                                   ..-
  NASA budget, 21, 22, 52-53, 61, 62,         Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination
     80, 85, 86, 93, 163-164                     Team, 239
  Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle ao-       Lunar Science Conference. Second. 5-7,
     plication - NERVA), 52                      369
               (
  press conference, 11-12, 136, 181           Lunar Science Institute, 291, 335, 342,
  quarantine of astronauts, 115                  369
                                              Lundin, Bruce T., 2, 167, 168, 196, 302
  Skylab program, 163-164, 181, 183
                                              Lundquist, B/G Gustav E. (USAF, Ret.),
  Soyuz I1 mission, 180-181
                                                 2. 308
  space program, 21-22, 23, 51, 61, 62,             ---
                                                -7

                                              Lunney, Glynn S., 57
     75-76, 80, 93, 121, 181
                                              Lunokhod 1 (U.S.S.R. lunar surface ex-
  space shuttle, 22, 80, 93
  This Island Earth (NASA SP-2501, 48               plorer), 145, 152, 246, 315, 368
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                             Manchester, Univ. of (U.K.),
  ceases operations, 272, 378                                                 64
  exploration, 4, 8, 9, 41, 66, 73, 88,      Manke, John A., 11, 49, 85, 142, 153
    133, 139, 168, 188, 196, 217, 221,       Manned space flight (see also Apollo
    231, 246, 256
                                                  program; Apollo 8 through Apollo
  press comment, 20, 43
                                                  17 missions ; Gemini missions ; Astro-
  results, 9, 59, 100, 209, 220, 278, 302,
                                                  naut; Cosmonaut; Salyut I ; Salyut
    322
                                                  1-Soyuz 10; Salyut 1-Soyuz 11;
Lyon, B/G Herbert A. (USAF), 193
                                                  Skylab ; Soyuz missions ; Space biol-
                                                 ogy; and Space station), 1, 4, 43,
                    M                             217, 325
                                               achievements, 30, 42, 47, 48, 207, 208,
M2-F2 (lifting body), 42                            223, 254, 312, 362
M2-F3, 42, 56, 200, 225, 239, 265, 319,        advantage, 59, 218, 224, 315
  337, 352, 365                                anniversary, 100, 122, 197, 198
M31 (Andromeda) (galaxy), 121, 253             award, 84, 298
M32 (galaxy), 121, 253                         cooperation (see also Docking), 110-
M82 (galaxy, 194                                    111, 185, 216, 238, 248, 325, 340-
McClellan AFB. Calif.. 14-15                        341, 343
                            ~.
McClintock, Barbara, '18                       EVA. See Extravehicular activity.
McConnell, Dr. Dudley G., 199                  funding, 20-21, 57, 64, 253, 368
McConnell, Joseph H.,. 69                     hazards, 59, 62, 115, 181, 185, 225, 228,
McCreery, Frank E., 307                             255, 289
McCurdy, Richard C., 75-76, 172                lunar landing. See Moon landing,
McDade, Rep. Joseph M., 222                         manned.
McDivitt, B/G James A. ( U S A F ) , 57        military aspects, 158, 191
MacDonald, J. Ross, 170                        policy and plans
MacDonald Observatory, Tex., 64                  U.S., 10, 13, 62, 96, 176, 178, 181,
McDonnell Douglas Corp., 3, 170, 186,               216, 249. 256., 280. 283. 312. 328-
                                                                       .    ,    ,
    195, 211, 220, 281, 298, 299                    356: 368'
 McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Co., 344             U.S.S:R., 61, 105, 110, 111, 154-155,
  McDonnell Douglas Aeronautics Co.,                158, 188, 191-192, 249, 268
    12, 38, 265, 276, 288, 355                 Dress comment. 215-216
McElroy, Dr. William D., 61, 196, 320          record, 30
McGannon, Dr. William J., 292                 safety aspects, 163-164
McGovern, Sen. George S., 71-72, 122,
                                             Manned Space Flight Network ( MSFN 1,
 263                                          27, 69, 269
McIntosh, Patrick S., 302
                                             Manned Space Program Accident/lnci-
McKay, Kenneth G., 170
                                              dent Summaries, 90
McMurtry, Thomas C., 65-66, 77,94, 101,
 141, 145, 233, 240, 252, 256, 270, 279,     Manned Spacecraft Center             (MSC)
 346, 349                                         (NASA), 8, 14, 38-39, 111, 133, 139,
McNamara, Robert S., 320                         181, 286, 305
Madras. India. 282                            aircraft electronic control system, 73
Madrid; Spain, 69, 165, 219                   Apollo spacecraft, 30-31, 208, 328
Maffei 1 (galaxy), 1                          Apollo 13 mission, 57
Maffei 2, 1                                   Apollo 14 mission, 35, 44, 48, 57, 64
Maffei, Paolo, 1                              Apollo 15 mission, 208, 215, 217, 225,
Magellan, Ferdinand, 310                         226,228,234, 279
Magellanic Premium, 314                       Astronaut Office, 254
                                              astronauts at, 4, 225,234
Magnesium tetrabenzporphine, 299
Magnetic field, 78, 79, 104, 308, 341, 354    award, 57, 84, 279
Maenetoelow. 23                               contract, 49, 102-103, 105, 106, 131,
MainetoGete;, 27, 51, 133, 144, 219, 285-        132, 171, 177, 186, 190, 195, 255, 320,
                                                 328
 286, 293
                                              Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., 7
Magnetosphere, 23, 357
                                              Earth Observations Aircraft program,
Magnetron, 190
Magnuson, Sen. Warren G., 19                     138-139, 171
Magruder, William M., 75, 84-85, 138,         earth resources experiment package
                                                 (EREP), 107
  351
Mahiney, David J., 212                        employees, 238
                                              Lunar Receiving Laboratory. See Lunar
Mailer, Norman, 4-5, 32
                                                 Receiving Laboratory.
Maine, Univ. of, 363
                                              lunar roving vehicle, 267
Maitland, Fla., 5
                                              Lunar Science Institute. See Lunar
Making of an Ex-astronaut, The, 90-91
                                                 Science Institute.
Management Study of NASA Acqumi-
                                              meeting, 243, 291
 tion Processes, 178
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  patent, 251                                   mapping, 246, 339, 361
 personnel, 113-114, 137, 176, 245, 247,        moon, 310, 331, 340, 342, 364
     357                                        photographs, 246, 321, 339, 353, 355,
 Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., 45,               360
    24s                                         poles, 321, 360
 press conference, 4, 35, 228, 234              radiation, 219, 338
 Skylab, 171, 258, 276, 284                     spectrometer data, 195, 340
  sounding rocket experiments, 130, 131,        surface, 246, 321, 337
     135, 171                                   temperature, 359
  space environment simulation cham-            volcanism, 340, 353
    ber, 307                                    weather, 174
 space shuttle, 105, 132, 160, 195, 320,       Mars I (U.S.S.R. Mars probe), 134
    328                                        Mars 2, 134, 147, 157, 209, 293, 318, 324,
 Tito, President Josip Broz, visit, 286         330, 332, 338, 340, 341, 351, 353, 354,
Mao Tse-tung, 72                                355, 357, 360, 368, 369
Maran, Dr. Stephen P., 36
                                               Mars 3, 147, 157, 209, 293, 318, 324, 330,
Marconi Space and Defence Systems, 19
                                                334, 337, 340, 341, 347, 351, 353, 354,
Marietta, Ga., 253-254
                                                355, 359, 360, 368, 454
Marine Resources and Engineering De-
                                               Marseilles, Univ. of, 311-312
 velopment Act, 99
                                               Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
Marine Science Afiairs: Annual Report
                                                   (NASA)
 of the President to the Congress on
                                               Apollo Telescope Mount, 9, 1 , 252,
                                                                                1
  Marine Resources and Engineering
                                                 284
 Development, 99
                                               astronaut visits, 272
Mariner 6 (Mars probe), 69, 148
                                              commemorative space stamps, 215
Mariner 7. 69. 148
                                              concept verification testing, 334
Mariner 8 (Mariner-H), 126-127, 136,
                                              contract, 99, 106, 158-159, 174, 175,
 146, 148, 149, 275, 365
                                                 180, 190, 245-246, 286, 330, 345-
Mariner 9 (Mariner-I). 127, 139, 164,
                                                 346, 356
    166. 246. 275. 353
                                              cooperation, 348
 control, 153, 179, 199, 263, 293, 306,
                                              employment, 238
    318, 321, 361
                                              launch vehicle. See Saturn.
 cooperation, 340, 355, 360, 369
                                              Life Scientists Program, 210
 cosi, 330
                                              lunar roving vehicle (LRV), 68
 launch, 146, 148-150
                                              meeting, 42, 142, 278, 337
 Launch Readiness Review, 146
                                              Neutral Buoyancy Space Simulator, 287
 photographs, 313, 314, 315, 321, 327,
                                              offshore oil and gas operations study,
    332, 340, 342, 347, 353, 365
                                                 348
 press comment, 314, 324, 327, 330,
                                              personnel, 46, 98, 116, 240
    332-333
                                              remote sensing techniques, 128
 press conference, 301, 339
                                              Skylab, 152, 175, 265, 284, 323, 353
 results, 314, 318, 324, 337-338, 339-
                                              space shuttle, 3, 60, 106, 160, 175, 193,
    340, 364
                                                 245-246, 345-346, 356
 test, 136
                                              space station, 12, 192-193
Mariner Venus-Mercury (spacecraft), 75,
                                              space tug, 224, 278
 115, 175
                                              Stratoscope I1 (balloon borne astro-
Mariner-Venus 1967, Final Project Re-
                                                 nomical telescope), 121
 port (NASA SP-190), 364
                                             Marsik, Stanley J., 72, 262
Mark, Dr. Hans M., 298
                                             Martin, B/G Abner B. (USAF), 193
Marov, M., 338
                                             Martin, John L., Jr., 54
Mars (planet) (see also Mariner 6
    through 9, Mars 1 through 3, and         Martin Marietta Corp., 107, 175, 211,
    Viking Project)                           281, 294, 310, 346, 351, 353
                                             Maryland, 97, 224
 atmosphere, 195-196, 246, 337-338,
                                             Maryland, Univ. of, 102, 299, 322, 356
       350, 359
                                             Mascon (mass concentration of gravita-
 dust storm, 301-302, 321, 332-333,
                                              tional pull), 109, 143
       339, 355, 361, 365
                                             Masefield, Peter G., 326
 exploration, 45, 162, 191, 318, 324, 345,
       351, 354-355                          Maser, 89, 154
                                             Mason-Rust Co., 80
 international cooperation,      174-175,
                                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology
    293-294, 321, 340, 355, 360
 manned, 22, 51, 320-321                         (MIT), 13, 64, 247, 248, 261
 plans, 22, 146, 147                          award, 57,279
                                              experiment, 102, 119, 183, 289, 310,
 softlanding, 337
 spacecraft, 62, 264                             369
 life on, 90, 338, 345                        funding, 248, 325

                                         447
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                                        ological Satellite,
                           239
                                                             , 11, 105, 195, 360, 366
        See Military assistance to safety
MAST.
  and traffic.                                Meteorology, 3, 10, 62, 70, 103, 180, 219,
Masursky, Dr. Harold, 339-340                   230, 303-304, 327
Materials technology, 23, 71, 132, 195,       Metric America (SP-345), 212
  279, 320, 335                               Metropolitan Construction Co., 195
                                              Meudon Observatory, France, 194
Mathematics, 288
                                              Mexico City, Mexico, 295
Mathews, Charles W., 340
                                              Mi-12 (U.S.S.R. helicopter), 147
MATRA (S. A. Engins MATRA, France),
                                              Miami, Univ. of, 242
  3, 19
                                              Michigan, Univ. of, 13, 22, 31, 41, 119-
Mattingly, L/CDR Thomas K., I1 (USN),
                                                120, 209, 234, 236, 315, 331, 369-370
  61, 171
                                              Michoud Assembly Facility ( MSPC), 80,
Mauchly, Dr. John W., 218
                                                200, 254-255, 291, 348
Maverick (missile), 312
                                              Mickelwait, Lowell P., 81
Max Planck Institute for Radio Astron-
                                              Micrometeorite, 54
  omy, 277
                                              Micrometeoroid, 108
Maxwell AFB, Ala., 354
                                              Microwave Communications, Inc., 65
May, Dr. Charles E., 72
                                              Midwest Research Institute, 328
MCC: midcourse correction.
                                              Mi015 (U.S.S.R. fighter aircraft), 248
MCI Lockheed Satellite Corp., 65
                                              MiC-19, 140
MDA. See Multiple docking adapter.
                                              MiG-23 (Foxbat). 124, 260. 264
MDS. See Modulation demodulation sub-
                                              ~i~-25,260
  system.
                                              MiG-27, 260
Mead, Merrill H., 330                         Military assistance to safety and traffic
Meaney, George, 131                             (MAST), 351
Mechanics and Control of Flight Award         Military Balance 1971- 1972, The, 247-
  ( AIAA) , 233                                 248
Mecom, John W., Jr., 345                      Military Construction Authorization Act,
Medaris, M/G John B. (USA, Ret.), 5             344
Medvedev, Zhores, 210                         Milky Way (galaxy), 1,36,89, 113, 299
Melbourne, Univ. of, 181                      Millard, John P., 81
Members of Congress for Peace Through         Miller, Rep. George P., 38, 42, 94, 301,
  Law, 122                                      347
Memorandum of Understanding, 88, 231,         Miller, William H., 141
  297                                         Millionschikov, M. D., 182
Mental telepathy, 46, 170                     Minalov, J. D., 64
Mercer, Robert D., 335                        Miner, Dr. Ellis D., 318
Mercury (planet), 22, 167, 350                Minimech ( self-deploying arm 1, 269
Mercury (spacecraft), 122, 286                Minnesota. 83
Merrill, Capt. Henry T. (Dick), 266           Minnesota; Univ. of, 279
MESA. See Modularized equipment stow-         Minow, Newton N., 320
  age assembly.                               Minuteman (missile), 117, 193, 199, 224
MESH (consortium), 19                         Minuteman 111, 21
Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm, 3                Mirabelle (particle accelerator), 168, 2?9
MET. See Mobile equipment transporter.        Mirage      IV-A       (French      supersonic
Meteor (U.S.S.R. meteorological satell-         bomber), 224
  ite), 366                                   MIRV. See Multiple independently tar-
Meteor 7, 1  1                                  getable reentry vehicle.
Meteor 8, 105                                 Missile, 182, 193, 319
Meteor 9, 195                                   air-to-surface ( ASM 1, 312
Meteor 10, 360                                  antiballistic ( A B M ) , 4, 43, 77-78, 137,
Meteorite, 9, 39, 167, 256, 315, 350, 369            152, 194, 284, 311, 347, 360-361
Meteoroid detection, 4 0 4 1                    contract, 8, 52
Meteorological satellite (see also indi-        foreign
                                                   France, 224
     vidual satellites, such as Ats 3,
     Ats 5, Essa 9, Itos 1, Meteor 7 ,             People’s Republic of China, 68, 119,
                                                     122, 150, 224, 248, 297, 320, 352,
                                                     ?c;7
                                                  United Kingdom, 224
                                                  U.S.S.R., 84, 85, 104, 107, 117, 135,
    gram, 103, 178, 180
                                                    137, 146, 152, 194, 218, 224, 248,
       program, 294-295, 356
  ITOS
  Nimbus program, 22, 151, 220, 329,                362
                                                guidance, 112
    356

                                        448
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  intercontinental ballistic (ICBM), 4, 21,     nomethyl hydrazine (MMH), 268
     68, 77, 84, 104, 107, 117, 135, 146,       nopole, 6
                                              Montegani, Francis J., 83
     150, 152, 194, 199, 224, 248, 264,
                                              Montoya, Sen. Joseph M., 69
     303, 357, 362
  limitation of. See Strategic Arms Lmi-      Moon (see also Apollo missions, Lunar
     tation Talks.                                Science Institute, Lunar Receiving
  multiple independently targetable re-           Laboratory, Sea of Rains, etc.), 120-
     entry vehicle (MIRV), 265, 364               121, 234, 313
  NATO, 224-225                                age, 257, 260, 265-266, 306-307, 365
  short-range-attack (SRAM), 8, 262            Apollo lunar surface experiment pack-
  statistics, 103, 107, 224                         age ( ALSEP ), 27, 142, 206-207
  submarine-launched (SLM), 19, 21, 52,        atmosphere, 223
     103, 224, 283, 286, 309, 335              atomic battery, 326
  test, 4, 78, 91, 95, 125, 135, 150, 199,     base, 47, 51, 249
     265, 310-311, 346, 361                    cold-cathode gauge experiment, 64, 142,
  tracking, 150, 176, 357-358                       144, 223
Mississippi, 351-352                           colonization, 312
Mississippi State Univ., 351-352               communications, 207
Mississippi Test Facility (MTF) (NASA),        crater, 27, 39, 41, 48, 204, 205, 306-
     60, 137, 174, 191, 341, 351-352                307
  Central Instrument Facility, 158             dust, 27
  Earth Resources Laboratory, 19, 49           eclipse, 44
Missouri, Univ. of, College of Engineer-       electrical properties experiment, 287-
                                                    290
  ing at Columbia, 78
MIT. See Massachusetts Institute of Tech-       exploration, 281, 293
  nology.                                          equipment, 27, 47, 120-121, 204-206,
Mitchell, Capt. Edgar D. ( US N )                     238-239. 365
  Apollo 14 mission                                international cooperation, 6, 247-248
     Bible carried, 214                            manned, 4, 25-30, 40, 41, 47, 48, 51,
     Congress, report to, 61                          59-60, 61, 86-87, 108, 120-121,
     docking, 25, 27                                  130-131, 141, 183, 196-197, 202-
     extrasensory perception test, 46, 170           208, 211-212, 219, 222-223, 223-
     extravehicular activity, 25, 27, 41,            224, 237-238, 247, 297, 302, 305,
        47, 48, 51                                   324, 342, 365
                                                   unmanned, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 20, 43, 73,
     flight, 24-30
     medical aspects, 5                              98, 100, 196, 220, 221, 237-238,
     Nixon, President Richard M., 24, 31,            246, 250, 256, 259, 267-268, 278,
        42                                           306, 366-368
     preparations for, 5, 10                    heat flow experiment, 142, 144, 205,
     press conference, 4, 41, 59, 170                245, 291
     quarantine, 5, 30                          landing
     splashdown, 30                                manned, 27, 39, 40, 69-70, 76, 80
Apollo 16 mission, 61                                 anniversary, 326
awards and honors, 72                                 commemorative coin, 243, 308
European tour, 150, 152                               commemorative stamp, 215, 232
                                                     implications, 208, 217-218, 368
  promotion, 47
  tribute to, 41                                     mementoes, 152
Mitchell, Dr. James K., 144                          U.S.S.R. plans, 259, 268, 331
Mitre Corp., 1                                     unmanned, U.S.S.R. (see also Lunok-
MMH. See Monomethyl hydrazine.                       hod I ) , 246
Mobile equipment transporter (MET), 27,         landing site, 30, 166, 202-203, 213, 217,
  30                                                 219, 254
Mobile quarantine facility (MQF), 30            laser retroflector experiment, 27, 64,
Modularized equipment stowage assembly                144, 278, 299, 315
                                                life on, 6
  (MESA), 27, 204
Modulation       demodulation     subsystem     lunar law treaty, 153-154
                                                lunar roving vehicle. See Lunar roving
   (MDS), 3 4
Moffet, Dr. Alan T., 102                           vehicle and Lunokhod 1.
Molniya I (U.S.S.R. comsat series), 156,        Lunar Science Conference, 5-7, 369
  238                                           magnetic field, 51, 64, 144
Molniya 1-18, 210                               magnetometer, lunar surface, 51, 142,
Molniya 1-19, 355, 366                             14, 293
Molniya 1 - , 330, 366
            11                                  mapping, 141, 293-294, 305
Mondale, Sen. Walter F., 145, 177-178,          mountains, 223. 230
  180                                           navigation, 207
Mongolia, 319                                   origin, 1 9 228, 245
                                                          0,
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                     Vostok 1 anniversary celebration, 100
 photographs, 29, 30, 35, 141, 220, 223,
       225, 226-227, 254, 268, 278                 Mosher, Rep. Charles A., 38, 222
                                                   Mossinghoff, Gerald J., 231
 probe
    Luna 18, 246                                   Motorola, Inc., Government Electronics
     Luna 19, 267                                    Div., 171
 quake, 64, 113, 142-143, 236, 288, 291            Mt. Hadley (lunar mountain), 223
                                                   Mount Palomar Observatory, Calif., 1
 radioactivity, 291
                                                   Moutsoulas, M. D., 64
 rilles, 7, 205
                                                   Moynahan, Dr. Daniel P., 16-17
 seismic experiment, 7, 25, 27, 44, 63,
       64, 113, 142-143, 203, 207, 236,            MQF. See Mobile quarantine facility.
                                                   MR-12 (U.S.S.R. rocket), 235
       245, 288
                                                   MSC. See Manned Spacecraft Center.
 shape, 223
                                                   MSFC. See Marshall Space Flight Center.
 solar wind experiment, 27
                                                   MSFN. See Manned Space Flight Net-
 suprathermal ion detector experiment,
       142, 288, 291                                 work.
                                                   MTF. See Mississippi Test Facility.
 surface, 7, 41, 223, 229, 306-307, 342,
       365                                         MTS (Meteoroid Technology Satellite),
                                                     356
    sample, 147, 167, 238, 250,308, 369
                                                   Mu-4S (Japanese booster), 48, 163-164
       Apollo 11, 5-7, 12-13, 14, 23, 30,
          3 940, 4546, 83, 115, 190, 236           Mueller, Dr. George E., 17, 138
       Apollo 12, 5-7, 12-13, 16, 23, 30,          Mukden, Manchuria, 140
                                                   Muller, Paul M., 314
          39-40, 4546, 83, 115, 190, 236,
          257                                      Multiple docking adapter (MDA) (Sky-
       Apollo 14, 24, 25-30, 41, 45-46,              lab component), 175, 183, 281, 284,
          59, 98, 115, 236, 265                      323,346, 353,355
       Apollo 15, 142, 203, 207-208, 217,          Multiple independently targetable reentry
          225-226, 228-229, 245, 253, 257,          vehicle (MIRV), 266, 364
          365                                      Murchison meteorite, 167, 256
       core sample, 228, 238, 260                  Murphy, James T., 46, 266
       exchange of, 10, 13, 16, 88, 159,           Murphy, Rep. Morgan F., 38
          190, 293, 369                            Murray meteorite, 167, 256
       irradiation, 111                            Museum of New Mexico, 42-43
       Luna 16,6, 16, 190                          Museum of Science and Industry, 262
       storage, 251                                Musketball (USAF satellite), 221, 366
 temperature, 220, 245, 291                        Muskie, Sen. Edmund S., 82, 195
 volcanic activitv. 212. 230. 291                  Myers, Dale D., 57, 63, 86, 93, 96, 133,
 water on, 6, 288; 2891294'291, 293, 297             139-140, 160, 192, 224, 240, 299, 326,
Moran, Capt. Walter P., 298                          328
Morgan, Brig. Gen. Thomas W. (USAF),
 36
                                                                      N
Morgantown, W. Va., 47
Morgenthau, Dr. Hans J., 117
Morison, RJA Samuel E. (USN, Ret.), 310            NAA. See National Aeronautic Assn.
Moritz, Bernard, 302                               NAC. See National Aviation Club.
Morrison. L. V.. 356                               NACA. See National Advisory Committee
Morton, Dr. Louis, 151                               for Aeronautics.
Moscow, 6-7, 19-20, 73, 122, 162, 168,
                                                         See National Academy of Engi-
                                                   NAE.
    187. 200. 250, 268. 299. 321. 325.               neering.
                        I     .    ,     .



    340, 357 '
                                                   NAS. See National Academy of Sciences.
 communications, 171, 265, 271, 272
                                                   NAS-NRC Space Science Board, 67
 International Congress of the History
                                                           See National Aeronautics and
                                                   NASA.
    of Science, Thirteenth, 234
                                                     Space Administration.
 international space cooperation meet-
                                                   NASA Aerospace Advisory Panel, 42
    ings, 16, 159, 216-217, 243, 284, 293,
                                                   NASA Central Planning Office, 161
    332, 334, 340-341, 343-344, 353
                                                   NASA Contractor Equal Employment Op-
 International Union of Geodesy and
                                                     portunity Program, 49
    Geophysics meeting, 241
                                                   NASA-DOT Office of Noise Abatement, 295
 Intersputnik agreement signing, 319
                                                   NASA Historical Advisory Committee, 151-
 Mutual Economic Assistance meeting,
                                                     152
    79
 Nixon, President Richard M., visit, 290           NASA Interplanetary Monitoring Platform
                                                     (IMP) Management Team, 46
 Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting,
                                                   NASA-NOAA Space Meteorology Team, 70
    145
                                                   NASA Office of Advanced Research and
 Soyuz 11 cosmonaut burial ceremonies,
                                                     Technolopv (OART), 14, 70, 130, 140,
    185-186
                                                     169, 232, 233, 239, 272, 349
 treaty signing, 45, 313-314

                                             450
 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

         Office of Applications (oA),   340,        related headings, such as Ames Re-
NASA
   369                                              search Center, Apollo program, Mari-
       Office of Industry Affairs and Tech-        ner 9 ; Intelsat-IV F-2; and Space
NASA
  nology Utilization, 199                          program, national), 9, 306
NASA office of Legislative Affairs, 231          accident, 22, 290
NASA Office of Manned Space Flight               accomplishments. See Space program,
   (OMSF), 12, 30-31, 84, 160, 188, 208,              national.
  267, 291, 302, 314, 3%                         agreement. See International coopera-
NASA Office of Space Science ( oss) , 340             tion; space; and Treaty.
NASA Office of Space Science and Appli-          anniversary, 32, 180, 196, 198, 326
  cations (OSSA), 67, 73, 93-94, 136, 150,       astronaut. See Astronaut.
  190, 270, 295, 302, 319, 340                   awards and honors, 17, 38, 57, 60, 69,
NASA Office of Technology Utilization, 82             72, 75, 78, 84, 106, 121, 135, 138,
NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acqui-               154, 179, 233, 239, 242. 262-263,
  sition (OTDA), 30-31, 69, 208                       266267, 298-299, 318
NASA Pasadena Office, 238                          Distinwuished Service Medal, 59, 302,
NASA Performance Evaluation Board, 153                364-365
NASA Project Designation Committee, 337            Exceptional Scientific Achievement
NASA/RECON (Remote Control), 81                       Medal, 255, 279, 302
NASA Safety Office, 90                             Exceptional Service Medal, 255, 279,
NASA Scientific and Technical Informa-                302, 314
  tion Facility, 69                                 Group Achievement Award, 279, 302
NASA Source Selection Board, 353-354             budget, FY 1972, 14, 20-21, 22, 32, 37,
NASA Space Program Advisory Council,                  38, 64, 116, 119, 121, 161, 280,
  106                                                 326, 328, 368, 369
NASA Space Shuttle Technology Confer-              bills introduced, 42, 44
  ence, 75                                         bills passed, 152, 175, 180, 198-199,
NASA Space Systems Advisory Commit-                      210, 211, 216
  tee, 188                                         bill signed, 221, 226
                (Scientific and Technical
NASA/STIMS                                         House consideration, 175
  Information Modular System), 81                     appropriations, 80, 172, 173, 175,
NASC. See National Aeronautics add                       209, 211
  Space Council.                                      authorization, 61-62, 63, 65, 69,
Nash, Douglas, B., 12-13                                 70-71, 75-76, 107, 152, 198, 209
Nassau County, N.Y., 295                           Senate consideration, 209
National Academy of Engineering ( NAE),               appropriations, 172, 180, 198; 209,
     49, 115, 170, 306                                   216
  Aeronautics and Space Engineering                   authorization, 52-53, 76, 85-88, 93,
     Board, 39                                           96, 171, 178, 180, 198, 210
  Committee on Interplay on Engineering          contract, 221,322
     with Biology Medicine, 322                    aeronautics, 101, 160, 187, 189, 290,
  Founders Medal, 115                                    338, 365
                                                   communication system, 128, 344
National Academy of Sciences (NAS),
                                                   computer services, 190
     187-188, 210, 265
                                                   engine, 1, 96, 345-346
  Jamaica Bay and Kennedy Airport:
                                                   facilities, 69, 195
     A Multidisciplinary Environmental
                                                   history, 292
     Study, 49
                                                   instrumentation, 50, 158
  meeting, 166-167, 248-249, 299
                                                   launch vehicle, 99, 153, 158
  Plan for U S . Data Management in the
                                                   life support system, 180
     Global Atmospheric Research Pro-
                                                   liquid hydrogen, 89
     gram, 303
                                                   lunar roving vehicle, 24
  Plans for U S . Participation in the
                                                   nuclear power, 147, 276
     GARP Atlantic Tropical Experi-
                                                   space equipment, 175,328
     ment, 303
                                                   space shuttle, 60, 101, 105, 106, 132,
  Space Science Board, 67
                                                         165, 186, 193, 218, 233, 240,
  United States Science Program, 167
                                                        245-246, 272, 276, 281, 298,
National Advisory Committee for Aero-                   320, 328, 345-346, 353-354,
     nautics ( NACA) , 49-50, 176                       356, 361, 368-369
  Gas Dynamics Laboratory, 290                        controversy, 218, 246, 353-354,
National Advisory Committee on Oceans                   356
  and Atmosphere, 292                              space station, 174
National Aeronautic Assn. (NAA) , 263              spacecraft, 2, 81, 115, 135, 153, 211,
National Aeronautics and Space Admin-                   294-295, 328
                                                   Study, 85, 101, 132, 189-190, 276,
    istration ( NAS ( ) (see also NASA Cen-
    ters, programs, probes, satellites, and             345-346, 362

                                           451
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                      Aerobee 170, 14, 41, 60, 79, 119,
  support services, 19, 71, 80, 98, 107,
                                                           209, 226, 228, 292, 296, 300,
       158, 173, 190,191,279
                                                           327
  telescope, 286, 330
                                                      Aerobee 170B, 190-191
cooperation, 2, 93-94, 97, 98, 102, 104,
                                                      Aerobee 350,52,159,174
     105, 130,160-161,170,253
                                                      Arcas, 54, 63, 64-65, 218, 222, 225,
  AEC, 52-53,96,99,116
                                                           230
            199
  AFCRL,
                                                         Boosred Arcas I, 50,63
  Agriculture, Dept. of, 98, 132, 168,
                                                        Boosted Arcas 11, 22,226,285
     286
                                                      Black Brant IIIB. 248
  ARPA, 23
                                                      Black Brant VB,54
  DOD, 87,93,123
                                                      Black Brant VC, 199
  DOT, 39, 53, 70, 122-123, 218, 247,
                                                      iavelin. 176
     264, 290,295,369                                     -----,-
                                                               -
                                                      I-



                                                      Nike-Apache, 14, 19, 22, 31-32,
  FAA, 70,218, 271,278,290
                                                           68, 73, 105, 107, 108, 111, 115,
  Geological Survey, 224
                                                           213, 234, 236, 246, 251, 257,
  HEW, 161
                                                           343
  HUD, 369
                                                      Nike-Cajun, 3, 5, 8, 64, 68, 74, 78,
  NSF, 369
                                                           112, 130, 131, 187, 192, 234,
  Smithsonian Institution, 97
                                                           236,259, 285, 343
  USA, 70,188, 233,272
                                                      Nike-Tomahawk, 12, 47, 74, 77, 78,
  USAF (see also X-24A1, 70, 87, 165,
                                                           79. 89.193. 323
      174, 218-219, 225, 272, 278, 290,
                                                      Viper Dart, 23k235, 236
     328, 365
  USN, 70,301                                         Stratoscope I1 (balloon-borne tel-
cooperation, international. See Interna-                   escope), 253
                                                  lawsuit, 65
  tional cooperation, space; Sounding
                                                  management. 41. 69
  rocket, international programs.
criticism, 1, 32, 84, 133, 145-146, 211,          manpower. See Employment.
     218, 219, 277                                meeting, 5-7, 12, 53, 63, 75, 97, 98, 105,
employment, 22, 61, 65, 76, 85-86, 238,               119-120, 142, 146, 173, 252, 254,
                                                      378
     368
exhibit, 147, 152, 353                            organizkion, 12, 44, 49, 69, 82, 98, 106,
facilities, 2, 8, 19, 20, 32, 42, 71, 80,             224, 233, 242, 251, 272, 295-296,
     94. 112. 126. 135. 152. 158. 191.                340, 369
     195, 209, 218, 220, 226, 2 4 t 251;          patents, 171, 251,259, 305, 308
     291-292, 343, 357, 365                       personnel, 101, 106, 112, 137, 252-253,
history, 9, 31, 50, 151,292                           257, 290, 314-315, 368
                                                    appointment, 12, 44, 46, 55, 56-57,
launch
  Apollo 14 (AS-509),24                               59, 61, 68, 69, 72, 79, 84, 98, 114,
  Apollo 15 (AS-510), 201                             116, 139, 159, 161, 167-168, 176,
   failure, 4, 126-127, 136, 146, 275,                186, 188, 191, 192, 194, 196, 197,
     294, 300, 365                                    200, 216, 230, 231, 233, 240, 245,
  postponed, 24, 342, 352                             251, 255, 267, 295-296, 323, 330,
                                                      357. 368
  probe
     barium-ion-cloudproject, 259                   death,'78, 85, 145, 176, 188
     Mariner 9 (Mariner-I), 148                     promotion, 36, 47, 240
                                                    resignation, 1 , 51, 52, 166, 177, 192,
                                                                   1
     PAET (Planetary Atmosphere Ex-
                                                      239,243,247, 368
        periments Test), 168-169, 240
                                                    retirement, 114, 116, 186, 240, 314,
  satellite                                           nlr
     Ariel 4 (UK-4),348                               Jk
                                                       c3
                                                  procurement, 62
     Eole 1 (CAS-1),23&231
     Explorer 43 (IMP-I),72                       programs, 22, 365-370
     Explorer 4 (SSS-A), 319
                 .
                 5                                  aeronautics (see also Wing, aircraft,
                                                         supercritical), 21, 23, 37, 39,
      Zntelsat-IY F-2. 14
     Intelsat-IF F-3,. 354                               53-54, 56, 66-67, 70-71, 73, 77,
     Isis 2 (ISIS-B ) ,88                                82, 94, 96-97, 101, 119-120, 121,
     Natosat 2 (Nato 2 ; NATO-B), 36-                   122-124, 127-128, 130, 165, 172,
       -.                                                173, 174, 187, 188-189, 195, 218,
       17
    Os0 7 ( OSO-H 1,269                                  221, 233, 262, 269, 272, 278 290,
    Sun Marco 3 (San Marco-C), 109-                      307-308, 335, 337, 356, 365, 369
                                                    astronomy, 2, 8, 9, 21, 22, 57, 67, 69,
       110
    SoZiad 10 (Explorer 44) (Solrad-                     74-75, 89, 95, 97, 98, 103, 121,
                                                         127, 148, 174, 17&179, 186, 189,
      C), 189-190
                                                         211,219, 231, 240,334, 344, 356,
  schedule for 1972.356
                                                         365, 368
  sounding rocket
    Aerobee 150, 13, 14, 54, 119, 161,              communications, 22, 41, 106, 128,
        171                                              173, 356

                                            452
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                        lifting body, 42, 200, 225, 239, 265,
   computer, 23, 32, 81, 98-99, 106-107,
                                                              317,337, 352,365
        179, 187, 231-232, 264,309
                                                         lunar module, 98, 200
   earth resources, 10-11, 21, 48, 61, 67,
                                                        lunar roving vehicle, 24, 51, 55-56
        87. 95. 96. 97, 119-120, 135, 170,
                                                        parachute, 247, 264,268
        l i3 , 175, 198; 221, 224; 281; 324,
                                                        remote sensing, 97, 368-369
        340, 356, 369-370
                                                         space shuttle, 60
   manned space flight (See also
                                                        space station, 11, 152, 252, 258,
        Apollo program)
                                                              276, 355
     achievements, 20, 30, 42, 47, 48,
                                                        spacecraft, 93, 96, 193, 327, 369
        207-208, 221-222, 223, 253, 361-
                                                      universities, 68, 85, 210
        362,368
                                                 National Aeronautics and Space Council
     criticism, 20, 43, 133, 236
                                                   ( NASC) , 9, 45, 68, 123, 175
     funding, 20-21, 57,64,. 254, 368
                                                 National Air and Space Museum, 52,
     international cooperation (see also
        Docking), 110, 185, 216, 238,              79-80, 101, 130, 135, 195, 301, 309, 323,
        247, 325, 340-341, 343                     329
                                                 National Atlas of the United States of
     plans, 10, 21-22, 61, 88-89, 96,
                                                   America, 11
        176, 216,328, 356, 368
                                                 National Aviation Club (NAC), 326
     policy, 12, 59, 61-62, 115, 127, 181,
                                                 National Broadcasting Co. ( NBC) ,88
        215,230,256,280-281,283
                                                 National Capital Planning Commission,
   meteorology, 22, 62, 103, 134, 168,
                                                   301, 309
        240, 252, 294, 329,356
                                                 National Center for Atmospheric Re-
   nuclear propulsion, 21, 22, 41, 52-53,
                                                   search ( N C A R ) , 121, 178,231
        71, 89, 93, 115, 220, 226, 235,
                                                 National Civil Service League, 60
        250, 276, 368
                                                 National Commission on Peacetime Tran-
   sounding rocket, 366, 370
                                                   sition (proposed), 72
   space biology, 21, 115, 127, 132, 138,
                                                 National Endowment for the Humanities,
         189, 235, 245, 253, 256, 261, 284,
                                                   97
        288,289, 325, 359,369
                                                 National Gallery of Art, 289
   space rescue, 23, 64, 68-69, 140, 173,
                                                 National Geographic Society, 310
         198-199
                                                 National League of Cities, 177
   space science, 20-21, 22, 88-89, 93,
                                                 National Medal of Science, 17-18, 138
         167. 369
                                                 National Moon Walk Day, 134, 170, 197-
   space shuttle. See Space shuttle.
                                                   198
   space station, 14, 38-39, 61, 84, 95,
                                                 National Museum of Natural History, 79-
         127, 164, 176, 183,249, 267,290-
                                                   80
         291. 302.324, 328, 361-362
                                                 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
      contract, 174
                                                      ministration (NOAA)
     crew preparation, selection, and
                                                   award, 279
         training, 38, 87, 106, 132, 173,
                                                   budget, 99, 349
         193-194, 284, 342
                                                   contract, 302
      criticism, 145-146
                                                   cooperation, 119-120, 231, 351
      design, 3, 12, 71, 174, 183
                                                   personnel, 12, 19, 217
      equipment, 265, 283, 283, 288, 353,
        ---                                        satellite, 356
        .?SS
                                                      launch, 294
      experiments, 10-11, 38, 87, 107,
                                                   sounding rocket experiment, 176, 234,
         132-133, 173, 175, 183, 193-194,
                                                         236
        342, 359
                                                   Space Environmental Laboratory, 302
      funds, 20-21, 93, 157, 173, 198-
                                                 National Park Service, 17, 112
         199, 221, 368
                                                 National Press Club, 238
      international cooperation, 3, 1 - 1
                                     01 ,
                                                 National Radio Astronomy Observatory,
         38, 45, 173,278
                                                   40, 102, 178
      meeting, 42, 346
                                                 National Religious Broadcasters, 18
      plans, 6849, 89, 127-128, 164,
                                                 National Research Council (NRC), 252
         172, 192-193, 198, 229, 256, 290-
                                                    United States Space Science Program,
        291, 324, 334, 342
                                                       167
      test, 11, 64, 99, 132, 355
                                                    U.S. Committee for the Global At-
   space tug, 224, 278, 340
                                                       mospheric Research Program, 303
   technology utilization. See Technol-
                                                 National Research Council of Canada,
        ogy utilization, space.
   tracking and data acquisition (see
                                                                   Ju b, 157
         also Tracking), 21, 69, 97, 173,
                                                                                 20
         267, 36%370
   test
      aircraft, 83, 87, 233, 262, 278, 284
      concept verification testing (CVT)
                                                     energy sources, 154
            system, 334

                                               453
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                             Natural Resources, Dept. of (proposed),
 Enrollment Increases in Science and
                                               81-82. 154
    Mathematics in Public Secondary
                                             Naugle,'Dr. John E., 66, 93-94, 133, 164,
    Schools, 194849 to 1969-70,288
                                               217, 300-301, 359
 Estimated Academic R&D Direct Price
                                             Naval Air and Material Center, 244
    Trends 50 Percent Higher Over I.  )
                                             Naval Air Missile Test Center, Calif., 276
    ade 1961-71,305
  Federal Funds for Academic Science,        Naval Air Systems Command, 190,329
                                             Naval Observatory, 296,32 4
    Fiscal Year 1969, 58
                                             Naval Oceanographic 050 119-120
 Federal Funds for Research, Develop-                                    e,
                                             Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), 8, 16,
  ment, and Other Scientific Activities,
                                               23, 54, 132, 189, 226, 240, 269, 277-
    251
                                               278. 349
 Federal R&D Expenditures Related to
    Budget Functions, 1960-72, 175           Navai Warfare Panel, 57
                                             Navigation satellite, 95
  Federal Support to Universities and
    Colleges, Fiscal Year 1970, 161          NBC. See National Broadcasting Co.
                                             NCAR. See National Center for Atmos-
  funds, 20, 40, 58, 157, 198,209,216,226
  grants. 221                                  pheric Research.
  Fndus&Gk&D, 13, 117-118, 352               Nebraska, 128
                                             Nefyuduv, Yuri G., 167
 Industrial R&D Spending, 1970, 352
                                             Nelson, Sen. Gaylord, 253
  interdiscblinary conference, 359
                                             Nepoklonov, Boris, 306
 NASA report 0 n - w ~ 116
                        to,
                                             Neptune (planet), 22, 179, 324
  organization, 61, 69
  personnel, 61, 103, 170, 196, 301, 320,    NERVA. See Nuclear energy for rocket
                                               vehicle application.
    341
                                             Netherlands, 291, 310
  Recent Trends in Enrollment and Man-
                                             Neupert, Dr. Werner W,
    power Resources in Graduate Sci-                                    339
                                             New Cities Research and Experimenta-
    ence Education, 1969-70, 146
                                               tion Administration (proposed), 286
  Research and Development in Indus-
    try, 1969: Funds, 1969; Scientists &     New Hampshire, Univ. of, 269
    Engineers, January 1970, 117-118         New Jersey Dept. of Transportation, 287
  Research and Develoament in Local          New Mexico, 42
    Governments, Fiscal Years 1968 &         New Mexico State Univ., 313, 339
    1969, 33                                 New Orleans (aircraft), 248
  Research Applied to National Needs         New Orleans International Airport, 312
     (RANN), 178                             New Orleans, La., 60, 77, 345
  Scientific Activities of Independent       New Technology Opportunities Program,
    Nonorofit Institutions 1970. 58            303. 344
        .   I

  scientists and engineers, unemployed,      New York Academy of Sciences, 167
    76, 117-118, 188                         New York, N.Y., 2,279,282, 350
   Unemployed Rates for Scientists,            air services and traffic, 19. 126, 182,
                                                                         ..       .
    Spring 1971, 188                              257, 288
National Science Foundation Act of 1950,       Apollo 14 mission, reaction, 43
  197                                          astronauts in, 65, 238, 239
National Science Teachers Assn. ( NSTA ) ,     communications via satellite, 271
  268                                          meeting, 15, 36
National security, 32-33, 37, 86, 99, 136-   New York State Court of Appeals, 131
  137,150, 263,275, 281, 303, 360            New York Times Special Features agree-
                                               ment, 200,211
National Security Industrial Assn., 263
National Society of Engineers, 166           New York Univ. Medical Center, 189
National Space Club (NSC), 15, 69-70,        Newell, Dr. Homer E., 108, 126, 133
     106, 113, 324, 347                      Newport News, Va. 157
  Press Award, 69-70                         NGC 7662 (Planetary Nebula), 253
                                             NGG253 (galaxy), 194
National Technology Support: A Study
                                             Nicks, Oran W., 48, 302
  of Research and Development Trends
                                             Nierenberg, Dr. William A., 292
  and Their Implications (AIA study),
                                             Nike-Apache (sounding rocket), 226
  116
                                               airglow, 108
National Transportation Award, 139
                                                cloud study, 105, 251, 257
National Transportation Safety Board, 82
                                               energetic particles and fields, 14
National Urban Coalition, 50                   ionosphere study, 19, 22, 31-32, 1 1  1,
National Weather Service, 219                     115
National Zoo, 32                               micrometeoroid collection, 108
NATO. See North Atlantic Treaty Organi-        pilot density probe, 343
  zation                                       polar cap absorption data, 246
Natosat 2 (NATO-B) (military comsat),          solar eclipse data, 68
  36-37, 41,369                                upper-atmosphere data 108, 213, 234

                                         454
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Nike-Cajun (sounding rocket)                           National Moon Walk Day, 197-198
                                                       New Technology Opportunities Pro-
  airglow, 130, 131
  cloud study, 112                                           gram, 303
  cooperative experiment, 64-65, 74-75,                nuclear war deterrent agreement, 264-
                                                             265
     112, 370
  euuatorial atmomhere data. 83                        nuclear warhead test, 300,303
  gfenade experiGent, 3, 5,’ 8, 68, 174,               patent policy statement, 238-239
     187, 192, 259                                     presidential aircraft, 212,326-327
  ionosphere study, 285-286                            public relations activities order, 37
                                                       reorganization plans, 81-82
  solarkclipse comparison data, 68
  upper-atmosphere data, 3, 5, 8, 78, 174,             reports transmitted to Congress, 37,
                                                             54-55, 76, 180
     187, 192, 234, 236,343
                                                       resignations accepted by, 196, 199, 348
Nike-Tomahawk (sounding rocket)
  auroral study, 12, 47, 77, 89                        SALT agreement, 137,264-265
                                                       science, 40, 180, 251
  electric-field study, 74-75, 78, 79
                                                       Seabed Arms Control Treaty, 45
  ionosphere study, 193
                                                       Soyuz 11 cosmonauts death, message to
  stellar astronomy study, 323
                                                             U.S.S.R., 180-181
Nikitrine, Ignatiy A. See Fedoseyev, Ana-
                                                       space program, national, 37, 55, 59, 76,
  toly.
Nikolayev, L/C Andrian 6. (U.S.S.R.),                        161, 263-264, 265
                                                       mace shuttle. 297
  16,100, 152,167, 266
                                                       supersonic transport, 37, 81, 130, 349-
Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Valentina, 16
                                                             350, 351
Nikon-F (underwater camera), 104
                                                       Technology Mobilization and Reem-
Nimbus (meteorological satellite), 22,
                                                             ployment Program, 94
  329
                                                       United Nations Day, 191
Nimbus 4, 63, 64-65, 151, 220, 222, 225,
                                                       USAP Museum dedication statement,
  230
                                                             247
Nimbus-E (R&D satellite), 356
                                                       U.S.S.R. message to on Apollo I4 mis-
Nix Olympica (Mars), 321
                                                             sion, 43
Nixon, President Richard M., 3, 186, 292               World Law Day, 166
  Aeronautics and Space Report, 37
                                                     NK-144 (turbofan engine), 126
  Apollo 11 lunar samples, 42-43
                                                     NOAA. See National Oceanic and Atmos-
  Apollo 14 mission, messages and stat?
                                                       pheric Administration.
        ments. 24. 31. 39. 42. 59
             ,   ,   ,   I   ,



                                                     Nom 1 (National Oceanic and Atmos-
  Apollo 15 mission, messages and state-
                                                       pheric Administration meteorological
        ments, 201, 208, 212, 213, 221-222,
        253, 279                                       satellite), 294
  appointments and nominations by, 11,               Nobel Conference, 281-282
        13, 16-17, 19, 45, 49-50, 56-57,             Nobel Prize, 89
        59, 132, 152, 193, 194, 197, 252,              in Chemistry, 307
        254, 290, 292, 294, 312, 320, 3 4 a            in Medicine, 282
        349, 368                                       in Physics, 307, 309
  astronauts                                         NOISE (aircraft noise organization), 137-
     promotion, 47
                                                           138
     report to, 67                                   Noise, aircraft, 137, 138, 271
     resignation, 52
                                                       contract, 198, 365
     White House dinner, 256                           NASA-DOT Office of Noise Abatement,
  awards by, 59, 138
                                                           295
  bills signed, 221, 226, 354
                                                        NASA research, 241, 242, 251, 295, 307,
  budget, 20, 38, 40
                                                           365
   Columbus Day, 243
                                                       supersonic transport, 2, 150, 307, 351
  conference on employment, 63
                                                     Nolan, James P., Jr., 151-152
  Defense, Dept. of, 354
                                                     NORAD. See North American Air Defense
  emergency loan guarantee, 124, 201,
                                                       Command.
        216
                                                     Norfolk, Va., 349
  environmental program, 42
                                                     Norite, 7
  Environmental Science: Challenges for
                                                     North American Air Defense Command
        the Seventies, National Science
                                                        ( NORAD), 61
        Baard Report, 180
                                                     North American Aviation, Inc., 10
   Fulton, Rep. James G., death of, 282
  hijacking of aircraft, 36, 55                      North American Rockwell Corp. (NR)
   international cooperation, space, 37,               aircraft, 290, 298, 309, 344
        55.138.166.265                                 award. 279
   messages to. Congress, 37, 55, 74, 81-82,           contract, 1, 178, 186, 190, 343
        99,103,154,180                                 Rocketdyne Div., 60, 158, 175, 193,218,
   NASA appropriations, 20-21,221,226                      233,240,245,353,356

                                               455
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                       See Organization for Economic CO-
  Space Div., 153, 171,195                      OECD.
                                                  operation and Development.
  space shuttle, 37,281
                                                Of a Fire on the Moon, 4
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
                                                Office of Management and Budget (OMB),
   (NATO), 36-37, 41, 168, 224, 248, 365,
                                                  199, 260, 297,326
  369
                                                Office of Naval Research (ONR), 244
North Pole, 310, 329
                                                Office of Science and Technology (oST)
Northeast Corridor, 308
                                                  ( President's 1, 232
Northern Illinois Univ., 83
                                                                      -.
                                                Office of Technolorn Assessment (mo-
Northrop Corp., 1
                                                  posed), 197
  Northrop Aircraft Corp., 216
                                                Office of Technology Transfer (pro-
  Northrop Services, Inc., 158-159
                                                  posed), 173
Northwest Environmental Technology
                                                Offshore Airport Center Planning Con-
  Laboratories, Inc., 320
                                                  ference. 282
Norway, 12, 341                                 Offshore oil study, 348
Notre Dame Univ., 114                           Of0 (Orbiting Frog Otolith satellite), 40-
NR. See North American Rockwell Corp.             41, 127
NRC. See National Research Council.
                                                OGO. See Orbiting Geophysical Observa-
NRL. See Naval Research Laboratory.
                                                  tory.
NSC. See National Space Club.
                                                Ogo V (Orbiting Geophysical Observa-
NSF. See National Science Foundation.
                                                  tory), 2, 93
NSTA. See National Science Teachers
                                                O'Hair, Mrs. Madalyn Murray, 49,65
  Assn.
                                                O'Hare International Airport, 9
Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle appli-
                                                Ohio Historical Society, 198
     cation (NERVA)
                                                Ohsumi (Japanese satellite), 48, 268
  funds, 21, 41, 94, 195, 198,226, 292
                                                Oklahoma, 2, 288
   NASA program, 22, 52, 71, 116, 251, 276,
                                                Oklahoma City, Okla., 2
     368
                                                O'Leary, Dr. Brian T., 90-91
Nuclear power, 83, 100, 154, 196, 199,
                                                Olsen, Kenneth H., 16-17
  213, 250
                                                Olympus (turbojet enginge), 126
Nuclear propulsion, 41, 52, 96-97, 221,
                                                OMR. See Office of Management and
  235. 250. 320-321
                                                  Budget.
Nuclear submarine, 21
                                                OMSF. See NASA Office of Manned Space
Nuclear test, 84, 310-311, 320, 324-325,
                                                  Flight.
  326, 331
                                                On the Moon with Apollo 15, 183
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, 162
                                                ONR. See Office of Naval Research.
   underground, 250,300
                                                OPTAG. See Optical aimpoint guidance
Nuclear weapons, 218, 224, 247-248, 252,
                                                  system.
   265,266
                                                Optical aimpoint guidance (OPTAG) sys-
Nygren, R/A Harley D. (USN), 12
                                                   tem, 346
                                                Optical plasmatron, 323
                                                Outical Societv of America. 142
                    0                           Okbita network (U.S.S.R. comsat sys-
                                                   tem 1, 238, 330
                                                Orbital Workshop (Skylab component),
    See NASA Office of Applications.
OA.
                                                   132, 152,164, 183, 284, 323
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 99, 102
Oao 2 (Orbiting Astronomical Observa-           Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (OGO),
                                                    0
  tory), 93,239,246                                 L
                                                Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) (see
OAO-B, 163,276
                                                  also Os0 I , etc.), 2,21, 67
OAO-C, 356
OART. See NASA Office of Advanced Re-           Order of Lenin, 163
                                                Order of Leopold, 260
  search and Technology.
Obata, Gyo, 301, 309, 323, 329                  Oreol (Soviet-Frenrh satellite), 359, 3'6
Oberth, Hermann, 234                            Organization for Economic Cooperation
Obregon, Mauricio, 310                            and Development (OECD), 201
O'Brian, Hugh, Youth Foundation, 162            Orgueil meteorite, 256
Ocean of Storms (Oceanus Procellarum)           Orion (constellation), 299
   (moon), 7,12-13,236,291                      Orion (NASA barge), 152,284
Oceanography                                    Orion Nebula, 121
  international aspects, 110, 112-113           Orlando, Fla., 131
  record, 262                                   Ormsby, Robert B., 348
  research, 24, 119-120, 262                    OSO. See Orbiting Solar Observatory.
  treaty, 45, 47, 75-76                         Os0 I , 269
  US. program, 99,292-293,348,349               Os0 2, 269
Odessa, U.S.S.R., 200, 350                      Os0 3, 269
O'Donnell, John J., 3 5 , 334                   Os0 4, 269

                                              456
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 19il

                                                Patent, 171, 238-239, 251, 259, 268, 305,
Os0 5, 269
                                                  308, 335,360
Os0 6, 269
                                                Patrick AFB, Fla., 13, 272
Os0 7 (oso-n), 269, 277, 302, 333, 3 ! 4%
                                                Patsayev, Viktor I., 154, 180, 186, 192,
  361, 365
OSO-C, 269                                        200. 283
OSO--H, 2                                       Patuxknt Naval Air Station, Md., 12
oss. See NASA Office of Space Science.          Paul, Dr. Rodman W., 151-152
OSSA. See NASA Office of Space Science          Paul VI, Pope, 43,215,232
                                                Pearce, J. B;, 148
  and Applications.
OST. See Office of Science and Technd-          Pecora, Dr. William T., 120
  ogy (President’s).                            Peebles, Ohio, 241
O’Sullivan, William J., 157                     Pegasus 1 (VTOL aircraft engine), 300,
                                                            1                    -   .
OTDA. See NASA Office of Tracking and             329
  Data Acquisition.                             Peking, People’s Republic of China, 1 1 1,
O’Toole, Thomas, 24, 47, 112, 133, 223,           257, 305
  337, 349                                      Pelly, Rep. Thomas M., 38
Outer Planets Mission Steering Group,           Pendray, G. Edward, Award, 15
  96                                            Pendray, MIS. Leatrice M.,282
Ov 1-20 (Orbiting Vehicle Research              Pennsylvania State Univ., 56
  Satellite), 220, 366                          Pennsylvania, Univ. Of, 129, 187, 218
OV I-21,220,366                                 Pensacola, Fla., 182
                                                Pentagon, 4, 240
OV-1OA (Bronco) (research aircraft),
                                                Pentagon papers (background report on
  301
                                                  U.S. in Vietnam war). 320
Oxford. Ohio. 242
                                                Penzias, Dr. Arno A,, 299
Oxford’Univ.; 242
                                                People mover transit system, 47,55
Oximeter, 199
                                                People’s Republic of China, 306, 352, 361
Ozone, 54, 63, 64-65, 74-75, 222, 225, 230
                                                  aircraft, 140
                                                  disarmament, 252
                    P                             launch, satellite, 61, 365, 368
                                                  missile program, 68, 119, 122, 150, 224,
                                                     248,296-297, 319-320,357-358
P-3A (turboprop research aircraft), 120           nuclear test, 84, 324-325
P-3C (antisubmarine patrol aircraft), 12,         satellite, 75, 81
  17. 38. 41                                      space program, 53, 72, 111, 368
P-38 ifi‘ghter aircraft), 115                     technology, 273
Pacific Missile Range ( PMR), 152,276           Pepin, Dr. Robert O., 279
Pacific Ocean. 165.296-297                      Perel’man, R. G., 183. 363
  Apollo misSions,‘30, 108, 349                 Perry, Geoffrey E., 249
  communications satellite, 3, 74, 98, 176,     Perry, Robert L., 346
     177, 219-220, 313                          Perseus (constellation). 1
  missile interception tests, 4, 77-78, 125     Peters, Harry E., 154
  oil spills, 81                                Petrone, Dr. Rocco A., 70,215, 323
  Salyut 1, 282-283                             Petrov, Dr. Boris N., 101, 171, 188, 217.
Packard, David M., 158, 350                       325, 334
PAET (Planetary Atmosphere Experiment           Pettis, Rep. Jerry L., 1 6
                                                                         4
  Test), 168-169, 240                           Phaetonis (Mars), 337
Pago Pago, 30                                   Philadelphia, Pa., 314
                                                                     B.,
Paine, Dr. Thomas O., 56-57, 314-315,           Philipp, Dr. Warren        72, 262
  368                                           Philippines, 219-220. 352
Pakistan, 140                                   Philips, Ronald J., 177, 192
Palestine, Tex., 121                            Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim, and Bal-
Palmdale, Calif., 47                              IOU. 79
Palmer Observatory, 311                         Phillips, L/G Samuel C. (USAF),    101-102,
Palos, Spain, 31                                   188, 266
Pan American World Airways, Inc., 109,          Phinney, Dr. William, 228
  148, 257, 297-298,330                         Phobos (Martian moon), 310, 331, 340,
Panofsky, Dr. Wolfgang K. H., 183                  342. 365
Parachute test, 247, 264, 268                   Phoenicis Lacus (moon), 353
Parin, Dr. Vasily V., 163                       Phoenix, Ariz., 75, 281
Paris, France, 148, 287, 291, 347, 351, 352     Photography (see also Moon, photo-
Paris International Air Show, 147, 150,            graphs), 35-36, 72
   152, 168,214,249                             Pickering, Dr. WilIiam H., 55, 159, 192,
Particle accelerator, 36, 50, 168, 281-282,       313, 314
  299                                           Pin Main, Alaska, 74
Particle and field experiment, 248              Pinkel, I. Irving, 362-363

                                              457
                                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                         Postal Service, U.S., 232
Pioneer (program), 21, 69
                                                         Potomac River, 288
Pioneer-F (interplanetary probe), 74,
  250,322, 327,369                                       Powell, Maj. Cecil (USAF), 37, 65, 130
Pioneer-G (spacecraft), 322                              Powers, Francis Gary, 329
Piper Aztec (light aircraft), 220                        Pratt & Whitney Div. See United Air-
Piper Navajo (light aircraft), 310, 329                    craft Corp.
PLACE. See Position-location and aircraft                Present, Stuart M., 22-23
  communications experiment.                             President’s Science Advisory Committee,
Planetary Explorer mission, 186                            16-17, 49-50
Planetoid, 357                                           Press, Dr. Frank, 345
Plans for U.S. Participation in the GARP                 Press comment
  Atlantic Tropical Experiment, 303                        AAAS convention, 1
Plasma, 320, 323                                           aerospace industry, 309
Playboy International Writers Convoca-                     antiballistic missile ( A B M ) , 4
  tion, 280                                                Apollo program, 161, 197, 223-224, 229
Plesetsk, U.S.S.R., 8, 249                                 Apollo 11 mission, 232-233
  Cosmos launch, 9, 49, 66, 98, 102, 108,                  Apollo 14 mission, 17, 35, 38, 40, 42,
     125, 139, 146, 148, 153, 200, 240, 250,                  43. 44. 47
     254, 255, 262, 265, 270, 291, 306, 323,               A p o h 15 mission, 213, 215-216, 217-
     325, 327, 333, 334, 337, 347, 351, 353,                  218, 222, 223-224, 225-226, 230
     359                                                   AKIOIIO mission, 236
                                                                   17
  Meteor 8 launch, 105                                     atomic bomb test, 311
  Meteor 9 launch, 195                                     computer, invention of, 218
  Meteor 10 launch, 360                                    emergency industrial loan guarantee,
  Molniya 1-19 launch, 355                                    194
  Molniya Il-1, 330                                        engineers, 104-105
  Oreol launch, 259                                        F-14 (fighter aircraft), 271, 287
Plight of Soviet Science Today, 210                        Fedoseyev, Anatoly, 176
                                                           Fletcher, Dr. James C., appointment of,
PLSS. See Portable life support system.
Plutarch, 227                                                 64, 72
Pluto (planet), 22, 179, 310                               international cooperation, space, 13,
Plutonium 244, 102, 250                                       19-20, 247-248, 249-250, 347
PMR. See Pacific Missile Range.                            Kennedy Space Center economy drive,
pndb: perceived noise in decibels.                            287
                                                           Luna 18 mission, 259
Pobedonostsev, Yu. A., 261
P o d g o r n y , P r e s i d e n t N i k o l a y V.       lunar exdoration. 4. 223-224
   (U.S.S.R.), 43, 180-181, 222                            McDonnell Dougfas ‘Corp., 170
Pogue, Maj. William R. ( U S A F ) , 68                    Mariner 9, 314, 324, 327, 330, 332-333
Point Barrow, Alaska, 3, 5, 174, 187, 192,                 Mars 2. 324, 330
  288, 343                                                 Mars 3; 324, 330, 347
Point Mum. Calif.. 152. 276                                military procurement bill, 284
Polaire (French satellite), 342                            moon, water on, 293
Poland, 43, 287, 319                                        NASA, 139
Polar cap absorption, 196. 246                                public information policy, 84
Polaris imide-1, 175, 176                                  National Air and Space Museum, 329-
                                                               --_
Pollack, Dr. James B., 340                                     311
                                                                .1
Pollock, Howard W., 19                                       New Technologies Opportunity Pro-
Pollution control, 32, 42, 49                                  gram, 344-345
Pomeroy, Dr. John H., 251                                    New York Times Special Features
Pompidou, President Georges (France),                          agreement, 211
  125, 299, 349-350                                          noise, aircraft, 242
Ponnamperuma, Dr. Cyril A., 39, 167,                         nuclear warhead test, 303
  256, 322, 356                                              nuclear weapons deterrent agreement,
                                                               266, 271
Popovich, Pave1 R., 152
Port of New York Authority, 49                               People’s Republic of China satellite, 72
Portable life support system (PLSS), 156,                    Pioneer-F probe, 74
                                                             Rowe, Henry S., resignation, 320
  205
Porter, Daniel R., 198                                       SALT agreement, 189
                                                             Salyut 1-Soyus 10 mission, 110-111,
Porter, Frank C., 82
                                                               156-157, 158
Porter, Sylvia, 17
                                                             Schlesinger, Dr. James R., appoint-
Portugal, 219-220
                                                               ment, 213
Poseidon (missile), 52, 224, 309
Poseidou (nuclear submarine), 21                             scientist-astronaut, 230
Position-location and aircraft communi-                      Seabed Arms Control Treaty, 47
                                                             Seaborg, Dr. Glenn T., retirement, 213
  cations experiment (PLACE), 361-362
                                                             Soyuz 1 I accident, 185
Post, Wiley, 288

                                                       458
 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

    space program, national, 32, 74, 223-      Pritchard, Wilbur L., 299
        224                                    Probe (see also individual probes, such
    space shuttle, 14                               as Luna 18, Luna 19, Mariner 8,
    supersonic transport, 78, 79, 85, 119,          Mariner 9, Mars 2, Mars 3, and
        129-130, 139                                Venus 7)
    technology, 331-332                           international cooperation, 145, 259
    technology utilization, 140                  interplanetary, 15, 20, 22, 67, 115, 175,
    Tor0 (asteroid), 332-333                        179
    U.S.S.R. space program, 24, 101, 1 1  1,     Jupiter, 22, 67, 74, 322, 327, 356, 369
        119                                      lunar. See Luna 16, Luna 17, Luna 18,
    Venus 7,20                                      Luna 19, Surveyor 3, and Zond 2.
 Press conference                                Mars, 22, 146, 147-148, 191, 293, 318,
    aerospace industry employment, 125-             321, 324, 337, 345, 351, 354-355, 360
          126                                    Mercury, 22, 175
    aircraft, military, 121                      Neotune. 22. 179
    Apollo program, 215                           Plito, 22, l i 9
   Apollo 14 mission, 4, 35, 41, 59               Saturn, 22, 121
       extrasensory perception tests, 170        sun, 237, 252
   Apollo 15 mission, 120, 141, 142-144,         Uranus, 22
          156, 217, 227, 228, 245, 312           U.S.S.R., 4, 9, 15, 20, 134, 147-148,
       lunar samples, 238, 257-258                  209, 237, 246, 267-268, 293
    Apollo 27 mission, 234                       Venus, 15, 22, 67, 115, 175, 186, 333
    C-5A contract, 2                           Professor Zubou (U.S.S.R. ship), 358
    comet, 93                                  Pronulsion. 95. 98
    Concorde (supersonic transport), 351       Proipero (X-3) (U.K. technology sateI-
   earth resources technology satellite, 96      lite), 300,368
    F-14B (jet fighter), 212                   Proton, 19
   international cooperation, space, 191       Proton (U.S.S.R. booster), 246, 249
    L-1011 (TriStar) (jet transport), 221      Proxmire, Sen. William 73, 81, 145, 177,
   launch vehicles, U.S., sale of, 4%            252, 260, 271, 284
   Lewis Research Center, 246-247              Public Service Award (NASA), 279
   lunar rock sample storage, 251              Pudenz. Dr. Robert H.. 112
   lunar roving vehicle, 120                   Pueblo,' Colo., 182     '
   manned space flight, 312                    Puerto Rico, 71, 133, 134
   Mariner 8, 136                              Pulsar, 36, 67, 74, 89, 131
   Mariner 9, 301-302, 321                     Pulver, W. A., 307
   military expenditures, 350                  Purdue Univ., 98
   National Air and Space Museum, 301          Pyrimidines, 167
   nuclear test ban, 250
   People's Republic of China
                                                                   Q
      nuclear test, 84
      satellite, 1 1
                  1
   Pioneer program, 322
                                               Q-fan engine, 363
   plutonium, 102
                                               Quarantine, 5, 30, 115, 188, 222
   Salyut 1-Soyuz 10 mission, 110, 119,
                                               Quasar, 67, 74, 89, 102, 190
          191-192
                                               Queens Univ., 10
  space program, national, 119, 121, 127,
                                               QUESTOL. See Quiet, experimental, short
          138, 146
                                                 takeoff and landing transport aircraft.
   space shuttle, 272
                                               Quiet Engine Project, 83, 96, 130, 241
   space station, 249-250
                                               Quiet, experimental, short takeoff and
   supersonic transport, 2, 127, 148, 150
                                                 landing (QUESTOL) transport aircraft,
   Toro (quasi-moon), 281-282
                                                 218, 337, 338, 356, 365
   Tu-144, 264
   unmanned spacecraft exploration, 57
   US.-U.S.S.R. space docking, 177
                                                                   R
   U.S.S.R.
      computer program, 121
      missile program, 146, 286                Radar, 9, 48, 64, 222, 231, 260, 267, 310,
      space program, 329                         347
Price, Dr. P. Buford, 6                        Radar-cross-section (RCS) test vehicle, 261
Price, Rep. Robert D., 38                      Radiation (see also Ultraviolet and
Princeton Electronics, Inc., 360                    X-ray), 9
Princeton, N.J., 282                             cosmic, 63, 197, 209, 219, 325
Princeton Univ., 18                              effects. 235. 241, 242, 261, 325
Priorities for Space Research, 1971-1980         gamma, 181       .
   ( NAS-NRC Space Science Board report 1,       measurement, 197, 209, 325
  67                                             solar, 189
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                                     AEC. 332
                                                     DOD, 124, 332
                                                     NASA, 20, 42,  93, 116, 175, 251, 332,
       See Research and Applications                    336. 368
RAM.
  Modules.                                            NOAA,. 99
                   Corp., 57                       science, 20, 33, 40, 89, 251
                  320,336,346                      U.S.S.R., 86, 124, 201
                 ch and development.             Research and Development in Industry,
Rangel, Rep. Charles B., 38                        1969: Funds, 1969; Scientists & Engi-
RANN. See Research Applied to National             neers, January 1970 (NSF 71-18), 117-
  Needs program.                                   118
Rapp, Rita M., 38                                Research and Development in Local
Rathbun Dam, 213                                   Governments, Fiscal Years 1968 & 1969
Raushenbakh, Boris V., 119                          (NSF 71-61, 33
RB-57F (reconnaissance research air-             Research and Technology Operating Plan
  craft), 120, 168                                  (mop) Summary, 46, 334
RB-211 (jet engine), 38, 44, 88, 124,            Research Applied to National Needs
  22 1                                             (RANN program), 178
RCA, 71, 81, 349                                 Research, Inc., 106
  RCA Alaska Communications, Inc., 71            Research Triangle Institute, 200
  RCA Global Communications, Inc., 71            Resolute Bay, Canada, 248
  RCA Service Co., 174                           Reusable nuclear stage (RNS), 276
Rea, Dr. Donald G., 178                          Review oj Recent Launch Failures
Recent Trends in Enrollment and Man-                (House report), 275
                                                 Reynolds, Clarke G., 363
  power Resources in Graduate Science
  Education, 1969-70 (NSF report) ; 146          RF : radio frequency.
                                                 RFP: request for proposals.
Rechtin, Eberhardt, 363
                                                 Rice Univ., 47, 144, 288, 291
Reconnaissance satellite, 243, 296, 328
                                                 Rickenbacker, Edward V., 165
Record
                                                 Rieger, Siegfried H., 298
  aircraft, 12, 17, 38, 41, 220, 226, 330
                                                 Riga, Latvia, 110
  spacecraft, 30, 35, 207
                                                 Riea (Dlanetoid). 357
  underwater, 314
                                                 Ri& Ciater (moon), 205
Redstone (booster), 122
                                                 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 248, 249
Redstone (missile 1, 362
                                                 RGlO (rocket engine), 96
Redstone Arsenal, Ala., 5, 279
                                                 RM (Radiation/Meteoroid satellite), 40-
Redstone Arsenal Army Airfield, Ala., 253
                                                    41
Rees, Dr. Eberhard F. M., 68, 196, 224,
                                                 RNS. See Reusable nuclear stage.
  242, 344
                                                 Robert Hutchings Goddard-Father         of
Rehovoth, Israel, 18
                                                   the Space Age, 214
Reitsch, Hanna, 320
                                                 Rohertson, R. E., 261
Relay telemetry subsystem (RTS) , 343
                                                 Rockefeller Univ., 265
Relativity, theory of, 296
                                                 Rockwell Standard Corp., 10
Reliability, 164
                                                   Rockwell Standard Co.,
Remote sensing (see also Earth resources         Roe, Rep. Robert A., 38
  experiment package; Earth Resources            Rogers, Will, 288
  Technology Satellite), 96, 97, 104, 119,       Rogers, Secretary of State William P., 17,
  128, 132, 139, 198, 286, 318, 333, 369           070
                                                   LIL
Rendezvous, 68                                   Rohini (Indian rocket), 282
  Apollo 14 mission, 30                          Rohr Corp., 307
  Soyuz 10-Salyut 1 mission, 108, 110,           Rolla, Mo., 296
     121                                         Rolls-Royce Ltd., 38, 44, 88, 124, 173,
                                                   221, 267, 300
                                                 Romania, 243, 319
                                                 Rome, Italy, 257, 323
  (RAM), 3, 101, 192, 330, 334, 337, 341         Rome, Univ. of, 262, 319
Research and development (R&D), 46,              Roosa, L/C Stuart A. (USAF)
                                                   Apollo 14 mission
    178, 276, 320, 334, 363
                                                     Congress, report t , 61
  aeronautics (see also Aeronautics, re-                               o
                                                     docking, 25, 29
    search), 123, 271, 369
                                                     flight, 24-30
  cost, 116, 305

                                           460
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                              Salyut 1-Soyuz 10 mission, 108, 110, 112,
     lunar photography, 27
     medical aspects, 5, 30, 4 , 261
                              4                 119, 121, 282
     Nixon, President Richard M., 24, 31,     Salyut I-Soyuz 11 mission, 156, 158, 177,
       42, 43                                    191, 200, 277, 282
     preparations for, 4, 10                  Salyut Crater (moon), 203
     press conference, 4, 41, 59              Samoa, 30
                                              SAMSO. See Space and Missile Systems
     quarantine, 5, 30
     splashdown, 30, 42                          Organization.
                                              San Antonio, Tex., 325
  ApolIo 16 mission, 61
                                              San Clemente, Calif., 243
  awards and honors, 72
                                              San Diego, Calif., 207, 281-282, 291
  European tour, 150, 152
  promotion, 47                               San Francisco Bay, Calif., 281
                                              San Francisco, Calif., 32, 80, 307
  tribute to, 42
                                              San Francisco International Airport, 310
Rosamond Dry Lake, Calif., 265
                                              San Marco (Italian launch site), Indian
Rose, Tokyo, 243
Rosen, George, 363                               Ocean, 319
                                              Sun Marco I (Italian satellite), 109-110
Rosenberg, Morris D., 343
                                              Sun MUKO 2, 109-110
Rosman, N.C., 272
                                              Sun Marco 3 (San Marco-C), 109-110,
Ross, Miles, 271
                                                 333, 355, 368, 469
Rotating-cylinder-flap system, 301
                                              Sandage, Dr. Allan R., I8
Rothrock, Dr. Addison M., 176
                                              Sands Point, N.Y., 13
Rotor, 188-189
Roush, Rep. J. Edward, 173,222                Santa Clara, Univ. of, 254
Rover. See Lunar roving vehicle.              Santa Fe, N. Mex., 42-43
Rowen, Henry S., 320                          SAO. See Smithsonian Astrophysical Ob-
                                                 servatory.
Royal Astronomical Society, 202
                                              Saphier, Lerner, Schindler-Environetics,
Royal Greenwich Observatory, 327, 356
                                                 182
RTD 701 (calibration target satellite),
                                              Sapp, Capt. Earle W. (USN), 349
  221
                                              Sarnoff, David, 349
RTOP. See Research and Technology
                                              SAS. See Small Astronomv Satellite.
  Operating Plan Summary.
                                              SAS-B (Small Astronomy-Satellite), 356
Rukavishnikov, Nikolay, N., 107, 283
                                              Sashin, O., 220
Rumford Premium, 102
                                              Satellite Early Warning System (SEWS),
Kusk, Dr. Howard A., 189                                                 - .
Russell, Dr. Archibald E., 326                   319
The Russian Space Bluff, 331                  Saturn (booster), 24-25, 57, 201, 276
Ryan, Gen. John D. (USAF), 1                     Saturn IB, 64, 99, 164, 328
                                 1
                                                   S-IB stage, 291-292
                                                 Saturn V, 60, 110,245
                    S                              contract, 153, 353-354
                                                    cost, 209
                                                   launch, 217
S-IC. See Saturn V (booster), stage, 1st.
                                                      AS-509, 24, 30
S-11. See Saturn V, stage, 2nd.
                                                      AS-510, 202, 207
S-IVB. See Saturn V, stage, 3rd.
                                                   program, 57, 328-329
$210 (Japanese rocket), 9
                                                   stage
S. A. Engins MATRA, France, 3, 19
                                                      1st (S-IC-511), 254,255
SAAB Aktieboloag, 3, 19
                                                      2nd ( S I I ) , 153
Sabin, Dr. Albert E., 18
                                                      3rd (S-IVB), 25, 202-203, 365
SAC. See Strategic Air Command.
                                               Saturn (planet), 22, 121
SAE. See Society of Automotive Engineers.
                                               Sawyer, Paul, 79, 84
Safeguard (antiballistic missile system),
   4, 43, 77, 78, 125, 311, 361                Scarp Crater (moon), 205
                                               Schaefer, Hermann J., 241
Sagan, Dr. Carl E., 248-249, 318, 331
Sagittarius (constellation), 93                Schaeffer, Dr. Oliver A., 265
St. Louis, Mo., 288                            Schaibley, John R., 188
                                               Scheer, Julian W., 51, 200, 232
St. Moritz, Switzerland, 99
St. Vincent Charity Hospital (Cleveland),      Scherer, Lee R., 159, 255
   106                                         Schilling Trophy, 262-263
                                               Schlesinger, Dr. James R., 199, 213, 222,
Salon-de-Provence, France, 150
Salpeter, Edwin E., 90                           233,294,300, 311,346
SALT. See Strategic Arms Limitation            Schmickrath. Bernard A.. 178
   Talks.                                      Schmitt, Dr.' Harrison H., 200-201, 217,
Salt Lake City, Utah, 161                        229, 230, 234, 236, 312
Salyut 1 (U.S.S.R. scientific space sta-       Schneider, William C., 358
   tion), 105, 108, 110, 112, 122, 154-155,    Schneiderman. Dan. 321
   162-163, 177, 198, 229, 282, 366-367        Schultz, M/G Kenneth W. (USAF), 193
                                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

SCI Systems, Inc., 193                          Scott, Miss Sheila, 220
SCI Electronics, Inc., 193                      Scout (booster), 110, 164, 168, 189, 230,
Science (see also National Academy of              259. 319. 348
     Sciences and National Science Foun-        Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 292
     dation), 5, 58, 76, 234                    Sea Grant Program, 99
  award, 17, 102, 138, 282, 307, 311            Sea of Fertility (Mare Fecunditatis)
  benefits, 88, 146                                 (moon). 7. 190. 246
  criticism, 147, 277, 283, 291, 303            Sea of Rains (Mare Imbrium) (moon),
  education. 288                                   4, 10, 66, 115, 133, 143, 167, 168, 196,
  Governmint support of, 20, 40, 58, 88,           223, 227, 278, 291
    99, 108, 116, 187, 216, 260, 363            Sea of Serenity (Mare Serenitatis)
  human needs. 89. 108. 363                         (moon). 143
  international 'cooueration. 177               Sea of Tkanquility (Mare Tranquillita-
  national poiicy i n d goais, 17, 20, 51,         tis) (moon), 6, 13, 121
    54-55, 69, 81, 89, 167, 187, 296, 363       Sea Sciences Corp., 292, 293
  President's Science Advisory Commit-          Seabed Arms Control Treaty, 45, 47, 55
                                                Seaborg, Dr. Glenn T., 65, 194, 199, 213,
    tee. 16. 49
  U.S.S.R.,' 82, 100, 110, 140, 163, 183,         215, 219, 233, 250, 253, 257
    190, 210, 262, 291, 309, 311, 315, 323      Sealab Project, 292
Science and Technology, Dept. of (pro-          Seamans, Secretary of the Air Force,
  posed), 69                                       Dr. Robert C., Jr., 72, 87, 266
Science Information Exchange, 82                Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, 278
Science Research Council (SRC) (U.K.),          Seattle, Wash., 57, 63, 81, 166, 333
  348, 356                                      Secret Sentries in Space, 24.3
Scientific Activities of Independent Non-       Seed experiment, space, 235
                                                Seiberling, Rep. John F., Jr., 38
  profit Institutions 1970 (NSF 71-9), 58
Scientific Balloon Flight Station, Tex.,        Seismometer experiment, lunar, 291
  I",
                                                   ApoZZo 12, 7, 25, 63, 113, 203, 207, 236,
  ILL
Scientific instrument module ( S I M ) , 202,         245
  207. 223                                        Apollo 14, 25, 30, 44, 63, 64, 13, 203,
Scienhst-astronaut, 87, 90, 133, 138, 200-            207, 236, 245
                                                  Apollo 15, 143. 203, 207. 222, 236. 245
    201, 217, 228-229, 230, 234, 236, 312
Scientists, 1, 248                              Seitz, Dr. Frederick, 112, 113, 265
  employment, 58, 76-77, 104-105, 118,          Self-test and repair (STAR) computer, 179
    119, 188, 252                               Serenitatis, Mare (Sea of Serenity), 143
  immigrant, 107                                Sergievsky, Boris, 330
  NASA programs, 96, 210                        Serphukov accelerator, U.S.S.R., 168, 182,
  reorientation, 221                               299
  Union of Concerned Scientists, 209            Servan-Schreiber, Jean Jacques, 73
                                                Service module ( s M ) , 30, 141, 207
Scorpius (constellation), 93
Scott AFR, IN., 132                             SES-10033 (Surface Effect Ship), 200
Scott, Cot. David R. (USAF)                     Sesp 1971-2 (Space Experiments S u p
  Apollo 15 mission, 114, 223, 226, 257-          port Program satellite), 289
       258, 298                                 SEVA. See Stand-up extravehicular activity.
                                                Sevastyanov, Vitaly I., 152, 167, 266
    celebrations for, 222, 236, 237
    Congress, report to, 253-254                SEWS. See Satellite Early Warning Sys-
    extravehicular activity, 120-121, 203-        tem.
        204                                     Seyfert Galaxy, 73-74, 89
     flight, 202-208                            Shaffer, John H., 2, 65, 107, 194, 212,
    Kennedy Space Center visit, 271               237, 287, 266, 332, 334, 351
                                                Shaniro. Dr. Irwin I.. 102. 310
    Marshall Space Center visit, 272
                                                Shaplei Willis H., 60, 267
    medical aspects, 118, 207, 222, 225,
        228, 261, 289                           Sharp, Mitchell W., 250
    New York Times article. 200-201,            Shatalov. Vladimir A., 16. 107, 283
                                                Shea, Joseph F., 102
        228
                                                Sheldon, Dr. Charles S., 1 , 7, 268, 362
                                                                           1
    Nixon, President Richard M., 201,
        208, 221-222                            Shemya, Amchitka Island, 326
                                                Shepard, R/A Alan B., Jr. ( U SN ) , 247
    preparations for, 114
                                                  Apollo 14 mission, 35
    press conference, 120-121, 227
    tribute to, 121-122                              Congress, report to, 60-61
    U.N. visit, 239                                  docking, 25, 29-30
  Apollo 17 mission, 229                             extravehicular activity, 25-26, 27-
                                                        28, 41, W 7 , 48, 51
  awards and honors, 239, 260, 262, 266,
    346-347                                          flight, 24-30
  European visit, 311                                golf shot, 28-29,106
                                                     medical aspects, 5, 30, 44+,261
Scott, Sen. Hugh, 191
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     Nixon, President Richard M., 24, 31,            test, 11, 44 132, 152, 252, 258, 276,
        42, 43                                          353, 355
     preparations for, 4, 10, 22-23                Skylah Student Education Conference,
     press conference, 4, 41, 59-60                   268-269
     quarantine, 5, 30                             Skylab Student Project, 268-269
     significance, 61                              Stater. John C.. 18
                                                   Slayton,. Donald K , 39, 176, 181
                                                                      .
     splashdown, 30, 42
   appointment, 176, 254                           Small .Astronomy Satellite (SAS), 67
                                                     Explorer 42 (Uhuru), 89, 113, 131, 319
  awards and honors, 72, 106, 242, 2616
                                                      SAS-B, 356
  European tour, 150, 152
  Freedom 7 mission, 122                           Small Scientific Satellite, 319, 365, 369
                                                   Small Business Administration, 334
  promotion, 240
  tribute to, 42                                   Smelt, Dr. Ronald, 102
Shepherd, James T., 116                            Smith, Dr. Bradford A., 313, 339
Shields, Jack E., 133                              Smith, Delbert E., 117
                                                   Smith, Sen. Margaret Chase, 24, 68
Shinsei (New Star) (Japanese satellite),
                                                   Smith, W. B., 310
   268, 368
                                                   Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
Shklovsky, Dr. Yosif S., 248-249
                                                      (SAO) (Camhridge, Mass.), 7, 40, 313
Short-range attack missile (SRAM), 8, 262
                                                   Smithsonian Institution, 24, 52, 82, 97,
Shuang-ch’eng spaceport, People’s Repuh-
                                                     101, 130, 135, 153, 195, 301, 309
  lic of China, 53, 61
Shuttle Technology Program-Fiscal                  Smog research, 170
   Year 1972, 263                                         See Synchronous Meteorological
                                                   SMS.
Siberia, 210, 243, 288                               Satellite.
Significant NASA Inventions, Available             SMS-A (Synchronous Meteorological Sat-
  for Licensing in Foreign Countries, 129            ellite), 356
                                                   Smyth, Robert K., 141
Sikorskv. Aircraft Div.. United Aircraft
           I,

  Corp., 150, 357                                  SNAP-SA (radioisotope thermoelectric
Sikorsky, Igor I., 150                               generator), 180
Silver, Dr. Leon T., 245. 257-258, 278             SNAP-19, 250
                                                   SNAP-27. 250
SIM. See Scientific instrument module.
Simmons, Dr. Gene M., 183, 247                     SNECMA (Soci6t6 Nationale d’ctude et
Sinkiang Province, People’s Republic of               de Construction de Moteurs d’Avia-
  China, 150                                         tion), 267
Sirius (star), 306                                 Snow, Edgar, 8  4
Sjoberg, Sigurd A., 57                             Snow, Dr. Joel A., 301
Sjogren, William L., 314                           SNSO. See AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Sys-
Skully, Richard P., 237                              tems Office.
Skylah (spacecraft) (see also Airlock              Snyder, Dr. Conway W., 144
  module; Apollo Telescope Mount:                  Society of Aerospace Material & Process
  Multiple docking adapter; Orbital                  Engineers, 279
  Workshop), 42, 152, 172, 183, 265                Society of American Test Pilots, 259
Skylab program, 4 + 56, 172, 176, 328-
                     4,                            Society of Automotive Engineers ( S AE ) ,
     329                                             130, 161, 326
  contract, 99, 106, 171, 175, 278, 279,           Society of Exploration Geophysicists, 312
     286                                           Society of Sigma Xi, 283
  crew preparation, selection, and train-          Sodium experiment, 251, 256
                                                   Sokolsky, V. N., 234, 261
     ing, 86-87, 132, 133, 284, 288, 346
   design. 64- 183                                 Solar cell, 4, 12, 369
                1
      “     I


  experiments, 10-11, 38, 87, 106-107,             Solar corona, 277-278
     173, 175, 183, 193-194, 268-269, 342,         Solar energy, 129, 154
     358-359, 361                                  Solar flare, 56, 190, 277, 302, 304, 349,
  funds, 20-21, 94, 157, 173, 198-199,               365
     221- 368                                      Solar neutrino, 113
           ---
       -7

  hardware, 64, 265, 281, 284, 323, 346,           Solar radiation satellite. See Solrad 8, 9,
     353, 355, 368-369                               and 10.
                                                   Solar wind, 67, 73, 93, 341, 354
  international cooperation, 10, 38, 44,
    ? -0
                                                     experiment, 27, 144
    1I5
  medical aspects, 167, 193-194, 256, 276,         Solrad 8 (Explorer 30) (solar radiation
    342                                              satellite), 190
  NASA program, 10-11, 39, 62-63, 84,              Solrad 9 (Explorer 37), 190
    86-87, 94-95, 127, 164, 172, 267, 291,         Solrad 10 (Explorer 44) (Solrad-C),
    302, 324, 361, 363-364, 368                      189-190, 240, 365
  safety aspects, 42                               Somnium, 233-234
  space rescue program, 64, 68-69, 163-            Sonett, Dr. Charles P., 5, 64, 350
    164, 173, 198-199                              Sonic boom, 78, 112, 122, 351

                                             463
                                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

Sophia, Princess (Spain), 24-25                   life support system, 95-96, 105, 156,
Sorells, A. R., 90                                      181, 193-194, 196-197, 208, 231,
Sortie can, 334, 340                                    235, 244, 308, 311-312
Sounding rocket (see also individual              lunar soil experiment, 6, 1 11
     sounding rockets: Aerobee, Arcas,            medical benefits, 183, 189, 235, 292, 368
     Black Brant VB, Centaure, Javelin,           meeting, 253
     Nike-Apache, Nike-Cajun,          Nike-      NASA program, 138, 189, 210, 235, 245,
     Tomahawk ; Vertikal-2)                             284
                                                     Apollo 14 mission, 5, 14, 17, 30, 35,
   international programs, 236, 252, 369
   NASA-Canada, 8, 9, 14, 50, 63, 89, 174,                44, 63, 261
        192, 246, 248                                Apollo 15 mission, 188, 193, 196-197,
     -France, 64, 74, 78, 82, 259, 370                    207, 223, 225, 228, 289
     -India, 111, 115                                Skylab, 132, 193-194, 288
             -
     -India-Tanan. 111                           nutrition, 177, 276, 289
                   , ---
     -U.S.S.R., 10, 133-134                       radiation effects, 63, 235, 261, 325-326
   U.S.S.R.-France, 359                          Soyuz 11 accident cause, 187
Sours, Wayne P., 269                              U.S.S.R. program, 176-177
                                                  weightlessness, effects of, 127, 132, 163,
South Africa, 267
South Carolina Lions Clubs, 140                         181, 342
South Dakota, 128                              Space debris, 166, 173, 181-187, 209
South Pole, 310,329                            Space Electronics Corp., 57
Southwest Research Institute, 15               Space Flight Award (AAS), 179
Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, 163        Space General Corp., 57
Soviet Academy of Sciences, 73, 94, 100,       Space law, 153
     119, 127, 140, 145, 163, 181, 182, 218,   Space, military use of, 77
                                                 communications, 37, 41, 74, 80, 87, 95,
     268, 277, 357
  Council for International Cooperation              306, 336, 365
                                                 NATO, 36, 41, 365
     in Space Research, 217
  honorary membership, 65, 194                    navigation, 94
  Intercosmos Council, 171                       reconnaissance, 124, 328
  international cooperation, 249                 space shuttle, 75, 87, 95, 328
                                                 US. (see also unidentified satellite),
   international cooperation, space, 10, 16, ,
     77, 88, 133, 217, 242, 283, 293, 340,           74, 87, 95, 124, 306, 328, 336
                                                 U.S.S.R., 7, 24, 115, 158, 172, 176,
     347, 353, 359, 369
  lunar rock samples, exchange of, 88,               191-192, 296, 338, 362
     159, 190                                  Space, peaceful use of, 10, 16, 91, 101
Soviet Council of Ministers, 200               Space program, national (see also indi-
Soviet Party Congress, 94                            vidual programs, such as Apollo pro-
Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70, 132                  gram: and National Aeronautics and
The Soviet SST, 126                                  Space Administration, budget), 67,
Soviet State Committee for Nuclear                   162, 172, 243, 275-276, 282, 283,
  Energy, 219                                        328-329, 342-343, 365-368
Soviet State Planning Committee, 121             achievements, 7-8, 51, 167, 179, 225,
Soyuz (program), 284                                   253. 364-369
Soyuz (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 16, 152, 177            manned space flight, 30, 42, 47, 48,
Soyuz 1 mission, 266                                   208, 209, 223-224, 253-254, 361,
Soyuz 9 mission, 155-156, 169                          364, 368
Soyuz 10 mission, 107, 112, 119, 121, 283        Aeronautics and Space Report of the
Soyuz 11 mission, 154-156, 180-181, 185,               President, Transmitted to the Con-
  186, 187, 226, 283, 299, 366                         gress, January 1971, 37
                                                 anniversary, 142, 180
Space and Missile Systems Organization
                                                 benefits. See Suace results.
   (SAMSO), 102, 178, 188, 266, 290, 310,
                                                 budget, 7-8, 14, 20-21, 31, 32, 38, 57,
  336
Space biology, 99, 325                                 62, 112, 119, 121, 220, 221 292,
  animal experiments, 127, 182, 235                    363364. 368
  award, 163, 298,325                            cost, 50-51, 62
  back contamination, 115                        criticism, 20, 32, 43, 133, 145, 146, 211,
  environment, effects of, 167, 225, 228,              229, 236
                                                 employment, 61-62, 75-76, 172, 179,
       256, 261, 277
  extraterrestrial life, 167, 248-249, 322,         368
       337-338, 345, 369                         international aspects (see also Interna-
  international cooperation, 11, 36, 284,              tional coooeration. soace). 7-8.
        325, 359                                       10-11, 15-i6, 17, i8, '37, 45, 5 d
  International Symposium on Basic En-                 55, 60-61, 68, 96, 133, 138-139,
       vironmental Problems of Man in                  159. 165. 185. 191. 247-248. 249-
       Space, Fourth, 277                              25d, 263; 265,. 324 '

                                           a
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  management, 69-70, 72, 106                     contract, 60, 101, 105, 106, 132, 165,
  military aspects, 7-8                             187, 193, 218, 233, 240, 245-246, 272,
  Nixon, President Richard M., 42, 54-              276, 281, 298, 320, 328, 345, 353-354,
       55. 59. 161. 263-264. 265                    356
  objecti&’67,      105, 117,‘ 215, 263-264,     cooperation, 87, 93, 244, 257, 276
       272-273, 280-281, 343-344                 cost, 24, 62, 94, 127-128, 145, 172,
  policy, 7-8, 32-33, 51, 67, 121. 127-             182-183, 257, 315
       128, 145, 146, 163-164, 165, 181,         criticism. 145-146
                                                 design, 60, 64, 80, 87, 132, 161, 165,
       183, 199, 200, 212, 213, 267, 324
  p~t-Apollo,21-22, 45, 51, 57-58, 61-              171, 218, 272, 281, 352, 356, 362-
       62, 67, 74, 89, 93, 96-97, 105, 139,         363, 365
       145, 263, 324, 328-329                    develomnent site. 145. 281
  press comment, 32, 74, 223-224                 engine, 60, 87, 160, 193, 232, 240, 245-
  press conference, 21-22, 119, 122, 127,           246,345,354,356
                                                 funds for, 14, 20, 22, 37, 50-51, 80,
        139
  significance, 31, 42, 59, 126, 225, 281           87. 94. 116. 129. 152, 157. 177-178,
  Space Program Advisory Council, 105               198-199. 221. 226. 229. 368
  U.S.S.R. vs. U.S. See Space race.              international &operation,7 3, 16, 37, 45,
                                                    278, 291, 340-341, 369-370
Space race, 7, 16, 24, 25, 62, 91, 1 1   1-
                                                 launch and landing sites, 2. 281
  112, 121, 158, 185, 223, 229, 329, 330,
                                                 meeting, 42, 75, 918, 279; 291, 352
  331, 366
                                                 military application, 87, 280, 328
Space rescue, 22, 64, 68-69, 140, 164,
                                                 NASA program, 50-51, 62-63, 93, 127-
  173, 198
                                                    128, 129, 139-140, 145, 160, 164, 165,
Space results (see also Earth; Mars;                182-183, 192-193, 213, 263, 264,275-
     Moon : Venus : individual Drobes.              276, 280, 297, 324, 330, 334
     satellites, and sounding rockek), 43;       patent, 171
     47, 51, 93, 126, 136-137, 167, 172,         press comment, 14
     215-216, 217-218, 221-229, 298, 312,        safety, 42
     321. 368                                    shuttle pilot study, 308
  agriculture, 37, 98, 368, 369                  Shuttle Technology Program-Fiscal
  aircraft, 70, 74                                  Year 1972, 263
  astronomy, 67, 93, 113, 223, 239, 245,         tests, 60, 87
     257, 265-266, 281, 314, 315, 318, 321,      test facilities, 8, 60
     332-333, 342, 349, 358-359, 368           Space Shuttle Aerothermodynamics Tech-
  communications, 37, 126, 281, 368              nology Conference, 352
  computer, 32, 98-99, 106-107, 121-122,       Space Shuttle Technology Conference, 98
     162                                       Space Shuttle Technologies, FY 1971
  earth sciences, 19, 32-33, 44, 48, 67,         Programs, 129
     119-120, 128, 137, 171, 174-175, 198,     Space station (see also Salyut I and
     230, 253, 261, 281, 309, 324, 369-370       Skylab), 4 ,58, 249
                                                              4
  economic benefits, 51, 166, 172                contract, 174
  education, 37, 117, 243                        criticism, 145
  engineering, 140, 259, 308, 309, 368-          design, 3-4,12, 175, 183
     369                                         international cooperation, 3, 10, 38, 45,
  environmental sciences, 37, 67, 162,              173, 278, 333
     231, 320-321, 322, 324, 348, 368            military, 229
  For the Benefit of all Mankind: A              NASA program, 10-11, 12, 14, 50, 88,
     Survey of the Practical Returns from           127-128, 139-140, 145, 172, 174-175,
     Space Investment, 350-351                      192, 228-229, 334
  international relations, 44                    use. 10-11.90.342
  materials technology, 23, 72, 74, 350-         U.S.S.R., 61,‘100, 101, 107-108, 110-
     351                                            111, 115, 154-155, 163, 188, 18%
  medicine, 98-99, 106-107, 188, 189,               190, 197, 282-283, 365-366
     193-194, 199-200, 235, 253, 256,
                                               Space tug, 224, 278, 340
     261. 271-272. 292. 368
                                               Spacecraft (see also individual space-
  meteoroIogy, 37, 281, 303, 327
                                                    craft, such as Apollo, Explorer,
  military, 70, 75, 87,95
                                                    Luna, Mariner, Skylab)
  navigation, 37
                                                 accident. See Accident, spacecraft.
  oceanography, 120, 348
                                                 airlock, 284
  science and technglogy, 315
                                                 command and service module. See
  social problems, 342
                                                    Command and service module.
  transportation, 37, 251, 257, 259
                                                 command module. See Command mod-
Space Science Award (AIAA), 15                      ue
                                                     l.
                         e,
space shuttle, 44, 58,         95, 139-140,      computer, 179
     213, 229                                    Contamination, 56
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                               Staats, Comptroller General Elmer B.,
  debris, 313-314
                                                 218
  design, 15, 64, 68, 80
                                               Stafford, Maj. Thomas P. (USAF), 176,
  eleckical systems, 244
                                                 186
  equipment, 106, 183, 207, 254, 264,
                                               Stand-up extravehicular activity (SEVA) ,
     265, 284, 302, 306, 323, 328, 330,
                                                 203-204
     344
                                               Standard Oil Co. of New Jersev. ,_ 170
  exhibit, 152, 153
  instrumentation, 8, 10-11, 14, 35-36,        Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 36
     38, 174-175, 236-237, 240, 277, 278,      Stanford Research Institute, 291
     321, 355                                  Stanford Univ., 13, 15, 98, 183, 197, 235,
  international cooperation, 105                    248, 298
  life support system, 95-96, 99, 156,           Stanford Univ. Medical Center Cardi-
     181, 193-194, 196-197, 235, 308                ology Dept., 301
  lunar module. See Lunar module.              Star, 13, 36, 38, 60, 113, 226, 239, 350
  materials technology, 87, 195, 279           STAR. See Self-test and repair computer.
  multiple docking adapter, 284, 323,          STAR (Satellites for Telecommunications,
     34.6, 353, 355                              Applications, and Research) (consor-
  propulsion. See Engine; NERVA; Nu-             tium), 19
     clear propulsion; and individual
                                               Star City, U.S.S.R., 16
     launch vehicles. such as Saturn.
                                               State, Dept. of, 45, 48, 77, 102, 120, 237,
  research and applications module
                                                 272, 358, 369-370
      ( R A M ) , 3, 101, 192-193, 330, 334,
                                               State Univ. of New York
     337, 340
                                                  Buffalo, 201
  safety, 42, 64, 68-69, 178, 261, 362-
                                                 Stonv Brook, 192. 257.260. 265
     363
  scientific instrument module, 203, 207,      Statements by Presidents of the United
     223                                         States on International Cooperation in
  service module. See Service module.            Space-A Chronology: October 1957-
  test, 86-87, 132, 152, 232, 258, 264, 327      August 1971 (Sen. Doc. 92-40), 265
Spacesuit, 153, 156, 196, 223, 286, 288        5techer, Theodore P., 36
                                               Stein, Andrew J., 2
Spacetrack system, 290-291
Spain, 43, 112                                 Steinbacher, Dr. Robert H., 301, 318
Spartan (missile), 4, 311, 326, 346            Stennis, Sen. John C., 19, 351
Spectrograph, 8                                Stereo-1 (U.S.S.R.-France Mars experi-
Spectroheliograph, 8                              ment), 354
Spectrometer, 10-11, 144, 148, 175, 195-       Stevens, Peter, 347
   196,220-221, 265-266, 31%                   Stevenson, M/G John D. (USAF, Ret.),
Speer, Dr. F. A., 98                              12
Sperry, Lawrence, Award, 298                   Stever, Dr. H. Guyford, 320, 341
Sperry Rand Corp., 159                         Steward Observatory, 40
Spin-scan camera, 15                           Stockholm, Sweden, 282,329
Spinar (celestial object), 73                  Stokes, Mayor Carl B., 2
Spirit of '76, The (Presidential aircraft),    STOL (short takeoff and landing) air-
  212, 326-327, 350                                  craft, 298, 363
Spitz, Dr. Armand N.,103                          Canada, 147, 280
Spitz Laboratories, 103                           contract, 19, 187, 300, 338, 365
Spivak, Jonathan, 182-183                         cooperative research, 39, 71, 218, 267,
Spring Mill State Park, Ind., 199                    290, 315
Sprint (missile), 4, 43, 77-78, 125, 361          Italv. 315
                                                  NASA program, 21, 22, 39, 71, 97, 127,
Spruce Goose (flying boat), 45, 197
SPS. See Service propulsion system.                  171, 187, 218, 233, 290, 301, 308,
Spur Crater (moon ) , 205                            337,338,365,369
Sputnik (U.S.S.R. satellite), 145              STOLAND (advanced STOL avionics sys-
Sputnik 1, 24, 59, 113, 209                       tem), 187
Sputnik 2, 24                                  STOLport, 19
SR-71 (reconnaissance aircraft), 115           Stoner, George H., 57
SRAM. See Short-range attack missile.          Strasser, Gabor, 363
SRC. See Science Research Council              Strategic Air Command (SAC), 279
   (U.K.).                                     Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT),
Sriharikota Island, India, 282                    55, 74, 148, 189, 190, 194, 195, 252,
SS-6 (Sapwood) (U.S.S.R. ICBM), 362               264-265, 266
SS-9 (U.S.S.R. ICBM), 84, 117, 135, 152,       Stratoscope I1 (balloon-borne telescope),
  194, 362                                        121, 253
SS-11 (U.S.S.R. ICBM),   146                   Strughold, Dr. Hubertus, 298, 325
SST. See Supersonic transport.                 Stuhbs, Dr. Peter, 57
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

A Study    OJ NACA and NASA Published        Symington, Sen. Stuart, 19
  Information of Pertinence in the De-       Symphonie (West German comsat), 352
  sign of Light Aircraft, 56                 Symposium on Clean Room Technol-
Stuhlinger, Dr. Ernst, 334                     ogy in Surgery Suites, 139
Submarine, missile-carrying, 224, 283, 286   Symposium on Uranium Plasmas: Re-
Subsatellite, 87, 207, 225, 365                search and Applications, 2nd, 320
Suffolk County, N.Y., 295                    Synchronous Meteorological Satellite
                                               (SMS), 21-22, 356
Sukhanovsky, A., 315
Sukhoi Su-11 (U.S.S.R. fighter aircraft),    Synthesis (radio telescope), 279
                                             Syromyatnikov, V. S., 254
   360
Sullivan, Rep. Leonor K , 247
                         .                   Szent-Gyorgi, Dr. Albert, 296
Sullivan, Walter S., 223, 287, 342
Sun, 113,223, 257,350
                                                                 T
  satellite data, 269, 335, 349
  sounding rocket data, 228, 252
Sunspots, 56, 304
                                             T-33 (jet trainer), 115, 308
Suomi, Verner E., 15
                                             Tacsat I (comsat), 74
Super Guppy (NASA cargo aircraft), 281,
                                             TACT. See Transonic Aircraft Technol-
  288, 355
                                                ogy Program.
Super nova, 36
                                             Tactical Air Command, 262
Superconstellation (transport aircraft),
                                             Takizawa, Ataru, 138-139
   101
                                             Talkeetna, AIaska, 69
Supercritical wing. See Wing, aircraft.
                                             Tango-Kilo (satellite reconnaissance in-
Supersonic transport (SST) (see also
                                                telligence), 124
     Concorde and Tu-lM), 119, 192
                                             Tansei (MST-1) (Japanese satellite),
   cost, 73, 82, 84, 157, 346, 351
                                               48, 161-162, 200, 368
  criticism, 73
                                             Tanum, Sweden, 341
  design and development, 60-61, 90,264,
                                             Task Force on Science and Technology,
     323, 326
                                               320
  sconomic aspects, 56, 82, 109, 130, 131
                                             Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
  Final Report oj the Ad Hoc Super-
                                                6
     sonic Transport Review committee of
                                             Taurus (constellation), 350
     the Ofice of Science and Technol-
                                             Tavlor. Dr. Gerald R h
     o m . March 30. 1969. 232
                                             Tailor: John- W. R.: $96
  foreygn, 82, 85, 147, 214, 280-281, 332
                                             TD-1 (ESRO scientific satellite), 356
  funds, 21, 74, 78, 80-81, 82, 98, 129-
                                             TDRSS. See Tracking and data relay sat-
     130, 131, 135, 137, 138, 139, 211,
                                               ellite system.
     232. 366
                                             Teague, Rep. Olin E., 38, 63, 142, 222
  hazards, 6061, 150, 240-241, 242
                                             Technology, 4, 16, 89, 146147, 283
  international aspects, 84-85, 109
                                               benefits, 20, 126, 216, 272
  Nixon, President Richard M., 37, 81,
                                               exhibit, 99, 301
     82, 130,349-350, 351
                                               funding, 20, 109, 116, 118, 331-332
  press comment, 78, 79, 85, 119, 129-
                                               international aspects, 17,55
     130, 139
                                               policy, 50, 55, 81, 86, 109, 116, 213,
  press conference, 48, 138, 148, 351
                                                  248, 263-264, 275, 290-291, 303, 331-
  sonic boom, 351
                                                  332, 344, 362
The Supersonic Transport: (Study), 56
                                               U.S.S.R., 311
The Supersonic Transport: A Factual
                                             Technology, Inc., 276
  Basis for Decision, 60
                                             Technology Mobilization and Reemploy-
Suprathermal ion detector experiment,
                                               ment Program, 94, 119, 141-142
  142, 288, 291
Surface propulsion system (SPS), 203         Technology unitization, space, 53, 76, 81,
Surveyor (program), 47,212                        129, 283, 350-351
Surveyor 3 (lunar probe), 57, 83               agriculture, 10-11, 368
Sutherland, Dr. Earl W., Jr., 282              communications, 18, 37, 368
Sutter, Dr. John F., 257, 265                  earth resources, 10-11, 325
Swan experiment, 10                            ecology, 164 321
Swann, Dr. Gordon A., 245, 279                 economic problems, 160,283
Swearingen Aircraft Co., 309                   education, 37, 306
Sweden, 3, 19, 96, 198, 213, 313, 341,         engineering, 311, 334-335
  345, 346                                     environmental problems, 96, 307, 324-
Swenson, Dr. Loyd S., Jr., 234                    325, 368
Swigert, John L., Jr., 68, 75, 179, 266        health, 306
Swiss Transport Museum, 267                    materials technology, 250, 259
Switzerland, 50, 305                           medicine, 98-99, 180, 199-200, 235,
Symington, Rep. James W., 38                      250, 253, 292, 301, 322, 350-351, 368
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  meteorology, 37                              Thermonuclear fusion, 213
  oceanography, 10-11, 104                     T 'ry, Paul, 309
                                                '
  Office of Technology Transfer (pro-                                     SP-2501, 48
                                               This Island Earth (NASA
                                               This New Ocean: A History of Project
     posed), 173
  pollution control, 322                         Mercury, 234
  press comment, 140                           Thomas, Dr. Gary, 2,93
   safety, 146                                 Thompson-csF, 3
                                               Thompson, Gerald M., 161
  science, 350
  social problems, 160, 301, 303, 306, 342     Thompson Trophy Race, 382
  transportation, 37, 160, 309                 Thor-Able-Star (booster), 180
  urban planning, 281                          Thor-Agena (booster), 8, 48
                                                 Thorad-Agena, 80-81, 195, 254, 289,
Tektite I, Project, 263
                                                   3sn
Tele-Communications, Inc., 74
                                               ThorTBker I1 (booster), 48, 157, 287
Telesat Canada, 128
                                               Thor-Delta (booster), 120, 269, 300-301
Telesat-A (Canadian comsat), 128, 356
                                                 longtank, thrust-augmented, 294-295,
Telescope (see also Radiotelescope), 54,
                                                    300-301
  67. 121. 253
    I    .


                                                 thrust-augmented, 72-73,106
Telescope, space (see also Apollo Tele-
                                               Thorpe, Day, 5
  scope Mount), 67, 330
                                               3C-279 (quasar), 102
Television, 52, 83, 186, 237-238
                                               Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
  Apollo 14, 10, 23, 25-30, 40, 41, 43,
                                                 Station (TERLS), India, 18-19, 105,
     65
                                                  111, 115
  Apollo 15, 197, 203, 206-207, 213, 215-
                                               Tidbinbilla, Australia, 69
     216
                                               Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft Technol-
  Apollo 16, 267
                                                 ogy Program, 272
  educational, 161, 264
                                               Time magazine, 281
  Lunokhod 1,8,220
                                               Tischler, Adelbert O., 291
  Mariner 9, 318
                                               Titan (booster). 153
  Soyuz 10, 108
                                                 Titan IIIB-Agena, 11
  Soyuz 11, 156
                                                 Titan IIIB-Agena D, 79
  via satellite, 23, 71, 88, 98, 128, 161,
                                                 Titan IIIC, 95, 122, 306, 310, 313, 329
     210, 330,354,355
                                                 Titan IIID, 163
Teller, Dr. Edward, 152
                                               Titan (missile), 224-225
Tennessee Technological Univ., 298-299
                                               Tito, President Josip Broz (Yugoslavia),
Tennessee. Univ. of. Suace Institute. 240
                                                 286
Tereshkova, Valentina: See Nikolayeva-
                                               Tito, Mrs. Josip Broz, 286
  Tereshkova, Valentina.
                                               TLI: translunar injection.
Terhune, L/G Charles H. (USAF,Ret.),
                                               Tobias, Dr. Cornelius A., 63
  159-160
                                               Toksoz, Dr. Mehmet Nafi, 345
TERLS. See Thumba Equatorial Rocket
                                               Tokyo, Japan, 133,138,257
  Launching Station.                           Tokyo, Univ. of, 83-84
Test Vehicle 3 (TV-31, 135                       Institute of Space and Aeronautical
Teton National Park. 112                            Science, 9, 48
Tetr 3 (Test and ' Training Satellite),        Topaz (U.S.S.R. nuclear reactor), 250
   269, 365                                    TOPS. See Thermoelectric Outer Planet
Texas, 370                                       Spacecraft.
Texas ABM Univ., 111                           Torell, Bruce N., 178, 218
Texas Instruments, Inc., 170                   Toro (asteroid). 281-282. 232-233
Texas, Univ. of, 144, 193                      Toronto, Univ. of, 315     '
Textron, Inc.                                  Toulouse, France, 150,242,248
  Bell Aerospace Go., div., 200, 290, 361      Tournesol (French satellite), 103, 369
  Bell Helicouter Co.. div.. 357               Townsend, John W., Jr., 19,302
                     I   ,




TF-8A (jet research aircraft), 122, 356        Tracked air cushion research vehicle,
  contract, 345346                               182, 348
  test flight, 65-66, 77, 9&95, 101, 114-      Tracked Hovercraft, Ltd., 348
     115, 140, 145, 163, 165, 192, 233,        Tracking, 209
     240-241, 252, 256, 270-271, 27'2,           Apollo 14 mission, 30
     278-279, 287, 345, 349, 365-366             balloon, 250-251,254
Thackray, Arnold, 187-188                        budget, 21
                                                 cooperation, international, 106, 36%
Thant, U, U.N. Secretary General, 153-
  154, 222, 239,252                                   370
                                                 deep space (DSN) antenna, 69, 102,
Tharsis (Mars), 321
                                                      313, 318
Thayer, Sylvanus, Award, 121
                                                 military, 357-358
Thermoelectric Outer Planet Spacecraft
                                                 MSFN, 27,69,269
  (TOPS), 179


                                         468
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

  satellite, 102, 290                           Turcat, Andrb, 249
  ship, 350, 357-358                            TWA. See Trans World Airlines, Inc.
  sounding rocket, 64                           27th Tactical Fighter Wing, 314
  station, 97                                   Tycho Crater (moon), 245
     Australia, 69
     South Africa, 267
                                                                    U
     Spain, 69
Tracking and data relay satellite sys-
  tem (TDRSS). 173                              u2 (reconnaissance aircraft), 95, 115,
                                                 -
Tracking ship, '350                                120, 158,281, 329
Trans World Airlines, Inc. (TWA), 71            Uchinoura Space Center, Japan, 9, 48,
Transit &A (navigation satellite), 180            200, 268
Transonic Aircraft Technology Program           UH-ID (helicopter), 74
   (TACT 1, 165, 272                            UHF: ultrahigh frequency.
TRANSPO '72, 309                                Uhuru (Explorer 42) (Small Astron-
Transportation, Dept. of (DOT) (see also          omy Satellite), 89, 113, 131, 319
     Federal Aviation Administration),          U.K. See United Kingdom.
     288, 307                                   Ulan Bator, Mongolia, 238
  air traffic control, 85                       ULMS. se e Underwater long-range mis-
  automated transit system, 47, 55                 siIe system.
  award, 75                                     Ultraviolet (uv), 8, 14, 23, 60, 119, 135,
  budget. 21. 211. 226                            148, 189, 220, 242, 302, 318, 327, 366
  conGadt, 19, 4?, 85, 182                      Ultraviolet panorama (S-138) experi-
  cooperation, 3, 39, 53-54, 121-122, 187,        ment, 38
     218-219.242.290. 369
                                                U.N. See United Nations.
  facilities, 194, 247, 264
                                                Underground nuclear tests, 300, 303
  general-aviation safety, 276-277
                                                Underwater long-range missile system
  noise abatement, 21, 122-123, 242, 290
                                                   ( UL M S ), 335
  organization, 81-82
                                                Unemployment Rates for Scientists,
  personnel, 45, 107, 123-124, 193, 253,
                                                  Spring 1971 (NSF report), 188
     323
                                                Unidentified satellite, 11, 49, 79, 80, 107,
  R&D, 82, 122-123, 369
                                                  122, 157, 163, 195, 227, 254, 287, 296,
  STOL aircraft, 19, 39, 187, 218-219, 290
                                                  341, 350
  supersonic transport, 21, 60, 74, 75, 81,
                                                                        /
     82, 84-85, 88, 129-130, 211, 323           Union of Concerned Scientists, 209
  tracked air cushion research vehicle,         United Aircraft Corp.
     ___
    183                                           Hamilton Standard Div., 363
  Transportation Systems Center, 82               Pratt & Whitney Div., 60, 96, 131,
                                                      178, 198, 218, 232, 240, 246, 300,
Treasury Dept., 266
                                                      354, 356
Treaty, 45, 47, 55, 88, 153-154, 162, 173,
                                                  Sikorsky Aircraft Div., 150, 357
  313-314
                                                United Airlines, 211
Tribus, Myron, 1 1
                                                United Automobile, Aerospace, and
Trubshaw, Brian, 48
                                                  Agricultural Implementation Workers
Truman. President Harm S.. 248
                                                  of America. 343
Truszynski, Gerald M., 69,97
Truxal, Dr. John G., 16-17                      United Cerebral Palsy Research Foun-
                                                  dation, 253
TRW Inc., 89, 117, 174, 282. 306, 327,
                                                United Kingdom (U.K.), 171, 249, 287,
     345-346
                                                      312, 331
  Systems Group, 329, 335-336
                                                  aerospace industry, 88, 173, 329
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin, 234
                                                  aircraft, 80, 224, 300, 329, 346
Tu-104 (U.S.S.R. jet airliner), 140
                                                      Concorde, 157, 214,346
Tu-134 (U.S.S.R. jet airliner), 140
                                                  aircraft carrier, 224
Tu-144 ( U.S.S.R. supersonic transport),
                                                  Apollo 14 mission, reaction, 43
  77, 79, 85, 126, 127, 147, 150, 157,
                                                  booster, 211, 300, 310
  214, 232, 249, 263, 264, 314
                                                  computer use, 122
Tu-154 (U.S.S.R. jet airliner), 140
                                                  cooperation, space, 3, 16, 19, 37, 57-
Tucker, Dr. Wallace, 113
                                                         58, 96, 291, 310, 348, 369
Tucson, Aris, 40, 281
                                                  Defence Ministry, 303, 329
Tullahoma, Tenn., 60
Tumulty, William T., Jr., 269                     hovertrain, 348
                                                  launch, 365, 368
Tupolev, Aleksey A., 127, 148, 264
Tupolev, Andrey N , 260, 263, 264
                  .                                   Ariel 4 (UK-4) (scientific satel-
Turbine-alternator compressors ( TAC) ,               lite), 348
                                                     Prosper0 (X-3) (technology satel-
  147
                                                         lite, 300
Turbo-Mallard (amphibious aircraft),
                                                  missile-firing submarines, 224
  288

                                          459
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

 nuclear power, 252                                United States and Soviet Progress in
 research and applications modules                   Space: Some New Contrasts, 7-8
     (RAM), 3                                      United States Space Science Program,
  Science Research Council, 348, 356                  167
 space shuttle, 16, 37, 291                        Universe, 132
United Nations (U.N.), 70, 104, 110, 120,
                                                   Universities, 68, 85, 146, 161, 210, 248,
     166, 171, 250, 361,370
                                                      306, 308
 Apollo 15 message, 222
                                                   Uranus (planet), 22
  astronaut visit, 65, 238, 239
                                                   Urey, Dr. Harold C., 6, 109
 Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
                                                   US. Air Force (USAF) (see also indi-
    Outer Space, 173,182, 334
  General Assembly, 153, 252, 254, 257,                 vidual bases, centers, and com-
    313, 334                                            mands, such as Air Force Academy,
 lunar law treaty draft, 153                            Air Force Systems Command, Air
 Scientific Subcommittee on Space, 198                  Defense Command, Arnold Engi-
                                                        neering Development Center, Ed-
United Nations Day, 191
                                                        wards AFB)
United Nations Peace Medal, 318
                                                     aircraft (see also individual aircraft,
United States (US.) (see also appro-
                                                           such as G5A, F-15, F-111, Heli-
    priate agencies and Congress)
                                                           copter, YF-lZ), I, 21, 70, 87, 94,
  atlas, 11
                                                           95, 112, 168, 239, 248, 255, 263,
 award, 38-39, 60, 102, 139, 282, 307,
                                                           279, 300, 302, 344
     314
                                                      anniversary, 94
 budget, 17, 20-21, 118
                                                     award, 72, 178, 266, 354
  communications, 3, 71
                                                      budget, 94. 263
 defense, 20, 21, 103-104, 119, 124, 170,
                                                     conGact, 2, 8, 12, 94, 294, 300, 310,
     194, 201, 224-225, 284, 288, 319-
                                                           312, 341
     320, 360, 361
                                                     cooperation, 65, 70, 87, 95, 130, 142,
  disarmament, 74, 85, 136
                                                           165, 173-174, 199, 210, 218-219,
 economy, 71-72, 160, 295
                                                           225, 237, 272-276, 278, 281, 290,
 education, 146, 161, 260
                                                           328, 351, 365
 employment, 3-4, 20, 63, 76, 104-105,
                                                      FRUSA (flexible rolled-up solar ar-
     118, 119, 124, 141-142, 188, 252-
                                                           ray), 8
     253, 308, 309
                                                      launch
 energy sources, 129, 154
                                                        satellite, 11, 49, 79, 80, 107, 122,
 engineering, 308
                                                           157, 163, 195-196, 220-221, 227,
 environmental program (see also Air
                                                           254, 287, 289, 296, 306, 350, 365
    pollution; Noise, aircraft; and Wa-
                                                        failure, 49, 342
    ter pollution), 2, 13, 42, 76, 78, 96,
                                                     lifting body, 11, 39, 49, 65, 85, 130,
     170, 180, 231
                                                           142, 153, 210-211, 351, 365
 foreign policy, 54-55, 117
                                                     missile program, 77-78, 95, 199, 224,
  Government reorganization, proposed,
                                                           225, 262, 266, 312, 346
     81-82, 154
                                                     personnel, 11, 36, 42, 180-181, 186,
 international cooperation, 17, 104, 190,
                                                           191, 193, 320
     191
                                                     reentry vehicle, 220-221
 international cooperation, space. See
                                                     satellite, 243
    International cooperation, space.
                                                     space program (see also Defense,
 meteorology, 2, 103, 180, 303-304
                                                           Dept. of), 94, 328
 metric system, 212
                                                     space shuttle, 276
 nuclear nonproliferation treaty. See
                                                     Transonic Aircraft Technology (TACT)
    Nuclear nonproliferation treaty.
                                                           Program, 165, 272
 oceanography, 12,19, 24,45
  patent policy. 238-239                           US. Arms Control and Disarmament
 Eesearch a n d development, 13, 20, 33,             Agency, 74
                                                   US. Army (USA), 43, 70, 74, 182, 186,
    116, 118, 122-123, 124-125, 175-176,
     201, 251, 291, 303, 305, 331-332,               189, 272, 288, 294, 351, 357, 361, 365
     336, 363                                      U.S. Army (USA) Air Mobility Re-
 science and technology, 11, 17, 18, 20,             search and Development Laboratory,
    30, 40, 58, 69, 76, 86, 89, 99, 104,             233
     108-109, 113, 118, 126, 127-128, 147,         US. Coast Guard, 21
    160, 167, 173, 187-188,197, 248, 260,          US. Conference of Mayors, 177
    291, 296, 303, 331332, 363-364                 US. Court of Appeals, District of Co-
 space program. See Space program,                   lumbia, 300
    national; Space race; Space results.           U.S. Forest Service, 129
 transportation (see aIso Supersonic               U.S. Geological Survey (USCS), 1 , 104,
                                                                                      1
    transport), 36, 47, 53, 82, 128-129              120, 171, 224, 245, 279, 281, 339-340,
 Vietnam war. See Vietnam war.                       348, 351

                                             470
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                   Council of Ministers, 216-217
U.S. Marine Corps             80
                    (uSMC),
                                                   defector, 147, 168, 171, 176, 190, 329,
US. Military Academy, 11
US. Military Academy Assn. of Gradu-                    331
                                                   disarmament (see also U.S.S.R., SALT
  ates, 121
US. Naval Aerospace Medical Institute,                  talks), 54-55, 74, 137, 148
                                                   five-year plan, 58
  182
U.S. Navy   (USN),18,241                           launch, 366-368
  aircraft, 11-12, 17, 18, 41, 445-47, 70,            probe
     112, 124, 141, 152, 163, 210, 211,                 Luna 18, 246
                                                        Luna 19, 267-268
     212. 219, 246. 252, 255.. 271, 272,
                                                        Mars 2, 134
     284; 286,‘ 301,. 322, 323
                                                        Mars 3, 147
  award, 72
                                                      Salyut 1 105
                                                                ,
  contract, 329, 335
                                                      satellite
  cooaeration, 119-120. 244. 369-370
                                                        Cosmos, 7, 9, 11, 15, 42, 49, 54,
  missile, 52, 335
                                                           61, 78, 84, 93, 94, 96, 98, 102,
  missile-firing ship, 125
                                                           108, 110, 115, 124, 125, 128, 133,
  personnel, 47, 345
                                                           135, 139, 146, 148, 153, 160, 174,
  satellite, 95, 180
                                                            197, 200, 212, 219, 222, 227, 240,
  Sealab Project, 292-293
                                                           250. 254. 255. 262. 265. 268. 270,
  space shuttle, 244
                                                           280; 284-285,’ 287,’ 291; 306; 323,
  spacecraft recovery force, 349
                                                           325, 327, 333, 334, 337, 339, 343,
  surface effect ship, 18, 199-200
                                                            347-348, 351, 352, 353, 358, 359
U.S. Postal Service, 232
                                                        Intercosmos 5, 337
US. Supreme Court, 49,65
                                                         Meteor 7, 1   1
USA. See US. Army.
                                                        Meteor 8, 105
USAF. See US. Air Force.                                Meteor 9, 195
                                                        Meteor 10, 360
“USAF in Space” (exhibit), 153
                                                         Molniya 1-18, 210
USGS. See U.S. Geological Survey.
                                                         Molniya 1-19, 355
USMc. See U.S. Marine Corps.
                                                         Molniya 11-1, 330
USN. See US. Navy.                                       Oreol, 359
U.S.S. Nathaniel Greene (submarine).                  sounding rocket, 237, 252, 304
   309                                                SOYUZ 107-108
                                                              IO,
U.S.S. New Orleans, 30, 42                            Soyuz 1 , 154-155
                                                                1
U.S.S. Observation Island, 125                      Lunokhod I , 4, 8, 9-10, 20, 41, 43, 60,
U.S.S. Okinawa, 207, 222                                 66, 73, 98, 100, 133, 139, 145, 152,
U.S.S.R. (Union of Soviet Socialist Re-                  168. 188. 196. 209. 220. 221. 246.
     publics) (see also Soviet Academy                   256; 272, 276, 306-3071 315; 322;
     of Sciences, etc.), 330, 362                        368
   aircraft, 12, 17, 38, 78, 79, 85, 103,           Ministry of Health, 36
        124, 126, 127, 140, 147, 148, 150,          missile and rocket program, 84, 103-
        157, 211, 214, 232, 248, 249, 260,               104, 107, 109, 117, 122, 129, 135,
        263, 264, 280, 286, 312, 314, 346,               137, 146, 152, 194, 243, 248, 286,
        360                                              303, 304, 320, 360
   anniversary, 100, 152, 167                       missile threat to, 224-225
   Apollo 1 mission reaction, 162
             I                                      nuclear energy facilities, U.S. visit to,
   Apollo 14 mission reaction, 35,43                     219
   Apollo I5 mission reaction, 222                  nuclear test, 331
                                                    Paris Air Show exhibit, 152, 168
   astronomy, 357
                                                    probe, 4, 9, 15, 20, 209, 293
   award, 180, 191,218, 266,311
                                                    research and development, 86, 124-
   booster. 115. 246. 249
                                                          125. 201
   communications satellite system, 238,
                                                    S A L T - ~ ~ ~54-55,  74, 148, 189, 190,
                                                                    ~S,
        3Rn
                                                          194-195, 252, 264-265, 266
  coopiiition, 54-55, 117, 190, 197, 287,
                                                    science and technology, 100-101, 110,
      299
  cooperation, space, 10, 13-14, 16, 19-                 124-125, 140, 163, 172, 182, 183,
                                                         190, 210, 262, 290-291, 303-304,
      20, 36, 43, 54-55, 62, 68, 77,
                                                         309,311, 315, 323
      101, 133-134, 139, 153-154, 159,
                                                     Soyuz I 1 cosmonauts funeral and
      171, 177. 185, 196. 197. 198. 216-
      217: 235: 237. 238. 243. 248. 249-                 burial, 185, 186
      275; 2M: 290; 293; 299: 3197 321;             space encyclopedia, 91
                                                    space program, 7-8, 58, 62, 66, 73,
      323, 325, 330, 332, 334, 337, 340,
                                                          82, 86, 94, 100-101, 102, 110, 1 11,
      347, 358, 369
  cosmonaut. See Cosmonaut.                               152, 154-156, 157, 162-163, 166,

                                             471
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                Viking Orbiter (spacecraft), 211,344
       167; 174-175, 176, 183, 201, 218,
       220, 221, 237, 283-284, 299-300,         Viking, Project, 247,264, 275
                                                Vinogradov, Dr. Aleksander P., 6, 159,
       329. 331. 353. 366-368
                                                  217
     military use, 7 3 , 24, 115-116, 158,
                                                Viper Dart (sounding rocket), 234, 236
       176, 296-297, 339
  space station, 105, 107-108, 1 01 1
                                    1-1,        Virgin Islands, 98, 133, 134,308
       112. 115. 119. 122. 127. 154-156,        Virginia, 97, 224
                                                Virginia Institute of Marine Science, 292
       1741175,’ 186,‘ 198,’ 282-1283, 368.
  space tracking ship, 350                      Virginians for Dulles, 271
  spacecraft. See U.S.S.R., launch; and         Virgo (galaxy), 132
       individual spacecraft, such as           VLA. See Very-large-array telescope.
       Luna 16. Mars 2. Molniva I-18.           Vladimirov, Leonid, 329, 331
                                                Volgograd, U.S.S.R., 304
       Salyut 1 , ’ ~ o y u iIO.
                                                Volkov, Vladislav N., 154, 180, 181, 186,
  supersonic transport, 77. 79, 126, 127,
       147, 148, 157                              192, 200, 283
  treaty, 45, 47, 153-154, 177, 313-314         Volpe, Secretary of Transportation John
  weapons, 39, 104, 115-116, 129, 201             A., 9, 19, 107, 109, 182, 194, 276-277,
Ustinov, G., 314                                  295
Utah State Medical Assn., 256                   von Braun, Dr. Wernher, 191,298
Utah. Univ. of. 49.57. 72. 85. 368                awards and honors, 266
                     I   ,



uv. See Ultrav’iokt.                              global resources management system,
                                                     32-33, 321
                    v                             science and technology, 147
                                                  space program, national, 62-63, 68-69,
                                                  147, 249,281, 283, 329, 342
VAB. See Vehicle Assembly Building.               space shuttle, 62-63
Van Allen radiation belts, 261                  von KQrmin Lecture, 298
Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (see also West-          von Opel, Fritz, 99
     ern Test Range), 8                         Voskhod 1 mission, 100, 262
  missile target, 78                            Vostok 1 (U.S.S.R. spacecraft), 152
  satellite launch vehicle                      Vostok 4 mission, 152
     Agena, 350                                           (vertical or short takeoff and
                                                V/STOL
     Atlas. 220                                   landing) aircraft, 18, 65, 80, 298, 300,
     Thor-Agena, 49, 195, 254                     329, 365
     Thor-Burner 11,48, 157                     V/STOLpOrt, 287
     Thorad-Agena, 80, 195, 254, 289, 350       VTOL (vertical takeoff and landing) air-
     Titan IIIB-Agena,, 11, 79, 107, 227,         craft, 12, 262, 298, 300
       296
     Titan ____ 163
         . ITTD
          .
Vandcrbilt Uni;.,282                                               W
Vanguard (satellite), 75. 135. 362
Van&zrd-A History, 75
                                                Wagner, Charles S., 32, 44, 307
Van Reeth, G., 352
Vecchietti, George J., 166                      Wakelin, James H., Jr., 11
                                                Walker, R. M., 83
Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB)(KSC),
  271                                           Wallops Island, Va., 176
Vehicle Technology for Civil Aviation:          Wallops Station (NASA)
  The 70s and Beyond (conference), 307           bird migration cooperative experiment,
Vela (nuclear detection satellite), 153               160-161
Venus (planet, 14, 20, 22, 50, 62, 67, 174,      Central Atlantic Regional Ecological
  186, 218, 333                                       Test Site (CARETS) project, 224
Venus 7 (U.S.S.R. interplanetary probe),         contract, 126
  15, 20                                         launch
Vernadsky Institute for Analvtical Chem-            barium-ion-cloud (BIC) cooperative
                                                         probe, 259
  istry, 6
                                                    Planetary Atmosphere Experiments
Veronique (French rocket), 235
                                                         Test (PAET), 168-169
Vertikal-2 (U.S.S.R. sounding rocket),
  237, 252                                          sounding rocket
Very-large-array ( v u ) radiotelescope,              Aerobee 350,52,159
  280                                                 Arcas, 218
                                                                   m,
VHF: very high frequency.                             Black Brant       54
Victoria, Australia, 167                              Black Brant VC, 199
Vienna, Austria, 148, 199, 253, 265                   Boosted Arcas 1 , 22
                                                                       1
Vietnam war, 220,320,350, 358                         Javelin, 176
Viking (program), 22, 61, 67, 116, 164                Nike-Apache, 68,236235,236-237,
                                                         257
  339

                                              472
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

                                                 White Sands Missile Range (WSMR),
                                                     N. Mex.
                                                  atmospheric data experiment, 236
                                                  launch
 meeting, 97 '                                       Aerohee 150
 open house, 105                                         atmospheric data, 171
 runway research program, 278                            micrometeorite study, 54
Wapakoneta, Ohio, 198                                    solar astronomy, 161-162
Washington, Bradford, award, 327                         stellar data, 13
Washington, D.C., 41, 129, 187, 219, 222,                ultraviolet astronomy, 14, 23, 119
    268, 280, 296, 301, 308, 314, 323                    x-ray astronomy, 132
 astronauts in, 59, 141                              Aerobee 170
 awards presented in, 135, 139, 178, 194,                airglow, 41, 209
   263,298-299,302,326                                   solar astronomy, 228
 comsat communications system, 252,                      stellar data, 226
    265, 271, 272                                        test and support mission, 292
 meetings, 15, 18, 36, 38-39, 53, 68-69,                 ultraviolet astronomy, 79, 119, 226,
                                                            296
    88, 112-113, 146-147, 166, 238, 281,
    297, 306, 335                                    Aerobee 170B, 190-191
                                                     Aerobee 174, 350
 press conference, 59-60, 71, 102, 114,
    122, 125-126, 141, 152, 156-157, 191-            Boosted Arcas 11.226. 285-286
    192                                              Nike-Apache
Washington National Airport, 165, 209,                   airglow, 108
 271                                                     micrometeorite collection, 108
Washington Univ., 83, 296                            Nike-Cajun
Washington, Univ. of, 13, 63                             airglow, 130, 131
Wasserburg, Dr. Gerald J., 7, 167, 235-                  atmospheric data, 8
                                                         ion composition study, 285
 236
                                                 White Sands Test Facility, N. Mex., 131
Water pollution, 293, 322
                                                 White, Thomas D., National Defense
Water-vapor electrolysis system, 308
Watkins, Allen H., 139, 171                       Award, 150
Watson, Ambassador Arthur K., 350                White, Gen. Thomas D., Space Trophy,
                                                  178
Watt, James, International Medal, 84
Weapon systems, 39, 40, 72, 78, 84, 303          Whittaker Corp., 200
                                                 Wichita, Kans., 82, 121
Weather modification, 62, 320
                                                 Wicker, Tom, 217
Weaver, Kenneth F., 70
                                                 Wideroe, Turi, 135
Webb, James E., 69
                                                 Wiesner, Dr. Jerome B., 282
Webb, John A., Jr., 106
                                                 Wilford, John N., 343-344
Weicker, Sen. Lowell P., 24
                                                 Williams, Squadron Leader Graham, 135
Weightlessness, effects, 127, 132, 153, 163,
                                                 WilIiamsburg, Va., 136, 307
 181, 342
                                                 Wilson, George C., 66, 115-116
Weizmann Institute of Science, 18
                                                 Wind tunnel, 9, 70, 153,365-366
Welch, Dr. William J., 299
                                                 Window Crater (moon). 205
Weliachew. Dr. Leonid N.. 194                    Wine. aircraft
Wertz, Carl C., 178
                                                  suup'ercritical, 70, 122, 345, 356
Wesleyan Univ., 145
                                                     flight test, 65, 77, 94, 101, 114, 141,
Wesselski, Clarence J., 251
                                                         145. 163. 165. 192. 233. 240. 251-
West Point, N.Y., 121
                                                         252, 25G256,' 269; 272; 279, 287,
Westerbork, The Netherlands, 280
                                                         346, 349, 365-366
Western Test Range (WTR), 88, 348
                                                  swing, 248
Wetherill, Dr. George W., 212
                                                  test, static, 255-256
Wetport (offshore airport), 137-138
                                                 Winstein, Dr. Saul, 18
Wheeler. Dr. .Tohn A.. 18
                                                 Wisconsin, Univ. of, 15, 60, 79, 239, 279
Whirlpool galaxy. 279-280
                                                   Educational Satellite Center, 117
Whitcomb, Gov. Edgar H., 199                     Witkin, Richard, 131
Whitcomb, Dr. Richard T., 299                    Wollin, Goesta, 302
White, L/C Edward H., I1 (USAF), 10,             Wood, Dr. John A., 7
  357                                            Woomera, Australia, 356
White, Robert M., 19                             Woomera Test Range, Australia, 300
White House, 9, 4243, 124, 198, 212,             Worden, L/C Alfred M. (WAF)
     265. 282                                     Apollo 15 mission
  appointments, 114, 253                              celebrations for, 222-223, 238-239
 astronauts, 59, 68, 356                              Congress, report to, 254
  awards presented at, 59,138                        extravehicular activity, 141, 207-208
 space program, 37,63,272                             flight, 202-208

                                               473
                                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971

     Kennedy Space Center visit, 271             X-15 (rocket research aircraft), 239
     Marshall Space Center visit, 272            X-24A (lifting body), 210, 351, 356, 365
    medical aspects, 207, 222, 225, 228,           test flight, 130, 153, 351
       261, 289                                      glide, 39, 210
    New York Times article, 200-201,                  powered, 11, 49, 65, 85, 142, 210
       229                                       X-24B, 210,351,356,365
     Nixon, President Richard M., 201,           XE (nuclear rocket engine), 53
       208-209, 221-222, 223, 256                XLR-129 (rocket engine), 87,240, 276
     photography, 206-207                        X-ray, 67, 99
     preparations for, 141                         source, 50, 52, 63, 73, 89, 119, 132, 174,
    press conference, 141, 227                        189, 197,226,296,356
    tribute to, 221-222                            weapon detection device, 278
       U.N. visit, 239
       White House visit, 256
                                                                     Y
  Apollo 17 mission, 228-229
  awards and honors, 239, 260, 262, 266,
    346-347
                                                 Yak-40 (U.S.S.R. jet transport), 140
  European visit, 311
                                                 Yangel, Mikhail K., 73, 297
Working Group on Philosophy, Science,
                                                 Yardley, John F., 299
  and Technology, 126
                                                 Yegorov, A. D., 167
Working Group on Remote Measurement              Yegorov, Dr. Boris B., 111,119,262
  of Pollution, 231                              Yeliseyev, Dr. Aleksey S., 107, 1 0 1 1
                                                                                    1-1,
World Administrative Radio Conference
                                                   282-283
  for Space Communications, 132
                                                 Yellowstone National Park, 112
World Law Day, 166
                                                 Yerevan, U.S.S.R., 277
World Weather Program, 103,230
                                                 YF-12 (jet interceptor), 174
World Yeather Program, Plan for Fiscal           YF-12A, 115
  Year 1972, 103
                                                 Young, Capt. John W. (USN), 61, 171,
World Weather Watch, 180
                                                   323
Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy, 263
                                                 Yugoslavia, 43, 242-243, 286, 305-306
Wright 1909 Military Flyer, 248
Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, 247, 268
WSMR. See White Sands Missile Range.
                                                                     Z
WTR. See Western Test Range.
Wydeven, Dr. Theodore, Jr., 308
                                                 Zagreb, Yugoslavia, 4  3
Wydler, Rep. John W., 38
                                                 Zhulin, Dr. I. A., 321, 340
Wyle Laboratories, 49
                                                 Ziegler, Henri, 351
Wynn, Rep. Larry, Jr., 38
                                                 Zieeler. Ronald L.. 135
Wyoming, 128
                                                 Zngniye (Knowledge) (All Union Znaniye
                                                   Society, U.S.S.R.), 177
                   X                             Zoller, Lowell K., 196
                                                 Zond (program), 235
X-1 (rocket research aircraft), 239              Zond (U.S.S.R. spacecraft 1,268
X-3 (satellite). See Prospero.                   Zond 2, 134
              aircraft 1, 262                    Zuckerman, Dr. Benjamin M., 299
X-14A (VTOL
                                                 Zumwalt, Adm. Elmo R., Jr. (USN), 18
X-l4B, 262




                                           474
            NASA HISTORICAL PUBLICATIONS



HISTORIES
    Robert L. Rosholt, An Administrative History of NASA, 1958-1963, NASA SP-
      4101, 1966, GPO, $4.00.*
    Loyd S. Swenson, James M. Grimwood, and Charles C. Alexander, This New
      Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, NASA SP-4201, 1966, GPO, $5.50.
    Constance McL. Green and Milton Lomask, Vanguard-A History, NASA SP-
      4202, 1970: also Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1971, $12.50.
    Alfred Rosenthal, Venture into Space: Early Years of Goddard Space Flight
      Center, NASA SP-4301, 1968, GPO, $2.50.
    Edwin P. Hartman, Adventures in Research: A History of the Ames Research
      Center, 1940-1965, NASA SP-4302, 1970, GPO, $4.75.

HISTORICAL
        STUDIES
  * Eugene M. Emme (ed.), History of Rocket Technology, Detroit: Wayne State
      University, 1964, out of print.
    Mae MiIIs Link, Space Medicine in Project Mercury, NASA SP-4003, 1965,
      NTIS, $6.00.* *
    Historical Sketch of NASA, NASA EP-29, 1965 and 1966, NTIS, $6.00.
    Katherine M. Dickson (Lihrary of Congress), History of Aeronautics and Astro-
      nautics: A Preliminary Bibliography, NASA HHR-29, NTIS, $6.00.
  * Eugene M. Emme (ed.), Statements by the Presidents of the United States on
      International Cooperation in Space, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and
      Space Sciences, Sen. Doc. 92-40, 1971, GPO, $0.55.
    William R. Corliss, N A S A Sounding Rockets, 1958-1968: A Historical Summary,
      NASA SP-4401, 1971, GPO, $1.75.
    Helen T. Wells with Susan Whiteley, Origins of NASA Names, NASA SP-4402
      (1973).
    Jane Van Nimmen and Leonard C. Bruno with Robert L. Rosholt, N A S A
      Historical Data Book, 1958-1968, NASA SP-4012 (1973).
CHRONOLOGIES
     Aeronautics and Astronautics: A n American Chronology of Science and Tech-
        nology in the Exploration of Space, 1915-1960, compiled by Eugene M. Emme,
        Washington: NASA, 1961, NTIS, $6.00.
   * Aeronautical and Astronautical Events of 1961, published by the House Committee
        on Science and Astronautics, 1962, NTIS, $6.00.
   0 Astronautical and Aeronautical Events of 1962, published by the House Committee

        on Science and Astronautics, 1963, NTIS, $6.00.

   .-
   0 Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1963, NASA SP4004, 1964, NTIS, $6.00.




   .-       ,1964, NASA SP-4005, 1965, NTIS, $6.00.
   .-       ,1965, NASA SP-4006,1966, NTIS, $6.00.
            ,1966, NASA SP-4007, 1967, NTIS, $6.00.
   .-        , 1967, NASA SP-4008,1968, GPO, $2.25.
   *- ,        1968, NASA SP-4010, 1969, GPO, $2.00.

   .-        , 1969, NASA SP-4014, 1970, GPO, $2.25.
   *-
             , 1970, NASA SP-4015 (1972).
     James M. Grimwood, Project Mercury: A Chronology, NASA SP-4001, 1963,
        NTIS, $6.00.
      James M. Grimwood and Barton C. Hacker, with Peter J. Vorzimmer, Project
    0

        Gemini Technology and Operations: A Chronology, NASA SP-4002,1969, GPO,
        $2.75.
      Ivan D. Ertel and Mary Louise Morse, The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology,
        Vol. I, Through November 7, 1962, NASA SP4009, 1969, GPO, $2.50.
      Mary Louise Morse and Jean Kernahan Bays, The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronol-
        ogy, Vol. 11, November 8, 1962-September 30, 1964, NASA SP-4009 (1973).
   * R. Cargill Hall, Project Ranger: A Chronology, JPL/HR-2, 1971, NTIS, $6.00.


   * GPO: Titles may be ordered from the Superintendent of Documents, Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.
  ** NTIS: Titles may be ordered from National Technical Information Service,
Springfield, Va. 22151.




                            Q U.S.                                      -9i-zsa
                                     GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1973
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE                   ADMINISTRATION
             WASHINGTON.             D.C.   20546
                                                                                         P O S T A G E A N D FEES P A I D
                                                                                       NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
                  O F F I C I A L BUSINESS                                                SPACE ADMtNISTRATION
                                                                                                      451
           P E N A L T Y F O R P R I V A T E U S E 1900




                                                                                                If Undeliverable (Section 165
                                                                         POSTnIASTER :          Postal JI:iniial) Do Not Retom




                          “The aeronautical and space activities of the United States shall be
                        conducted so as to contribute . . . to the expansion of human knowl-
                        edge of phenomena in the atmosphere and space. The Administration
                        shall provide for the wsdest practicdble and appropriate dissemination
                        of mformution concernkg its activitres and the results thereof.”
                                                -NATIONALAERONAUTICS               SPACE ACT OF 1958
                                                                             AND




  TECHNICAL REPORTS: Scientific and                                     TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS: Information
  technical information considered important,                           published in a foreign language considered
  complete, and a lasting contribution to existing                      to merit NASA distribution in English.
  knowledge.
  TECHNICAL NOTES: Information less broad                               SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS : Information
  in scope bur nevertheless of importance as a                          derived from or of value to NASA activities.        I
  contribution to existing knowled,ge.                                  Publications include final reports of major projects,
                                                                        monographs, data compilations, handbooks,
  TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS
                                                                        sourcebooks, and special bibliographies.
  Information receiving limiter1 distribution
  because of preliminary data, security classifica-
  tion, or other reasons. Also includes conference
                                                                        TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION
   proceedings with either limited or unlimited
                                                                        PUBLICATIONS : Information on technology
  distrtbution.
                                                                        used by NASA that may be of particular
  CONTRACTOR REPORTS: Scientific and                                    interest in commercia1 and other non-aerospace
  technical information generated under a NASA                          applications. Publications include Tech Briefs,
  contract or grant and considered an important                         Technology Utilization Reports and
  contribution to existing knowledge.                                   Technology Surveys.

                              Details on the availability of these publications may b e obtained from

                              SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL I N F O R M A T I O N OFFICE
                                                   AUTICS AND                SPACE AD                      INISTRATION
                                                                             20546
                                                          Washington, D.C.