                                                  NASA SP-4021




ASTRONAUTICS AND
AERONAUTICS, 1976
                   A Chronology




                  Eleanor H. Ritchie



              The NASA History Series




  Sczentific a n d Technical Informarion Branch                 1984
  NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE                  ADMINISTRATION
                                                    Washington, D.C.
                                                ~~~           ~~           ~




For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U S . Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C. 20402 (paper cover)

                                 Library of Congress (halog Number 65
                                        C
                                                                                       .......
February ............................................................................
March ...............................................................................            43
April ................................................................................           69
May .................................................................................            87
June .................................................................................           111
July ..................................................................................          137
August ..............................................................................            175
September ..........................................................................             203
October .............................................................................            235
November ..........................................................................              267
December ..........................................................................              285
Appendix A: Satellites. Space Probes. and Manned Space Flights. 1976 .                           307
Appendix B: Major NASA Launches. 1976 ..................................                         337
Appendix C: Manned Space Flights. 1976 ...................................                       341
Appendix D: NASA Sounding Rocket Launches. 1976 ....................                             343
Appendix E: Abbreviations of References ....................................                     351
Index and List of Abbreviations and Acronyms ..............................                      355
Errata in Earlier Volumes .......................................................                397


                                     Illustrations
                                    ............................................
 Comsats launched by NASA. 1976                                                                    2
Concorde arrives at Dulles Airport .............................................                 103
Third Century America exposition opens at KSC ............................                       108
National Air and Space Museum ...............................................                    138




                                                                          ....................   223
 Enterprise (Shuttle Orbiter 101) rolled out at Rockwell
                                                                     ........................    258
 XV-15 (tilt-rotor research aircraft) rolled out at Bell

                                                   ...
                                                   111
                            January 1976

1 January: “An impressive record of cost-cutting that could well set an
    example to many agencies” had been achieved by NASA since the mid-
    sixties, said Sen. William A. Proxmire (D-Wis.), one of the agency’s
    severest critics. Chairman of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee
    that handles NASA’s   appropriation, Proxmire said that NASA had made its
    tight budget go farther by acting as its own prime contractor when
    construction bids were too high; buying electronic parts from a standard-
    ized list; providing reimbursable launches to private industry and other
    outside organizations on an “accelerated” basis, although not-
    according to Proxmire-charging enough for them; and, in general,
    making “one dollar do the job that it took two dollars to do in the free
    and easy money days.” (Today, 1 Jan 76, 1)
* Failure to reach a satisfactory nuclear arms agreement with the Soviet
    Union would result in U.S. development of a new land-based inter-
    continental missile, according to U.S. government sources quoted by
    Reuters in a Baltimore Sun story. The 5-yr defense plan to be submitted
    to Congress in 3 wk with the new FY 1977 budget would include spending
    $1.07 billion to start work on a larger and more accurate missile called
    MX that could be launched from silos, aircraft, or land-mobile platforms.
    The new missile would be operational by 1985, the report said. ( B Sun,
     1 Jan 76, A6)
* 2 January: NASA planned 18 major satellite launchings in 1976, 16 from
    Cape Canaveral and 2 from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air
    Force Base. First of these, on 13 Jan., would be a US.-Canadian commu-
    nications technology satellite; second, on 15 Jan., would be the Helios
    satellite built by West Germany. Other NASA launches during the year
    would include 2 comsats for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization; 2
    maritime comsats (Marisats); Palapa, a comsat for the Indonesian gov-
    ernment; the second geostationary operational environmental satellite
    (GOES-B); and Lageos, a laser geodynamic satellite to help alleviate
    earthquake hazards. ( N Y T , 3 Jan 76, 5)
* As he assumed the presidency of the American Association for the Ad-
    vancement of Science, Dr. William D. McElroy (chancellor of the Univ.
    of Calif. in San Diego, and former director of the National Science
    Foundation) said he planned to reorganize the AAAS journal Science,
    involve the association more deeply in government and industry activity,
    and quadruple the membership. Dr. McElroy, called the “leading world
    authority on the biochemistry of firefly light,” said he hoped to stop the
    publication of pure research papers in Science, as more specialized
    scientific journals could do this more efficiently, and to promote a free
    flow of ideas between the universities and the industrial community by

                                      1
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January




Four of the cornsats in NASA’s 1976 launch schedule: A, Cornsat General’s Marisat,
                                                  c.
launched 19 Feb.; B , NATO III-A, launched 22 Apr.;  cornsat General‘s cornstar 1A,
launched 13 May; D, Indonesia’s Palapa, launched 8 July.




                                        2
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      January

    including more articles of interest to users in industry and engineering,
    and paying more attention to science issues in government policy. He
    referred to the “unfortunate separation” between industry and univer-
    sity after World War 11 when science gained new nonindustrial financial
    support; by increasing the circulation of Science magazine, he would
    expand the AAAS membership, as the magazine is available only to mem-
    bers. (NIT, 2 Jan 76, 10)
5 January-4 February: Permission to fly the British- and French-built
    Concorde supersonic transport into the U.S. was the subject of a hearing
    called by Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, Jr., in Washing-
    ton to help him decide the matter within 30 days. Basic arguments pro
    and con were not new, observers agreed, as they had all been thrashed
    out in a bitter 1971 congressional fight that halted U.S. efforts to build
    an SST after about $1 billion had been spent on the project. The case
    against the Concorde had been that it was too noisy and that its emissions
    polluted the atmosphere and depleted the stratospheric ozone shield.
    Spokesmen for the Concorde cited its benefits in speed of travel and
    technical achievement. At the hearing, representatives of the Va. state
    government called for approval of Concorde landings at Dulles, in view
    of the airport’s significance as Virginia’s international gateway; these
    advocates found themselves opposed to the views of the local Va. juris-
    dictions which did not want the SST landing there. Gov. Hugh Carey of
    N . Y . opposed the Concorde’s coming into JFK Airport because of the
    noise. On 6 Jan. the Environmental Protection Agency reversed its
    previous stand, calling for a total ban on commercial operations in the
    U.S. of the British-French SST. On 13 Jan., the Aerospace Industries
     Assn.-kl.s.     manufacturers of aerospace vehicles and components-
    submitted a letter deploring the cancellation of the US. program and
    supporting Concorde’s application to operate. On 29 Jan., the Am. Inst.
    of Aeronautics and Astronautics, claiming to represent 22 000 engineers
    and scientists, called for a limited-operations trial period to collect data
     as the basis for a final decision on giving Concorde access to U.S. airports.
     The Concorde had begun regular passenger service 2 1 Jan. between
     Paris and Rio de Janeiro, and between London and Bahrain, as the climax
     of 14 yr of technical cooperation between Britain and France and a joint
     investment of more than $3 billion.
           DO'^ Secy. Coleman announced 4 Feb. that he had granted the Con-
    corde “limited scheduled commercial flights’’ into the U.S. for a period
    not to exceed 16 mo under precise limitations. British Airways and Air
    France could send up to 2 flights per day into JFK and Dulles airports,
    but the permission could be revoked upon 4 mo notice or immediately in
     case of emergency. The limitations included prohibitions on landing or
     takeoff in the US. before 7 am or after 10 pm local time, and on flying
     at supersonic speed over the u.S. or any of its territories. In his 61-page
     decision with 36 pages of appendix, Coleman said the 16-1110 period
     should be long enough to demonstrate the validity of his judgment. Upon
     hearing of the secretary’s decision, 2 members of the Senate Commerce
     Committee were narrowly defeated in an attempt to ban the Concorde

                                        3
January                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    from landing in the U.S. by attaching such a ban to a bill authorizing funds
    for airport development. The Concorde’s only supersonic competitor was
    the IJSSR’STupolev-144, in service since 26 Dec. 1975 within the Soviet
    Union as a freight plane. (NYT, 5 Jan 76, 1; Av Wk, 5 Jan 76, 26;
     W Star, 6 Jan 76, A-3; W Post, 6 Jan 76, A-1; AIA Aerospace News
    Release 76-1; text, AIAA letter to DOT, 29 Jan 76; NIT’ 21 Jan 76,
    16-17; WStar, 21 Jan 76, A-3; B Sun, 28 Jan 76, A-6; NYi”, 1 Feb
    76, 3-1; I o Release 09-76, 4 Feb. 76; N f l , 5 Feb 76, 1, 16, 32M;
                )T
     W Post, 5 Feb 76, A-1, A-18; B Sun, 5 Feb 76, A14)
6 January: The Republic of Ireland would become the eleventh member of
    the European Space Agency, ESA announced today, when parliaments of
    the existing member states (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
    the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom)
    ratify the agency’s convention. Ratification might take 1 to 2 yr, during
    which time Ireland would retain its observer status. The ambassador of
    the Republic of Ireland in Paris signed the ESA convention 3 1 Dec. 1975.
    (ESA release 5 Jan 76)
7 January: The U.S. Coast Guard began its Project Icewarn field program
    with the first of a number of daily ice-observation missions by aircraft
    over the Great Lakes during the winter navigation season. The flights
    would continue through 2 Feb., when ice conditions were expected to
    stop all shipping on the Great Lakes, and resume in Mar. with the
    breakup of the ice and continue through Apr. Objective of the program
    was to provide Coast Guard personnel with experience in operating a
    side-looking airborne radar (SLAR) system developed by NASA’s          Lewis
    Research Center, which included equipment to convert radar signals to
    ice-cover images transmitted in real time from the aircraft to the ground
    through a relay channel on SmslGoes 1. The system would be demon-
    strated in a simulation during which ice-cover information would be
    transmitted to captains of lake shipping for use in routing the ships
    through the ice. (Wkly Briefs for Admr, 12 Jan 76)
  A new computer program developed at Johnson Space Center from Landsat
    digital data could compile maps on any scale desired showing water
    surfaces in excess of 0.024 sq km, said specialists in the Earth Obser-
    vations Division at JSC. Nations needing an inventory of their water
    resources could obtain maps of their lakes and reservoirs, and state
    governments could use the service in choosing between recreational and
    industrial use of available water supplies. The program, called Detection
    and Mapping (DAM) Package, required only $300 worth of computer
    time to map more than 33 800 sq km. As the two Landsats cover about
    9 5 percent of the earth’s land mass, the system could produce surface-
    water maps for virtually all populated regions with almost 100% accu-
    racy for water areas as large as 0.04 sq km; position accuracy-the
    degree to which the maps match the terrain-would be within 90m of
    dead center. User training would be typically no more than a day, and
    the system would need no experts to implement it. (NASA Release 76-4;
    JSC Release 76-01)
* The Peoples Republic of China indicated for the first time that it planned
    to put a man into space, according to an article in the Peking Kuang-
                                       4
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     January

    ming Daily entitled “The Launching and the Bringing Back of Artificial
    Satellites from Earth.” As reported by radio from Hong Kong, the article
    recalled that PRC had put 5 satellites into orbit since 1970, emphasiz-
    ing that China 4 (launched 26 Nov. 75) “returned to earth as scheduled
    after functioning normally.” After explaining how satellites were
    launched and recovered, the article added that recovery was particularly
    significant in “sending men into space.” The radio report said that the
    article-first of its kind in the official PRC press-was even more sur-
    prising because the Chinese supposedly had not heard that man had
    walked on the moon, as this had never been reported in the Chinese press.
    (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, by G. Biannic, 7 Jan 76)
8 January: Goes 1, a new geostationary environmental satellite launched in
    Oct. 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
    (NOAA), became operational, replacing Sms 1 above the equator over
    northern Brazil to provide forecasters with visual and infrared pictures
    of the western hemisphere, to monitor solar-flare activity, and to relay
    information from data-collection stations in remote areas. Sms 1 would
    be moved to standby status over the eastern Pacific south of Mexico; a
    prototype satellite, some of whose systems have degraded, it could still
    provide full operational data on an emergenc basis. Sms 2, launched in
    Feb. 1975, was moved in Dec. from 115BW to 135”W to provide
    improved imagery of the Pacific in the Hawaiian Islands area. (NOAA
    Release 76-1)
0 The Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., NASA’s           prime site for
    experimental research in aeronautics, was renamed the Hugh L. Dryden
    Flight Research Center in memory of the pioneer aeronautical re-
    searcher who was first Deputy Administrator of NASA, a position he held
    until his death in 1965. Dr. Dryden’s contributions to aeronautical
    research included investigation of high-speed airfoils, supersonic
    propeller-tip velocities, boundary layers, and airflow wind turbulence,
    and development of high-speed wind tunnels. He was director of the
    former National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics from 1947 until
    that agency became NASA in 1958. (NASARelease 76-7; FRC Release
     1-76; Goddard News, Feb 76, 6)
0 In observing the results of Salyut 4’s first year of operation in space, Soviet
    cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov in an article in Pravda reviewed the
    research and experiments conducted on board the space station, calling
    it     major achievement for Soviet space navigation.” Special mention
    was given to the solar radiation studies and environmental photography
    done from Salyut 4; the first expedition photographed a million sq km
    of Soviet territory, and the second crew also took pictures to enable
    scientists to follow developments in hydrology, vegetation, and climate.
     Medical studies of the crews centered on the effects of long space flights
    and the mechanism of the body’s adaptation to weightlessness. Salyut 4,
     the article noted, was built with an eye to longer activity for the station
     and better facilities for prolonging manned missions. (FBIS, Tass in Eng-
    lish, 8 Jan 76)
9 January: Geos 3, the geodynamics experimental ocean satellite launched
     9 Apr. 1975, completed 9 mo in orbit and the project was judged
                                       5
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    successful with respect to the prelaunch mission objectives. Problems
    with orbit definition and revised criteria for data distribution had delayed
    the release of large quantities of data, said a report by Charles W.
    Mathews, Associate Administrator for Applications at NASA, but the first
    batches would be shipped 30 Jan. to principal investigators, and sub-
    sequent batches would be released monthly thereafter. (MOR E-855-
    75-01 [postlaunch], 25 Feb 76)
10 January: An unmanned ground terminal that could operate with several
    satellites in synchronous orbit above the earth was patented by three
    engineers for the Communications Satellite Corporation. Previously, a
    separate earth terminal was needed for each satellite. William K. Sones,
    Laurence F. Gray, and Louis Pollack, of the ComSat staff in Washington,
    D.c.,invented the new facility, considered a major advance that would
    add reliability and reduce costs. The structure included a single reflector
    about 9.7m by 15.4m with enough traveling-wave tubes, transmitters,
    receivers, and amplifiers to handle two or more satellites, plus monitors
    and controls; the reliability feature was a system that switched in another
    tube if one became defective. Possible uses would be on offshore rigs or
    at oil-pipeline installations that were unmanned but required constant
    communication by satellite. (NW, 10 Jan 76, 31)
11 January: The French government halted operations of sounding-rocket
    and scientific satellite launchings from its base at Kourou, French Gui-
    ana, after 7 yr of activity that included launches of 275 rockets or
    balloons, many of them under U.S. government or National Science
    Foundation programs. The base had become a victim of European eco-
    nomic problems that had led to the abandonment of ELDO-the European
    Launcher Development Organization formed by several countries in July
    1966-when the first launching in 1971 failed. The head of the oper-
    ations division at Kourou said there was a complete lack of coordination
    among the countries, although France and its partners had spent about
    $500 million on the site and support facilities at Kourou. Space research
    would resume in about 4 yr with the launch of a 3/4-ton tele-
    communications satellite sponsored by the French government, under a
    new system in which each project would be under the management of one
    country. Ten European governments would contribute money, and the
    funds would be allocated in the form of contracts for each project.
    (W Post, 11 Jan 76, E 7)
12 January: Use of dirigibles instead of drifting stations in the Arctic Ocean
    for polar exploration and scientific studies was advocated by Soviet polar
    explorer Nikolay Blinov, a staff member of the Leningrad Arctic and
    Antarctic Institute, as reported by Tass. The USSR had been using obser-
    vatories set up on ice floes to forecast weather and ice formations on the
    northern sea route for about 40 yr; the 23rd North Pole station was
    established on a large iceberg in the last quarter of 1975. Blinov pointed
    out that the continuously drifting stations, never safe from breakup
    and melting away upon encounter with warm water, offered less relia-
    bility than dirigibles, which could remain over a location for an indefinite
    time to register data on the “hydrological regime” of a certain area and

                                      6
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    January

    would be durable and less expensive to maintain. (FBIS, Tass in English,
    12 Jan 76)
13 January: Eighty percent of the 114 federal research laboratories had not
    adopted cost-cutting activities recommended 6 yr ago by the General
    Accounting’Office. A new GAO survey found that agencies had not made
    periodic inspections of equipment to find unused items that could be sold;
    had not established equipment pools to eliminate duplication and under-
    use of costly scientific tools; and had not started using “time meters” as
    a check on how often the equipment was used. Agencies following the
    three recommendations could save millions of dollars, said Rep. Les
    Aspin (D-Wis.) in releasing the GAO report, citing an atomic research
    facility that saved $24.2 million by disposing of unneeded equipment.
    Aspin also referred to purchases of expensive sophisticated equipment
    for a single experiment that was never used again, when it could have
    been sold or passed along to another agency. ( W Star, 1 3 Jan 76, C8)
* The largest optical telescope in the Southern’Hemisphere began operation
    on a mountaintop about 483 km north of Santiago, Chile, to give astron-
    omers their best look at objects such as the Magellanic Clouds and the
    brightest globular star clusters visible only from that hemisphere. The
     13.7m-long telescope’s steerable portion weighed 300 tons, so delicately
    balanced that one person could move it by hand. Its mirrors were made
    of Cervit, an optical material insensitive to temperature changes; its
     15-ton main mirror was 4 m in diam. and 6 1 cm thick, and the secondary
    mirror was 1.3 m in diameter. The new Cerro Tololo Inter-American
    Observatory would be run by the Association of Universities for Research
    in Astronomy (AURA), Inc., under contract to the National Science
    Foundation and in cooperation with the Univ. of Chile at Santiago; Cerro
    Tololo and its sister institution, Kitt Peak National Observatory near
    Tucson, Ariz., would be national research centers with 60% of all tele-
    scope time available to qualified visiting scientists who would otherwise
    lack access to instruments capable of frontier research in astronomy.
    (NSF Release PR 76-4)
14 January: The French government had earmarked a preliminary budget
     of $3.6 million for development of a spy satellite that would survey the
    earth’s surface with infrared cameras, the N.Y. Daily News said. Weigh-
     ing several hundred kg and orbiting at 500 to 600 km altitude, the
     satellite would use several lenses in visible and infrared light to detect
     details at sizes ranging from 10 to 100 m. The government’s represen-
     tative for armaments, J.-L. Delpech, said that France had “no military
     space policy” because reconnaissance satellites were “not essential” to
     France’s “deterrent strategy.” (FBIS, in French, 13 Jan 76; NY News,
      14 Jan 76, 58)
15January: Helios 2, third* cooperative project of the U.S. and the Federal
     Republic of Germany, was launched from Complex 41 of the Eastern
     Test Range at 1 2 3 4 am EST (0534 GMT) on a Titan-Centaur (TC-5) into

*First FRG-US. venture was the German research satellite GSR-A, launched
    in Nov. 1969 and titled Azur in orbit.

                                       7
January                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

     a solar orbit that would put it between 44 million and 144 million km
     from the sun, 3 million km closer than its twin, Helios 1, launched 10
      Dec. 1974. Each Helios carried 7 experiments of West German scien-
     tists and 3 from the US. The experiments would investigate solar proc-
     esses and events such as coronal, solar-wind, and interplanetary fields
     and waves; cosmic rays, both solar and nonsolar; dust particles and
     zodiacal light; and celestial mechanics. Helios 2 was the first spacecraft
     carrying a detector for gamma-ray bursts in space, whose cause and
     source had not been identified since discovery in 1969. Combining Helios
     data with information from other satellites might pinpoint the direction
     of the sources and permit their identification with visible celestial objects.
     The Helios spacecraft weighed 376 kg, with a 1.75 m cylinder carrying
     conical solar arrays on each end that gave it a spool shape; with deploy-
     able booms extended, Helios 2 would measure 32 m tip to tip. The solar
     arrays would provide a minimum of 240 w at aphelion-much more
     when closer to the sun-to power the data handling and transmission.
     Scientists also hoped for more information on the unexpected concen-
     tration of micrometeorites found by Helios 1; about 15 times more of
     these particles were detected within 53 million km of the sun than had
     been observed near the earth. Cost of the 2 Helios missions was about
      $260 million, of which the German share was about $180 million for
     spacecraft units, 7 experiments, and command and data-acquisition
     expenses; mission control would be at the German Space Operations
      Center near Munich. The U.S. paid for the 2 launch vehicles and the 3
      U.S. experiments, plus support services, a total of about $80 million. A
     third Helios had been considered for launch in 1980 to measure solar
     activity at the height of the 11-yr cycle and to study Comet Encke. (NASA
      Releases 75-317, 76-2; MOR S-823-76-02 [prelaunch] 7 Jan 76,
     [postlaunch] 23 Jan 76; NYT, 16 Jan 76, 27)
    The USSR’s supersonic passenger plane TU-144, in service between Mos-
      cow and Alma Ata in Kazhakstan, had flown further on the special test
      bench still being used to operate its engines under varying flight condi-
      tions than it had in the skies, according to a story in the newspaper
      Pravda. The bench, designed simultaneously with the aircraft itself,
      could accommodate the 65-m-long plane and simulate conditions such as
      outside-temperature changes from -6OOC to 150°C; oncoming and
      vertical air currents with a velocity of 30 to 50 m per see; and air-current
      impact on skin and control mechanisms in TU-144 takeoff and landing.
      The plane’s wings and fuselage were “wrapped” in 5000 steel rods with
      sensors attached to 12 000 points that signaled the slightest change to
      computers; the bench included 8000 thermometers, as well as 3300 km
      of wires from the TU- 144 to instruments and computers, “equal to the
      distance between Moscow and Alma Ata,” the report said. During the
      tests, the cabin retained normal atmospheric pressure and temperature
      even when exterior conditions imitated those at 18 to 20 km in the
      stratosphere where the plane would be flying. (FBIS, Tass in English,
      1 4 Jan 76)
    Scientists attempting to find a source of unlimited energy like that which
0
      powers the sutl had taken two potentially significant directions, Walter
                                        8
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     January

    Sullivan reported in the New York Times. Soviet researchers had shifted
    from emphasis on laser beams for crushing nuclear fuel to superdensity,
    to use of electron beams for that purpose. Although 90% of U.S. effort
    had been on converging pulses of laser light, a new system of using ion
    beams had shown advantages over the electron-beam method from which
    it evolved: the apparatus would deliver a vast amount of energy to a fuel
    pellet, causing the shell to explode both inward and outward. The inward
    blast, crushing the pellet core to 1000 times its original density, would
    produce a fusion reaction resulting in helium, and a small amount of mass
    would be converted into a large amount of energy. The U.S. electron-
    beam study was based at Sandia Laboratories, in N.M., one of three
    research centers operated by the Energy Research and Development
    Administration. Although the US. use of ions was the chief novelty in the
    fusion-energy field, laser fusion was still the front runner, Sullivan noted.
    ( N U , 15 Jan 76, 22)
16 January: An impartial “science court” to weigh controversial national
    issues such as pesticide use or nuclear-reactor safety was one of several
    ideas under consideration by two advisory groups appointed by the
    President last year to give the proposed White House office of science
    and technology a head start in its task of making major policy decisions.
     Dr. Simon Ramo, chairman of the advisory group on technological
     contributions to economic strength, pointed out that no procedure
    existed for dealing with scientific an
    issues. Dr. William 0. Baker, preside
     the other advisory group on advances
    meeting of the groups in Washingt
     science-court idea in an experime
     which a clearcut statement of scientific
     arguing the case with advocates and cross
     with an impartial panel of scientific judge               the decision. Dr.
     Ram0 said the experiment should teach the a
     issue they chose, help the gover
     issue, and demonstrate whether the co
     on which the advisory groups
     included the world problem of
     nological innovation and its e
     government regulation on advancement in science and technology.
     ( N W , 16 Jan 76, 32)
0 The board of directors of Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat)
     declared a quarterly dividend of 25 cents per share payable 15 Mar. to
     all shareholders of record at close of business 13 Feb. The group’s 22nd
     consecutive quarterly dividend would be the 7th at the 25-cent rate.
     (ComSat Release 76- 1)
17-29 January: The Communications Technology Satellite designed by
     u .s. and Canadian technicians-world’s most powerful comsat-was
     launched from Complex 17, Eastern Test Range, at 6:27:54 pm EST
     (2328 GMT)on a Delta 2914 vehicle, delayed from its scheduled date of
      13 Jan. The 346-kg space craft cost $60 million in Canadian funds and
     $22 million in US. funds. The design departure used on Cts was the
                                       9
   Cts was the result of a 5-yr international program of cooperation
between NASA and CDC to pioneer in new methods of providing commu-
nications services by transmitting high-quality color Tv and other data to
small user-operated ground stations in remote areas. It carried a high-
                                                    eveloped at LeRC that
                                                    higher than those of
                                                    r and less expensive
                                  w frequency band providing microwave
                                   1971, the World Administrative Radio
                                 g frequencies between 11 and 14 ghz and
                                 and broadcast satellites of the future, in
                                                     t in the 1980s. The
                                                     f transmitting its own
                                                      1 consulting services
                                sing small, inexpensive-even portable-
                                se 76-9, 75-316; MOR E-610-76-01




                                                        ra that had taken




                       nary spacecraft such as Sms 1 and 2 and Goes 1,
                  er visual transmission and provided nighttime imagery


                                  onstrations such as medical and edu-

                                 10
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    January

e Reviewing the Energy Research and Development Administration’s first
   year of operation, ERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans Jr. said the
    U.S. had taken major steps to assure adequate energy supplies in the
    future. Establishment o ERDA on 19 Jan. 1976, bringing together energy
                             f
    research functions formerly located in other agencies, was itself a mile-
   stone. Specific steps cited by Seamans included a major solar-heating
    demonstration and completion of two heating-and-cooling projects; de-
    velopment of a national energy R ~ plan emphasizing conservation of
                                             D
   energy and development of new sources; demonstration and testing of
    more efficient recovery and use of coal, oil, and shale; biohazard screen-
    ing of 150 compounds in fossil fuels to determine which might cause
    cancer or genetic mutations; and identifying problems in the nuclear-fuel
    cycle, including reprocessing of fuel and disposal of wastes. Describing
    fossil and nuclear energy as the near-term and midterm resources of the
    nation, Seamans said that conservation should enable them to carry the
    u .s. into the next century, when essentially inexhaustible energy sources
    should be available: solar electricity, breeder reactors, and fusion power.
    (ERDA Release 76-5)
  The Apollo lunar scientific experiments package (ALSEP) set up on the moon
    in Feb. 1971 by astronauts Alan B. Shepard and Edgar D. Mitchell
    during the third manned exploration of the moon ceased transmission,
    probably because of failure of electronic components, engineers at John-
    son Space Center said. The Apollo 14 instrument, one of five stations on
    the moon, had provided scientists with lunar seismic data in combination
    with stations set up during the Apollo 12, 15, 16, and 17 missions.
    Originally designed with a 1-yr lifetime, the ALSEP 14 was first of the
    stations to fail completely, although it had lost its ability to receive
    commands a year previously. The remaining stations continued to pro-
    vide data on the moon’s seismic activity, heat flow, interactions with
    earth’s magnetic field, and the solar-wind and cosmic particles that
    continuously bombard the lunar surface. Findings based on ALSEP data
    included measurement of moonquakes, mostly at about 4 on the Richter
    scale; indications of a lunar core at or near the melting point; a thick
    lithosphere that probably prevented mountain-building on the moon; and
    a tenuous atmosphere deriving from solar-wind particles. The seismic
    instruments on the ALSEPs were the most sensitive in existence, and
    the remaining stations were estimated to last for another 3 yr. (JSC
    Roundup, 1 3 Feb 76, 1)
  Food preparation and packaging techniques developed by NASA to feed
    Apollo and Skylab crews during space flight had been used in a pilot
     program to provide balanced nutrition to elderly persons living alone, the
     Johnson Space Center announced. The program, called Meal Systems for
     the Elderly, was part of JsC’s Technology Utilization program to apply
     space-developed technology to solution of earthbound problems. The
     goal was to provide a meal system that could be opened, cooked, eaten,
     and cleaned up by older people living alone; each meal would provide at
     least a third of the daily diet allowance for an older person, and a field
     demonstration had been scheduled that would evaluate the meal design
     and delivesy methods by the end of 1976. The Jsc team developing the
                                     11
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    program would aim at a shelf-stable, multimeal package that could be
    distributed by several methods-even parcel post-to senior citizens
    living beyond the range of hot-meal delivery or to those in areas where
    meals were not provided. (NASA Release 76-6; JSC Release 76-02)
20 January: Dr. Wernher von Braun, who had retired in 1972 as Deputy
    Associate Administrator for Long-Range Planning at NASA Hq, said in a
     Washington Star interview that he had been brought to Washington in
    1970 to “lend clout to NASA’s      ability to get its appropriations.” His
    assignment had been to present to Congress the program of a manned
    expedition to Mars; “so many national problems” had arisen that Con-
    gress would not commit itself to another multibillion-dollar space pro-
    gram, and the reusable space shuttle was the only element of the concept
    that survived. Dr. von Braun recalled that NASA’s     resources were cut to
    about a third during his last 2 yr at NASA, and the new organization with
    which he was associated-the National Space Institute-was created to
    “reach large numbers of people” and broaden public support of basic
    science, “where it is much more difficult to predict the payoff.” “Re-
    member,” he added, “nuclear energy, which ultimately was used in the
    hydrogen bomb, was discovered because some astrophysicists were inter-
    ested in what keeps the sun hot.” ( W Star, 20 Jan 76, A-1)
21 January: President Ford sent a t394.2-billion FY 1977 budget request to
    Congress, an increase of $44.8 billion over the FY 1976 request; how-
    ever, comparisons were distorted by the switch this year to a new federal
    budget calendar. (FY 1976 would end as usual on 30 June, but FY 1977
    would not start until 1 Oct.; for the “transition quarter,” July through
    Sept., the budget would run about $98 billion, revenues at $81.9 billion,
    and the deficit at $16.1 billion. The change appeared in the Budget
    Reform Act of 1974, to give the Congress more time after it convened
    in Jan. each year to adopt a budget for the coming fiscal year.)
        The budget attempted to explain “what went wrong” when an esti-
    mated national deficit of $9.4 billion turned out as an actual deficit of
    $43.6 billion; in FY 1975, the last completed fiscal year, spending totaled
    $324.6 billion ($20 billion more than anticipated), whereas receipts were
    only $28 1 billion, compared with an original estimate of $295 billion, the
    difference partly owing to an antirecession tax rebate enacted toward the
    end of the fiscal year. The biggest single factor-$6.5 billion spent in
    unemployment compensation-resulted from the recession unforeseen
    early in 1974; apart from higher unemployment payments under the
    existing program, Congress had extended benefits and coverage,
    accounting for $1.5 billion of the increase.The budget said that most of
    the discrepancy “can be explained by differences between actual and
    assumed economic conditions and the effects of new legislation.’’ The
     NY” commented that “total figures for outlays, receipts, and the deficit
    in the [budget] document submitted at the beginning of each year for the
    fiscal year to follow have become increasingly meaningless.”
        In a press briefing on his budget, President Ford stated his intent to
    “restrain the growth of federal spending and restore the vitality of the
    private economy.” This was expected to be the keystone of his campaign
    for reelection. Total federal outlays under the proposed budget would

                                     12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      January
     increase 5.5% over the current fiscal year, less than half the average
      annual growth in federal spending over the past 10 yr. Largest per-
     centage increase in the budget again would be in the field of energy
      research; aside from defense, increased spending in areas such as mass
      transit and water pollution would represent work on programs already
      begun rather than new starts.
          Highlights of the budget were:
      0 Increased defense spending of about $10 billion, exceeding $100
             billion for the first time.
       * Increased Social Security payments by employers and employees,
             to close the gap between income and outgo.
          A proposal for consolidating about 60 current federal programs-
             in areas such as health, education, child nutrition, and social serv-
             ices-into “block grants” to the states, with few strings attached.
          Proposed spending for defense represented a turnaround of sorts:
      defense spending had fallen for a while after Vietnam, then rose again in
      FY 1975 with the end of the draft and conversion to higher priced
      all-volunteer armed forces with an upward pressure on wages. The outlay
      in FY 1977 would be for weapons; more than half the recommended
      increase would go for procurement, research, and development. Defense
      at $101.1 billion would constitute a fourth of the total budget, as in
      recent years, and Social Security about another fifth. Interest on the
      public debt would add a tenth; these three items would account for more
      than half. Five other basic budget items-Medicare-Medicaid, unem-
      ployment compensation, civil service retirement, and veterans bene-
      fits-would make up three fourths of the total, leaving only a fourth of
      the total budget for all remaining government spending.
           Science, represented by $23.5 billion in federal R((ID spending pro-
      posed for FY 1977, would use more than half that amount for military
      projects; the space program would get $3.6 billion, only 4% more than
      the current year and much less than price escalation. Highest priorities
      for increases in civilian spending on science would be colleges and
      universities, which would get $2.6 billion in research funds, and the
      National Science Foundation, which would get $812 million. NASA, under
      the proposed budget, would postpone purchase of one of the Space
      Shuttles for a year, and would drop its plan for a Mars-Jupiter-Saturn
      explorer. At the height of spending for the Apollo program 10 yr ago,
      civilian and nonspace science got 20% of RslD funding; in FY 1977,
      it would get 37%. (W Star, 21 Jan 76, A-1, A-10, A-1 1; W Post,
       22 Jan 76, A-1, A-14, A-15, A-16; NYT, 22 Jan 76, 1 , 2 4 , 2 5 , 2 6 )
    At a hearing on solar power from satellites conducted by the subcommittee
0
      on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate Committee on
      Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Deputy Administrator George M.
      Low and Dr. John M. Teem, ERDA’S Assistant Administrator for Solap,
      Geothermal, and Advanced Energy Systems, were questioned closely by
      Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky), subcommittee chairman, on the ERDA and
       NASA responsibilities for the program. Testimony revealed that ERDA had
      prime responsibility for solar, as well as other, power-generating con-
       cepts, and that NASA had not requested funds for developing an indepen-
                                        13
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    dent program but was working on solar-power ideas to use in satellite
    missions. Primary goal of ERDA’S program, Dr. Teem testified, was devel-
    opment and demonstration of terrestrial solar-energy applications that
    were commercially attractive and environmentally acceptable: solar
    thermal electric, photovoltaic, wind, and ocean-energy conversion.
    Dr. Teem pointed out that the FY 1977 budget included no direct funding
    for energy R&D for NASA, as the basic responsibility rested with ERDA.
    Dr. Low added that, when ERDA decided that research should proceed,
    NASA would do the work with ERDA funding. (Text, pp. 192-227)
  Flight tests by the Air Force had confirmed the concept called LATAR
    (laser-augmented target acquisition and recognition) that would permit a
    pilot in a high-performance single-seat fighter to fly the aircraft and
    operate its weaponry at the same time. The LATAR pod, mounted under
    the fuselage of an F-5E directly beneath the cockpit, contained a laser-
    target designator, a spot tracker, and an electro-optical sensor. The spot
    tracker was a device that finds a laser “spot” from another target
    designator operated from another aircraft or on the ground; initial target
     identification could be either visual, by radar, or by a helmet-mounted
     sight system that integrated sight control with movement of the pilot’s
     head. The flight tests were conducted at the Air Force Flight Test Center,
     Edwards AFB, Calif. (OW Release 308.75)
22 January: The Aerosat Space Segment Board, representing the European
     Space Agency, Comsat General Corp., and the government of Canada,
     decided to issue requests for proposals for a supply of Aerosat spacecraft
     beginning 1 Mar., with target date for award of contract 15 Nov. The
     Aerosat program, to be carried out by =A, the U.S. Federal Aviation
     Administration, and the government of Canada, would set up an experi-
     mental satellite-communications system between transoceanic aircraft
     and the ground to tescfunctions and timing of an operational system for
     the International Civil Aviation Organization. Two satellites designed for
     7-yr lifetime would be launched into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic
     Ocean, probably in 1979-80. (EA release 23 Jan 76; Comsat General
     Release 76- 103)
0 Commenting on the first 3 mo of operation of the USSR Venus orbiters, Tass
     reported that optical instruments had yielded new data on the planet’s
     cloud layer, much more transparent than earth clouds, and on lumines-
     cence of the dark side of Venus, formed in a relatively narrow layer at
     high altitudes. The orbiters were measuring magnetic fields connected
     with the solar wind in the vicinity of Venus, but had not registered a
     magnetic field of the planet itself, the report said. (FBIS, Tass in English,
     22 Jan 76)
23 January: Three space scientists at Johnson Space Center would begin a
     week-long round-the-clock test of experiments and procedures in a
     mockup of the Spacelab designed for the Space Shuttle. The team,
     headed by astronaut-physician Dr. Story Musgrave, would eat, sleep,
     and perform space-related duties in a mockup of the Shuttle orbiter crew
     compartment, and would carry out more than 20 experiments in space
      medicine and one in space physics inside the 6.8-m-by-4.06-m Spacelab

                                       14
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  January

    mockup. The team inside would be in constant communication with flight
    operations engineers and scientists at control points outside the mockup,
    which had been equipped with both instruments and experiments just as
    the Spacelab would be. The team would demonstrate 14 operational tests
    whose results would serve in planning inflight crew activities, procedures,
    and scheduling, and in studying items such as personal hygiene, general
    housekeeping and special-purpose cleaning and maintenance, and func-
    tional utility of the orbiter aft deck from which many of the Spacelab
    experiments would be monitored. The simulation was also designed to
    evaluate ground-support procedures and data-handling techniques. (JSC
    Release 76-04)
0 INTELSAT-the     International Telecommunications Satellite organization-
    awarded a 9-mo $75 000 contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for devel-
    opment of improved vibration-test techniques for testing future Intelsat
    spacecraft, leading to reduced spacecraft weight and a lessening of
    Epacecraft fatigue. (INTELSAT Release 76- 1-M)
0 The Soviet Union would use artificial satellites and manned orbital stations
    to investigate dynamic processes in the ocean during the new 5-yr plan
    period, Tass reported. Soviet oceanologist Leonid Brekhovskikh in an
    interview forecast a growing number of experiments conducted jointly
    with other countries, among them a “polymode” experiment with the
    US. to study the nature of huge vertical formations in the ocean discov-
    ered by Soviet scientists in 1970. The USSR also planned a global satellite
    experiment called “pigap” for concurrent study of dynamic processes in
    the atmosphere and the ocean. (FBIS,Moscow Tass, U 1, 29 Jan 76)
24 January: The National Transportation Safety Board reported that u.S.
    commercial airlines had the best safety record in 1975 since 1957, with
    only 42 accidents and a total of 124 deaths, 112 of those in the major
    air disaster of the year: the crash of an Eastern Airlines flight short of
    the runway at Kennedy International Airport in New York City on
    24 June 1975. The fatality rate-statistically 0.001 per million air
    miles flown-was especially encouraging as it came after 467 persons
    had been killed a year earlier in commercial aviation accidents. John € .   I
    Reed, acting chairman of the safety board, commented that it was
                                                             .
    “as difficult to explain a good year as it is a bad one . . we’d like to
    feel that all the effort toward safety is a contributing factor.” ( W Post,
    25 Jan 76, A3)
25 January: The Great Galactic Ghoul struck again, reported Wushington
    Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole, when one of the unmanned Viking
    spacecraft (Viking 2) approached the orbit of Mars and lost one of its
    three ovens designed to heat samples of the Martian surface and look in
    the gases for signs of Martian life. Space scientists found that almost all
    the accidents with Mars-bound spacecraft-three failures and four near-
    failures-had occurred in the same region, which had no unusual fea-
    tures such as extra cosmic dust or increased solar wind, magnetic field,
    or background radiation. First “victims of the Ghoul” were Soviet
    spacecraft-Zond 2 in 1964, and Mars 1 a year later-whose batteries
    died when they crossed the area and never came on again. One Mariner

                                     15
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    lost its radio in the Ghoul’s orbit but came back on when it reached Mars;
    another lost one or two instruments to cosmic dust; two others lost their
    guidance stars when they reached the Ghoul’s orbit, but locked on them
    again when they left it. Most costly casualty of the Ghoul was Mariner 7,
    whose battery exploded the day in 1969 when it crossed the Ghoul’s
    orbit, damaging the rest of ahe spacecraft so that it was useless by the
    time it flew past Mars. The area was about 56 million km from earth and
    209 million km from the sun, and Viking 2 would not leave it until some
    time in February; scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory were hoping
    for no further damage to it or to the other Viking, which was coming
    along a month behind the first. (W Post, 25 Jan 76, A-3)
0 Establishment of an Office of Science, Engineering, and Technology Policy
    in the White House, a goal of US. scientists since 1973, would become
    effective within 6 wk or so, the New York Times reported. Since Presi-
    dent Nixon had abolished a similar office, the scientific community had
    been concerned over the lack of provision at the top level of government
    for sophisticated advice on science and technology affecting U.S. policies
    on world food supplies, environmental pollution, energy, transportation,
    disarmament, and similar problems. The Ford Administration had en-
    couraged Congress to establish such an office by law rather than set one
    up by executive order, and the House of Representatives had passed an
    Administration-backed bill in Nov. 1975. A Senate bill, “roughly com-
    parable” according to the NIT, had been agreed upon by several com-
    mittees and was on its way to passage; this measure would establish a
    White House office with a director and as many as 4 associates, who
    would work closely with the Office of Management and Budget on science
    and technology budgets and would prepare an annual report for the
    President to send to Congress on science, engineering, and technology,
    with options on federal investment and priorities in the three related
    fields. The Senate bill would also call for authorization of funds to
    establish science and technology offices in each state; the House bill did
    not have similar provisions. (NW, 25 Jan 76, 26)
0 The Federal Aviation Administration’s flight service station at Tucumcari,
    N.M., was receiving reports of cigar-shaped flying objects with pulsating
    colored lights dominating the night skies over Clovis, N.M. The objects
    were reported by policemen and residents for 4 nights, and a reporter
    photographed one of the objects showing a curved strip of light against
    a black background. FAAradar had shown nothing unusual, a spokesman
    said. (W Star, 25 Jan 76, A-7)
26 January: Prompted by the crash of a TWA flight near Dulles Airport that
    took 92 lives in Dec. 1974, the Federal Aviation Administration hired 6
    veteran airline pilots to analyze air traffic-control procedures, but the
    findings were so scathing that the report had not been released, said an
    editorial in the Pashington Star. The National Transportation Safety
    Board this week issued its findings in the case with a “rare dissent” in
    assigning blame for the crash. The Star pointed out that, although the
    Air Line Pilots Assn. disagreed with the majority finding of pilot error and
    the Professional Air Traffic Controllers disagreed with the minority

                                      16
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      January

    finding of ground-control error, leaders of both groups-and members of
    the board-all questioned FAAhandling of its responsibilities. The Star
    called on new FAA administrator John McLucas, sworn in in Nov., to
    make air safety his highest priority. (W Star, 26 Jan 76, A-14)
* The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) had joined
    in research in Antarctica on stratospheric pollution with a team from the
    Univ. of Wyo. supported by the National Science Foundation. NOAA’S
    Aeronomy Laboratory would launch 2 balloons carrying probes with
    containers that would open at different altitudes to collect a vertical
    profile of fluorocarbons and nitrogen oxides in the relatively clean stratos-
    phere over Antarctica. The measurements would be used in testing two
    theories of ozone destruction in the stratosphere, the first being the
    production of destructive chlorine through breakdown of manmade
    fluorocarbon aerosols migrating into the upper atmosphere. The other
    theory posed a natural ozone-limiting cycle, involving dissaciation in the
    stratosphere of bacterially produced nitrous oxide that became nitric
    oxide harmful to the ozone layer. The Antarctic launches would help to
    explain variations in nitrous oxide measurements as a function of lati-
    tude, season, or some other cause. (NOAA Release 76-17)
27 January: Laser beams had become the latest major tool in manufacturing
    aircraft, the Aerospace Industries Association announced, reporting on
    a year-long series of tests of the numerically controlled laser cutting-arm
    technique. The test objective was to define effects of a laser on physical
    characteristics of the parts produced, such as corrosion and fatigue. The
    cutting arm was coupled with a computer data bank that chose the best
    method of positioning parts on flat thin aluminum sheets, saving both
    time and money and reducing aluminum scrap by 30 to 50%. Usual
    methods such as blanking, routing, and sawing had been used since
     World War 11. The Air Force was funding a program to use thicker sheets
    of metal and higher power lasers in an application of new technology to
     aircraft manufacture. (AIA Release 76-4)
28 January: The Viking 1 on its way toward Mars might have lost the use
    of one of its ovens just as Viking 2 was reported last week to have done,
    project officials said. Each of the Mars landers carried three ovens to heat
    surface samples for analysis by a gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer
    that would determine atmosphere elements and search for organic mate-
    rial that would indicate biological or nonbiological activity. Loss of one
    oven on each craft would not affect the operation of the instruments, but
    would mean that only two instead of three soil analyses would be done.
    A separate biology instrument on each lander would search directly for
    life forms in soil samples. A monitoring device on the ovens was suspected
    as the cause of the test-data anomaly. (NASA Releases 76-14, 76-15)
0 The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and
    Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and
    Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the
    Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator
    for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program
    status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic

                                       17
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace
    industry; nqtional transportation policy; military aircraft selection; ex-
    porting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the
    future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA
    convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during
    which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The
    AIAA’S von KLrmb lecture would be presented by 1.E. Garrick, distin-
    guished research associate at NASA’s     Langley Research Center, speaking
    on aeroelasticity.
        At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be
    presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and
    Edgar M. Cortright-former director of h R C and previously Chief of
    Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Pro-
    grams, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Appli-
    cations and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq-would be
    installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975
    after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of
    Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence
    “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design
    division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and
    astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the
    first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
* A communications satellite system to serve more than 200 U.S. public
    television stations within the next 2 yr was proposed by the Public
    Broadcasting Service and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in a
    report prepared for managers of PBS member stations before the annual
    meeting in Los Angeles next month. If the member stations approved the
    proposal and the Federal Communications Commission followed with its
    approval promptly, the system could be in operation within 21 mo,
    putting PB ahead of commercial networks by renting circuits on satellites
    operated by Western Union Telegraph Co. instead of leasing land lines
    from American Telephone & Telegraph at ‘$12 million a yr. The $38-
    million satellite system would offer 3 or 4 channels instead of the single
    land line; expense of additional land lines had precluded additional trans-
    missions to special audiences, such as Spanish-speaking populations in
    major cities and the US. Southwest; the cost of the land lines would
    increase yearly; and the cost of adding other stations to the PB satellite
    system would be limited to the cost of a simple ground receiver. ( W Star,
     2%Jan 76, A-1; W Post, 29 Jan 76, A-7)
29 January: Intelsat IV-A F-2, second in a series of improved commercial
    comsats, was launched from Cape Kennedy on an Atlas-Centaur at
    6:56 pm EST (2356 GMT) into a transfer orbit at about 31 000-km
    apogee, aimed at a station over the Atlantic Ocean at 29.5‘W which it
    should reach by April. Working as a backup to lntelsat IV-A F-I, the
    newly launched spacecraft would provide almost two thirds more commu-
    nications capability than previous Intelsats, by increasing the number of
    transponders from 12 to 20 and by using an improved antenna system
    that permitted frequency reuse by beam separation. The east-pointed
       pm used for transatlantic service would illuminate Europe and Africa;
                                      18
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     January
    the same 320-mhz bandwidth would be reused in the west beam aimed
    at North and South America, doubling the usability of the frequency and
    the satellite’s capacity. The cylindrical spacecraft was about 7 m high
    and 2.38 m in diameter, with a solar panel about 2.8 m long; liftoff weight
    was 1515 kg, and in-orbit weight 825.5 kg. (NASA Release 76-8; MOR
    E-491-633-76-02,          12 Feb 7 6 [prelaunch], 25 Feb 7 6 [postlaunch])
0 Soon after Rockwell International Corp. was named prime contractor on a
    $5-billion Space-Shuttle program, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chair-
    man of the House Science and Technology Committee, had accepted an
    invitation for a trip to Rockwell’s resort in the Bahamas. Teague’s name
    was added to a list of senators and representatives who had accepted
    invitations from Rockwell, a prime government contractor; most went to
    hunt at the company’s lodge in Maryland. Three Senate staff members
    had accepted invitations to hunt at the Maryland lodge of another
    contractor, Northrop Corp. During the previous week, the Pentagon had
    rebuked 38 civilian and military officials, including admirals and gen-
    erals, for accepting similar invitations from Northrop. House rules
    prevented members, officers, or employees from accepting gifts “of
    substantial value, directly or indirectly, from any persons, organization,
    or corporation having a direct interest in legislation before the
    Congress;” the Senate had no similar written regulation. ( W Post,
    29 Jan 76, F-5)
0 A vacuum test facility built near Philadelphia in 1962 by General Electric
    to test satellites would be used to freeze-dry most of New York City’s
    air-pollution control records, damaged in a 16th-floor records office on
    Wall Street by flooding from a ruptured check valve in the 17th-floor
    airconditioning system, the New York Times reported. Hundreds of
    thousands of cards and pages had been shipped in a refrigerator truck to
    Pa. to be dried before mold could form and consume the cellulose fibers
    in the paper. After placement in the chamber, the records would undergo
    a vacuum so that the water would turn into vapor, move to a condenser,
    and turn to ice; after being frozen and dehydrated, the papers would be
    rewarmed. Use of the facility would save “hundreds of thousands of
    dollars” and untold time in attempting to duplicate the records, the
    Commissioner of Air Resources said. (NU, 29 Jan 76, 35)
30 January: Col. Stuart A. Roosa, 42, an astronaut since 1966, announced
    in Houston that he would retire from the Air Force and from NASA on 1
    Feb., one day after the 5th anniversary of the launch of his only space
    flight, Apollo 14. Roosa had piloted the command module while Capt.
    Alan B. Shepard and Cdr. Edgar D. Mitchell had made the third moon
    landing, and had previously been on the Apollo 9 backup crew. Roosa
    told associates he was exploring “companies involved in new proce-
    dures.” ( N U , 30 Jan 76, 34; W Star, 30 Jan 76, A-2)
e Sun Marco C-2, launched from the San Marco platform 18 Feb. 1974 into
    an elliptical orbit to record day-by-day variations in the equatorial atmos-
    phere’s density, composition, and temperature, was declared a success
    after 2 3 mo in orbit during which it obtained more than 17 diurnal cycles
    of data. The data had been correlated with data from Explorer 51 (AE-C)
    in studying ,the physics and dynamics of the thermosphere, and these
                                      19
                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    studies would continue as more data from the two satellites were pro-
    cessed and analyzed. Two U.S. scientific instruments were still operating
    normally, but the Italian air-drag balance instrument (which mal-
    functioned shortly after launch) had not performed properly. (MOR
    S-894-74-04, 30 Jan. 76)
  INTELSAT-the International Telecommunications Satellite organization-
    awarded an 18-1110$275 000 fixed-price contract to TRW Systems, he.,
    for a skewed reaction-wheel thruster attitude-control and stabilization
    system. A system based on the reaction-wheel principle would offer a
    combination of light weight, high reliability, and accurate performance
    for future comsats. External disturbances of satellite stability would be
    canceled by spinning up the reaction wheels to create offsetting torques,
                                                            Release 76-4-M)
    then stopping the spin by use of thrusters. (INTELSAT
* INTELSAT-the International Telecommunication Satellite organization-
    awarded a 12-mo $22 000 fixed-price contract to the Republic of
    China’s Government Radio Administration for collection and study of
    ionospheric scintillation data at 4 ghz, to be used as a data base for
    studying satellite-signal fluctuations caused by ionospheric effects.
                Release 76-5-M)
    (INTELSAT
During January: Using Landsat imagery of an 85 000-sq-km region from
    the western edge of the Nile to the border of Libya along the Medi-
    terranean coast, the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Tech-
    nology at the request of President Anwar Sadat made a study of the
    region’s geology, drainage, and ground water. The study resulted from
    problems of a rising ground-water table and salinity on newly reclaimed
    areas west of the Nile Delta. A copy of the report, sent to NASA by the
    Egyptian academy’s remote-sensing research project, said in part, “The
    new maps prepared from Landsat satellite images are more detailed and
    much more elaborate as compared to previous maps prepared by the
                         .
    traditional methods . . It has been possible to construct on the Landsat
    images 14 geological and environmental units in the investigated
          .
    area . . This work helps to decipher the geological history of northern
                                                            .
    Egypt, the Mediterranean Sea and the Nile Delta . . It is emphasized
    that additional irrigation waters should not be introduced in the area of
    investigation until detailed geological and hydrogeological studies have
    been carried out.” (Wkly Briefs for Administrator, 12 Jan 76)
0 Two scientific experiments carried on last July’s Apollo-Soyuz (ASTP) mis-
    sion had produced spinoffs that would benefit sufferers from phlebitis and
    leukemia. Each of the experiments had used electrophoresis-passing an
    electric current through a solution to separate differing types of cellular
    matter-under the weightless conditions of space flight to produce re-
    sults unobtainable in earth’s gravity. One experiment used human kidney
    cells in isolating pure samples of the 5% of cells that manufactured an
    enzyme (urokinase) effective in removing blood clots from veins and
    arteries, with major potential for treating persons with conditions such as
    phlebitis. The separated cells, frozen and returned for use as starters in
    a culturing process, provided 6 to 7 times more urokinase than the
    original sample. The other spinoff was the successful testing of a pre-

                                      20
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   January

     servative medium developed for use on the ASTP mission that would make
     it possible to perform transfusions of a certain type of white blood cells
     in the treatment of leukemia; the preservative, used to freeze granu-
     locytes on the mission, actually improved the survivability of the cells so
     that a stock of the material could be kept frozen for use upon demand,
     instead of searching for donors with resultant delay in emergencies. (NASA
      Releases 76-3, 76-5)
    Communications via satellite was a science-fiction writer’s dream 30 yr
0
     ago, but within 2 decades after Arthur C. Clarke predicted it, the first
      comsat-Early Bird, launched 6 Apr. 1965 into synchronous orbit-
     began operations 28 June 1965 and opened a new chapter in commu-
      nications history. In an article in the Telecommunications Journal,
      Santiago Astrain, secretary general of the International Tele-
                                                          viewed the past 10 yr,
      communications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT),
      up to the new Intelsat IV-A, largest operational comsat to date.
          The brief history of INTELSAT summarized the organization’s devel-
      opment from 1960, when President Eisenhower called for the creation
      of a global communications system; after the United Nations passed a
      resolution supporting the concept, the u.S. Congress passed the Commu-
      nications Satellite Act of 1962 that brought the Communications Sat-
      ellite Corporation (ComSat) into being. On 20 Aug. 1964, 11 countries
     (representing 85% of the world’s telecommunications traffic) created an
      international consortium to be managed by ComSat on an interim basis.
      On 12 Feb. 73, the Definitive Agreements were signed; by the time they
      took effect, the number of member nations had increased to 80. Mem-
      bership was open to all countries that were members of the International
      Telecommunications Union (ITU); any country, whether or not a member
      of INTELSAT, could have access to the system on a nondiscriminatory
      basis.
          Current planning was geared to meet a traffic demand for capacity to
      handle about 70 000 telephone channels by 1984; this would represent
      a 6-fold increase within 10 yr. Intelsat V satellites due to enter service
      in 1979 would provide more than 2 3 000 channels. As INTELSAT had the
      object of providing high-quality communications service, its policy had
      been to maintain a “spare” comsat in each ocean to make additional
      capacity always available; this had enabled the organization to provide
      domestic services at a reasonable cost. Since operations began in 1965,
      the number of countries actually participating in operations had in-
      creased from 5 to 64; the number of earth stations, from 5 to 90; and
      the number of antennas, from 5 to 115.(Telecommunications Jl, vol42,
      672-677)
    NASAissued 2 major reports-s~-386, “Outlook for Space,” and SP-387,
0
      “A Forecast of Space Technology 1980-2000”-prepared             by a task
      group initiated by Administrator James C. Fletcher in June 1974 to
      examine the civilian role of the u.S. space program during the coming 25
      yr. The group included 20 representatives of NASA and 1 from the USAF.
      “Outlook for Space,” according to the foreword by Fletcher, was “an
      impressive analysis of the services that space systems and technology

                                      21
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
January

    might provide the world of today and tomorrow,” and related this anal-
    ysis directly to national needs and human purposes.
        “A Forecast of Space Technology,” according to a preface by study
    director Donald P. Hearth, “was an important element of the study and
    provided key inputs to the study and its conclusions.” The technology
    forecast was conducted by a team from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
    supported by representatives of other NASA centers; Jack N. James and
    Rob Roy McDonald of JPL led the technology team. This report forecast
    developments in technology of acquiring, processing, transferring, and
    storing information, energy, and matter.
        “Outlook,” on the other hand, identified future objectives of space
    programs and prepared background information that could serve as a
    basis for development of program plans. Objectives were established as
    earth-oriented or extraterrestrial; categories of need were either physical
    (provision of food, shelter, health, security, education, good environ-
    ment, and the work necessary to obtain these) or needs of mind and spirit
    (the quest for knowledge, the need to explore the unknown, the sense of
    accomplishment in the face of challenge). The 3 conclusionsof the report
    were that a space program could help fill the need to improve food
    production and distribution, to develop new energy sources, to meet new
    challenges to the environment, and to predict and deal with natural and
    manmade disasters; that the space program could answer the need for
    intellectual challenge, exploration, and knowledge that would help hu-
    manity understand its relation to the universe; and that those in charge
    of the space program must make it recognized as meeting these public
    needs. Efforts recommended by the study group would be in data man-
    agement, predictive modeling of future missions, advanced commu-
    nications, space processing, and a permanent space station. (Text)




                                     22
                            February 1976

1 February: Scientists at Mass. Institute of Technology, using NASA’s 3   Sas
    x-ray astronomy satellite, found a stellar object unlike any other and
    were unable to say what it was. The discovery, located by Dutch astron-
    omers in the center of the galaxy in the constellation Sagittarius, gave
    off x-ray bursts that were unevenly spaced, although pulse after pulse
    proved to be identical. The object might be a single new source or a
    combination of old ones, but its distance was millions of light years and
    the source might be nonexistent now, the investigators said. (W Star,
    1 Feb 76, A-6)
2 February: A “so far secret NASA material” in outfits worn by 3 u.S. skaters
    was credited by an Olympic games official with the clean sweep of the
    international women’s speed-skating championships at Davos, Switzer-
    land. Sheila Young of Detroit, Mich., set a world record of 40.91 sec for
    the 500-m race; Leah Poulos of Northbrook, Ill., set a US. national
    record of 2: 13.98 for the 1500-m event, followed by Young and Nancy
    Swider of Park Ridge, 111. The press chief of the Innsbruck organizing
    committee said a flood of records could be expected because skating
    garments “contain an aerodynamic property which is better than any
    used before,” and attributed the US. victories to a “frog suit” made of
    the new material. US. Olympic Committee officials said they had no
    knowledge of such suits, and team members were not available for
    comment. ( W Star, 2 Feb 76, D-1)
3 February: Tests on the Lageos-a geophysical research satellite expected
    to remain in orbit several million years-concluded at Goddard Space
    Flight Center at the end of Jan., NASA announced, and the satellite would
    be shipped to the Western Test Range in California for launch in late
    April. Called the “cosmic golfball” because of its 426 special reflectors
    designed to return laser pulses to their exact point of origin on the earth,
    Lageos would provide a stable point in the sky to permit measurement of
    the relative locations of participating ground stations within a few centi-
    meters; these measurements would provide scientists with models of
    earth’s crustal motion, useful in predicting earthquakes. Manager of the
    Lageos project would be the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville,
    Ala. (MSFC Release 76- 17)
@ A team of engineers and scientists at NASA’s  Jet Propulsion Laboratory had
    devised a way to transfer blood without contamination and lengthen its
    safe storage time, NASA announced. Using a concept developed in space-
    craft sterilization, the team-under contract to the National Heart and
    Lung Institute of the National Institutes of Health-worked out an
    aseptic fluid-transfer system on which patents had been applied for by the
    Calif. Institute of Technology, which operates JPL for NASA. Two dual-
    walled tubes, fused and penetrated by heat, would permit clean transfer
                                     23
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
February

      of blood from one container or bag to another; the unique connector
      would be manufactured as part of the container. Outer portions of the
      tubing would be polyvinyl chloride, and the inner parts of heat-resistant
      kapton; application of heat at 2OO0C through a metal clamp to the flat
      end links of each tube would effectively fuse the tube and sterilize the
      adjoining areas. Heat could be applied by a portable device no larger than
      an ordinary hair dryer. The method was reported to kill 99.999%of all
      bacteria and spores, even when surfaces had been purposely con-
      taminated. (NASA Release 76-20)
    Pioneer IO-on its way out of the solar system-would cross the orbit of
0
      Saturn nearly a billion miles from earth on 10 Feb., NASA announced. As
      it crossed Saturn’s orbit, the Pioneer would be 1 384 600 000 km from
      the sun and 1 435 807 000 km from earth; however, the big-dish
      antennas of NASA’s    Deep Space Network should be able to hear the
      spacecraft as far out as the orbit of Uranus-3.2 billion km from
      earth-which it should reach in 1979. Systems aboard the 256-kg
      spacecraft were still operating, and the Pioneer was returning valuable
      information on the character of the interplanetary medium in the
      unexplored space beyond the orbit of Jupiter, which it flew past in
      Dec. 1973. Project officials said that communication might be possible
      well beyond Uranus. Pioneer I O carried a message for any intelligent
      beings who might retrieve it on its wanderings through the galaxy;
      scientists calculated that it might encounter a star system once every
      million years, and should remain in good condition even though its
      nuclear power source would die in a few decades. (NASA Release 76-21;
      ARC Release 76-04)
    An environmental satellite operated by the National Oceanic and Atmos-
0
      pheric Administration (NOAA) used its capability of measuring ocean
                                      had
      temperatures to help fishermen on the Calif. coast find tuna and salmon.
      A pilot project using satellite imagery to locate areas of “upwelling” off
      the coast-areas where cold nutrient-rich water would rise from the
      bottom to the surface-had shown that these areas were favored by the
      fish, and the fishermen could save time and fuel by using the data to
      locate them. NOAA’S polar-orbiting satellite passing over the coast twice
      daily would use visual and infrared sensors to relay data including
      sea-surface temperatures to earth, where images of thermal fronts indi-
      cated upwelling areas. The fronts transferred to navigation charts would
      be available to fishermen at northern Calif. ports. NOAA’S National Envi-
      ronmental Satellite Service conducted the research through a
      NOAA-supported sea grant program at Humboldt State Univ.; the tech-
      nique would be applicable to fishing industry in many parts of the world.
      (NOAA Release 76-10)
    A new manmade fiber stronger than nylon for possible use in drogue
      parachutes had been tested in the 5-m transonic tunnel at the Arnold
      Engineering Development Center in Ohio, the Air Force announced. The
      material, called Kevlar, had been developed by DuPont for use in tires,
      and could be woven into parachute materials twice as strong as nylon
      with only half the weight and volume of nylon counterparts. The AEDC
      tests used 4 ribbon-type parachutes 2 m in diameter, tested to destruc-
                                      24
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  February

    tion; one was 100% nylon, another 100% Kevlar, and the remaining two
    were composed of different blends of the two substances. *The tests
    measured dynamic loads as the chutes were deployed at about 966 km
    per hr at simulated altitudes from 15 to 115 km; steady-state loads were
    also measured at those altitudes for speeds of from 640 to 1440 km per
    hr. The material-evaluation tests were a novelty for the tunnel, normally
    used for aerodynamic studies of large-scale models or engine compati-
    bility with flight hardware. (AF OIP 003.76)
4 February: First mainstage test of the Space Shuttle main engine occurred
    at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Hancock County,
    Miss., Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The engine-called the
    Integrated Subsystem Test Bed-was fired for 3.38 sec, reaching and
    stabilizing at its minimum power level: 50% of its rated power level of
     1 668 075 newtons at sea level, or 2 090 654 newtons at altitude. Tests
    were conducted by the prime contractor for the engine, Rocketdyne Div.
    of Rockwell International Corp., under MSFC direction. (MSFC Release
    76-29; Rockwell Release RD-2)
0 An asteroid more than 3 km across was photographed near earth 27 Jan.,
    about 7.5 million km distant, by the Mt. Palomar Observatory, the Calif.
    Institute of Technology reported. The asteroid, of the type that made
    giant craters on planets of‘the solar system, was closer to earth than any
    known celestial body other than the moon. The institute said there was
    no chance that the asteroid-called 1976 AA-would collide with the
    earth on its present path, as the orbits of the earth and the asteroid did
    not touch. ( N U , 4 Feb 76, 21)
5 February: The “Historic Redstone Test Site” at MSFC, neglected since the
    final Redstone test firing in Oct. 1961, would be restored to its original
    appearance as an exhibit for visitors during the Bicentennial celebration,
    MSFC announced. The interim test stand, as it was called, was built by the
    US. Army in 1953 and used to test moderate-range Redstone rockets.
    On 31 Jan. 1958, a modified Redstone renamed Jupiter-C launched into
    orbit the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1. Another modification of the
    Redstone tested on the stand was the Mercury-Redstone, one of which
    powered the first U.S. manned space flight-that of Alan Shepard in
    May 1961. The stand was the site of 364 test firings between 1953 and
     196lJafter which it was retired from a space program that had become
    much more sophisticated. Painted in its original colors and designs, and
    with a Redstone borrowed from the Army Missile Command installed on
    it, the site would appear much as it did 15 yr ago in its new role as an
    historical exhibit. (MSFC Release 76-32)
0 Physicists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill.,
    discovered a new elementary particle, heaviest ever observed, the annual
    meeting of the American Physical Society was told. The investigators
    from Columbia Univ., the State Univ. of N.Y. at Stony Brook, and the
    Fermi lab said the “upsilon” particle raised the possibility that physics
    might never be able to identify any ultimate or basic building blocks of
    matter. The upsilon was discovered in debris of particles created by
    acceleration of a proton beam aimed at a beryllium target; the resulting

                                     25
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
February

    collision produced a cluster of electron-positron pairs with a mass of
    6 billion electron volts, more than 6 times that of the proton and 1.5
    times that of any other particle. The report on the upsilon particle was
    a last-minute addition to the annual meeting’s agenda because the data
    were available only in the last few wk; first observed about 5 mo ago, the
    upsilon had been seen only 12 times so far, but was expected to require
    new thinking in theoretical physics. (B Sun, 6 Feb. 76, A-3; W Post,
    9 Feb 76, A-3)
0 The accepted explanation of solar energy-fusion         of hydrogen atoms into
    helium at the sun’s core-had been challenged by more than one recent
    discovery, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Measurements of
    natural vibrations in the sun, published in the journal Nature by a Soviet
    and British group, had revealed that the sun pulsed steadily every 2 hr
    40 min. Such regularity had not been predicted by the fusion theory.
    Another group, reporting in the journal Science on a 3-yr experiment
    directed by the Brookhaven National Laboratory, found fewer neutrinos
    created by thermonuclear reactions at the sun’s center than was “consis-
    tent with standard ideas of stellar evolution.” Suggested explanations
    were a tiny black hole at the sun’s center, which could radiate energy
    outward without creating neutrinos, or a shutoff of the sun’s thermo-
    nuclear furnace, which would lower the number of neutrinos long before
    any decrease in heat or light would become apparent. (CSM, 5 Feb 76,
     16; B Sun, 23 Jan 76, A-3; NIT, 23 Jan 76, 1; 18 Feb 76, 32)
0 Thermal protection fabrics developed for use in the Apollo and Skylab
    programs would be the basis for research into improved clothing and
    equipment for firefighters, under a contract signed between NASA and the
    Department of Commerce’s National Fire Prevention and Control Ad-
    ministration. The agreement assigned management responsibility to
    Marshall Space Flight Center for a 3-yr program funded jointly by NASA
    and NFPCA at a cost of $300 000 in the first year. The program would
    emphasize weight reduction, performance, and cost of equipment to
    improve the chances of a firefighter’s surviving any fire uninjured, in a
    job described as the most hazardous in the US. (MSFC Release 76-31)
6 February: U.S. airlines suffered a near-record deficit in 1975, according to
    year-end statements recently released that showed declines for nearly all
    the 11 trunk carriers and a total deficit of $87 million, second only
    to 1970’s loss of $100.8 million. In 1974, the group had earned
    $250.8 million. Reasons given included rising fuel prices, costly strikes,
    and proliferating fare discounts. The recession in the first part of 1915
    cut passenger traffic for all lines, and fuel costs continued to soar another
     30% in 1975 after doubling the previous year. Increasing numbers of
    discount fares resulted in an average of 7.04 cents of revenue per
    domestic passenger mile for TWA, down from 7.51 cents for the same
    month a year earlier. Although January 1976 traffic had increased about
     11%, and predicted profits from an increase of 2% in unit revenues
    might produce as much as $140 million for the 11 major carriers, this
    would represent only a 6% return on equity compared to the 12%
     considered fair by the Civil Aeronautics Board. ( M T , 6 Feb 76, 39)

                                       26
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    February

    A small-scale model of the Space Shuttle and its launch pad would be used
0
    in a test program begun at MSFC to reduce noise during a Shuttle launch.
    Sound energy could damage sensitive instruments or other payloads
    carried in the Shuttle orbiter, and reducing launch noise by modifying the
    launch facility would be more economical than redesigning the launch
    vehicle itself or its associated payloads to tolerate anticipated levels of
    noise. The model would test various designs that sprayed water into, above,
    and below the rocket exhaust; firing the engines into a water spray would
    convert acoustic (sound) waves into thermal energy, which would dissi-
    pate as steam. Use of the water technique had significantlyreduced-but
    not eliminated-the damaging noise. (MSFC Release 76-33)
9 February: An ad hoc committee of 9 prominent astronomers, assisted by
    a group of experts from NASA, ERDA, and the Air Force and the atmos-
    pheric and astronomical science communities, reviewed the program of
    solar research being conducted by the U.S. Air Force's Sacramento Peak
    Observatory in N.M., and recommended that the National Science Foun-
    dation assume responsibility for its operation after 30 June 1976. The
    Air Force had established the observatory near Alamogordo in 1952 to
    research methods of predicting solar geophysical disturbances that might
     affect military responsibilities of the AF; reduced manpower had forced
     the AF to earmark the observatory for phaseout. Dr. H. Guyford Stever,
    director of NSF, announced that NSF would take over the SPO operation
     and continue its role in solar research at a productive level. Constructed
     at a cost of about $8 million, SPO had an estimated replacement value of
    about $20 million. (NSF Release PR76- 15)
10 February: Atmosphere Explorer D, second in a series of 3 maneuverable
     unmanned spacecraft designed to explore a specific a e a of earth's outer
     atmosphere, had ceased functioning, spacecraft controllers at GSFC said.
     M - D had stopped working 29 Jan. when a power-supply electronics
     malfunction disabled its solar array. Launched 6 Oct. 1975, M-D had
     transmitted important data on energy transfer in the upper atmosphere
     and on processes critical to the atmospheric heat balance; although it did
     not last its design lifetime of 1 yr, it did transmit a full set of lower
     thermosphere data on the daylight side from North to South Pole at
     constant times du&g its 4-mo operation. AE-C, launched in 1973, was
     still functioning normally, returning upper-atmosphere data in the region
     above 128 km; AE-E, launched in Nov. 1975, had a payload similar to
     that of the others but also carried equipment to measure earth's ozone
     layer between 20°N and S. (NASA Release 76-24)
12 February: The three U.S. astronauts who participated in last summer's
     Apollo-Soyuz project-Thomas P. Stafford, Vance Brand, a n d b o n -
     ald K. Slayton-left Saudi Arabia after a 2-day visit in Riyadh and
     headed for Abu Dhabi, capital of the United Arab Emirates, on a goodwill
     tour of the Middle East. (NYNews, 12 Feb 76, 96)
0 NASA announced award of an $8.8-million extension for 1 yr of a contract
     with Northrop Services, Inc., of Houston for operation and maintenance
     of lab and test facilities at Johnson Space Center. Northrop had provided
     these services to JSC for the past 3 yr; the extension would bring the value

                                       27
                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
February

    of the contract to $37 416 742. Northrop had used 425 employes to
    maintain and operate the life sciences and engineering labs and the lunar
    curatorial lab.
        NASA also announced award of a $6.8-million extension for 2 yr of a
    contract with the Charles Stark Draper Labs., Cambridge, Mass., for
    technical support of Space Shuttle orbiter avionics software develop-
    ment. Draper had provided this support to JSC since 1974. The effort,
    employing 55 people, would include software design, verification, simula-
    tion, requirements formulation, and analysis as required for program-
    ming the guidance, navigation, and control computer for the Shuttle
    orbiter. (JSC Releases 76- 12, 76- 14)
@ Louis Morton, one of the foremost US. military historians and chairman of

    NASA’s  historical advisory committee from 1970 to 1973, died at the age
    of 63 in Burlington, Vt., after surgery. A member of the National
    Archives advisory council since 1968, he had worked strongly for sepa-
    ration of the National Archives and Records Service from the General
    Services Administration, and had advocated a coordinating office for the
    federal government’s entire historical program with a chief government
    historian. Based at Dartmouth College, where since 1960 he had been
    teacher, writer, and administrator, Morton was active in national
    organizations related to history and had served on history and biography
    juries for the Pulitzer prize. He had been with the Army’s office of
    military history from 1946 to 1959, serving as historian, then as deputy
    chief and chief of the Pacific branch; he was editor of an 1 1-vol. history
    of the U.S. Army in the Pacific during World War 11, and general editor
    of the 17-vol. “Wars and Military Institutions of the US.” (W Post,
     15 Feb 76, B 12)
13 February: Ceremonies at GSFC honored 45 members of the team respon-
    sible for NASA’s rocket, the “workhorse” of the agency’s most
                       Delta
    dependable launching systems. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher
    and Deputy Administrator George M. Low participated in the event.
    Delta placed NASA’s communications satellite (Echo 1) into orbit
                           first
     12 Aug. 1960; through January 1976, 119 Deltas had been launched.
    The Delta’s reliability and economy had made it the primary vehicle for
    commercial spacecraft, international users, and operational meteorolog-
    ical systems. The number of reimbursable launches for non-NASA users
    had increased over the years; of the 1 1 Delta missions scheduled for
     1976, all but 2 would be launched for foreign or commercial users on a
    reimbursable basis, better than 80%of the total. Delta’s payload capabil-
    ity had risen from 68 kg to 910 kg. As Dr. Fletcher remarked, “Delta
    is becoming a standard against which to measure the conduct of NASA’s
    business in the future.” (NASA Release 76-27)
  Dr. Alexander M. Lippisch, designer of the first operational rocket-powered
    fighter aircraft, died in Cedar Rapids, Ia., at the age of 81. As chief of
    design after 1939 at Germany’s Messerschmitt Company, his speed
    research led to development of the ME 163B, world’s fastest airplane at
    that time, which had a speed of nearly 1015 km per hr and could climb
    to 9 km in 3 min. As director of research at the Airplane Research

                                    28
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  February

    Institute in Vienna after 1943, he was rounded up in Operation Paperclip
    by the Allies, who put him to work for the U.S. Air Force technical
    intelligence section and sent him to the U.S. in 1946 to work at Wright-
    Patterson Field in Ohio. He had left government service in 1957 and
    gone to work for Collins Radio, where he headed the company’s aero-
    nautical laboratory. In 1965 he left Collins to form his own group, the
    Lippisch Research Corp., and at his death was developing an airfoil boat
    and an aerodyne (wingless aircraft) for the West German government.
    (NIT, 13 Feb 76, 34)
15 February: The long-secret site of USSR space launches-previously
    identified by U.S space experts as Tyuratam, for the name of the local
    railway station-was identified in the newspaper Kazakhstanskaya
    Pravdu as “Leninsk,” in a dispatch on construction of electric power-
    transmission lines. The dispatch, stating that the Leninsk area had been
    connected to the Central Asian power grid, was believed to be the first
    in which the name appeared in a Soviet publication. US. astronauts who
    visited the space complex last year during Apollo-Soyuz mission prepara-
    tions had reported that a city of about 50 000 population was associated
    with the launch complex, and was known as Leninsk. Publication of the
    name--which had not appeared on Soviet maps or reference books-was
    considered either an oversight by the censor or a decision to make the
    name public. (NIT, 15 Feb 76, 12)
0 An around-the-world auto race planned for mid-1976 as part of the US.
    Bicentennial celebration would feature a 1914 Model T Ford, tracked by
    a NASA satellite from the starting point i Paris to its termination in New
                                             n
    York City, NASA announced. The car, driven by Goddard Space Flight
    Center employee Robert H. Pickard, would carry a 13.6-kg electronics
    package that would transmit the car’s ground speed to the random-
    access measuring system (RAMS) carried on NASA’s    Nimbus 6 meteorolog-
    ical satellite that covers the entire globe once every 12 hr. Nimbus 6
    would relay information to GSFC through a ground station in Alaska. The
    auto race would demonstrate use of the R A ~ system for ground tracking
                                                   S
    applications where transmissions could encounter various kinds of inter-
    ference; normally, RAMS would collect data from instruments on moving
    platforms such as balloons or buoys to allow calculation of wind or
    sea-surface movements. Pickard, a car enthusiast, had worked in the
    space program since the Vanguard days and was presently project man-
    ager for the comsat-metesat system called GOES (geostationary opera-
    tional environmental satellite). (NASA Release 76-23)
17 February: Under an agreement between NASA and ERDA-the Energy
    Research and Development Administration-in the initial phase of
    ERDA’S 5-yr program for solar heating and cooling, Marshall Space
    Flight Center would assist in managing the commercial demonstration
    projects portion that would show the nation’s businesses and industries
    that solar heating, cooling, and hot-water systems could be used eco-
    nomically to relieve the growing demand for fossil fuels. MSFC would
    evaluate responses to Program Opportunity Notices (PONS)-ERDA’S
    equivalent of NASA’s  Requests for Proposals-and would administer the

                                     29
February                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    demonstration projects resulting from contracts awarded by ERDA. The
    PONS solicited a variety of commercial projects that would use solar-based
    systems in commercial buildings; of the 308 proposals received from
    industry, ERDA expected to award from 8 to 20 contracts during 1976.
    (MSFC Release 76-42)
18 February: A “house of the future” incorporating technology from aero-
    space research would be open to the public at Langley Research Center
    after July 1, NASA announced. The Tech House, a project of NASA’s
    technology utilization program, would demonstrate how an average fam-
    ily could cut fuel consumption by two thirds and water consumption by
    one half, using innovative energy and water management systems inte-
    grated with building designs and materials. Building started in late Jan.;
    all equipment and features in the house would be available to the public
    within 5 yr, or are available now. A family selected by NASA would live
    in the house for at least a year, beginning early in 1977; a systems
    engineer would monitor all use of the systems in the normal life of the
    family and record day-to-day savings. The contemporary one-story
    house would have an enclosed living space of about 500 sq m; its major
    feature combined solar collectors with night radiators and heat pump for
    one of the most cost-effective heating and cooling systems now available.
    Contributing to the NASA project were the National Association of Home
    Builders, the National Bureau of Standards, and the Department of
    Housing and Urban Development. (NASA Release 76-26)
* The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported 1975 net
     income of slightly more than $46 million, compared to nearly 145 million
     for 1974, attributing the increase to additional leasing of circuits to the
     corporation’s customers-3833 at the end of 1975, compared to 3510
     in 1974. The report noted the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 1975 ordering lower
     rates for services provided through ComSat’s global system, and warned
     that the decision would have “a substantial adverse impact” on future
     earnings unless modified by judicial review. ComSat had appealed the
     ruling and delayed filing a schedule of lower rates. (ComSat Release
     76-3)
* More than 25% of all scientists and engineers in the U.S. and the USSR were
     engaged in weapons work of some kind, whereas fewer than one hun-
     dredth of 1% were engaged in arms control or disarmament, said William
     Epstein, former director of the U.N. Disarmament Division, in a letter to
     the New York Times.Warning of the “terrible doomsday weapons that
     scientists may yet develop” in the spiraling arms race, Epstein called on
     scientists and engineers to establish nationally and internationally a code
     of conduct that would include educational work on the perils of the arms
     race and political efforts to achieve arms control and disarmament.
                                                                     ..
     “Science may be neutral and amoral, but scientists are not . They
     have a moral duty to use their capabilities for the benefit of humanity and
     not for its destruction.” Uniting their efforts behind a “Hippocratic
     oath” not to engage in means of mass murder, associations of scientists
     and other professional bodies could provide moral support and tangible

                                     30
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    February

    assistance to those “even in dictatorial countries” where imprisonment
    or harassment would be the result of such action. (MT, 18 Feb 76,33)
19 February: Marisat 1 -first satellite of a privately owned $100-million
    system to provide rapid high-quality communications between ships at
    sea and shore stations-was launched on a Delta for Comsat General
    Corp. from Cape Canaveral at 5:32 pm local time (1032 GMT). The
    655-kg craft was headed for a stationary orbit 35 788 km above the
    Atlantic Ocean at 15OW, about 547 km southwest of the coast of
    Liberia. A second satellite, Marisat B, would be stationed over the Pacific
    later this year. Marisat 1 carried 2 channels each about 4 mhz wide,
    operating in the L and C bands; one would translate shore-to-ship signals
    from 6 to 1.5 ghz, the other would translate ship-to-shore signals from
    1.6 to 4 ghz. Ground stations at Southbury, COM., and Santa Paula,
    Calif., would provide earth-satellite communications links, using 12.8-m-
    dia. antennas to relay tracking, telemetry, and command information
    between the satellites and the Comsat General control center in Washing-
    ton, D.C. The U.S. government would use three UHF channels on the
    satellite, completely separate from the L- and C-band channels, through
    its own terminal facilities. The satellite system, owned and operated by
    a consortium headed by the Comsat General Corp., would be used by
    commercial shipping lines, as well as by the U.S. Navy pending com-
    pletion of its own Fleet Satellite Communications System. By early April,
    commercial telephone, telex, and data communications would be avail-
    able to link ships and offshore facilities with shore stations connected into
    domestic and international communications networks worldwide. Marisat
    mobile terminals had been purchased or leased from Cornsat and in-
    stalled on ships of a number of nations. (NASA Release 76-22; MOR
    M-492-205-76-01 [prelaunch] 26 Jan 76, [postlaunch] 13 Apr 76;
    Cornsat Release CG 76-107; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-6)
  A new comet now approaching the sun-named Comet West, after Richard
    M. West of the European Southern Observatory at Geneva, Switzerland,
    who discovered it in Nov. 1975-would be the object of extensive space
    and ground-based study to identify and measure its constituents, NASA
    announced. Comet West would come closest to the sun on 25 Feb., but
    would not be readily visible until about 2 March because of solar bright-
    ness; it would provide the first opportunity for extensive comet study
    since the appearance in 1973 of Comet Kouhoutek (a “visual disappoint-
    ment” from which more had been learned about comets than in all the
    time that had gone before). NASA would participate in the study along with
    the Naval Research Laboratory, and with the Univ. of Colo. at Boulder
    and the Johns Hopkins Univ. (NASA Release 76-31)
@ Work began on the world’s largest radiotelescope-the              “Very Large
    Array,” consisting of 27 dish antennas each 25 m wide and weighing 160
    tons, plus a Y-shaped layout of rail tracks and underground tubing along
    three 21-km legs-and was scheduled for completion in 1981 at a cost
    of $76 million. The plains of St. Augustine, N.M., isolated and desolate,
    had been chosen because a ring of mountains would prevent radio
    interference. The VLA would probe objects such as quasars that appeared

                                      31
                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
February

      to speed away at more than half the speed of light, as well as other puzzles
      such as black holes, star formation, galactic structures, and interstellar
      molecules. Its design would improve on three weaknesses of current
      telescopes: poor resolution, poor sensitivity, and inability to make images
      or maps quickly. Antenna signals routed through underground wave-
      guides to a control center would be amplified and fed into a computer
      system that could turn out high-resolution images of the radio source in
      8 to 12 hr. The array would be supervised by officials of the National
      Science Foundation, Associated Universities, Inc., and the National
       Radio Astronomy Observatory. (CSM, 19 Feb 76, 16)
*   The universe had been analyzed and found to be open, a group of astron-
      omers told the annual meeting of the American Association for the
      Advancement of Science in Boston. The director of Cornel1 Univ.’s
      national astronomy and ionosphere center, Dr. Frank Drake, said that
       the most recent astronomical data indicated that in about 30 billion years
      the universe would have changed, and no stars would appear in a night
       sky, having gathered into “Island Universes”-clusters of galaxies
       widely separated from each other. Computer analysis of recent obser-
       vations indicated that separation of galaxies into islands had not yet
       begun, which meant that the universe might be comparatively young.
      The conclusion that the universe was open had been based on factors
       such as expansion rate, deceleration, and density of the universe. Evi-
       dence today would support the “big bang” theory which stated that the
       universe had exploded in the beginning from a single solid mass, and
       would go on expanding. (B Sun, 19 Feb 76, A-3)
*   US. observers were concerned about spiraling strategic arms programs in
       the USSR, Christian Science Monitor reported. Heavy payload in the
                  the
      Soviet nuclear system and an expanded program of deploying multiple
      warheads had aroused fears of a possible “first strike” by the USSR
       against U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) systems. Intelligence
       experts estimated the USSR would have 1500 land-based missiles by
       summer, compared with 1054 for the US.; an article in Foreign Affuirs
       magazine by Paul Nitze-Secretary           of the Navy in the Johnson
       administration-had stated the Russians believed they could “win” a
       nuclear war, whereas popular feeling in the U.S. was that all participants
       in a nuclear exchange would be destroyed. A Russian “cold launch”
       system for missile launching that did not damage the silo was contrasted
       to the U.S. “hot launch” system that damaged the silo during launch. The
       Pentagon had sought $78 million for development of a new ICBM called
       “MX,” and a FY 1977 budget of $9.4 billion for strategic forces. (CSM,
        19 Feb 76, 6)
*   Extinction of several species of life forms resulted from a weakening of the
       earth’s ozone shield nearly a million years ago, according to a study of
       recorded atmospheric occurrences that had not previously been corre-
       lated. In the Jan. issue of the British scientific journal Nature, Drs.
       George 6. Reid and 1.S.A. Isaksen of NOAA and Thomas E. Holzer and
       Paul J. Cruzen of the National Center for Atmospheric Research,
       Boulder, Colo., stated that fears about man-caused destruction of stratos-
       pheric ozone might be well founded. Examination of earth-core samples
                                        32
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     February
    showed extinction of species of microscopic sea animals during a reversal
    in polarity in earth‘s magnetic field that weakened magnetic forces
    shielding the atmosphere from solar and cosmic radiation. The resultant
    heavy bombardment of radiation formed nitric oxide in the high atmos-
    phere, in turn destroying part of the ozone shield. Similar increases in
    radiation, recently recorded, would inevitably affect present organisms,
    the report said; aside from direct effects on higher forms of life, indirect
    damage would come from the consequent upset of the ecological life
    cycle. (NU, 19 Feb 76, 21)
20 February: Astronomical observations and laboratory experiments span-
    ning 16 yr had failed to detect any signals of life in outer space, the
     142nd annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement
    of Science was told. The session in Boston heard reports on a 4-galaxy
    scan using the largest radiotelescope in the world-the 600-m-dia.
    antenna at Arecibo, P.R.-from Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornel1 Univ. and his
    Cornel1 colleague, Dr. Frank Drake, director of the National Astronomy
    and Ionosphere Center at Arecibo. “Of the trillion stars we looked at in
    four galaxies,” Dr. Sagan said, “there is not a single one that at the time
    of our observation was devoting a major effort to communicate with us.”
    Another effort-a 4-yr scan by the National Radio Astronomy Obser-
    vatory at Green Bank, W.Va., of 659 stars in the region of the Milky
    Way-had yielded negative results after analysis of 90% of the obser-
    vations. However, fewer than a millionth of the stars in the Milky Way
    had been scanned, for very brief periods, at only a few wavelengths.
    Negative results did not rule out the possibility of receiving the looked-for
    signals some day, the meeting was told. (NU, 21 Feb 76, 40; B Sun,
     21 Feb 76, A-3; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-3)
0 NASA announced selection of the Boeing Commercial Airplane co. of Seattle
    for award of a $20-million contract to build an experimental flight
    research aircraft for use in noise-reduction technology. Boeing would
    modify a government-furnished C-8 Buffalo transport aircraft into a
    quiet short-haul research airplane (QSRA) for the Ames Research Center’s
    noise-reduction research program, aimed at reducing aircraft-noise im-
    pact on U.S. communities and congestion at major airports. The redesign
    to meet QSRA concepts would enhance aircraft performance and control
    at low speeds, and would demonstrate propulsive-lift technology that
    would permit civil transport aircraft to achieve a short takeoff and
    landing (STOL) capability. STOL aircraft could use runways at existing
     smaller airports to relieve traffic at large metropolitan airports, as well
     as to reduce noise impact. (NASA Release 76-33)
0 A simple, inexpensive, and effective method of suppressing noise in wind-
     tunnel testing of space vehicles would be patented by two MSFC engineers,
     MSFC announced. While developing an acoustic environment for reentry
    of the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster, Paul W. Howard and Luke A.
    Schutzenhofer of MSFC’S Systems Dynamics Lab. found their acoustic
     data distorted by background noise reflected at transonic speeds from the
     walls of the wind tunnel, causing shock waves. The primary aerodynamic
     cause of the background noise was found to be the edgetone effect of
     high-velocity windflow over holes in the perforated walls of the tunnel;
                                       33
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
February

    covering the perforated walls with wire screening minimized direct con-
    tact between the airstream and the edges of the holes, and the noise was
    greatly reduced. The temporary fix proved so successful that the screens
    were permanently installed, and the patent should be issued to the public
    by early summer. (MSFC Release 76-44)
21 February: A simple device to reorient an orbiting satellite toward the earth
    stations with which it would communicate had been used successfully on
    Satcom 1, RCA-owned comsat launched by NASA in December 1975.
    Patented by two engineers at the RCA Electronics Div. in N.J., the new
    equipment took advantage of the gyroscopic effect of a wheel normally
    rotated to stabilize a satellite in synchronous orbit; only a simple start
    signal from the earth could activate it. Previous systems needed precision
    controls involving delicate sensors and thrust motors manipulated from
    the ground. Satcom 1, in synchronous orbit at about 35 000-km alti-
    tude, had been rotated 90’ by the new system to point its instrumen-
    tation at the earth; it would begin regular transmission in March. (NYT,
    21 Feb 76, 31)
0 A Russian system for intercepting and destroying satellites apparently was
    unsuccessful this week, U.S. intelligence sources said. The test involved
    Russian satellites only, and posed no threat to any U.S. satellites in space.
    A target spacecraft (Cosmos 803)launched from Tyuratam 12 Feb. was
    the object of the test, carried out by an interceptor spacecraft (Cosmos
    804) launched 4 days later. Observers differed on whether the intercep-
    tor had been maneuvered close enough to destroy the target, although
    a routine announcement by the USSR said the second launch had success-
    fully completed its mission. In 5 tests between 1968 and 1971, USSR
    interceptor satellites had blown up on radio signal after approaching the
    targets in orbit, and the explosions had destroyed both interceptors and
    targets; Cosmos 804 had not blown up. U.S. Secretary of State Henry
    Kissinger had said that the 1972 nuclear arms limitation agreement with
    Russia forbade the 2 countries from interfering with each other’s satel-
    lites, but did not prohibit tests of an antisatellite system. (B Sun, 2 1 Feb
    76, A-1; W Star, 21 Feb 76, A-3)
22 February: Study of earth’s climate to permit predictions of global climatic
    changes by the end of the century should be the top space priority, said
    a study group formed by NASA last year to assess U.S. progress in space
    and where it should go next. The 3-vol report of the study group did not
    mention manned exploration of Mars, which had been the prime recom-
    mendation of a forerunner study 7 yr ago. Citing the dependence of the
    world’s population on a complex system producing food and fiber where
    climate is favorable, the report said the entire system was predicated on
    a constant climate. Understanding of climatic processes would help solve
    earth’s most pressing problems: food shortages, and worldwide weather
    changes caused by pollution. The report estimated that a 1-degree
    cooling of earth’s annual temperature would mean loss of $1 billion in
    grain production, $2.2 billion in timber and fiber output, and $1.4 billion
    in fish catches; the drop would also increase the demand for electrical
    energy by $700 million, with a $2.4 billion rise in health costs other than

                                      34
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   February

    treating skin cancers caused by alterations in earth’s atmosphere. The
    group recommended development of 6 satellites to identify and assess
    worldwide crop conditions; other satellites to study chemical changes in
    the atmosphere and to watch for solar changes affecting earth’s weather;
    and a z w o r k of 4 to 6 large geostationary satellites to observe ice and
    ocean conditions and keep tabs on the earth’s radiation balance. Manned
    flight should develop along the lines of Space Shuttle and space station-
    to be used partially for climate study-and instrumented craft should be
    sent to explore every solar-system planet except Pluto, the report said.
    Cost of the weather-satellite program was set at $1.7 billion, with oper-
    ating costs over 20 yr estimated at $4.6 billion; the planetary exploration
    program would cost a total of $5.1 billion to the year 2000. (W Post,
    22 Feb 76, A-3)
  NASA announced plans for a seventh Lunar Science Conference to be held
     15 to 19 March at JSC, bringing together scientists in geology, chemistry,
    physics, astronomy, engineering, and biology under joint sponsorship of
    Jsc and the Lunar Science Institute of Houston. Discoveries about the
    moon would be applied to problems of the origin and early history of the
    solar system, for instance using lunar data to interpret craters and
     volcanoes photographed on the surfaces of Mercury and Mars. Other
    papers would discuss meteorites, satellites of Jupiter (about the size of
    earth’s moon), and use of earth-based telescopes to measure chemical
    composition of asteroids. Lunar science conferences had been held
    yearly since 1970, when the first such assembly heard scientific results
    from the Apollo 11 moon-landing mission. More than 700 scientists
     from as far away as Australia attended the 1975 conference. (NASA
     Release 76-25)
0 Steam might be the power behind rockets of tomorrow, the annual meeting
     of the American Association for the Advancement of Science was told by
     Dr. Freeman Dyson of the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study.
     Steam engines of the future would be powered not by coal but by laser
     beams so powerful that they could instantly turn water into superheated
     high-velocity steam that could carry a 1-ton spacecraft into earth orbit.
     Basic research on laser propulsion had already been done by Dr. Arthur
     Kantrowitz of the Avco Everett Research Lab. in Cambridge, Mass. A
     laser beam with energy of 1 million kw would be needed to carry a rocket
     and its spacecraft away from earth; this laser would be 10 times more
     powerful than any developed so far. Ideally, the laser and rocket would
     be located on a mountain at 3-km altitude, where air would be free of
     water vapor that would reduce laser efficiency. Development of laser
     propulsion would take money, Kantrowitz said, but not as much as other
     rocket engines have cost. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A-2)
23 February: Western &ion filed with the Federal Communications Com-
     mission a tariff designating 11 more major metropolitan areas as “Sat-
     ellite Access Cities.” W U had already placed on line to Westar, the first
     U.S. domestic comsat system,.9 major metropolitan areas-New York,
     Washington, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Los Angeles, San Francisco,
     Houston, and Pittsburgh-served by 5 ground stations, located near

                                     35
February                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      New York, Chicago, Atlanta, Dallas, and Los Angeles. The Glenwood,
      N.J., station (near N.Y. City) would serve Boston, Buqalo, Philadelphia,
      Baltimore, and Wilmington under the new access. The station at Lake         I




      Geneva, Wis. (near Chicago), would serve Detroit, Milwaukee, Cleve-
      land, Cincinnati, and St. Louis; the station at Cedar Hill, Tex., would
      serve Kansas City. In operation for more than a year, the 2-comsat
      Westar system had been used by several hundred corporations for both
      voice and data transmission; Westar also included TV centers in New
      York, Los Angeles, Chicago, and Dallas that had been transmitting
      increasing amounts of US. video news and sports coverage since
      July 1975. (WU news release 24 Feb 76)
    In a close race to tame the hydrogen-bomb reaction process-fusion-to
@

      make electricity, the U.S. and USSR were both ready for larger en-
      gineering units to demonstrate the practical production of electricity by
      the mid- 1980s, reporter Robert Toth said in the Los Angeles Times.The
      Kurchatov Institute in Moscow had announced earlier in Feb. a “break-
      through” in the first successful test conducted in its Tokamak-10, the
      last purely experimental machine intended to prove feasibility of the
      approach. Last November, US. had announced a comparable achieve-
      ment with the Alcator Tokamak at the Mass. Institute of Technology,
      described as a major development in fusion research. Although u.S.
      scientists claimed a fusion process had been first tested at Los Alamos
      20 yr ago, it was not seriously pursued, whereas the late Dr. Lev
      Artsimovich of the USSR had worked along the same line independently
      and given the machine its name-a Russian contraction for current-
      machine chamber-upon achieving the first success.
          Advantages of the fusion process were that it was the most efficient
      reaction known, producing 180 times more energy than consumed; fuel,
      the heavy forms of hydrogen, would be as inexhaustible as the seas; and
      the process left no radioactive waste like that from atomic-power plants
      based on the fission reaction. Fusion would require containment of the
      reaction in a magnetic field, which had been accomplished, and contin-
      uous production of energy would require temperatures of a million
      degrees Centigrade and a density of 100 trillion ions for a second-
      conditions beyond the capability of present machines. Both the U.S. and
       USSR results had been 5 to 10 times less than needed, although they were
       5 to 10 times greater than previously achieved. (W Post, 23 Feb 76,
    A- 1)
24 February: The Apollo lunar scientific experiment package (ALSEP) left on
    the moon’s surface during Apollo 14, reported dead [see 18 Jan.] when
    transmission ceased last month from unknown causes, came to life just
    as unexpectedly 19 Feb. with transmitter, receiver, and experiments
    functioning very well. One experiment-the charged-particle lunar envi-
    ronment experiment-had previously been unable to perform during
    lunar daylight because temperature variations had degraded its power
    supply; since the revival, the experiment had been sending good data
    during lunar daylight. J% scientists and Bendix engineers who designed
    the ALSEPs had no idea what happened to the Apollo 1 4 station, one of

                                      36
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 February

    5 transmitting data from the moon; one possibility cited was a relay in
    the power system that had stuck and then became unstuck. Estimated
    remaining life of the Apollo 14 station was once again 2 to 3 yr; all the
    stations had performed well, with the oldest-from Apollo 12-nearing
    its 7th year. ALSEP experiments were still providing data on conditions
    inside the moon and on moonquakes; scientists were still hoping for
    seismic signals from a large meteor impact that would identify the moon’s
    core. (NASA Release 76-34; JSC Release 76-17)
  Pure carbon materials originally developed as ablative heatshields on the
    Apollo spacecraft were being used at medical centers across the US. in
    research on artificial limbs and implants in human tissue. The inert
    tendencies and high degree of purity exhibited by the carbon materials
    made them suitable for implantation without causing infection or rejec-
    tion. Northwestern Univ. in Ill. and the Rancho Los Amigos hospital
    center run by the Univ. of Southern Calif. at Los Angeles had studied the
    materials in skeletal fixation devices that used carbon-button implants to
    connect the devices to nerves. Other projects included carbon implants
    to control pain (especially in the lower back) and neuroelectric stimu-
    lators to relax contracted muscles in paralyzed patients. Much of the
    technology used in purifying the carbon materials originated at NASA’s
    Marshall Space Flight Center. (MSFC     Release 76-45)
25 February: Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission
    of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first
    free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials
    announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis
    Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as
    a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager
    of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With
    Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G.
    Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space.
    The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing
    747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at
    about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle
    to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif.
    to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7;
     w  Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
  Comsat General Corp. announced an agreement with ARCO-the Atlantic
     Richfield Co.-to install a Marisat terminal on the S/S Arco Prudhoe
     Bay, a tanker commissioned in Baltimore in 1971, to evaluate satellite
     communications with an eye to equipping other Arc0 ships if the new
    medium should prove reliable. The tanker would transport crude oil from
    Alaska to US. west-coast ports, and communications via satellite would
    be valuable during periods when the aurora borealis (northern lights)
    made high-frequency communication difficult. Comsat facilities had been
    installed previously on 15 commercial vessels; the Marisat system would
    be the 16th, and would begin operations in commercial service about
     1 April. (Comsat Release 76-105)


                                     37
February                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
26 February: A radio sensing system deployed by the federal government in
    remote areas of the US. since the spring of 1975 to warn of impending
    natural disasters had already passed one test, reported David S. Johnson,
    director of the National Environmental Satellite Service. An impending
    flood upstream from the town of Deming, Wash., had been detected by
    the sensors, and the river had crested an inch above its flood stage as
    predicted. The radio sensors, attached to transmitters, collected and
    relayed data from NOAA geostationary satellites (Goes 1 , watching the
    East Coast, and Srns 2 watching the Pacific Coast); the satellites relayed
    the information to NOAA computers in the World Weather Building at
    Suitland, Md. Initial work on the system began in the 1960s, and it was
    already operational. By summer of 1976, 150 to 200 sensor stations
    would be in place; a total of about 10 000 would eventually be situated
    to warn of floods, earthquakes, forest fires, or tidal waves that began in
    unfrequented areas. The system could also be used for keeping track of
    ships at sea or of trucks on the highway. ( B Sun, 26 Feb 76, A-1; NOAA
    Release 76-32)
  Recovery of the unmanned Soyuz 20 spacecraft that landed in Kazakhstan
    16 Feb. carrying a “comprehensive biology payload”-including both
    plant and animal life-concluded what the Christian Science Monitor
    described as an impressive 3-mo biology experiment. Results from
    Soyuz 20 would be compared with those of similar experiments-
    including some from the US-carried on the Vostok-type biosat Cos-
    mos 782 which stayed 19.4 days in space last year. Cosmos 782 had
    carried a small centrifuge to test effects of artificial gravity on flora and
    fauna; comparison of the previous tests with those from Soyuz 20 would
    help decide whether-and how much-artificial gravity would be needed
    in future space stations. Soyuz 20 had docked with the Salyut 4 space
    station 19 Nov. 1975, an example of a self-docking biolab that demon-
    strated the USSR plan for assembling complex space objects ‘from sepa-
    rately launched modules. (CSM, 26 Feb 76, 6)
27 February: Beginning with the 1976 forest-fire season, a new satellite-
    linked monitoring system of 23 NASA-designed ground stations would
    monitor forest conditions throughout thousands of sq km in Calif.’s
    Region One redwood area, providing data every 3 hr to foresters in
    Sacramento by means of a geostationary weather satellite. The 90-kg
    self-powered stations developed by NASA’s       Ames Research Center in
    cooperation with the state Division of Forestry would transmit continuous
    reports on wind speed and direction, air temperature, solar radiation,
    relative humidity, and the moisture content of forest litter such as pine
    needles and grass. Sensors to be added would measure rainfall and air
    pollution, including particulate matter and ozone concentration. The
    Synchronous Meteorological Satellite 2 (Sms 2) operated by NOAA from
    its vantage point over the equator would receive and relay the data. (JSC
    Roundup, 27 Feb 76, 3; NASA Release 76-28; ARC Release 76-07)
0 Charles w . Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator of Applications, retired
    after 33 yr of government service with NASA and its parent organization,
    NACA. As a member of the science staff at the Langley Research Center
    since 1943, he was chairman of the group that developed specifications
                                      38
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    February

    for the Mercury spacecraft before NASA was established. When Mercury
    became an official program in 1958, Mathews transferred to Houston
    (now the Johnson Space Center), serving as manager of the Gemini
    program. Upon completion of Gemini, Mathews went to NASA Hq as
    director of the Skylab program (then known as Apollo Applications
    Program); in 1968, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for
    Manned Space Flight, and remained in that position until 197 1. Awarded
    the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson in 1966 for
    contributions to the manned space program, Mathews received the award
    a second time in 1969 for contributions to the first manned lunar landing.
    At his retirement, he stated that he would “continue to devote effort to
    the further realization of-the tremendous potential of space . . .” (NASA
    Release 76-38)
29 February: The concept of a “science court”-an impartial quasi-judicial
    body of scientists to conduct inquiries into conflicting scientific claims-
    was advanced by Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz, director of Avco-Everett Lab-
    oratories, a high-technology industrial firm in Mass. The proposal would
    be a means of assuring a rational and orderly assessment of scientific
    facts underlying highly complex issues of public concern. Although
    hearings had been held by Congress and federal agencies on issues such
    as radiation, automotive safety, air pollution, drugs, and pesticides, these
    had frequently been superficial and led to no resolution of facts. A recent
    Harvard University book on the subject said in part: “The principal
    shortcoming of such hearings can be revealed simply by asking how
    ‘adversary’ these adversary hearings are . . . direct battle over facts, if
    it occurs at all, takes place as a free-for-all in the mass media.”
    Conflicting statements by experts had added to confusion and paralyzed
    decision-making processes. A test of the “science coort” concept had
    been recommended as part of the new White House office of science and
    technology policy. ( N U , 29 Feb 76, 8)
0 Information of value to the u.S. Pioneer mission to Venus scheduled for
     1978 was published by the USSR in Pravda after 4 mo of analysis of the
    2 Soviet spacecraft that reached Venus in Oct. 1975. Each of the
    Russian craft, weighing about 5000 kg, separated into an orbiting section
    and a landing capsule; the two landers transmitted the first panoramic
    photographs of the Venus surface to earth. US. scientists had debated the
    angle at which landers should enter the Venus atmosphere; the Russian
    report stated that Venera 9 entered at 20.5” and Venera 10 at 22.5”
    to the horizon. Besides the entry angIe, the report included details of
    descent, amount of sunlight on the surface, wind speeds, rock chemistry,
    and character of surface erosion. Although the 2 landers failed under
    surface temperatures of 482°C and pressure 90 times that of earth-
     Venera 9 lander operated 53 min., Venera 10 65 min-the orbiters
    continued to transmit data on cloud cover and upper atmosphere. The
    US. planned to launch 2 spacecraft, an orbiter and a lander, toward
    Venus in 1978, the lander separating into 4 or 5 probes to relay data via
    the orbiter to the earth. (NW, 29 Feb 76, 34)
  Grover Loening, pioneer aeronautical inventor and first person to receive
    an M.A. degree in aeronautics from an American university, died at the
                                      39
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
February

    age of 8 7 at his home in Fla. after a long illness. In 1913, after working
    for an aeroplane builder in N.Y., Loening became assistant to Orville
    Wright and manager of the Wright brothers’ factory in Dayton, 0. In
    1914 he was appointed chief aeronautical engineer of the Army Signal
    Corps aviation section. As vice president of Sturtevant Aeroplane Co., he
    pioneered the first U.S. steel-frame airplane in 1915; later he formed his
    own company and developed the M 8 2-seat Pursuit monoplane using
    rigid strut bracing, which he patented. After World War I, Loening
    produced the Flying Yacht which established world records and won him
    the Collier Trophy in 1921;his next success was the Loening Amphibian,
    with the first practical retractable carriage. A member of the Aviation
    Hall of Fame, Loening was one of the first directors of Pan American
    Airways and a member of the Smithsonian Institution board for about
    20 yr. Awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit and nearly every U.S.
    aviation medal, he had been selected 3 wk ago to receive the Smith-
    sonian’s Langley gold medal for aerodromics. ( WStar, 3 Mar 76, B-5)
During February: Water hyacinths thought to be environmentally affected
    by the location of NASA’s     National Space Technology Laboratories in
    Miss. proved to have unexpected benefits for space-age processes and
    byproducts, when NASA scientists monitoring the effects of wastes dis-
    charged into nearby streams found that the water plants had a peculiar
    ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals, and to metabolize various
    other chemical pollutants, while they continued to produce massive
    amounts of plant material. For a year, biochemists at NSTL had worked
    with the plants as a filtration system for purifying polluted waters, as a
    source of biogas for fuel, as a protein and mineral additive to cattle feed,
    and as a soil fertilizer and conditioner. The vascular plants could absorb
    and metabolize large quantities of nutrients and pollutants from domestic
    sewage waste waters. An installation of the size needed to meet pollution
    standards at the nearby community of Orange Grove would have cost
    about $500 000; stocking the sewage lagoon with enough water hya-
    cinths to purify up to a half million gallons of sewage outflow daily cost
    only a few thousand dollars.
        Plants taken from sewage lagoons had been dried and ground into
    feeding rations for beef cattle, producing a meal rich in minerals and
    protein, and added to corn silage fed to a herd of steers at the nearby
    agricultural experiment farm operated by Miss. State Univ. A 4-mo
    study resulted in weight gain comparable to that on a diet fortified with
    cottonseed or soybean meal. The high cost of fuel for drying the plants
    after harvesting led to construction of a prototype solar dryer at NSTL
     that was designed to dry 18 tons of wet material each 36 hr; the dryer
    might prove a solution for agricultural problems other than drying of
    grains and forage.
        Another use of the plants was as a source of methane gas and
    fertilizer, using an anaerobic fermentation process with a yield of nearly
     57 000 cu.m. (2 million cu. ft.) of gas from an acre of water hyacinths.
     A state like La., with more than a million acres of unwanted water
    hyacinths, might produce more than enough methane gas to fuel

                                      40
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       February
       2 million homes in the New Orleans region annually. Another study
      showed a remarkable ability of the plants to filter out “heavy” metals
      (cadmium, mercury, nickel, lead, silver) and other toxic organic sub-
      stances common in industrial waste waters. Although plants harvested
       from these sites could not be used for animal feed or fertilizer, they could
       be used to produce methane gas; researchers found that biogas generated
      from plants containing trace metals yielded a higher percentage of
      methane than plants free from metals. Spinoff projects resulting from
       worldwide interest in the NASA findings included a survey by NASA in-
      vestigators of water hyacinths blocking up the White Nile, requested by
       the Sudanese government; a plan to use hyacinth plantings as a detection
      system for assessing heavy-metal pollution in waters near thermonuclear
       installations; and use of the plants in a system to recover millions of tons
      of gold “tailings” left over from mining and present in streams near
      disused mines in the western U.S. (NASA Release 76-36)
    A 7.6-m radio-controlled model of the dirigible Hindenburg, star of a
0
       recent motion picture on the last days of the world‘s largest airship, was
       given to the National Air and Space Museum for display along with a
       full-size control car used in interior and exterior filming of the picture.
       Other full-size sets had been constructed to represent the passenger
       compartments, internal engineering and cargo areas, and a complete bow
       section. The radio-controlled model could perform 28 separate func-
       tions, from dumping water ballast to operating a complex system of
       interior lighting. (NAA newsletter Feb 76)
    The tlSSR had made good use of observations from its manned space
      stations, Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov said, citing photographs
      taken by Salyut 3 showing 67 locations where oil and natural gas could
      be found in the Caspian Sea region and 84 in Uzbekistan. The satellite
      did in 3 mo a job that had taken 60 yr of ground prospecting to reveal
      102 deposits, he said. Published in the Feb. issue of the British magazine
      Spacejight, the report by Sedov mentioned contributions to agriculture
      from a space survey that revealed millions of gallons of water “just below
      the surface” of arid lands near the Caspian Sea, showing areas that might
      be suitable for “oasis farming” or grazing livestock. Discussing changes
     in the environment made possible by space technology, Sedov said such
     influences should “bear a global character,” to avoid a repetition of the
      66
        notorious experiment” (the so-called West Ford) in which the U.S.
      released a cloud of copper fibers in orbit in 1963 for communications
     experiments; West Ford caused worldwide complaints by radio astron-
      omers. (Spacejight, Feb 76, 54)




                                        41
                              March 1976

1 March: NASA’scancellation of a mission to Uranus by withholding funds in
   a severely restricted budget for FY 1977 had produced a “Uranus
    option” plan, sponsored by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
    that would take a spacecraft destined for Saturn and give it the ability
    to go the extra distance to Uranus as well. In an interview with the New
     York Times,John R. Casani-deputy project manager of the Mariner
    project at JPL-said the necessary trajectories had been plotted, and
    modification of the spacecraft remote-sensing instruments to use at
    Uranus was already under way.
        Of the two Mariner missions scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept.
     1977, to fly by Jupiter in 1979 andSaturn in Nov. 1980 and Jan. 1981,
    the first mission would remain unchanged. The second Mariner, trailing
    the first by 9 mo, would fly a lower speed trajectory to allow a bigger
    slingshot effect from Saturn’s gravity for propulsion toward Uranus; the
    slower speed would also allow flight controllers to decide on the basis of
    the first Saturn flyby whether to use the second Mariner for a closer look
    at Saturn or to go for Uranus. The second choice would mean that, by
     1985, U.S. spacecraft would have looked closely at all the planets of the
    solar system except Neptune and Pluto; a Mariner flyby of Uranus
    between Nov. 1985 and Jan. 1986 would take the spacecraft further out
    into the solar system, toward Neptune. Obtaining data on Neptune would
    take “a miracle,” Casani said, although the JPL engineers would not rule
    out the possibility. The infrared spectrometer on the second Mariner
   would be improved in sensitivity to detect the temperature of Uranus,
    twice as far from the sun as Saturn is, and 20 times as far as earth; also,
    the spacecraft would be able to photograph Uranus, 4 times the diameter
   of earth, and gather data on its magnetic field, atmosphere, and other
    physical properties. The Mariner missions to Jupiter and Saturn would
    cost about $305 million; addition of the trip to Uranus would add about
    $21 million to the cost of the mission. (NYT, 1 Mar 76, 1 1 )
  An all-systems simulation of landing Vikings 1 and 2 on the surface of
    Mars, to exercise the entire 750-person Viking flight team so that
    everyone knew exactly what to do when the time came later this year,
    began 20 Feb. and built up to a “Mars landing” 22 Feb., concluding
    today as a “fantastic success” according to James S. Martin, Jr., project
   manager at Viking Control in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory installation
    in the San Gabriel Mts. near Pasadena. The computer program had to
    be redesigned to facilitate uplink command to the spacecraft cameras,
   and more time had to be allowed for certain ground-control and data-
    processing procedures, but no major problems developed. In the room
    where a full-scale model of the Viking lander complete with operational

                                     43
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March
    cameras stood on a simulated Martian surface, prankish team members
    had put three tiny marine fossils from earth’s Paleozoic period on the
    sand within the camera field-of-view. When the camera came on to
    transmit after the simulated landing, the first picture was startling, but
    the fossils were immediately recognized, and the joke demonstrated that
    even tiny objects near the landing site would appear in the pictures
    transmitted from Mars. (NW, 4 Mar 76, 32)
  Lt. Col. Michael A. Love, test pilot of the successful NASA lifting-body
    program, was killed in the crash of an F-4C fighter on a dry lake bed at
    Edwards AFB, Calif., shortly after takeoff in a proficiency flight. Love’s
    navigator, Maj. E.B. Underwood, Jr., ejected from the plane before it
    crashed and was hospitalized in stable condition. Love, 37, was chief AF
    pilot assigned to the X-24B program that tested a wingless aircraft to
    develop a space vehicle that could be flown to earth and landed like a
    plane. After serving in the lifting-body program as a chase pilot for
    various M-2 and X-24A flights, Love made his first X-24B flight on
    4 Oct. 1973 and had piloted the plane to its fastest speed-better than
     1860 kph-before terminating the program 20 Aug. 1975 with a hard-
    surface landing of the X-24B on the runway at Edwards. ( WStar, 2 Mar
    76, A-5; W Post, 3 Mar 76, A-20; NASA X-Press, 12 Mar 76, 2)
0 At 0300 CMT (12:30 pm local time) the Japanese ionosphere sounding
    satellite Ume was launched from the Tanegashima site on the 3-stage
    liquid-fuel N rocket to an orbital altitude of about 1000 km. The cylin-
    drical satellite weighed 139 kg, had a diameter of 9 4 cm, and was 8 2 cm
    high. Its estimated lifetime was 1.5 yr. This was the second successful
    launch with the new N rocket. (FBIS, Kyodo 29 Feb 76)
0 A technical management team calla SPICE for Spacelab payload integra-
                                      %       (
    tion and coordination in Europe) would be established by the European
    Space Agency as the result of a planning meeting in Paris, ESA an-
    nounced. The team would work at the Federal Republic of Germany’s
    technical center at Porz-Wahn, with half of its 20 members from the
    center’s staff; the ESA announcement called the center “the European
    organization that has devoted the most effort to forecasting, studying and
    preparing the utilisation of Spacelab.” Max Hauzeur, manager of the
    SPICE team, would be responsible for a number of items for the first
    Spacelab payload: coordination of instrument and experiment develop-
    ment; data management; design and interface specifications; schedule
    monitoring; acceptance of experiments, and approval of integration
    tests; and coordination of training programs. (ESA release, 1 Mar 76)
* The European Space Agency (ESA) announced an agreement on loan of a
    radiometer for 2 yr to the Iranian College of Science and Technology at
    Tehran for use in propagation experiments in the 12-ghz band, to be
    used by European relay satellites for long-distance public telecommuni-
    cations. The experiments would be carried out in “particularly inter-
    esting conditions,” E% said, because of Iran’s geographical and climatic
    characteristics. (ESA release, 1 Mar 76)
2 March: Discovery of a new kind of photosynthesis-a bacterial system
    using purple instead of green pigment to convert sunlight into chemical
    energy and food-was announced by a team of scientists from NASA’s

                                     44
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       March
    Ames Research Center and the Univ. of Calif. medical center at San
    Francisco. Contained in cell membranes of Halobacterium halobium,
    found in salty waters, the pigment when energized by sunlight could
    transfer protons across the membrane. It appeared to increase the
    evaporation rate of salt, with possible applications in desalination of sea
    water; it also seemed to resemble rhodopsin, the little-understood visual
    pigment of the eye, and might aid in understanding the evolution and
    operation of vision. The purple pigment, which acted as a proton pump,
    might also explain the key process of ion transport in all cells. Deposited
    on a flm and exposed to sunlight, it had already been tried out in crude
    solar cells. Scientists were excited by the possibility of practical uses of
    the purple pigment because-although less efficient than chlorophyll-it
    could be purified and was stable over a broad range of temperatures and
    activities. The newly discovered process was the first instance of a system
    other than the one based on green chlorophyll in which cells could use
    light energy to survive, said Dr. Walter Stoeckenius of the University of
    Calif., chief researcher. Bacteria used in the research came from salt
    flats near the Mediterranean, where they had been known for a century
    to cause pinkeye in salted fish and red herrings to become red. The study
    in which the discovery was made was part of research into earth orga-
    nisms living in extreme environments like those expected to exist
                                                                       w
    on other planets. (NASA Release 76-30; ARC Release 76-12;               Post,
    3 Mar 76, A-1; B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
* A cooperative use of spaceflight techniques by U.S. and USSR scientists
    might verify the existence of “gravitational waves” that could be used
    to probe quasars and other explosive cosmic events, said an article in the
    Astrophysical Journal. The new technique-proposed by Dr. Kip S.
    Thorne of Calif. Institute of Technology and Prof. Vladimir B. Braginsky
    o Moscow State University-would use a net of radio signals between
      f
    earth and interplanetary spacecraft to monitor sudden unexplained
    fluctuations in the returned radio frequencies. Analysis of changes in the
    length and shape of the waves would reveal what had happened to the
    matter that generated the wave, according to the theory. The idea of
    gravitational waves had grown by analogy with the three types of man-
    ifestations of electrical force: the static electric field, static magnetism,
    and radiated waves that took form as visible light, radio waves, x-rays,
    etc. As the extremely precise clocks needed for the experiments had only
    recently become available, the search for gravity waves might not be
    successful for another decade, the scientists said. ( N U , Mar 76, 17)
                                                                   2
2-9 March: Comet West, one of the few such objects visible to the unaided
    eye in daylight, reached maximum visibility in the eastern sky before
    sunrise this week. Having skirted the sun a week ago, the comet had
    become less brilliant as its distance from the sun increased, but was more
    easily seen as it moved away from the sun. The comet was said to be the
    brightest such object since Comet Bennett’s appearance in 1970. The
     comet had appeared in photographs taken in August 1975 at an obser-
     vatory in the Chilean Andes, but was not identified until Richard West,
     a Dane working in Geneva, studied the photographs. Comets are of
     special interest because they are thought to be composed of materials

                                      45
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

    from the outer fringes of the solar system. Reports from Italy, Switzer-
    land, and elsewhere described the comet’s tail as 2 to 4 times the
    apparent diameter of the moon, unusually short for so bright a comet.
    NASA reported extensive observations of the comet using rockets, high-
    flying aircraft, and ground-based instruments; smog or clouds might
    make ground observation difficult. ( N I T , 2 Mar 76, 17; 9 Mar 76, 43;
    B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
3 March: Women would definitely be admitted to the US. space program, the
    Chicago Tribune reported, and NASA would make a formal announce-
    ment in July. Only one woman-Russia’s Valentina Tereshkova, who
    orbited for 3 days on Vostok 6 in June 1963-had been in space so far.
    The U.S. space women would fly on the Space Shuttle scheduled to be
    operational by 1980; the exact number had not been determined, but
    they would form part of a group of 15 mission specialists who would be
    chosen within the coming year. Screening, evaluation, and physical
    examination of applicants would be completed by Dec. 1977, and select-
    ees would join NASA as candidates for space flight by July 1978. ( B Sun,
    3 Mar 76, A-3)
5 March: First microwave observations of carbon monoxide in the upper
    atmospheres of earth, Venus, and Mars were reported by a team of
    scientists at NASA’s Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena. Establish-
                         Jet
    ment of carbon monoxide as a common component of the upper atmos-
    pheres of the planets should lead to a better understanding of the delicate
    balances in earth‘s atmosphere, said Dr. Joe W. Waters, who headed the
    team. Carbon monoxide at lower altitudes on Venus and Mars, as well as
    on earth, had previously been measured by infrared techniques that had
    also detected CO on Jupiter last year, according to J ~ L ’Dr. Reinhold
                                                                 s
    Beer. JPL microwave observations used a radiotelescope at Aerospace
    Corp.’s electronic research laboratory to detect the carbon-monoxide
    absorption frequency at high altitudes, well above the smog layer over
    Los Angeles; calculations indicated that the same technique could mea-
    sure co in the upper atmospheres of the other planets. The Mars experi-
    ment used the larger radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., to record the
    identifying signal. 60 occurred in 20 parts per million at 80 km altitude
    on earth, and about 1000 parts per million at 100 km above Venus; the
    Mars readings were still being analyzed. (NASA Release 76-40)
0 Simultaneous measurement of ocean-surface conditions from an aircraft
    and from an altimeter on NASA’s 3 satellite 840 km above the
                                         Geos
    surface was the mission of a NASA-Navy team just back from a month’s
    expedition to Newfoundland. Correlation of aircraft data on actual sur-
    face conditions with remotely sensed data from Geos 3, launched 9 April
     1975, would demonstrate satellite capability of making accurate and
    rapid sea-state measurements. Newfoundland was chosen for the experi-
    ments because it exhibited a wide range of climatic and oceanographic
    conditions within a relatively short time period. Measurements taken
    were sea ice, sea state, swface-wind field, and determination of atmos-
    pheric refractivity. Each pass of the satellite-8 to 10 times a day-
    would produce 10 to 1 5 min of data relayed to Goddard Space Flight
    Center via tracking stations at Bermuda, Madrid, or Winkfield, England.
                                     46
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      March

    Satellite observations plotted for the North Atlantic would be compared
    with aircraft data and with daily Navy-NOAA forecast maps. The team
    consisted of 8 persons from the Naval Research Laboratory and 11
    representatives of Wallops Flight Center and Lockheed contractors.
            Release 76-39; WFC Release 76-2)
    (NASA
  NASA selected Grumman Aerospace Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astro-
    nautics Corp. to negotiate fixed-price contracts for parallel systems
    analyses of concepts for space stations in low- and synchronous-altitude
    earth orbits, including orbit-to-orbit transportation. The 2 studies, each
    to last 18 mo and cost about $700 000, would be managed by MSFC for
    Grumman and by Jsc for McDonnell Douglas; the work would begin
    1 Apr. The studies would define an operational base in space to serve as
    a space laboratory, of modular construction with potential for growth
    over the years. Proposals were also received from Rockwell International
    Space Div. and Boeing Aerospace Co. (NASA Release 76-41; JSC Release
    76-19; MSFC Release 76-50)
0 The Dept. of Defense announced its fmt successful powered flight test of
     a bomber-launched cruise missile, prototype of a weapon the USSR had
     sought to curb in strategic arms talks. The Boeingmade missile, basically
     a pilotless jet drone resembling a small plane with airbreathing engines,
     could carry nuclear warheads at low altitudes to evade detection by
     enemy radar. The successful test, in which the robot-like craft was
     launched from a B-52 at an altitude of about 3 km and flew for 11 min.
     over the White Sands range, was viewed as a step in final development
     of a highly strategic weapon for the U.S. Control of cruise missiles-both
     air- and submarine-launched types-had been a major issue in negotia-
     tions with the USSR. The Air Force missile just tested would be an aid to
     bomber penetration of enemy defenses, whereas the Navy’s cruise mis-
     sile would be a tactical type for use against enemy ships rather than a
     strategic type aimed at land targets. The first test scheduled for 26 Feb.
     had been canceled because of problems with the B-52’s airconditioning
     unit. Later tests would try out the programmed guidance system.
     ( W Post, 6 Mar 76, A-12; W Star, 6 Mar 76, A-2; B Sun, 6 Mar 76,
     A-1; NYT, 6 Mar 76, 18)
0 A new device called an ultrasonic bolt-stress monitor-using       ultrasonics to
     measure stress on a bolt-had been developed by LRC physicist Joseph
     S. Heyman, the Langley Researcher announced, and would be submit-
     ted to Industrial Research magazine as a candidate for selection among
     the 100 most significant new products developed during the year. The
     bolt-stress monitor would replace equipment now in use to monitor a
     multitude of bolts in a facility or a piece of equipment, as it would detect
     a 1-psi change in 50 000 psi in measuring stress. Heyman had invented
     a continuous-waveultrasonic microemboli monitor, used to observe blood
     circulating outside the body during surgery and detect larger than nor-
     mal particles, that was selected by the magazine as an IR 100 winner in
      1974. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 3)
6 March: U.S. failure to renew the Indian government’s access to the AB
     sate1Jite relaying birth-control and agricultural information to 2400 vil-
     lages might intensify tensions between Washington and New Delhi, the
                                      47
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

    Baltimore Sun said in an editorial. An alliance of U.S. scientists and
   environmentalists had already protested the sale to India of uranium for
   a power station near Bombay; the group had asked the Nuclear Regu-
   latory Commission to require India to demonstrate that the substance
   would not be used to make bombs, as India had done in 1974 with
   plutonium derived from Canadian material supplied for a joint atomic-
   energy project. Combined with Ford Administration efforts to use devel-
   opment aid to force India into a more friendly posture, the Sun said that
   withholding advanced technology used by India for humanitarian pur-
   poses would create “an unnecessary blur” between humanitarian and
   development aid and would exacerbate rather than relax existing ten-
   sions. ( B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A-12)
7 March: Dr. James B. Pollack, research scientist at Ames Research Center,
   had been named to receive the H. Julian Allen award for 1975, for major
   findings about the atmosphere of Venus. Dr. Pollack and coworkers used
   airborne infrared telescope observations in 1974 to show that the top
    20 km of Venus’s heavy cloud cover consisted of a water solution of
    concentrated sulfuric acid. The heat absorption peculiar to sulfuric acid
   might account for conditions of extreme heat near the surface of Venus.
    Dr. Pollack would share honors with 8 other Ames employees; the award,
    given for outstanding papers written by members of the Ames staff, would
   be accompanied by an honorarium of $1000. (ARC Release 76-1 1)
8 March: Jan A. Bijvoet (pronounced byfoot) of the Netherlands arrived at
    Marshall Space Flight Center where he would on 1 April become the new
    representative of the European Space Agency (ESA) in the Spacelab
   program office. Most of his career had been with transatlantic cooper-
    ative programs; from 1961 to 1970, he had worked for NATO as a senior
   scientist in the evaluation methods section of SHAPE’S technical center.
    Before coming to MSFC he had spent 6 yr in ESA’S aeronautical satellite
   program, a joint activity of ESA and the Federal Aviation Administration.
    At MSFC Bijvoet would be responsible for technical and managerial liaison
   between NASA and E% on the Spacelab program. He succeeded Robert
    Mory, who had been at MSFC since the beginning of the Spacelab program
   in 1973 and had been reassigned to the Paris oflice of ESA. (MSFC Release
    76-70)
9 March: Former astronaut William A. Anders, serving as chairman of the
    Nuclear Regulatory Commission, was appointed U.S. ambassador to Nor-
    way by President Ford. Anders, 42, had served at NRC since Dec. 1974
    and had told the President he wished to remain in the post for only a yr.
    Selected as an astronaut by NASA in 1963, Anders was one of the 3
    crewmen of Apollo 8 to orbit the moon at Christmastime 1968. Anders
    left the corps of astronauts in 1969 to become executive secretary of the
    National Aeronautics and Space Council, a White House post abolished
    by President Nixon 4 yr later; he then was appointed head of the Atomic
    Energy Commission (whose functions were reorganized in 1974 into the
    Energy Research and Development Administration and NRC). He had
    turned down an offer of reappointment at NRC for a 5-yr term. (WSJ,
    9 Mar 76, 3; W Post, 8 Mar 76, A-20)

                                    48
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    March

12 March: Tests completed in flight on the two Mars-bound Viking spacecraft
    showed that each had 2 ovens of the organic chemistry experiment in
    good working order. JPL spokesmen said they were confident the instru-
    ments would carry out the investigations planned on the Mars surface
    later in the year. Earlier data indicated that one oven on each spacecraft
    might have failed, but investigators would not be certain until the Mars
    landings, scheduled for early July and Sept. The ovens-3 on each
    Viking lander-were designed to heat surface samples to 500°C to
    release organic matter in the soil for analysis by the gas chromatograph
    mass spectrometer on each lander. (NASA Release 76-43)
  Dr. Bruce T. Lundin, director of Lewis Research Center, received the 1976
    Astronautics Engineer Award from the National Space Club at its 19th
    annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard memorial dinner in Washington. The
    award, made by a group of judges including former NASA scientist
    Dr. Wernher von Braun, was for outstanding leadership in development
    and operation of the Centaur high-energy rocket stage, and the
    Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur launch vehicles. The Atlas-Centaur
                         Surveyor spacecraft in the 1960s and many others
    launched all NASA’s
    such as OAOS, the recent Intelsats, Mariners, and Pioneers. The Titan-
    Centaur, largest U.S. rocket, launched West Germany’s Helios space-
    craft toward the sun and the Viking spacecraft to Mars. A NASA employee
    since 1943, Dr. Lundin became director of L R C in 1969 after a year and
    a half at NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator and Acting Associ-
    ate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. As leader in
    the development and operation of the Centaur vehicle, he built the
    Centaur staff at Lewis and made the decisions that set the character and
    style of the whole project. (Lewis News, 19 Mar 76, 1; L R C Release
    76-1 1 )
0 First of 4 u.s.-West German rocket launches to investigate the source of
    the aurora borealis, in a study called Project Porcupine, would be fired
    to an altitude of 500 km from northern Sweden, NASA announced. Two
    identical 250-kg payloads would be flown at twilight between 17 Mar.
    and 4 Apr. when moonlight interference would be at a minimum; a
    second pair of rockets would be launched in 1977. The instrument
    packages would have 12 quill-like booms sticking out to gather data for
    aurora-probe experiments beyond the orbits of the U.S. Skylab and USSR
    Salyut space stations. At about 450 km altitude, canisters of barium
    would be exploded to identify magnetic-field lines and plasma drifts; a
    NASA jet from Ames Research Center would be in flight over Greece to
    photograph the clouds released from the rockets. Data from Project
    Porcupine would be compared with energetic-particle and magnetic-field
    data gathered by NASA’s 6. The payloads, largest and most complex
                               Ats
    to be fired on sounding rockets, would be the first flown on the new Aries
    rocket, modified from Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile parts
    provided by the U.S. Air Force. Project Porcupine would be part of
    the 1976-78 International Magnetospheric Study, a 40-nation effort
    to explore the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 76-44; NIT,
     28 Mar 76, 21)

                                     49
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March
14 March: US. worldwide predominance in science and technology had
    eroded over the past 15 yr, said a National Science Foundation report
    transmitted to Congress by President Ford. Based on a review of 492
    major technological innovations, the report said the U.S. share of the total
    sank from 75% in 1953-55 to 58% in 1971-73. U.S. spending on
    research and development declined from a peak of 3% of gross national
    product in 1963 to 2.3%in 1974. Since 1960, U.S. receipts for use of
    American inventions abroad had tripled, but payments the other way had
    increased 4.5 times. Foreign inventors receiving U.S. patents now ac-
    counted for more than 30% of all those issued by the Patent Office. The
    study was the most specific compilation to date on changes in relative
    support for science in the U.S. and other nations; the USSR, West Ger-
    many, France, and Japan had improved their inventiveness and worker
    productivity faster than the U.S. The message to Congress did not
    mention the international comparisons, but said inflation and reces-
    sion had adversely affected science and technology in the U.S. (NW,
     14 Mar 76, 1 )
15 March: A Titan III-c rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center at
    2:55 am local time (0755 GMT) carried into stationary orbit at about
    36 000 km 2 experimental nuclear-powered comsats for the US. Air
    Force; 23 min later, the Navy’s Solrad 11-A and 11-B riding pig-
    gyback on the same rocket were sent toward an orbit more than
     120 000 km up and at opposite sides of the earth, where they would
    monitor solar flares that disrupt communications and navigation systems
     on earth. The Air Force’s Les-8 and Les-9 were designed to guard
    against space jamming of U.S. military communications; spokesmen said
    the satellites were “right on the money” but would undergo various
    tests before they began their experimental message traffic. (NW,
     17 Mar 76, 39)
0 Insulation systems developed under contract at MSFC for the liquid-
                                Saturn V launch vehicle had found new uses
    hydrogen tanks of NASA’s
    in the shipping industry, MSFC announced. Two firms-McDonnell
     Douglas and Rockwell International Corp.-had              developed the
    polyurethane-foam systems for efficient cryogenic (low-temperature)
    insulation. The McDonnell techniques had been used to insulate storage
    tanks on liquefied natural-gas carriers in conjunction with a French naval
    engineering firm; the system, to be marketed jointly by the 2 firms, had
    the advantages of quick and easy installation with high efficiency that
     would reduce boil-off (loss through evaporation) for a given thickness of
    insulation. The Rockwell system was adapted for tuna-boat insulation;
     more than 40 boats had been equipped with the new insulation before
    being sold at prices ranging from $1 million to $4 million. (Marshall
     Star, 31 Mar 76, 4; MSFC Release 76-51)
  Astronaut Eugene A. ’Cernan, last man to leave footprints on the moon’s
    surface when he commanded Apollo 17 in 1972, would leave govern-
    ment service 1 July. Cernan, a Navy captain, would complete 20 yr in
    the Navy in June and would retire from both the Navy and the astronaut
    corps. Selected as a NASA astronaut in 1963, Cernan had had 3 space

                                      50
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      March
    missions (including 2 flights to the moon) and was the second American
    to walk in space, when he was pilot of Gemini 9 in June 1966. As
    lunar-module pilot of Apollo 10 in May 1969, he and Astronaut Thomas
    P. Stafford had flown the module within about 15 km of the moon’s
    surface in a full-scale rehearsal of all but the final moments of the first
    lunar-landing mission 2 mo later. In Dec. 1972, Cernan and Astronaut
    Harrison H. Schmitt landed at Taurus-Littrow during the last scheduled
    manned lunar mission. In 1973, Cernan became special assistant to the
    Apollo program manager, working on the joint U.S.-USSR Apollo-Soyuz
    Test Project; in Sept. 1975, he became chief of training operations in the
    astronaut office. (NASA Release 76-47; J.% Release 76-20; W Star,
    16 Mar 76, A-2)
16 March: The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch
    of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn,
    Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site-now
    marked by a granite monument-and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at
    the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative
    rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high
    school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to
    print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was
    ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the
    vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the
    morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar
    landing.
        The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m
    high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of
    56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen.
    By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over
    110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of
    kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by
    Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out
    at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about
    the Auburn flight . . . In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s
    was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the
    1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to
    supersonic,
        Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did
    most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets
    such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had
    attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had
    planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm
    swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the
    event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass. ceremo-
    nies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was
    closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the
    scheduled helicopter could not fly. (NYT,16 Mar 76, 16; W Post,
     17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar
    76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club,
     19 Mar 76)
                                      51
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

    Timing the rebound of laser pulses aimed at reflectors left on the moon by
0
      Apollo astronauts had served to reinforce Einstein’s theory of relativity,
      according to a study in Physical Review Letters reported by the New
      York Times. The equivalence principle-that objects of different weight
      fell at essentially the same speed-was tested in the 16th century by
      Galileo, who showed that all bodies responded similarly to gravity regard-
      less of size or composition. Einstein’s theory was based on a related
      assumption, that the mass responsible for an object’s inertia was equiv-
      alent to the mass responsible for the gravity that it generated. However,
      if the gravitational pull of the earth were influenced by the sun’s gravity,
      the relationship between a body’s inertia and its gravity would not always
      be uniform, and the report described experiments to test a theoretical
      departure from equivalence. An eclipse of the sun in 1919had been used
      to test Einsteh’s theory, and showed that light from distant stars was
      bent-as expected-as it passed through powerful gravity near the sun.
      Other experiments-bouncing radar beams off Venus and Mercury to
      see if the beams were bent or lengthened by the sun’s gravity, or
      monitoring round-trip signals to Mariner 9 as it sailed behind the sun or
      radio emissions from quasars in that direction-had narrowed any devi-
      ations from Einstein’s formulation to a small margin.
          The experiments reported recently were independent analyses of
       1389 measurements of round-trip travel times of laser pulses aimed at
      moon reflectors, to detect changes in earth-moon distance to within
       127 mm. If earth gravitational energy were influenced by the sun’s
      gravity, the effect would alter the earth’s gravity more than that of the
      moon, and the moon’s motion about the earth would deviate by as much
      as a meter from conventional predictions. The experiments showed no
      such effect. (NY7’, 16 Mar 76, 17)
    The Energy Research and Development Administration requested pro-
      posals for what the Wall Street Journal called a “scaled-down’’ Insti-
      tute for Solar Research, a modest facility with a budget of $4 to
      $6 million in its first year. The National Academy of Sciences months ago
      recommended an institute with a wide research role, a staff of about
       1500, and an annual budget of $50 million; unsolicited proposals had
      been arriving from nearly every state, with many politicians interested
      in having the institute locate in their constituency. ERDA would operate
      the facility through contracts with any organization, including nonprofit
      groups, corporations, universities, or state or local governments, and
      operations should begin by early 1980, according to Robert Hirsch, an
      acting assistant administrator of ERDA, at the press conference. The
      institute was a requirement of a 1974 law calling for various solar-energy
      demonstrations to be financed by the federal government; ERDA wanted
      initial proposals for a 5-yr operation, with future functioning dependent
      on performance and availability of funds. As ERDA currently contracted
      out most of its solar research to private facilities, a reporter asked why
      its work called for a special institute instead of expanding the current
      research program; Hirsch responded, “because the law requires it.”
      (WSJ, 16 Mar 76, 3)

                                        52
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      March

1 7 March: NASA asked scientists to submit proposals for scientific experi-
     ments to be carried on the first Spacelab mission in late 1980, according
     to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science.
     Primary objective of Spacelab 1 would be to verify performance of
     systems and subsystems and to measure the environment surrounding
     NASA’s  Space Shuttle; secondary objectives would be to obtain scientific,
     applications, and technology data and to demonstrate Spacelab’s ability
     to perform space research. The first flight would emphasize stratospheric
     and upper atmosphere research, but proposals from other scientific
     disciplines were also solicited.
         Objectives of the Spacelab 1 mission had been planned jointly by NASA
     and the European Space Agency (ESA); the NASA announcement of oppor-
     tunity would be sent to U.S. scientists and those in all other nations not
     members of ESA, and ESA would make a separate solicitation to its 11
     member states. Responses would be coordinated between the two agen-
     cies. (NASA  Release 76-49)
   The [J.S. Navy Dept. selected General Dynamics Corp. to develop its cruise
     missile, under a $34.8-million contract that would cover costs of inte-
     grating systems into the prototype. CD won the award after 2 yr of
     competition with Vought Corp., a unit of LTv; the Navy recently finished
     a series of tests comparing prototypes made by the 2 companies. Last
     week the Navy had ordered Vought to stop work on its version, after the
     company had reported cost overruns and the missile performed badly
     under testing. The cruise missile, a jet-powered weapon with an advanced
     guidance system, would fly at low altitudes to make detection difficult.
     The sea-launched version could be put into submarine torpedo tubes and
     fired from under water as well as from ships. In both the Navy version
     and the Boeing missile being tested by the Air Force [see 5 Mar.],
     McDonnell Douglas Corp. was maker of the guidance system and Wil-
     liams Research Corp. the engine manufacturer. (WSJ, 18 Mar 76, 2)
18 March: Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, pilot of the docking module on the
     Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been appointed to a newly created
     position as Deputy Director of Flight Operations for approach and land-
     ing tests of the Space Shuttle at Johnson Space Center, the Spaceport
     News of KSC reported. Slayton would be responsible for planning and
     implementing the shuttle approach and landing test project, under the
     Director of Flight Operations for the Space Shuttle project. (Spaceport
     News, 18 Mar 76, 5)
   NASA announced it had completed negotiations with Owens-Illinois, Inc.,
     for replacement of a mirror blank for the Infrared Telescope Facility
     being built at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The 126-cm-dia. replacement would
     be ready for processing at the Kitt Peak National Observatory that would
     turn it into a telescope mirror. Opticians at Kitt Peak had cut a center
     hole in the original disc preparatory to grinding it when a fracture was
     detected last Sept.; the crack, extending radially more than 86 cm from
     the center hole, rendered the mirror blank useless. The original and
     replacement were cast from Cervit, a transparent ceramic material
     obtained by NASA for testing as part of the Space Telescope. When a

                                      53
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

    different material was decided on for the Space Telescope, the Cervit
    blank was transferred to the infrared telescope project. Cervit had prac-
    tically zero thermal expansion, making it ideal for telescope materials,
    and had been used in 2 of the world’s 5 largest telescopes. Under the new
    agreement, Owens-Illinois would provide a replacement lens for
    $200,000 and return of ownership of the damaged blank to the Ohio
    firm. (NASA Release 76-42)
19 March: Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator of NASA, announced
    that he would leave government service at the end of June to become
    president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, where he received his
    bachelor’s degree in aeronautical engineering in 1948 and master’s in
    1950. He had been a trustee of the institute since 1971. In 1949 Low
    became an aeronautical research scientist at NACA’s Lewis Flight Pro-
    pulsion Laboratory in Cleveland. When NASA was formed 9 yr later, he
    came to Hq-as Chief of Manned Space Flight and was chairman of the
    committee that planned the Apollo lunar landing program. He became
    Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight before trans-
    ferring to the NASA Manned Spacecraft center at Houston in Feb. 1964
    as Deputy Director. In April 1967 after the Apollo 204 fire, Low became
    manager of the Apollo spacecraft program; under his leadership, the
    spacecraft was redesigned, manned space missions resumed 23 mo later,
    and Apollo 11 made the first manned lunar landing in July 1969.
    Appointed Deputy Administrator of NASA by the President in Dec. 1969,
    Low negotiated the agreements with the USSR that led to the
    Apollo-Soyuz flight and other cooperative space projects. (NASA Release
    76-54; Admr’s letter, 19 Mar 76; NYT, 20 Mar 76,17; Marshall Star,
    24 Mar 76, 1)
* A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson
    Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins,
    chief of planetary and earth sciences at J s c , and Dr. Robert Pepin,
    director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice
    Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary
    view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest
    was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more
    interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and
    remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying
    geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range oper-
    ation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that re-
    sulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained”
    the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history-“Whatever
    history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present
    heat loss from the body.”
        Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists
    not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived
    data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its
    outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation
    or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of
    seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar
    evolution.
                                     54
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     March

       Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many
   more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely
   included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that
   revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history,
   whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no
   longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient
   to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances
   are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner
   planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid sur-
   faces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those
   days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These
   huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment
   took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from
   Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical
   record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity
   in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted.
        The intense bombardment had wiped out earth‘s early geological
    record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest
    earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back
    as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This bound-
    ary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest
    in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been
    not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other
    direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such
    as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have
    been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now
    been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling
    (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition
    and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact.
    Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one plane-
    tary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth,
    unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active
    planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had
    obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and
    planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had
    provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and devel-
    opment of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment
    was only one example of this application.
        Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be
    studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial
    planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot
    project to defme comparative planetology and relate it to a specific
    aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest
    recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be
    basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar
                                                   .
    system, “an enormous structure that would . . cover the state of Kan-
           ..
    sas if . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should
    be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the

                                     55
                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

   interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the devel-
   opment and evolution of a planet.
       Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman,
   and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s
   theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The
   task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the
   excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities,
   to high schools, and even to grade-school levels.
       One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold
   Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the
   formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the
   noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar
   physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that
   cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions.
   Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate
   which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende
   meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to
   what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula
   at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and
   planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar
   grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the
   earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological
   processes. So the search shifted to meteorites.
       Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the confer-
   ence had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar
   grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist
   of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth
   of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar
   grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question,
   Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbo-
   naceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the
   carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its
   composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that
   of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of
   planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the
   carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have
   originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without
   being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been
   created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial
   planets but in the region of the giant planets.
       If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear
   processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that pro-
   duced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all
   the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With
   rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains
   would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of
   a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all
   the elements around us would be the product.

                                   56
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    March
        Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and
   the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to
   supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract
   information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks
   as they had don in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible
                    \
   for a steady progr s in the field of measurements: “there simply was not
   the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.”
        Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in
   the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were
   beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every
   planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed
   through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a
   record of what had happened-for example, a preview of the kind of rock
   that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad
   framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just
   investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials
   brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Has-
   kins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a
    leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future
    generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because
    the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the
    building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled
    only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, mois-
    ture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regard-
    ing the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples.
    (Transdipt, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA
    Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post,
    21 Mar 76, A-3)
0 Congress’s Joint Committee on Defense Production, inquiring into
    government-contractor activities involving hospitality or gratuities to-
    ward federal employees, revealed that Rockwell International Corp. had
    entertained Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans, NASA astronauts, at
    a facility on Bimini in the Bahamas, in addition to 1 1 other NASA employ-
    ees who had enjoyed hospitality at a hunting lodge in Md. Both Rockwell
    and Northrop Corp., another NASA contractor, ran hunting lodges on the
    eastern shore of Md. where 13 NASA employees and one former employee
    had acknowledged acceptance of entertainment. The DOD had announced
    it would reprimand its chief of research, Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, and dock
    his pay, for accepting a similar weekend from Rockwell. ( W Star,
     19 Mar 76, A-1; WSJ, 17 Mar 76, 17)
22 March: A General Accounting Office review of the Seasat oceanographic
    spacecraft program revealed a lack of formal agreements between NASA
    and potential Seasat users on application of resources, said an article in
    Aviation Wk and Space Technology. CAO said there “should have been
    top-level agreements among NASA, the National Oceanographic and At-
    mospheric Administration, and the Defense Dept. concerning Seasat
    participation prior to project approval within NASA.” NASA responded that
    it was “of the opinion that there are clear understandings . . . regarding

                                     57
March                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    roles and responsibilities in the Seasat-A project and that formalized
    agreements are being prepared.” GAO also reported increased costs
    during Seasat spacecraft definition; objections from the user community
    to changes in instrumentation had prompted NASA to raise the cost ceiling
    on the spacecraft rather than fly hardware that would not meet user
    requirements. GAO asked Congress to require that NASA provide specific
    data on how Seasat would produce $350 million yearly in benefits; why
    NASA, rather than users, should pay for Seasat improvements to benefit
    the user community; and what agency responsibilities would be in future
    Seasat operations. (Av E% & Sp Tech, 22 Mar 76, 44)
0 In a special message to Congress, President Ford requested an increase in
    federal spending to $24.7 billion for scientific research and development
    in the energy, defense, and space programs. Ford said his request for the
     1977 fiscal year, an 11% increase over 1976 estimates, included
    $2.5 billion for basic research. The budget asked $2.6 billion for energy
           a 35% increase over 1976, including funds for nuclear power,
    development of solar and geothermal energy, and fusion power; major
    increases were for energy conservation and for research on fossil fuels
    to improve direct combustion of coal for production of oil and gas. The
    President also asked congressional conferees to act quickly on bills to
    establish the Office of Science and Technology. ( F S t a r , 22 Mar 76,7)
0 Pioneer 10, on its way out of the solar system, spent 24 hr in an enormous
    magnetic “tail” area of the planet Jupiter, the Ames Research Center
    reported, registering zero on its solar-wind detector during that time
    because the magnetic envelope completely shut out the solar wind.
    Dr. John H. Wolfe, project scientist, said it was conceivable that the solar
    wind “could have died completely for a whole day without our being in
    the tail . . . But we believe we’ve found that Jupiter has a very stretched-
                             .
    out magnetic envelope . .” Exact shape and size were not known, but
    were estimated as conical and better than 800 billion km long, spanning
    the distance between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. Earth’s magnetic
    tail had been measured at more than 6 billion km by previous spacecraft;
    the magnetic tails of the 2 planets had been shown to extend to great
    distances by the force of the solar wind, a supersonic charged-particle
    stream constantly emitted from the sun. (NYT, 26 Mar 76, 19; WPost,
    27 Mar 76, A-5; NASA Release 76-55; ARC Release 76-22)
0 Cost of the Air Force B- 1 bomber might run more than $1 1 billion over
     original estimates because of inflation and higher prices, said Rep. Les
     Aspin (D-Wis.), adding that total cost increases on the B-1 would be
     around $1 billion while d a t i o n would be responsible for another
     $10 billion increase. Three research contracts on the B-1 had already
     run $ 129 million higher than expected, he said, and those represented
     only money spent for models, engines, and electronics. By the end of
     1976, Congress would have to decide whether to go ahead with the
     bomber, intended as a replacement for the aging B-52. (LA Times,
     22 Mar 76, 11C)
23 March: The House passed, 330 to 35, and sent to the Senate an author-
     ization bill of $3.? billion for the nation’s space programs for FY 1977,
     slightly less than the administration request, but $133 million more than
                                      58
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      March

    for FY 1976. Research and development authorizations totaled
    $2.77 billion, nearly $10 million more than requested. The Space Shut-
    tle would use $1.29 billion in R&D money, plus $40 million for 8 construc-
    tion projects. ( W Post, 23 March 76, 6)
e A new network of space satellites would replace the existing hotline between
    Washington and Moscow later in 1976, said Willis K. Naeher, Deputy
    Assistant Secretary of State for Communications, on a weeklong working
    visit of U.S. communications specialists to Russia with Soviet counter-
    parts to check Soviet facilities and transmit test messages over both the
    Molniya and the Intelsat networks. The new system was planned to
    provide more reliable emergency communications between the two cap-
    itals than had been available for a dozen years using a transatlantic cable
    and radio system. The overland line had been disrupted when parts of the
    cable had been damaged by fire, stolen, and once plowed up by a Finnish
    farmer. Coordination was necessary because the U.S. and Russian sys-
    tems functioned differently: whereas Intelsat used a “necklace” of sat-
    ellites around the equator maintaining a fixed attitude toward earth, the
    Molniya traveled in an elliptical north-south orbit and would be visible
    from both countries for periods of 8 hr at most, so that 4 satellites would
    be needed instead of the 3 originally planned. Failure of a Molniya 111
    launch caused the delay from 1974, original starting date. Final test of
    the Intelsat portion would begin in Apr. (NYT, 23 Mar 76, 14)
0 The 2 USSR spacecraft orbiting Venus had completed their program, the
    Tass news agency announced, stating that further scientific experiments
    would be made “under an additional program.” Tass did not elaborate
    on the further experiments, nor did it indicate how long the two craft
    would remain in operation. Venera 9 had completed 75 orbits since its
    arrival at Venus on 22 Oct. 75, and Venera 10 had completed 71 since
    its arrival 3 days later, Tass said. (NYT, 23 Mar 76, 3)
                                      Space Shuttle orbiter in the 1980s would
24 March: Travelers aboard NASA’s
    use a unique space suit and rescue system, developed at Johnson Space
    Center. The Shuttle suit, a departure from the customized astronaut
    suits, would consist of a two-piece upper and lower torso cover in small,
    medium, and large sizes to accommodate all astronaut candidates or
    crews, including females. Only the pilot and mission specialist would be
    outfitted with the space suit; the commander and payload specialists
    would be provided with a personal rescue system nicknamed the “cosmic
    soccerball,” consisting of a container nearly a meter in diameter con-
    structed of three layers-urethane, Kevlar, and an outside thermal
    protective layer, with a small viewing post of tough Lexan-containing
    its own simplified life-support and communications systems. During a
    rescue operation in space, a space-suited astronaut could transfer the
    rescue balls in one of three ways: using the handle to carry the enclosure
    like a suitcase from one vehicle to another; hooking a device like a
    clothesline between two spaceships and passing the rescue ball with its
    passenger from the disabled ship to the other; or using the remote-
    manipulator arm in the orbiter’s cargo bay to pluck the rescue ball with
    its passenger from the disabled ship and put it aboard the rescue ship.

                                     59
March                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

        Materials to be used in the rescue ball and the Shuttle suit would
    provide longer shelf life, according to technicians who ran pressure and
    abrasion tests on them; use of the fabric to make joints in the space suits
    (instead of the Apollo and Skylab suit use of neoprene rubber molded into
    convolutes containing cables) would provide better mobility and reduce
    cost and weight of each suit. The new suit also featured a module
    construction that closed with a body seal at the waist, considered more
    reliable than the pressure-seal zippers used in the previous suits. The new
    suits also were designed with an integral portable life-support system as
    part of the rigid upper torso, instead of the bulky 34-kg package that
    previously had to be unpacked and connected to the suit. (NASA Release
    76-56; JSC Roundup, 26 Mar 76, 1)
25 March: The first satellite in the 2-ocean Marisat system inaugurated
    communications services to U.S. Navy ships. However, the scheduled
     1 Apr. start of service to commercial shipping was canceled because of
    malfunctions in C- and L-band transmissions, involving random vari-
    ations in signal strength. The Navy operations used UHF frequencies.
    Marisat 1 was launched 19 Feb. into synchronous orbit over the Atlan-
    tic; Comsat General Corp.-86% owner and manager of the Marisat
    system-said tests indicated that the problems could be solved “with
    respect to the [second] spacecraft’’ awaiting launch at ETR, in time to
    permit its scheduled launch 27 May for service in the Pacific Ocean. The
    difficulty appeared to be associated with a despun C-band triplexer,
    arising from loose metal particles. (Av Vc & Space Tech, 29 Mar 76,
                                                I
     14; Comsat 1975 rept. to stockholders, 9)
  Space-related technology would serve to monitor municipal water pollution
    and dispose of solid wastes, NASA announced, describing systems for
    electronic monitoring of water quality in cooperation with the Gulf Coast
    Waste Disposal Authority and for sewage treatment at a plant midway
    between Los Angeles and San Diego. Johnson Space Center at Houston
    developed under contract with Boeing a trailer-mounted automated sys-
    tem to process data from up to 40 different water sensors for rapid
    indications of pollution, temperature, turbidity, and similar items. The
    current procedure was to sample city water at regular intervals and send
    the samples to a laboratory for analysis, with results available days later.
    JSC and the Goddard Space Flight Center developed a biosensor to give
    total bacteria count directly, by adding chemicals that caused bacteria
    to radiate light; this sensor could both detect and quantify living or dead
    bacteria in a continuous-flow water sample.
        At Langley Research Center, scientists working on Skylab environ-
    mental control had developed an electronic sensor that could detect
    human or nonhuman fecal coliform bacteria in a few hours, rather than
    a few days; the device would permit public health authorities to act
    quickly if large quantities of disease-producing bacteria entered a water
    supply. The automated monitoring system would eventually include a
    device to detect known carcinogenic chemicals-chloroform and carbon
    tetrachloride, for instance-already found in the drinking water of cities
    surveyed for the project. Some of the pollutants were thought to be

                                     60
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     March

   byproducts of chlorine added to city water to guard against waterborne
   diseases. A gas-chromatograph technique developed at Ames Research
   Center to extract minute samples of organic materials from the atmos-
   pheres of other planets would be valuable to concentrate the harmful
   chemicals detected in city water for rapid onsite analysis. Another Ames
   system, attaching fluorescent dyes to bacteria so that their presence
   could be recorded by electronic sensors, could be applied to detection of
   waterborne viruses.
        As for sewage disposal, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used for the
   new million-gallon-per-daytreatment plant at Huntington Beach, Cal., a
   process invented by Marshall Humphrey, a JPL engineer working on
   lightweight materials for insulating rocket motors. Using a pyrolytic
   converter to produce activated carbon by chemical changes induced by
   heat, he found that sewage solids were excellent raw material for produc-
   tion of carbon. The new process would convert solid sewage to activated
    carbon, which could then be used to remove impurities from incoming
   waste water and recycled and reactivated with new incoming sewage.
   Gases generated from sewage solids would serve as fuel for the converter.
    Dry black odorless powder of carbon and ash would be the only residue
   from the process. Even the billion-dollar secondary sewage-treatment
   plants in compliance with EPA standards had not solved the problem of
   solid-waste disposal; primary treatment of sewage had left about 40%
   solid waste in water leaving the plants and discharged into rivers and
    offshore waters. The JPL process would exceed EPA standards for ocean
   discharge and reduce capital costs of processing systems as much as
    25%. (NASA Release 76-57; KSC News, 4 Mar 76, 2)
         reusable Space Shuttle program would produce significant benefits
  NASA's
    for civil aviation, the agency reported in announcing the first operational
    tests of an advanced flight-control system for civil aircraft to be conduc-
   ted by the Shuttle, together with advances in structural materials tech-
    nology for aerospace manufacturers.
        Standard heavyweight mechanical backup flight-control systems had
    been required when reliability of electronic control systems was in ques-
    tion; however, aerodynamic requirements for the use of mechanical
    systems had hampered development of flight-efficient aircraft designs.
    Use of the advanced electronic controls would reduce weight, resulting
    in less fuel consumption, and a computer tie-in with ground navigation
    and mission controls would provide constant reliable communication and
    reduce traffic delays. Use of composites-strong lightweight combina-
    tions of metals and plastics-would reduce structural weight by more
    than 30% compared to aluminum. Developed by NASA and the Air Force
    in collaboration with industry, the composites would demonstrate in
    Shuttle testing the weight reduction and cost effectiveness needed for
    future designs. (NASA Release 76-58)
26 March: RCA-B, called Satcorn 2 in orbit, was launched from the Eastern
    Test Range at 5:42 pm EST (2242 GMT) on a Delta 3914 vehicle into a
    synchronous transfer orbit at 35 753-km apogee and 185-km perigee,
    and inclination of 27.25". Second in a series of 3 large 24-transponder

                                     61
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

      comsats to be launched by NASA on a fully reimbursable basis for the
      Radio Corporation of America, Satcom 2 would transmit voice, data,
      telex, and facsimile messages to and from the continental u.s., Alaska,
     and Hawaii from its geosynchronous orbit at about 35 800-km altitude
      above the equator at 12OoW. The spacecraft was box-shaped, 1.2 x 1.2
      x 1.6 m, weighing at launch about 990 kg;2it was 3-axis-stabilized,
      carrying 2 rectangular solar panels about 7m continuously oriented to
      the sun to provide electric power. After dropping the apogee motor,
      Satcom 2 would weigh about 463 kg in orbit. The communications
      system included a fixed 4-reflector antenna assembly and a lightweight
      transponder of traveling-wave-tube amplifiers; the 24 input and output
      filters were of a graphite-epoxy composite. All 24 channels were simul-
      taneously operable throughout a minimum 8-yr lifetime, each having a
      36-mhz bandwidth within the 5oO-mhz allocation to RCA’S Globcom Inc.
              Release 76-37; MOR M-492-206-76-02 [prelaunch] 18 Mar 76,
      (NASA
      [postlaunch] 13 Apr 76)
    The Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Center, formerly the Flight Research
0
      Center at Edwards, Calif., was formally dedicated in a ceremony by NASA
      Administrator James 6. Fletcher; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first adminis-
      trator of NASA from 1958-1961; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), chair-
      man of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; and
      Mrs. Dryden, guest of honor, who unveiled a bust of her late husband that
      would be placed in the Center’s lobby. After the ceremony, visitors were
      invited to a display of aircraft in the main hangar, including the 747
      aircraft that would be used for the Space Shuttle orbiter approach and
      landing tests next year. Center efforts to transfer space technology to
      industry were represented by a solar-energy display and low-drag truck
      exhibits. Dr. Dryden in 1947 had been named to the newly created post
      of director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics; when
      Dr. Glennan, then head of the Case Institute of Technology, was selected
      as NASA’s administrator, he insisted on Dr. Dryden as his deputy.
                  first
      When James E. Webb was chosen NASA’s       second administrator, he also
      made the condition that Dr. Dryden remain as his deputy; he had served
      in that position until his death in 1965. (NASA X-Press, 26 Mar 76;
      program)
    Marshall Space Flight Center forecast completion by 1 April of a unique
0
      facility-one of the largest and most significant construction jobs under-
      taken in the past 10 yr-at the Center, an x-ray test facility costing
      about $4 million. The new facility included a 305-m-long stainless steel
      x-ray path guide tube nearly a meter in diameter, connecting the x-ray
      source with a 6-m-diameter instrument chamber housing the telescopes
      and other instruments to be tested. Work began in January 1975, and
      would be completed on schedule. The facility, the only one of its size and
      type, would be used first to test instruments for NASA’s    High Energy
      Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program; later it would be used in x-ray
      verification testing and calibration of mirrors, telescope systems, and
      instruments, for rocket payloads in x-ray stellar studies and similar
      projects. After checkout, the facility would be turned over to MSFC’S

                                      62
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    March

    Science and Engineering Directorate. (Marshall Star, 31 Mar 76, 4;
    MSFC Release 76-53)
          Technology Utilization Office, publisher since 1963 of more than
0 NASA’s
    6000 single-page Tech Briefs on new techniques and innovations re-
    sulting from advanced research and technology programs in NASA,
    announced it would begin publication of NASA Tech Briefi in April
    1976. The new document would be a two-color journal designed for
    non-aerospace users of NASA technology, containing informatioh on as
    many as 600 items annually that previously appeared in the single-page
    briefs as well as new data that previously appeared in Technology Com-
    pilation booklets. The document would sort the information into 9 tech-
    nical categories to make it accessible as a current-awareness medium,
    and a cumulative index would appear once a year. The journal would be
    free to U.S. citizens. (NASA Release 76-60)
27-28 March: A series of rocket experiments funded by the National Science
    Foundation and NASA was lauiched from Poker Flat Range, Alaska, to
    measure magnitude and direction of electric fields and neutral winds in
    the auroral atmosphere. Spectrographic observations of the releases of
    barium vapor on 2 successive days indicated that a pulsating aurora was
    induced by vapor releases near 250 km altitude, but only when the
    explosions occurred in the path of precipitating electrons associated with
    the visible aurora. Previous experiments had produced no definite evi-
    dence of pulsations, and the experiments would be repeated to clarify the
    results. (Nature, 12 May 77, 135)
28 March: A reorganization of the NASA office (NaPO) located at the
    contractor-operated Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena became
    effective. NuPo would no longer report to the Associate Administrator for
    Center Operations at NASA Hq in Washington, D.C.; a resident legal office
    would report to the NASA General Counsel, and a resident procurement
    office would report to the NASA Assistant Administrator for Procurement
    at Hq. E.S. Groo, the Associate Administrator for Center Operations, said
    the change was made to relate the N ~ P Ofunctions more directly to the
    functions performed by their Hq counterparts, or by certain NASA field
    centers. NuPo’s cryogenics procurement activities and personnel would be
    relocated to the MSFC resident office at Canoga Park, Calif., and would
    be functionally responsible to MSFC; the Delta procurement activities and
    personnel would remain at JPL but would be functionally transferred to
    GSFC at Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Release 76-50; Groo anno. 15 Mar 76)
0 A component of the backpack worn by Neil A. Armstrong on the moon’s
    surface had been used by the former astronaut-now professor of aero-
    space engineering at the Univ. of Cincinnati-in bioengineering experi-
    ments testing better blood pumps for heart-lung machines and artificial
    hearts or kidneys. The Apollo double-diaphragm pump that circulated
    cooling water through plastic tubes in the astronaut’s space suit proved
    in the [IC tests to be 10 or more times less damaging to red blood cells
    than pumps previously used. Blood, a delicate substance easily daniaged
    by prolonged mechanical pumping, had lost critical amounts of hemo-
    globin in procedures such as open-heart surgery when pumps had taken

                                     63
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

    over the heart’s function for several hours. Armstrong, working on a
    team at the university’s Institute of Engineering and Medicine, recalled
    the Apollo pump’s efficiency from a power and weight standpoint and
    borrowed one from NASA for experiments with animals. The pump, de-
    signed to run on minimum power, created little turbulence in the flow of
    fluid and had no moving parts to damage the cells. It would be further
    modified for medical use. ( N I T , 28 Mar 76, 64)
30 March: No immediate serious problem appeared to exist in modification
    of the stratosphere, according to a report released by an interagency task
    force on inadvertent modificationof the stratosphere (IMOS) prepared by
    the Interdepartment Committee for Atmospheric Sciences (ICAS). Assess-
    ing presently postulated manmade modifiers of the stratosphere other
    than fluorocarbons, the report considered 6 kinds of possible hazards:
    nitrogen fertilizers, brominated compounds, other chlorinated com-
    pounds, particles, the Space Shuttle, and carbon monoxide. The report
    concluded that concern over modification of the stratosphere was so far
    speculative, and that it was based on compounds not yet released to the
    upper atmosphere in quantities believed sufficient to produce a hazardous
    effect. Although a large number of substances had been considered, only
    those appearing most potentially harmful were singled out. Also, cumula-
    tive effects from several substances might become significant later, the
    report said, even if the effect of any single substance were relatively
    slight. The report urged increased research into stratosphere modifiers
    and prevention of inadvertent modification now and in the future. (IMOS
    report, 30 Mar 76)
31 March: First test firing of the second Space Shuttle main engine-Engine
    0002, first to have a flight-type engine-mounted controller-achieved
    the programmed 1.5-sec duration, firing through a diffuser used for
    altitude simulation when production engines were throttled in testing.
    Engine 0002, a flight configuration that would not be flown, was a
    developmental engine instrumented for test purposes. It was fired on the
    National Space Technology Lab’s Stand A-2, used in Saturn V tests
    during the 1960s and modified and reactivated for the Space Shuttle
    program. NASA planned to fire each engine on the A-2 throttling test
    position before using it on a Shuttle flight. Stand A-1, the sea-level
    test position, had been used for about a year to test the first SSME, a test
    version known as the integrated subsystem test bed; A-1 was also
    developed for the Saturn program and modified for Shuttle tests. (MSFC
    Release 76-57; Rockwell Release RD-7)
* Dr. William H. Pickering, director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the
    California Institute of Technology since 1954, retired, announcing that
    he would return- to Caltech as a professor of engineering. He had earned
    all his degrees at that institution and had joined the faculty in 1936,
    becoming a member of the JPL staff in 1944. The staff at that time
    numbered a few hundred; when he became director, the total had
    reached 1000, and numbered about 4000 when he announced his retire-
    ment. Born in New Zealand in 1910, Dr. Pickering had become one of
    the world’s foremost experts in space technology. Under his leadership,

                                     64
                                                                       March
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
    JPL had designed Explorer 1 , first successful US. satellite, and went on
    to develop and operate the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner space probes.
    Dr. Pickering was first president of the American Institute of Aeronautics
    and Astronautics in 1963, and president of the International Astronau-
    tical Federation in 1965-66. NASA’s   announcement of his retirement said
    he would work on gaining worldwide scientific support for the proposed
    International Solar System Decade of research and space exploration of
    all aspects of the solar system. (NASA anno. 2 3 June 75; Ny1; 21 June
    75, 41; LA Times, 31 Mar 76, 1; Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1)
0 Gerald A. Mossinghoff, NASA’s Assistant General Counsel for general law
    since Jan. 1974, was appointed Deputy General Counsel effective this
    date. He joined NASA in 1963 as a patent attorney in the Office of General
    Counsel; in 1966 he was named director of the Office of Legislative
    Planning at the U.S. Patent Office, and returned to NASA in Dec. 1967
    as Director of Legislative Liaison. He received NASA’s   Exceptional Ser-
    vice Medal in 1971. A registered patent attorney, Mossinghoff had
    received a B.S. in electrical engineering from St. Louis University and a
    J.1). with honors fromGeorge Washington University. (Admr.’s announce-
    ment, 31 Mar 76)
During March: Launch of RCA’S Satcom 2 this month was the second launch
    of a Delta vehicle using 9 large Castor IV solid rocket boosters instead of
    the standard 9 Castor 11s.(First to use the larger rockets was the Delta
    that launched Satcom 1 on 12 Dec. 75.) RCA had underwritten develop-
    ment expenses of adapting the NASA ‘Lworkhorse’’Delta to use the larger
    rockets, in a unique NASA-customer-launch vehicle contractor arrange-
    ment that had enabled RCA to design its domestic comsat to be the
    heaviest to date without having to use a larger and more expensive
    launch vehicle. The Castor IV boosters would permit a Delta to put into
    synchronous orbit a payload weighing about 900 kg, compared to about
    700 kg for a vehicle equipped with the Castor 11s. NASA was thinking of
    the more powerful Delta as a standard launch vehicle for other customers
    who could use the increase in permissible weight of about 29% in many
    areas of spacecraft design: weather forecasting, scientific exploration,
    and communications. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 1)
  More new discoveries would be made in space than on the ground during
    the first 10 to 15 yr of Shuttle operations, a colloquium on bioprocessing
    in space was told by James H. Bredt, NASA program manager for space
    processing. The meeting of more than 200 industrial and academic
    bioscience researchers at Johnson Space Center heard reports on Space
    Shuttle and Spacelab capabilities and status. Noting that Spacelab would
    be able to carry 300 to 400 experiments, more on each flight than all
    other previous manned space missions combined, Bredt urged the audi-
    ence to submit experiment programs that would make use of the new
    national resource. Participants recommended formation of a small group
    of bioscientists to advise NASA i discussions of space processing sug-
                                       n
    gestions, and scheduling of followup meetings to define areas of interest
    so that programs could be developed before instrumentation develop-
    ment began. NASA spokesmen said more than 1400 experiment proposals

                                     65
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

      for Shuttle flights were on hand, and Shuttle flight opportunities covering
      the first 2 Spacelab missions would be announced later this year. (Av W7c
      & S p Tech, 29 Mar 76, 53)
    Endorsed by the state of Colo. as a bicentennial project, a mobile space
@

      museum prepared by the High Flight Foundation-a nonprofit religious
      organization founded in 1972 by Apollo 15 astronaut Col. James B.
      Irwin-would tour the U.S. to give residents of 30 cities a chance to see
      a large exhibit on national accomplishments in space. The exhibit would
      include tools and photographs, miscellaneous objects and films. During
      the tour, various state governors participating in bicentennial celebra-
      tions would receive from the astronauts state flags that had been flown
      to the moon. With Col. Irwin on the board of the High Flight Foundation
      were astronauts Col. William R. Pogue (Skylab 3) and Col. Alfred M.
      Worden (Apollo 15). (Spaceport News, 1 8 Mar 7 6 , 8)
*   NASA announced selection of the initial crew of the Boeing 747 shuttle-
      carrier aircraft that would carry and launch the Space Shuttle orbiter in
      approach and landing tests. Pilots would be Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and
      Thomas C. McMurtry, both of Dryden Flight Research Center; flight-test
      engineers would be Victor W. Horton, also from Dryden, and Louis E.
      Guidry, Jr., of Johnson Space Center. All the men chosen were civilians.
      The ALT flights, scheduled for early 1977, would carry the orbiter to an
      altitude of 7.5 km, where it would separate from the 747 and the orbiter
      crew would pilot it to a glide landing. Unmanned and manned captive
      flights would precede initial free flights. (DFRC Release 3-76)
    A device used in training Apollo astronauts was adapted to assist persons
      incapable of supporting their entire weight with their legs. Developed at
      Langley Research Center, the flying lunar-excursion experimental plat-
      form would exert a constant weight-relieving force during any vertical
      movement by the patient; the supporting force would be selected for a
      particular patient, and could be changed as the patient’s condition im-
      proved. Besides its application as a device for exercise during rehabil-
      itation, the apparatus showed potential for use in warehouses and storage
      facilities where heavy equipment was handled. The project was di-
      rected by L~RC’STechnology Utilization Office. (Langley Researcher,
      5 Mar 76, 7)
    The Federal Aviation Administration would use 15 new twin-jet Sabreliners
@

      to do a nationwide airways navigation-system checking job that formerly
      took about 50 older aircraft to do, according to a report by Rockwell
      International Corp., makers of the Sabreliner. The old Civil Aeronautics
      Administration (predecessor to FAA) in 1932 had hired 2 pilots in single-
      engine planes to inspect beacon markers-then              the only night-
      navigation aids for air travel-as well as to check safety at emergency
      landing fields. The report reviewed the advent of radio-range trans-
      mitters, omnidirectional signals, and instrument-landing systems, for
      which the FAA operated a Flight Inspection National Field Office based
      in Oklahoma City with field offices in the continental US., the North
      Atlantic, and the Caribbean. Until recently, safety checks had been the
      job of a fleet of military-surplus C-47s (commercially called DC-3s)

                                       66
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          March

     known in World War II as Gooney Birds. These became unsatisfactory
     with the advent of the jet age, and Sabreliners were added to the fleet in
      1968. FAA officials noted that the new twin-jet could cruise at 435 knots,
      compared to 150 knots for the DC-3s scheduled for retirement in
     June 1976. (Skyline, Spring 76, 34)
    Observance of 1976 as the 50th anniversary of US. commercial aviation
0
      would be established by a resolution introduced in the Senate by
      Sen. Howard Cannon (D-Nev.). The Air Mail Act of 1925-known as
      the Kelly Bill-gave the Postal Dept. authority to contract airmail
      carriage to private carriers, but the first contract airmail flight did not
      take place until 15 Feb 1926 in Detroit, Cleveland, and Chicago. The
      Postal Dept. had laid out a transcontinental route, and the contracted
      routes acted as feeder lines that greatly expanded airmail service around
      the country. Passenger airlines existed, but passengers were few, so that
      carrying the mail could mean the difference between success and failure
      for the airlines of the period. Each of the 46 cities that inaugurated
      commercial airmail service 50 years ago would cancel its special com-
      memorative cover on the date of the first airmail flight to that city.
      Covers were issued by the Aviation Historical Foundation in cooperation
      with the U.S. Postal Service. (NAA News, Mar 76, 2)
    On a visit to the ERDA Model Zero 100-kw wind generator installed at
0
              Plum Brook Station near Sandusky, O., a reporter from Popular
      NASA’s
      Science magazine climbed the steel tower to get a close look at the
      monster propeller measuring more than 398 m and rotating at maximum
      speed of 40 rpm. The flexible aluminum propeller blades operated down-
      wind of the 30 m steel tower similar to utility rigs, set on a raised concrete
      foundation designed to withstand high wind and rotor-thrust loads and to
      be accessible for maintenance. The NASA approach to generating power
      had been to use large generators rather than groups of small ones; the
      power from wind was said to increase with the square of the rotor
      diameter, so that doubling the rotor diameter would produce 4 times the
      power, besides keeping costs down. Design improvements for future wind
      turbines would include use of composite materials to reduce cost and
      weight and improve reliability, and development of a different hub to
      reduce bending moments of the rotor-blade roots and make them less
      likely to break. (Popular Science, Mar 76, 73)
    A new technique of using aircraft to map surface temperatures of bodies
0
      of water with an accuracy close to 1 “C was announced by Calspan Corp.
      The company said the method could be used to monitor the discharges
      of large volumes of heated water into rivers and lakes by power plants,
      steel mills, and other industries. Ecologists had sought regular monitoring
      of such flows, said to be potentially dangerous to fish and other marine
      life. Like the conventional method of taking water temperatures from
      aircraft, the Calspan method used an infrared thermal mapper to record
      infrared radiation from the surface, but did not require “ground truth”
      readings taken simultaneously at the sites being scanned, using boats,
      equipment, ground personnel, and correlations that were both time-
      consuming and expensive. The new system used a radiometer to track

                                        67
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
March

      along the image produced by the thermal mapper, extrapolating true
      ground temperatures from a series of passes over sites with identical
      temperature and noting changes in infrared intensity. Maps using this
      technique had been within 1“C of agreement with temperatures checked
      at the water’s surface. (Calspan News, Second Quarter 76, 3)
*   An FAA test of a new method of conserving energy, to be used when weather
      or other factors caused delays in aircraft landings, saved nearly
      2.5 million liters of fuel in 1 day. The test consisted of holding Chicago-
      bound flights on the ground at 150 airports until they could be accepted
      at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport with a minimum of airborne
      delay. (Aw Wk & Space Tech., 22 Mar 76, 37)
*   A 3-yr International Magnetospheric Study that began 1 Jan., sponsored
      by the International Council of Scientific Unions, would be coordinated
      by a steering committee set up by the Special Committee on Solar-
      Terrestrial Physics, chaired by Juan G. Roederer, professor and senior
      research physicist at the University of Denver. The 20 or more countries
      participating in the study had already submitted more than 1000 individ-
      ual research programs, including ground-based, balloon, rocket, aircraft,
      and spacecraft experiments as well as networks of magnetic, auroral, and
      other geophysical observatories. Among major spacecraft projects
      planned by the European Space Agency, Japan, the Soviet Union, and
      the U.S. would be use of ESA’S Geos spacecraft in geostationary orbit. ESA
      and NASA would join in an International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE) pro-
      gram to measure properties of different parts of the magnetosphere
      simultaneously. About 40 other spacecraft launched before and during
      the study period were expected to contribute sun-earth physics data to
      the study. Roederer told the National Academy of Sciences that the
      international coordination differed from that used in the International
      Geophysical Year, relying on interlocking spacecraft missions and quick
      and active exchange of information and scheduling. (NAS News Report,
      Mar 76, 1)




                                       68
                              April 1976

1 April: Dr. Bruce C . Murray, professor of planetary science at California
    Institute of Technology and geologist by training, succeeded Dr. Wil-
    liam H. Pickering as director of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
    After earning bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor’s degrees at Massachu-
    setts Institute of Technology, Dr. Murray became a geologist and later
    served in the Air Force. At the USAF Cambridge Research Lab., trying
    to expand knowledge of the earth’s shape and gravity field by the use of
    earth satellites, he became interested in space technology. First faculty
    appointee at Caltech in the field of planetary astronomy in 1960,
    Dr. Murray and Prof. James Westphal were in 1962 the first observers
    of infrared emission from an object outside the solar system (a star) and
    did infrared mapping of the moon, Venus, and Jupiter. Dr. Murray was
    the author or coauthor of 4 books and more than 60 scientific papers,
    including the recent book “Navigating the Future.” (Pasadena Star-
    News, 1 Apr 76, 1; Glendale News-Press, 1 Apr 76, 1; Montrose
    Ledger, 1 Apr 76, 1)
                         Landsat 1 earth-resources survey satellite helped
  Images from NASA’s
    Alaskan Indians to choose the best areas of timberland and mineral
    deposits in compliance with the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of
     197 1, NASA announced. The act set aside 99 million acres from federal
    public lands so that more than 200 native village corporations and 12
    native regional corporations-representing about 100,000 Indians, Es-
    kimos, and Aleuts-could settle claims going back to the US. purchase
    of Alaska from Russia in 1867. A regional corporation-Doyon,
    1nc.-asked the Univ. of Alaska to recommend the best land out of
    inaccessible, irregularly shaped tracts scattered over the huge state.
    Though known to be rich in minerals and commercially profitable forests,
    the area had no detailed maps and few settlements, roads, or airfields.
    Scientists at the university’s Geophysical Inst. used Landsat images,
    combined with limited ground and aerial data, to map 7 million acres of
    which Doyon chose 2 million. The Doyon selections were based heavily
    on the Landsat maps; the university reported that application of Landsat
    data “at least doubled the value of the land selected . . .” (NASA Release
    76-63)
* Egypt and the Federal Republic of Germany had agreed that Germany
    would supply Egypt with a ground station for receiving transmissions
    from the Symphonie I and Symphonie 2 comsats jointly operated by
    FRG and France, the MENA news service from Cairo announced. The
    stations would use 200 lines initially for telephone contacts between
    Egypt and “each of Germany and France,” as well as between Egypt and
    any other Arab state in which a similar station would be established. The

                                     69
April                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    stations would also be used for television transmissions between France
    or Germany and Egypt. Egyptians would be sent to FRG for training in
    operating the proposed station, and steps toward establishing the stations
    would begin in 1976. (FBIS, MENA in English, 1 Apr 76)
2 April: Gerald D. Griffin, Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in
    NASA Hq’s Office of Space Flight, had been named Deputy Director of the
    Dryden Flight Research Center effective 1 May, NASA announced. Griffin
    joined NASA in 1964 and served as a flight controller at Johnson Space
    Center during the Gemini program before being named an Apollo flight
    director in 1968; he served in that position on all 11 Apollo missions, and
    was lead flight director on Apollo missions 12, 15, and 17. He went to
    NASA Hq in 1973 and had previously been Assistant Administrator for
    Legislative Affairs. He had served in the Air Force and was an aerospace
    engineer with Lockheed and with General Dynamics before coming to
    NASA. (NASA Release 76-66; DFRC Release 5-76)
0 Two engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a solar-
    energy collector using air rather than water for heat transfer; this might
    be the key to low-cost solar-energy systems. The collector consisted of
    3 parts: a rigid foam structure, a metal collector plate, and a transparent
    cover. The device needed no tools or fasteners, but could be fitted
    together, and required no insulation; it measured 1 by 2 m and weighed
    about 17 kg. The inventors said their collector had shown itself in tests
    to be as efficient as other more costly and complicated collectors, and the
    chief patent counsel at MSFC was considering it for eatenting. An average
    house of about 140 m would require about 67 m- of collector area, or
                             ’
    a 40-collector system, to provide sufficient heating. A solar-energy
    system could save a household about 75% of its normal winter heating
    expense, and could be modified to heat water year round. (NASA          Re-
    lease 76-56)
  The largest American flag ever painted would be exhibited on an outside
    wall of the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center as part
    of KSC’s preparation for the Bicentennial exposition Third Century Amer-
    ica, scheduled from 20 May through Labor Day 1976. The flag, mea-
    suring 6 4 m by 33.5 m, would be painted on the VAB-world’s second
    largest building-along with a huge Bicentennial symbol 33.5 m in
    diameter. More than 1900 liters of specially formulated paint had been
    donated by the Montgomery Ward paint laboratories, and the Bicen-
    tennial administration would pay for the painting. The 160-m-high
    south wall of the VAB would be washed down, rinsed, and primed with
    white before the finishing coat of white could be added and the design
    overlaid in red and blue. KSC had been chosen by President Ford to house
    the Third Century America exposition, featuring exhibits by 16 federal
    agencies and many US. industries, the only such exposition to be spon-
    sored by the government during the Bicentennial year. (KSC Release
     112-76)
                       of the 9 planets circling the sun-might have a surface
0 Pluto-outermost
    of frozen methane, putting its temperature in its near-vacuum environ-
    ment at close to absolute zero (total absence of heat) and indicating that
    never since. the ice formed had the sun’s heat been able to boil off the
                                     70
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        April

    covering, according to a team at the Kitt Peak National Observatory in
    Ariz. Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii said that Pluto
    might look and behave just the way it did when it was formed during the
    creation of the solar system; nowhere but on Pluto had methane been
    found as a solid, and nowhere else was it present in such abundance. The
    frozen surface also meant that astronomers might have been fooled since
    Pluto’s discovery in 1930 into thinking it larger than it really was;
    instead of being the size of the earth, Dr. Morrison said, “it might be only
    half our size or even smaller.” Pluto, 4.8 billion km distant, was the last
    planet to have scientists define its surface composition. (NYT, 2 Apr 76,
    37; W Post, 2 Apr 76, A-1; Science, 2 3 Apr 76, 362)
4 April: Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Lab. at Pasadena had used equip-
    ment identical to that used by NASA’s    Deep Space Network to maintain
    comfort conditions in a &tory building at JPL w t almost no operation
                                                       ih
    of the building’s conventional heating and cooling equipment, the L.A.
     Times reported. Adaptation of a simple 8-station remote-control panel
    allowed remote control of building ventilation, heating, and cooling;
    adaptation of a highly sensitive resistance device to measure return air
    on one of 4 air handlers permitted constant monitoring of the building’s
    average comfort level. Operators demonstrated maintenance of the com-
    fort level by using the thermal storage of the building structure, outside
    weather, heat from lights, and heat generated by occupants. Over a
    month, the building had used less than half the energy required in
    pre-energy crisis days. The program was expected to save more than
     10 percent of JPL’S annual energy costs. (L.A. Times, 4 Apr 76, 1)
5 April: Harris M. (Bud) Schurmeier, manager since 1972 of the Mariner
    Jupiter/Saturn project at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was named Assis-
    tant Laboratory Director for Civil Systems, JPL Director Bruce C. Mur-
    ray announced. The new post would direct Civil Systems activities at JPL,
    begun in the 1960s to apply specific JPL capabilities in technical and
    management areas to critical problems of society, including technolog-
    ical transfer to energy, environment, biomedical, and transportation
    systems. Replacing Schurmeier as manager of the Jupiter/Saturn
    project that would send 2 instrumented Mariner spacecraft to the giant
    outer planets next year would be John R. Casani, former manager of JPL’s
    Guidance and Control Division. While serving as Mariner Jupiter/Saturn
    project manager, Schurmeier had also acted as Deputy Assistant Labora-
    tory Director for Flight Projects for the past 6 yr; the latter position
    would not be filled immediately. (JPL release 5 Apr 76)
0 Howard R. Hughes, 70, aviation pioneer and founder of a financial empire
    that included aerospace and aviation holdings, died en route to Houston.
    He was president of Hughes Aircraft and sole trustee of its owner, the
    Howard Hughes Medical Institute. His estate was estimated to be worth
    between $1.5 and 2 billion. Newspaper accounts of his wealth and years
    of withdrawal from public contact told of his early achievements in flying,
    sparked by his learning to fly during his production in 1930 of “Hell’s
    Angels,” then the most expensive motion picture ever made. On 13 Sept.
    1935 he set a world land-plane speed record, flying the H-1 (his own
    design) at 566 kph; in the same plane, he established a transcontinental
                                      71
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
April

   speed record 19 Jan. 1937 of 7 hr 28 min. On 10 July 1938, he took
   off in another Hughes plane from N.Y. and flew around the world with 4
   associates in 91 hr. Although he had no degree, he studied at Caltech and
   Rice Institute and had helped to design several aircraft, including the
    Lockheed P-38 fighter and the same company’s triple-tailfin Constel-
   lation transport. (NYT, 6 Apr 76, 1; W Post, 6 Apr 76, A-1; Av Wk,
    12 Apr 76, 23)
6 April: Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a contract to
    Ivey’s Plumbing and Electrical Co. of Kosciusko, Miss., for construction
   of a test facility at MSFC for the solar heating and cooling development
   program MSFC is directing for the Energy Research and Development
   Administration. The $647,243 contract was awarded by the U.S. Army
   Corps of Engineers, which would monitor construction activities; com-
    pletion date set by the contract was 1 Nov. 1976. The facility would be
    located in an area formerly used as a swing-arm test facility for Saturn;
   data-acquisition equipment-instrument terminals and cabling from pad
   to blockhouse-used for Saturn would be available for the heating and
    cooling tests. The facility would consist of 4 test areas, 2 designed for
    complete system or subsystem tests; a third would be used to test liquid
    energy storage subsystems, and the fourth for passively testing solar
    collectors. A solar simulator constructed in a nearby building would be
    linked to the test facility for data collection.
        Subsystems and components to be tested would include solar col-
    lectors, thermal-energy storage equipment, and solar heating and cooling
    devices. Testing the hardware against predetermined performance
    standards would produce data for input to analytical programs; the
    analyses in turn would be used to evaluate total systems performance
    under environmental conditions other than those simulated during tests.
    Components of the facility-heat exchangers, cooling towers, chillers,
    fans, pumps, and control valves-would be arranged to permit maximum
    flexibility for future modifications and use of other test positions or
    procedures. (MSFC Release 76-59)
* New Mexico State University and NASA would sponsor a 3-day symposium
    aimed at motivating Hispanic and Native American college and high-
    school students to follow science and engineering as career fields, the
    Johnson Space Center announced. The symposium sent invitations to
    faculties of 14 colleges and universities with high numbers of Hispanic
    and Native American students, as well as local area high schools, to hear
    speakers and view exhibits from NASA field centers and from the aero-
    space industry. The session from 21 to 23 April would highlight career
    opportunities in the aerospace field, including a workshop session on the
    need for additional aerospace courses in the school curriculum and a job
    fair providing information on placement. (JscRelease 76-23)
* The Michoud Assembly Facility operated for NASA by MSFC at New Orleans
    was nearing production capability for the Space Shuttle external tank,
    MSFC announced. Delivery of all required items to Michoud would require
    an estimated 225 trucks, about three fourths of them carrying loads
    classified as oversize. By the time all 225 trucks arrived, total “train”
    length would have reached more than 3 km. Getting the equipment from
                                     72
                                                                         April
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    the suppliers located at faraway points such as Dallas, San Diego, Bal-
    timore, and Nashville had presented problems because of the size of the
    loads; special escorts were required for oversized loads, and travel time
    at New Orleans for oversize loads was restricted to the period between
     10 pm and 4 am. Tooling and fixtures being installed at Michoud would
    give Martin Marietta, prime external tank contractor, the capability
    needed to meet flight schedules; each Shuttle flight would require a new
    external tank, and NASA had planned more than 400 flights between
     1979 and 1989. Launches should number 60 per year by 1984. (MSFC
    Release 76-60)
* Every ruble spent on space research had been returned many times to the
    Soviet national economy, said Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov in a Tass
    interview during observations of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s
    space flight. Leonov was one of the two USSR participants in the Apollo-
    Soyuz Test Project, and had been the first man to walk in space during
    a Voskhod 2 flight 18 Mar. 1965. He stated that 496 spacecraft had
    been launched from Soviet cosmodromes in the last 5 yrs, 35 of them
    communications satellites, 1 3 Meteor weather satellites, and several
    Prognoz science satellites, as well as about 400 in the Cosmos series. The
    long-functioning Salyut stations were the main line of Soviet space
    activity, Leonov said, carrying out research in cartography, geology,
    agriculture, forestry, and hydrology as only a few of the many fields of
    knowledge expanded by work on orbital stations. Leonov also stressed the
    importance of the Soviet-American Apollo-Soyuz test project. (FBIS,
    Tass in English, 6 Apr 76)
6-9 April: Signatories of the International Telecommunications Satellite
    Organization (INTELSAT)held their 4th annual meeting in Singapore, with
    68 of the 93 signatories attending. The meeting adopted the board of
    governors’ recommendation to increase the capital ceiling for the global
    satellite system from $500 million U.S. to $900 million US., to allow
    financial flexibility for the Intelsat v spacecraft program. (The capital
    ceiling was defined as the net capital contributions of signatories and all
    outstanding contractual capital commitments.) The meeting also ap-
    proved requests from Nigeria and Zaire for use of the Intelsat space
    segment for domestic public telecommunications on the same basis as for
    international services. Intelsat satellites were providing fulltime services
    through 137 antennas at 109 earth stations in 73 countries. (INTELSAT
    Release 76- 12-1)
7 April: The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corporation was
    awarded a $6.9 million contract by Goddard Space Flight Center to
    produce Rs-27 engine systems for the Delta launch vehicle. The contract
    called for delivery of 10 engines between March and Sept. 1977. NASA
    had returned 12 Rocketdyne-built H- 1 engines for use in producing the
    new Rs-27 systems. (Rockwell Release RD-6)
* Tass announced that the CJSSR expedition Polar Experiment North-76 had
    begun work in the high latitudes of the Arctic. Using 10 scientific ships,
     as well as planes, radar, and installations for rocket probing of upper
     atmosphere layers, a team of scientists would observe ice floes in the

                                      73
April                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    polar basin, including the geogdaphic North Pole. The expedition, said to
    be the largest in the history of Arctic exploration, would simultaneously
    determine the heat balance deep in the ocean, in the atmosphere, and in
    floating ice in the North Pole area. Ice floes in the polar basin had been
    found to forecast climate changes in the densely populated and econom-
    ically developed areas of the northern hemisphere. From the beginning
    of the century to the 1940s, the floes had receded from continental
    coastlines, indicating a relative rise in global temperature; they had
    begun to appear further south again, indicating a cold phase, and the
    appearance had been correlated with difficulties in northern navigation
    and fisheries and unusually snowy winters in western Europe, droughts
    in Asia, and unexpected cyclones and hurricanes. (FBIS, Tass in English,
    7 Apr 76)
9 April: The Johnson Space Center announced award of a 1-yr extension of
    the Pan American World Airways contract for plant maintenance and
    operations services at the Center. Pan American had been selected
    13 Feb. 1974 to receive a cost-plus-award-fee contract for operation of
    all utility systems and maintenance of utilities, buildings, roads, ditches,
    and special equipment at JSC; the current award represented the second
    of 2 planned extensions and would extend the effective period through
     12 Feb. 1977. Annual estimated amount of the contract was $7.4 million.
    (JSC Release 76-25)
  A “mysterious force” on the moon had made one of the remote-controlled
    stations set up by Apollo astronauts behave peculiarly, Boyce Rensberger
    reported in the N. Y. Times. After operating without interruption since its
    placement on the lunar surface in Feb. 1971, the station went dead,
    returned to life spontaneously a few weeks later, then went dead again.
    Engineers at JSC were waiting to see if the unknown influence would
    switch the station on again. Called ALSEPS, for Apollo lunar scientific
    experiment packages, the five stations deployed on the moon at intervals
    since Nov. 1969 had been sending a steady stream of scientific data on
    moonquakes, heat flowing from the moon’s interior, and the nature of
    particles in the solar wind; the atomic power supplies, designed for a 1-yr
    lifetime, had proved more durable. The faulty station, left by the
    Apollo 14 mission, stopped receiving ground commands in March 1975
    when its receiver failed; on 18 Jan. 1976, its transmitter stopped; on
    Feb. 19, the entire station came back to life-both receiver and trans-
    mitter working-and one experiment that had never operated during
    lunar daytime began working flawlessly night and day. Then, exactly a
    month later, the entire station shut down again. One theory was that the
    starts and stops might relate to extreme temperature changes on the
    moon, varying from 121OC at lunar noonday to - 184OC at lunar
    midnight. However, as day and night had not originally affected the
    station’s operation, scientists could not explain why temperature change
    did not produce failure from the start. (NYT, 9 Apr 76, 4)
0 Astronomers at the University of Massachusetts had clocked pulsars-
    superdense remnants of collapsed stars-at speeds over 2 million kmh,
    making them the fastest movers in earth‘s galaxy, the National Science
    Foundation reported. Some of the objects exceeded galactic escape
                                      74
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        April

    velocity, meaning they could pull free from the Milky Way and spin off
    into intergalactic space. First discovered in 1968, pulsars were defined
    as dense bodies in which a sun-size mass had been compressed into a
    sphere 16 km in diameter. The material was said to be so dense that a
    teaspoonful would weigh a billion tons. With its collapse, the body would
    spin increasingly faster and its magnetic field would increase in intensity;
    the newly formed pulsar would send out electromagnetic signals that
    pulsed like a radio beacon with each turn (hence the name pulsar). The
    high velocities were thought to be caused by the intense magnetic fields,
    up to a trillion times that of earth‘s magnetic field: a slight displacement
    of the pulsar’s magnetic field could release large amounts of electro-
    magnetic energy in one direction, upon which the pulsar would move
    in the opposite direction as would a rocket. (Pasadena Star-News,
    9 Apr 76, 5)
12 April: Louis Mogavero was appointed Director of NASA’s            Technology
    Utilization Office in the Hq Office of Industry Affairs and Technology
    Utilization, the agency announced. Mogavero, who joined NASA in 1966,
    had held management and planning positions in the former Office of
    Manned Space Flight, and in 1972 had worked with a White House study
    group evaluating new opportunities in technology. Before joining NASA he
    was operations manager for new product development with the Boeing
    Co., and received a master’s degree in engineering administration in
     1970 from George Washington University. (NASA Hq announcement,
     12 Apr 76)
0 Electricity from outer space to power homes and industry would be not only
    possible, but entirely probable, soon after the turn of the century, said
    Ralph I. LaRock of NASA Hq at a recent meeting held at Marshall Space
    Flight Center. LaRock, director of the Energy Technology Applications
    Division in NASA’s    Office of Energy Programs, described a proposed
    satellite power system under study by NASA, industry, the Energy Re-
    search and Development Administration, and other groups. MSFC’S share
    of the study was aimed at defining overall systems requirements (includ-
    ing satellite structure, economical size and materials for the solar array,
    new technology needed in satellite and support systems, and transport-
    ing, erecting, and maintaining the system in space). LaRock said predic-
    tions of technology advancement during the 1980- 1990 time period
    indicated a good chance of “our having a few solar-power satellites in
    operation by the turn of the century.” (MSFC Release 76-75)
13 April: The House of Representatives passed H.R. 13172, authorizing a
    supplemental $16 800 000 for NASA for the period 1 July 1976 through
    30 Sept. 1976 (the so-called “transition period” after which the
    new government fiscal year would begin on 1 Oct.). The authorization,
    supplementing NASA’s     research and program management request, was
    $3 186 000 less than the original request of $19 986 000. (NASA Ofc.
    of Budget Operations, Chron. Hist. FY 76, 16 June 76)
0 Calling the Space Shuttle “clearly . . . the next logical step” in tapping the
    scientific and commercial possibilities of space, the Baltimore Sun said
    in an editorial that criticisms of the Shuttle program from an economic
    point of view should be balanced with the rewards that would come only
                                      75
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
April

   from experience. The first Shuttle was never intended to be self-
   supporting, the editorial said, and the rewards would include increased
   knowledge to serve as the basis for more sophisticated programs and the
   increased likelihood of constructing a permanently staffed permanently
   orbiting space station. Complaints from prospective users-ComSat and
    DOD-that Shuttle fees would be too high “before NASA even has an-
    nounced these fees” were an obvious ploy to keep the fees as low as
    possible, the editorial said. (B Sun, 1 3 April 76)
  A 2-yr comparative study of data on dust storms on Mars and earth
    revealed that Martian dust storms were much like severe ones on earth,
      only more so,” the Jet Propulsion Lab. announced. JPL investigator
        bb

    Peter M. Woiceshyn used Lowell Observatory data to conclude that a
    wall of dust more than 50 km high swept down the slopes of the Hellas
    area on Mars in July 1971 at speeds greater than 480 km per hr.
    Mariner 9 occultation data verified that winds of extreme velocity would
    be required to raise surface dust in the low atmospheric pressure of Mars,
    where the air density was only 1/100th that on earth. When Mar-
    iner 9 arrived at Mars in Nov. 197l, another dust storm had been raging
    for several weeks, and dust-cloud tops were estimated to be 50 to 70 km
    above the surface. The JPL report said the two 1971 storms and another
    detected by astronomers in 1956 began in the same location on the slopes
    of Hellas, triggered by a cold jet stream from the Martian north pole
    funneling down a long valley across the planet’s equator. Similar storms
    on earth in Russia, in Iran, and on the U.S. plains east of the Rockies
    caused great damage from soil erosion, similar to that on Mars revealed
    by Mariner 9. More storm data from Mars would be sought by the Viking
    spacecraft scheduled to land there in July and Sept. 76. (JPL release
     1 3 Apr 76)
* A celebration in Moscow of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s flight
    into space heard a speech by A.P. Aleksandrov, president of the Academy
    of Sciences, reviewing Soviet firsts in space: launch of the world‘s first
    artificial satellite, first manned flights and walk in open space, first flight
    to the moon and delivery to earth of lunar soil samples by automatic
    devices, creation of orbital stations, and unique experiments in the study
    of solar-system planets. Aleksandrov recalled that the first manned space
    flight occurred only 3.5 yr after launch of the first artificial satellite,
    which he said made the Russian word “sputnik” common to all peoples
    in all languages of the world. He reviewed Soviet progress in space
    research and applications, especially in communications, mentioning
    that the number of Orbita network ground stations to reach remote parts
    of the Soviet Union had now climbed to 6%.He referred to the success
    of the Apollo-Soyuz joint experimental flight as “a significant contri-
    bution to the progress of world cosmonautics.” (FBIS, Tass report
     13 Apr 76)
14 April: A NASA earth-survey aircraft-one of two U-2 high-altitude re-
    search planes flown by the agency-had been studying the stratosphere
    over Central America, South America, Canada, the Caribbean, and the
    Pacific Ocean to measure ozone, nitric oxide, and manmade pollutants as
    part of a long-term global effort to understand the effects of pollutants
                                       76
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       April
    on global climate over a long period of time. The data flights used 4
    scientific instruments: a stratospheric air sampler, to measure ozone and
    nitrogen ozide; an aerosol particle sampler, to measure minute aerosols;
    a stratospheric cryogenic sampler to measure halocarbons (freons) and
    methane levels; and a foil sampler, to measure aerosols and trace gases
    for the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The other 3 studies
    were under the direction of NASA’s  Ames Research Center. Data from the
    flights would be available to the other governments involved in the
    studies. (NASA Release 76-60)
15 April: Alternative “super safe” landing sites for the second Viking space-
    craft scheduled to arrive on Mars were being investigated by NASA,
    Dr. Harold Masursky told the annual meeting of the American Geophys-
    ical Union in Washington. Masursky, an astrogeologist with the U.S.
    Geological Survey, said the prime landing sites had been carefully se-
    lected and should present no problem. However, in case of trouble with
    the first lander, scheduled to touch down early in July, the second lander
    now scheduled to descend in a less well known area would proceed to a
    less challenging site to ensure salvaging the mission. The prime site, in
    the Chryse region at the mouth of the largest channel system identified
    on Mars, was of special interest because scientists thought areas with
    highest probabilities of water would be most likely to harbor life as known
    by man. The scheduled second landing area, called Cydonia, had the
    highest recorded atmospheric water content during the season when the
    Viking would land, but was in an area not accessible by radar from earth
    and was therefore not as well known. Giant radar telescopes in the US.
    and at Arecibo, P.R., were scanning areas near the Mars equator that
    would be safer than the prime sites, even if not as scientifically produc-
    tive. ( N U , 1 8 Apr 76, 25)
16 April: Dr. John F. Clark would retire 1 July after 10 yr as director of the
    Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA announced. His successor would be
    Dr. Robert S. Cooper, deputy director of GsFC. Dr. Clark had come to
    NASA in 1958, serving from 1963 to 1965 as Deputy Associate Adminis-
    trator for Space Sciences and Applications, after which he was appointed
     to his post at GSFC. An authority in atmospheric and space sciences,
     Dr. Clark while director at CSFC had been responsible for major advances
     in communications, weather and climate, earth resources, space physics,
     and space astronomy. (NASA Release 76-7 1)
0 Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of 2 contracts totaling
     $486 388 for fabrication and installation of 2 test towers to be used in
     structural load tests of the Space Shuttle external tank. One contract,
     awarded to the Lucey Boiler Co. of Chattanooga for $344 660, was for
     pickup from MSFC of government-furnished construction materials and
     fabrication and delivery by July 1976 of all sections and components of
     the towers. The other contract, awarded to Teledyne Brown Engineering
     of Huntsville for $141 728, was for installation of the towers by 30 Sept.
     (MSFC Release 76-69)   ‘

  The Communications Satellite Corp. reported net income of $11 041 000
    for the first quarter of 1976, compared with $12 692 000 for the same
     period of 1975. Although total income of $37 276 000 for the first
                                     77
April                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
    quarter was 2% higher than that for the same period in 1975, higher
    depreciation charges associated with the launch of additional satellites-
    Intelsat IV-A F-1 and F-2, and the first Marisat-and higher operat-
    ing costs, together with expenses of operating Satellite Business
    Systems-a partnership formed by subsidiaries of ComSat, IBM, and
    Aetna- accounted for the reduction in income. ComSat had appealed
    the FCC decision of 4 Dec. 7 5 reducing its rates, and FCC had delayed the
    effective date of the lower rates until the court had ruled on the appeal.
    (ComSat Release 76-7)
17 April: The $6.2-billion Space Shuttle, “America’s only remaining space
    spectacular,” might come apart at the seams because of unsafe nuts and
    screws, Jack Anderson and Les Whitten reported in the Washington
    Post. Discussion at NASA as early as Apr. 1973 had centered on the
    menace of substandard screws; in July 1973, Johnson Gage-a Bloom-
    field, Conn. firm-had sent NASA a warning based on tests of individual
    screw and nut threads stating that the standards “provide for a loophole
    that allows [NASA to] accept outright junk.” Computer tests had revealed
    that millions worth of faulty threads reached Rockwell International
    Corp., principal Shuttle contractor, because of low standards and it was
    feared the inferior screws had gotten into Shuttle equipment. Although
    company engineers were worried about the standards and the resultant
    products, the company bought fasteners from outside suppliers and could
    not control quality from 6000 vendors in 47 states, company minutes
    said. Industry had fought to keep the low standards rather than pay the
    estimated $120 million cost of retooling; the American National Stand-
    ards Institute, led by industry, had blocked every move for tighter
    standards, Anderson and Whitten charged. ( W P o s t , 17 Apr 76, B-11)
20 April: India’s second artificial earth satellite would be launched in 1978
    from a USSR cosmodrome, Tass announced. The agreement had been
    made at a Moscow meeting of a working group of Soviet and Indian
    specialists. (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 Apr 76)
21 April: Kennedy Space Center announced award to Pan American Tech-
    nical Services, Inc., Cocoa Beach, Fla., of the first contract to modify KSC
    facilities for Spacelab processing as part of the Space Shuttle program.
    The $129 627 contract included architect and engineer services to
    design the modifications of the Operations and Checkout BIdg., including
    changes in utilities (gaseous nitrogen, helium, high-pressure air, water
    and airconditioning) and adaptation of Apollo equipment acceptance and
    checkout rooms to make them compatible with ground-support equip-
    ment provided by the European Space Agency for automated Spacelab
    testing. Spacelab-to be carried into space by the Space Shuttle
    orbiter-was being designed, developed, and built by 9 member nations
    of ESA at a cost of $300 to $400 million. At the end of each mission, the
    Spacelab would be removed from the landed orbiter and prepared for the
    next mission. The engineering model to be used for facility and orbiter
    checkout was scheduled to arrive at KSC in July 1978; the first flight
    model was due in June 1979. ( K X Release 128-76)


                                      78
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         April

  William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut who became the first
    chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 1974, was sworn in
    as U.S. ambassador to Norway [see 9 Mar.]. (NRC Release 76-93)
* Joseph A. Zinno made aviation history “of a sort,” the National Aeronautic
    Association reported, when his man-powered 68-kg airplane swooped off
    the ground and flew more than 24 m for 5 sec at Quonset Point, R.I. In
    1959 a British industrialist had offered a prize of $24,000 (now grown
    to $92,500) for flight in a machine powered solely by the crew that could
    fly a figure-eight course around 2 pylons set 0.8 km apart and cross the
    starting and finish lines at least 3 m above the ground. So far 16
    Europeans and Zinno had succeeded in flying man-powered planes.
    However, aeronautical experts believed the altitude needed to make a
    figure-eight maneuver (more than 12 m) would undo any aviator striving
    for the prize. (NAA newsletter, June 76, 3)
e Tass announced the return to Riga of the 20th Soviet Antarctic expedition
    after, completing ‘‘its successful 15-month program of research.” For
    the first time under Antarctic conditions, scientists had operated autom-
    atized processing of data from rocket soundings of the atmosphere; also
    for the first time, a shelf glacier had been drilled with 3 holes, one of them
    358 m deep (entirely through the glacier). The Soviet scientists reported
    increasing cooperation with colleagues; the 20th expedition included
    geologists and medical workers from the German Democratic Republic,
    and a US. weather specialist spent the winter at the Soviet station while
    a Soviet glaciologist spent the winter at the US. McMurdo station. (FBIS,
    Tass in English, 21 Apr 76)
22 April: Nuto ZZZA, first in a series of NATO-USAF military comsats, was
    launched from Eastern Test Range at 3:46 pm EST (1046 GMT) by a Delta
    vehicle into a synchronous transfer orbit at about 35 000 km altitude
    before being positioned above the equator off West Africa at about
     15OW. The comsat would transmit voice, data, facsimile, and telex
     messages among military ground stations; a NATO IIIB spacecraft was
     scheduled for launch later in 1976 into geosynchronous orbit above the
     Indian Ocean. Nuto ZZZA, weighing 310 kg in orbit and designed for a
     7-yr lifetime, was drum-shaped, 2.2 m in diameter and 2.2 m long, and
     extended about 3 m with antennas out. The eventual 3-satellite system
     including 16 major ground terminals had been estimated to cost about
     $340 million. (NASA Release 76-46 and 76-46A; MOR M-492-
     207-76-01 [prelaunch] 19 Apr 76, [postlaunch] 20 May 76; WPost,
     23 Apr 76, A-21)
          Wallops Flight Center received a National Safety Council award for
e NASA’s
     its performance in on-the-job safety. The Council selected Wallops for a
     third-place award in its annual contest honoring the lowest disabling-
     injury frequency achieved by NSC member organizations. Wallops
     qualified for its award with a recorded rate of zero lost-time injuries per
     million man-hours worked, as compared to a rate of 1.4 injuries for all
     competing units in the Aerospace Section, Research and Development
     Division. (WFC Release 76-4)


                                       79
April                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

  The European Space Agency’s launch vehicle Ariane during its 5-yr
    development period would use hydrazine fuel supplied by the USSR,
    reported the British journal New Scientist. The u.S. hydrazine plant near
    Baltimore had been closed down because of contamination by nitro-
    samines, hydrazine sources suspected of causing cancer. Hydrazine,
    highly corrosive and difficult to handle, had not been manufactured in
    Western Europe, and no one wanted to do so, according to the report.
    Ariane’s discontinued predecessor Europa used a less powerful fuel-
    liquid oxygen and kerosene-and the USSR had used hydrazine from the
    plant near Moscow to power the large rockets that launched the Salyut
    space stations and large interplanetary probes. The report said that the
    hydrazine deal stemmed from France’s longstanding cooperation with the
    USSR in aerospace technology; if the Soviets should restrict hydrazine
    supplies, France would build a European plant because its commitments
    would override environmental objections. (W Post, 22 Apr 76, A-52)
23 April: Addressing the Utah Air Force Association’s Bicentennial program
    in Salt Lake City, NASA’s   Deputy Administrator George M. Low gave a
    status report on ongoing projects such as Landsat, Viking, and the Space
    Shuttle, then speculated at length on accomplishments in space that
    might be celebrated on the occasion of the US. Tricentennial. Referring
    to “the beginning of the industrialization of space,” using the first-
    generation reusable space-transportation system called Shuttle to set up
    the first factories in space, he said “the real breakthrough” would come
    with energy collected from the sun and beamed down with microwaves
    to provide all the electrical needs of a major city. None of this tech-
    nology, he added, was beyond today’s knowledge. He then forecast a
    cleanup of earth’s environment, communications applications of all
    kinds, and exploration of outer space made possible by discoveries using
    the Space Telescope, ending with descriptions of space colonies that
    would “become the real frontier.” He concluded by stating that “all of
    my projections are overly conservative” and could all become reality
    long before the end of America’s third century. (Text)
26 April: “No useful data” appeared in photographs taken during the
    artificial-eclipse experiment on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported
    Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine, quoting US. scientists
    who examined the photographs. This view contrasted with earlier Soviet
    statements. The experiment consisted of Apollo’s blocking out the solar
    disk while pictures of the corona were made from the Soyuz. According
    to the magazine, many NASA officials and U.S. scientists “believed pri-
    vately before the flight that the Soviet experiment would produce only
    marginal results.” (Av Wit, 26 Apr 76, 11)
0 A $4.5-million structural test data-acquisition system to be used for tests
    on Space Shuttle components was nearing completion of installation and
    checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center, MFSC announced. Developed
    by Avco Electronics, the system included a central facility with a com-
    puter system, 6 line printers, 5 graphics display units, a printer-plotter,
    2 card readers, and 4 video hard-copy units; 4 data-selector units; and
    24 static-input units. The central facility, to be located in MSFC’S Test
    Laboratory, was designed for a lifespan of 10 yr and would combine
                                     80
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       April

    extreme accuracy with high reliability and ruggedness. Testing the exter-
    nal tanks, solid-fuel rocket booster, and other parts of the Shuttle for
    structural integrity would require monitoring up to 6000 channels of
    data simultaneously, fed into the computers from test hardware else-
    where at the Center. The Avco contract also provided for training MSFC
    personnel to operate the system when completed late in 1976. (MSFC
    Release 76-73)
e Rockwell International awarded subcontracts totaling nearly $2 million for
    equipment and material for the US. Air Force’s new B-1 strategic
    bomber development effort. Rockwell was awarded the B-1 system
    contract in 1970, and the first prototype flew for the first time 23 Dec.
    1974. A second B-1 equipped with full offensive avionics made its first
    flight 1 April 1976; a third prototype nearing completion was scheduled
    to begin flight tests this year. Contracts just awarded to 5 Ohio companies
    were for manufacture of the fourth prototype. The companies were:
    Cleveland Pneumatic Co., main landing gear, $1,270,000; TRW Inc.,
    fuel pumps, $195,800; Westinghouse Aerospace Electric Div., gener-
    ator and controls system, $73,000; RMI co., titanium, $165,000; and
    Titanium Metals Corp., titanium, $106,000. The titanium would form
    major B-1 components such as the wing carry-through structure. (Rock-
    well Intl. Release LA-2)
e NASA was beginning to make headway in efforts to solve basic problems of
    U.S. aircraft manufacturers caused by a long-term dearth of low-speed
    aeronautical research, reported Aviation Week & Space Technology
    magazine. Industry engineers reporting on discussions at a recent Wi-
    chita meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers said use of the
    workshop technique had been effective in uncovering primary problem
    areas by crosstalk with such specialized segments as aerodynamicists and
    propulsion engineers. NASA research being further refined in industry
    product development included general-aviation aircraft airfoils, aircraft
    drag reduction, propeller efficiency, and reduction of airflow separation
    on wing trailing edges. Lewis Research Center had begun exploration of
    alternatives to conventional reciprocating engines, such as diesel and
    rotary concepts. NASA had also begun studying the application of ad-
    vanced technology to agricultural aircraft, said to be responsible for
    increasing farm production by about $10 billion annually, to solve prob-
    lems such as corrosion of aircraft structures by agricultural chemicals
    and control of chemical drift. (Av m, 26 Apr 76, 56)
e Employment in the U.S. aerospace industry continued downward, the an-
    nual employment survey by the Aerospace Industries Association said.
    Employment figures would fall below 900 000 by the end of 1976,
    compared with 925 000 at the start of the year. Peak employment in the
    industry was 1 500 000 in 1968. The predicted decline, amounting to
    3.5%, would be spread among all sectors of the industry; greatest
    decline-about 6000-would be in employment on aircraft programs,
    much of it in plants producing transport aircraft. The continuing erosion
    of the high-technology manpower base was principally due to slackening
    demand for commercial jetliners, uncertainties in export markets, the
    level of government commitment to new or replacement military aircraft,
                                     81
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
April

    and reduced investment in the space program, the report said. The
    forecast was based on data provided by 48 major firms representing more
    than 65%of total aerospace employment. (Aerospace News, 26 Apr 76)
0 Comsat General Corp. signed an agreement with the Water Resources
     Division, IJ.s. Department of Interior’s Geological Survey, to conduct a
    6-mo joint evaluation of the use of satellites to transmit data from remote
    hydrological sensors to a central facility. Comsat General would provide
     1 1 small data-collection platforms to receive and transmit the data via
    satellite to a central receive facility. The DCPS would be located near
    Survey sensors in the continental US.: 5 in the Pacific Northwest, 5 in
    eastern Pa., and one near Survey headquarters at Reston, Va. Central
     receiving station would be the ComSat station at Southbury, Conn.,
    where the data would be stored on magnetic tape and accessed by the
    Survey on interconnecting terrestrial lines. The program would provide
    a chance to evaluate collection of environmental data by satellite under
    operational conditions; it would begin later in 1976 and conclude within
     6 mo, subject to FCC approval. (ComSat Release CG 76-1 12)
0 The vast spaces between galaxies previously thought to be empty contained
    large clouds of gas, 2 scientists from the University of Arizona said. The
     National Science Foundation, which funded the research using the 2.3m
     telescope at Kitt Peak, announced the discovery as the most solid evi-
     dence to date for the presence of substantial amounts of matter between
     the galaxies. The discovery, expected to affect current theories on the
    evolution of galaxies, might contribute to learning whether the universe
     would continue to expand indefinitely; more mass in the universe, with
     resulting greater gravitational forces, would eventually halt and reverse
     the expansi’on. Dr. Robert E. Williams and Dr. Ray J. Weymann studied
     clouds of gas in the vicinity of certain quasars and found that the clouds
     were associated not directly with the quasars but with the cluster of
     galaxies that contained the quasar. (NSF Release PR76-35)
2 7 April: Marshall Space Flight Center announced shipment of the first
     production segment of a motor case for the Space Shuttle ‘solid-fuel
     rocket motor from the manufacturer (Ladish Co. of Cudahy, Wis.) to the
     Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services plant at Los Angeles, where it would
     undergo heat treatment and cleaning before being forwarded to Rohr
     Industries at Chula Vista, Calif. Rohr-subcontractor to prime con-
     tractor Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Utah-would process the cylin-
     drical segment, with a finished weight of about 5060 kg, for delivery to
     Thiokol in Sept. 1976. Thiokol would load the solid propellants into 4
     motor-case segments over 3 m in dia. and 45.5 m long, each holding
     about 500 000 kg of propellant. The 4 segments joined would stretch to
     more than 35 m and constitute about three fourths of the solid-fuel
     rocket booster. Each launch of the Shuttle would use 2 boosters, burning
     from ignition on the pad to burnout at an altitude of about 42 km; at that
     point, the SRBS would be separated and descend by parachute into the
     ocean for recovery, refueling, and reuse. (MSFC Release 76-76)
0 Observations from NASA’s    airborne Kuiper observatory by a group of Cor-
     ne11 University scientists reported the first occultation, or eclipse, of a
     star by a planet observed from above the lower layers of earth’s atmos-
                                      82
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      April

    phere. The occultation was observed from an altitude of 12.4 km over
    the Atlantic near Bermuda, using the 1-m telescope to view the passage
    of Mars between the earth and the star Epsilon in the constellation
    Gemini. Light from the star passed through the Martian atmosphere
    before reaching earth; changes in the light after it passed through the
    planet’s atmosphere would give astronomers new information about the
    density and composition of that atmosphere, thought to consist of argon
    rather than water and carbon dioxide which had been frozen into the
    Martian polar caps. The two unmanned Viking spacecraft scheduled for
    Mars landing later this year would also measure the argon present in the
    Mars atmosphere. (NSF Release ~R76-36)
28 April: A model of a nuclear reactor developed by NASA for space applica-
    tions, using a gaseous rather than a solid nuclear fuel, had begun tests
    at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, NASA announced. A reactor
    using gaseous fuel could operate at temperatures that would melt solid-
    fuel rods; the higher operating temperature would make the gaseous
    reactor potentially more efficient than conventional solid-core reactors.
    Also, the gaseous fuel would permit continuous reprocessing of the fuel,
    eliminating the need for a separate reprocessing plant required for solid
    fuel; the predicted efficiency would translate into reduced mass and
    weight in space applications. Nuclear-energized laser research by NASA
    indicated that power from a gaseous reactor could be generated as laser
    beams, offering the prospect of a new space technology by which energy
    from a nuclear-power station in space might be transmitted over large
    distances, using laser beams, to users on space platforms, lunar bases, or
    space ships for propulsion. The tests were designed to use hardware
    salvaged from an earlier NASA-Atomic Energy Commission nuclear-
    rocket program. (NASA Release 76-76)
29 April: Rear Admiral Stuart J. Evans had been named NASA’s         Assistant
    Administrator for Procurement, effective 1 June, NASA announced. Adm.
    Evans, the Deputy Chief of Naval Procurement, would assume his new
    post after retiring from the Navy 31 May 1976. He would succeed Rear
    Admiral Kenneth L. Woodfin (Ret.), present Assistant Administrator for
    Procurement, who had announced his plans to leave NASA after a year’s
    service to join a private firm. Adm. Woodfin had been Deputy Chief of
    Naval Material (Procurement and Production) before coming to NASA.
    (NASA Releases 76-68, 76-78)
  Tass reported a new development in U.S.-Soviet scientific and technical
    cooperation in a joint oceanographic experiment called Polymode to
    study vortex formations in the ocean. Professor Alan Robinson of Har-
    vard University, heading a delegation of U.S. oceanographers to a plenary
    meeting of the Polymode organizing committee, said the mission would
    help crack the secrets of the ocean and place its resources at the service
    of mankind. Scientists had theorized that ocean vortexes, like cyclones
    in the atmosphere, had substantial influence on weather all over the
    globe. Work on Polymode would begin in mid-1977, with the northern
    area of research in the North Atlantic, 1000 km west of the Azores, and
    the southern area 200 to 300 km north of the Antilles. (FBIS, Tass in
    English, 29 Apr 76)
                                     83
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
April

30 April: Venus-whose dense atmosphere had prevented observation of the
    surface, except by radar-might be as tectonically active as Mars, and
    possibly as active as the earth, researchers at JPL’s Goldstone tracking
    station announced. As reported in Science magazine, new high-
    resolution maps from 2 different radiotelescopes disclosed the planet’s
    surface with enough detail to permit a study of its geology. A series of
    8 maps taken by the 64-m steerable dish at Goldstone revealed a
    1500-km-long trough near Venus’s equator comparable to large earth
    rift systems such as the East African, giving “strong evidence of exten-
    sional tectonic activity” on Venus. Evidence of a fault movement seemed
    to appear in another Goldstone map showing a long arc-shaped mountain
    range crossed and bowed by another linear feature. A high-resolution
    image obtained at the Arecibo observatory in P.R. showed a large part
    of the Venus northern hemisphere including a basin-like feature
    about 1000 km across with a bright sharp rim; “the shape is wrong” for
    an impact basin, according to the Arecibo report. The new maps raised
    as many questions as they answered, Science commented. (Science,
    30 Apr 76, 454)
0 Long-term directions and opportunities in civil aviation-including     pas-
    senger air travel by rotorcraft froin small urban-center airports, or
    intercontinental air transportation on hypersonic craft rated environ-
    mentally acceptable-were projected in a NASA study, “Outlook for
    Aeronautics,” announced by the agency as the result of its study on the
    role it should play in research and development of aviation and the
    technical advances that might be needed. Relatively few major new
    developments could be expected through the early 1980s because of
    economic setbacks and environmental pressures, the agency said, but,
    with adequate research and technology investments, new opportunities
    should arise in the period 1985-2000. Demand for passenger transpor-
    tation should grow from 250 million annually to about 1 billion annually
    by the year 2000; by the late 1980s, air traffic should exceed the
    capacity of the present airport system. Congestion should lead to devel-
    opment of short-haul aircraft using smaller airports; increasing costs
    would result in greater efficiency and economy with improved safety in
    subsonic aircraft, the report said. (NASA Release 76-78)
During April: Air Force cold-weather tests of an air-cushion landing system
    for use on large transport aircraft were completed after 4 wk at a site in
    Canada. The device, which resembled an upside-down life raft installed
    under the fuselage, was made of rubber and nylon; it measured about
     10 m long and about 4 m wide. The elastic container was filled with air
    from two engines mounted under the wings; air forced out through more
    than 6800 holes on the bottom surface created an air bearing between
    the landing surface and the trunk. The cushion system, successfully
    demonstrated in the late 1960s on a smaller single-engine aircraft, had
    the advantage of exerting a very small amount of pressure over the entire
    landing surface as contrasted to conventional landing systems. Further
    tests of the system would be conducted on the twin-engine short-takeoff-
    and-landing (STOL) aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 76, 15)

                                     84
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       April

    Bicentennial year 1976 also marked the 50th birthday of scheduled-airline
0
      service in the U.S., the National Aeronautic Association reported. On
      13 April 1925, Henry Ford had started an air-freight service between
      Detroit and Chicago, first such commercial flights on a regular schedule.
      Upon passage of the Air Commerce Act of 1926, one of NAA’s founding
      members, William P. MacCracken, Jr., took office as the first U.S.
      Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics. By 1931, airlines
      were spanning the country; by 1950, US. airlines carried 19 million
      passengers 16 billion km, and in 1975 they carried more than 200 mil-
      lion passengers 263 billion km-amounting to almost 80% of intercity
      public passenger travel in the U.S. Airlines also accounted for 93% of
      travel to overseas destinations. In 1976, the US. scheduled-airline fleet
      included 2200 jet aircraft serving communities nationwide with 13 000
      daily flights. (NAA News, Apr 76, 3)




                                      85
                              May 1976

1 May: NASA announced issuance of a patent to Richard T. Whitcomb, an
   aerospace technologist at Langley Research Center, for an aircraft wing
   to be used at subsonic speeds. The new wing, called a supercritical or
   “upside down” wing, was described as increasing speed without need for
   additional power and as suitable for any aircraft flying near the speed of
   sound. Whitcomb last year received $25 000 for the invention from
           Inventions and Contributions Board. (MT, 1 May 76, 31)
   NASA’s
3 May: The European aerospace industry was frustrated in attempting to
   increase its share of commercial and military aircraft sales, said Robert
   B. Hotz, editor-in-chief, in an editorial in Aviation Week magazine.
   Although maintenance of a viable European aerospace industry would be
   in the best interest of the Western world, Hotz said, attempts to organize
   it on a truly international competitive scale had emphasized inherent
   weaknesses and failed to achieve fiscal success. Recent developments-
   nationalization of the British aircraft industry, and French moves toward
   a transatlantic rather than a cross-channel cooperation-had intensified
   the problems, characterized by higher wage scales and lower productiv-
   ity. Suggestions for improvement included organizations based on com-
   mercial and technical considerations, rather than on political boundaries
   and restrictions; marketing goals based on the broadest markets possible,
   rather than on narrow domestic requirements; and controlling labor costs
   that had priced European products out of the export market and had held
   production to a rate below that needed to fill international market re-
   quirements. (Av W,4, 3 May 76, 5)
4 May: NASA launched Lageos -a laser geodynamic satellite-from West-
   ern Test Range on a Delta rocket at 3 am CDT (0800 GMT) into a near-
   circular orbit with 5940-km apogee, 5845-km perigee, inclination of
    109.8O, and period of 225.5 min. Lageos, resembling a “cosmic golf-
   ball” 60 cm in diameter and weighing 41 1 kg, would act in space as a
   sophisticated mirror reflecting laser beams directed at it by stations on
   the ground; scientists timing the round trip of the laser beams would be
   able to detect movement of the earth‘s surface as small as 2 cm. The
   3-yr phase 1 of the Lageos mission would validate laser-ranging tech-
   niques as compared with long-baseline interferometry and lunar laser
   ranging; phase 2 would consist of application of phase- 1 techniques
   continuously for the usable life of the passive satellite. Although Lageos
   was not expected to fall back to earth for at least 8 million yr, and
   contained no moving parts or electronics to wear out, the 426 laser
   reflectors on its surface would be eroded in the space environment
   probably within 50 yr. (NASA Release 76-67; W F C Release 76-82; MOR


                                     87
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

   E-639-76-01 [prelaunch] 2 8 Apr 76, [postlaunch] 27 May 76; NIT,
   5 May 76, 30; W Post, 5 May 76, A-8)
5 May: Os0 8, an orbiting solar observatory launched 21 June 1975, had
     performed without failure of any subsystem except a redundant solar
     sensor, and was judged successful, according to a postlaunch mission
     operations report. Primary mission objectives were high-resolution spa-
     tial and spectral observations of the solar chromosphere and transition
     regions, obtained by the pointed experiments aboard the observatory;
     secondary mission objectives were met with “substantial numbers” of
     observations of solar x-rays, earth airglow, and cosmic x-ray background
      radiation. At launch, Os0 8 carried the most comprehensive package of
     cosmic x-ray experiments ever included in a single payload, including the
     first satellite instrument containing large-area thin plastic window detec-
     tors to measure ultrasoft x-rays; the first high-sensitivity crystal spec-
     trometer flown to measure cosmic x-ray sources with extremely high
     spectral resolution; and the first satellite experiment flown to measure
      x-ray polarization of cosmic sources with high sensitivity. (MOR S-82 1-
      75-09 [postlaunch], 10 May 76)
    Agreements between the French government and the European Space
      Agency for use of launch facilities at Kourou, French Guiana, were
      signed in Paris by Michel d’ornano, minister for industry and research,
     and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA. The Kourou facilities igclude
     the Guiana Space Centre belonging to France’s Centre National d’Etudes
      Spatiales (CNES) and the Ariane launching site belonging to ESA that
      replaced the former equatorial base belonging to the defunct ELDO orga-
      nization [see 11 Jan.]. The meeting of the European Space Conference
      in April 1975 had decided that all ESA member states would contribute
      to the costs of the Guiana space center until the end of 1980. Ariane
      (the ESA heavy launcher now under development) would provide Europe
      with a satellite launch capability of its own after 1980. (ESA newsletter,
      Aug 76, 2)
    The Energy Research and Development Administration announced
0
      plans to launch a giant manned and instrumented balloon, Da Vinci IZ,
      between 24 May and mid-June to determine physical and chemical
      changes in air pollutants over distances of several hundred km from their
      source. The helium-filled balloon more than 70 m high-equaling, with
      its gondola, the height of a 15-story building, and carrying the same
      crew of 4 that flew on D a Vinci I in November 1974-would fly for up
      to 36 hr at altitudes from 3 to 9 km from St. Louis, Mo., to a point in
      Ill., Ky., or 0. a Vinci Z flew from Las Cruces to Wagon Mound, N.M.,
                       D
      in 12 hr to prove the feasibility of using a manned instrumented balloon
      for lower atmosphere research. Crew members were Dr. Rudolf J. Engel-
      mann of NOAA; Otis Imboden, photographer from the National Geographic
      Society; Jimmie Craig, pilot from the U.S. Naval Weapons Center; and
      Mrs. Vera Simons, project consultant and experienced balloonist, who
      originated the idea for the project. The crew would use a variety of
      instruments to conduct more than 20 experiments to show what happens
      to a plume of polluted air as it moves across several states. (ERDA Release
      76-128)
                                       88
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
6 Muy: NASA announced award of a grant to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
    Troy, N.Y., to establish a center for the study of new composite materials
    and their application to the development of more efficient commercial
    transport aircraft. The grant would continue a relationship that began
    with establishment of a NASA program in materials engineering at RPI in
    196 1. The new grant for research into composites-very strong light-
    weight materials combining various substances, such as fiberglassbonded
    with epoxy-would emphasize more exotic composites using carbon
    fibers that exhibited high tensile properties. The potential structure-
    weight reduction of up to 30% in future aircraft using composites could
    translate into a 10 to 15% reduction in aircraft fuel consumption.
    First-year funding for the RPI center would be $300 000. (NASA Release
    76-82)
0 The FAA announced plans to test a computer-based system for predicting
    potential hazards from wake vortices along aircraft approach and depar-
    ture paths. The tests would take place at Chicago’s O’Hare International
    Airport and would run for several mo in an attempt to validate results of
    thousands of measurements previously taken at Kennedy Airport in New
    York, London’s Heathrow Airport, and Denver’s Stapleton Airport, to
    establish how long vortices linger on runways in relation to wind speed
    and direction. Additional tests at O’Hare would check out a system for
    detecting and tracking wind shear, another hazard to landing and depart-
    ing aircraft. (FAA Release 76-43)
7 May: NASA announced plans to launch a second maritime satellite (Marisat)
    for the Comsat General Corp. later this month, as part of a system to
    provide communications to the U.S. Navy, commercial shipping, and
    offshore industries. The first satellite of the system, Marisat 1, was
    successfully launched 19 Feb. into an orbit over the Atlantic at 15OW
    longitude, where it had provided UHF service to the Navy since 25 Mar.
    NASA hoped to inaugurate fulltime commercial voice and data communi-
    cations, using both Marisats, by 1 July. A third satellite had been con-
    structed as a spare. (NASA Release 76-83)
0 A launch-abort system for the Space Shuttle, for use in case of malfunction
    during the first 2.5 min of flight, was “quietly” removed by NASA 3 yr
    ago although such a system had been designed into the Shuttle late in
    197 1, according to the Wushington Post. (In 2.5 min the Shuttle would
    reach a 40-km altitude from which it could “fly” to earth.) Staff writer
    Thomas O’Toole said that in 1973 NASA “reversed itself and dropped the
    launch-abort system . . . a decision understood to have met with dissent
    inside the space agency.” The abort system designed for the Shuttle
    consisted of 2 huge solid-fuel rocket motors, one on each side of the
    Shuttle tail, that could be fired to separate the spacecraft and its occu-
    pants from the booster engines and main-engine fuel tanks in case of
    trouble; however, the abort motors weighed 43,500 kg-half as heavy
    as the entire 68 000-kg Shuttle carrying an average 18 000-kg pay-
    load-and even after they fired, the Shuttle would fall for 2 or 3 sec
    before being lifted away from the boosters.
        Elwood W. Land, director of system operations for the Shuttle pro-
    gram, defended the decision to remove the abort system, saying that it
                                     89
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

    was not needed because of redundancy built into the spacecraft and its
    engine. Land noted that, in 58 manned space flights, neither the US. nor
    the USSR had resorted to a launch-abort system to rescue spacecraft
    crews, notwithstanding 2 close calls: Gemini 6 astronauts had almost
    fired their ejection seats when their engine shut down on the pad in 1965,
    and the Soyuz 18 cosmonauts never reached earth orbit but flew their
    spacecraft to a landing in southeast Siberia. The 1-man Mercury capsule
    had a rocket-boosted escape system to carry the spacecraft cabin away
    from its rocket engines and fuel tanks; the 2-man Gemini had ejection
    seats to fire astronauts from the cabin like jet pilots from disabled
    aircraft; and the 3-man Apollo carried a large solid-fuel rocket motor
    that could pull the 18 000-kg spacecraft away from its tower of engines
    sec after trouble hit the engines or fuel tanks. Only remaining provision
    for the Shuttle was a pair of ejection seats for pilot and copilot of the first
    4 orbital test flights; the seats would be removed when 5 more crew
    members were added for subsequent tests and for operational flights.
    “There is no way to install 7 ejection seats in the shuttle,” the article
    noted. ( W Post, 7 May 76, A-3)
0 Bradford Johnston was appointed NASA’s     Associate Administrator for Appli-
    cations, succeeding Charles W. Mathews who retired 27 Feb., NASA
    announced. Johnston’s appointment would be effective 7 June. Now a
    private management consultant in Wis., he received a B.A. in economics
    from Wabash College and an M.B.A. from Harvard Business School.
    His NASA responsibilities would include planning and directing agency
    programs to identify and demonstrate useful applications of engineering
    and science techniques. (NASA Release 76-84; Hq announcement
     10 May 76)
* The Smithsonian Institution awarded its Langley gold medal for aeronautics
    to James E. Webb, former head of the National Aeronautics and Space
    Administration, and the late Grover Loening. Webb was cited for man-
    agement skills in leading the U.S. to “pre-eminence in space flight re-
    search and development.” Loening [see 29 Feb.] was honored as “a
    pioneer aeronautical inventor” who developed the Loening amphibian
    plane and the design of the strut-braced monoplane. ( W Post, 8 May
    76, E-3)
10 May: NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight
    Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and
    Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile
    Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for vali-
    dating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (IUS).
    The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one
    or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of
    the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the
    spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape
    trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet
    DO[) objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique require-
    ments (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller
    satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique

                                       90
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       May
    requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coor-
    dinating NASA’s activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch
                      IUS
    operations, and JX for IUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The
    Air Force was expected to award a contract for Ius development by Sept.
    1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
  NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and the Singer
    Company’s Simulations Products Division for parallel negotiations, lead-
    ing to award of a contract to one of the companies for maintenance,
    modification, and operational support of Johnson Space Center’s simu-
    lator complex to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle.
    The 2-yr contract beginning 1 July would provide for optional additional
    periods of 2 4 mo and 6 mo respectively. The training complex, consisting
    initially of a Shuttle procedures simulator and a crew procedures evalu-
    ation simulator, would have added to it an orbiter aerofight simulator and
    a Shuttle mission simulator. General Electric and Computer Sciences
    Corp. alsosubmitted proposals. (NASA Release 76-87; JsCRelease 76-30)
  Sen. John Glenn (D-O.), first American to orbit the earth in Mercury 6,
    said he would be available as a running mate for Jimmy Carter in the
    national elections but would not pursue the vice-presidential nomination.
    Glenn said Carter was clearly front runner in the Ohio primary scheduled
    for 8 June, and that his “ship is already in.” (NYT, 11 May 76, 13)
0 The European Space Agency announced plans for a NASA presentation on
    current status of the Space Transportation System to be held in Paris 12
    to 14 May, for about 250 representatives of governments, national
    institutes and agencies, and industry of the ESA member states. Opened
    by Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, the program would be introduced
    by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s    Assistant Administrator for International
    Affairs. Other NASA speakers would be John F. Yardley, Associate
    Administrator, Office of Space Flight; Chester M. Lee, director of space
    transportation system operations; and Harold E. Gartrell, deputy man-
    ager of the Shuttle payload integration’office. The Space Transportation
    System would include the US. Space Shuttle and the ESA Spacelab, as well
    as a new upper propulsion stage and a u.S.-developed tracking and data
    system. ESA representatives scheduled to present the Spacelab portion of
    the 3-day program would include Bernard Deloffre, director of the
    Spacelab program for ESA; Heinz Stoewer, Spacelab project manager;
    Jan J. Burger, Spacelab payload adviser; and Jacques Collet of ESA’S
    planning directorate. (ESA release 10 May 76)
10-12 Muy: The Senate considered and passed H.R. 13172 authorizing
    NASA $16 800 000 for increased pay costs for the “interim period”
    1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. The authorization-part of the budget for
    fiscal year 1976-supplemented NASA’s      research and program manage-
    ment request, and was $3 186 000 less than the original request of
    $19 986 000. (NASA of Budget Ops, Chron Hist FY 76, 16 June 76)
                           Ofc
11 May: President Ford signed legislation reestablishing the post of White
    House science adviser, a job abolished by President Nixon 3 yr pre-
    viously. The signing took place in the White House rose garden, at a
    ceremony attended by leading scientists. President Ford had asked for

                                     91
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

      legislation to set up the position and the White House Office of Science
      and Technology on the recommendation of Vice President Rockefeller
      and at the urging of major scientific groups; the job had previously
      existed under executive order. Originally established by President Roose-
      velt during World War 11, the position lapsed until 1957 when President
      Eisenhower reactivated it after the launch of Sputnik. President Ford
      was expected to make a early choice of science adviser, who would direct
      the Office of Science and Technology Policy and would also be a member
      of the Domestic Council and adviser to the National Security Council.
      ( W Post, 12 May 76, A-21)
    Communications Satellite Corp., the international telecommunications con-
0
      sortium, had begun contract negotiations with US. manufacturers on
      building a new generation of comsats with a capacity of about 12 000
      simultaneous telephone calls plus television, to meet growing demand for
      international communications expected by the early 1980s, the annual
      meeting of ComSat stockholders was told. Joseph V. Charyk, president
      of ComSat, noted that the 2 new Intelsat IV-A satellites scheduled for
      launch this year had a capacity of about 6250 simultaneous telephone
      calls, plus television; the first such satellite-Zntelsat I, the 1965 Early
      Bird-could carry either 200 telephone calls or one Tv channel. Charyk
      said negotiations had been held with Hughes Aircraft (maker of Intelsat
      IV), TRW Inc., and a division of Ford Motor Co. for construction of the
      new satellites. However, he said, ComSat’s share of future international
      satellite operations would depend on the outcome of its appeal from an
      FCC order of last Dec. calling for sharp reductions in rates. Had the FCC
      rates been in effect for all of 1975, ComSat profits would have been
      $1.60 a share rather than $4.62 a share, he said. ( W Post, 12 May 76,
      D-9)
    The Air Force awarded a $1 million supplement of a previous cost-plus-
      incentive-fee contract to General Electric’s Aircraft Engine Group at
      Cincinnati, O., a labor-surplus area, for extended flight-test spare parts
      support for B- 1 aircraft engines, the Department of Defense announced.
      (DOD Release 2 13-76)
    Clocking the speed of plasma at 50 km per sec in the active regions of the
0
      sun was “among the most interesting results” of investigations carried
      out aboard the USSR space station Salyut 4, Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov
      wrote in the Bulletin o the USSR Academy o Sciences. Feoktistov,
                              f                        f
      one of the cosmonauts on the flight of Voskhod 1 in Oct. 1964, was
      quoted in a Tass broadcast as saying that data from the two manned
      expeditions to Salyut 4 were still being processed, but that the missions
      had established man’s ability to “work well in conditions of weight-
      lessness” for more than 2 mo. Citing the stay of Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly
      Sevastyanov aboard the station from 25 May to 25 July last year, and
      describing the use of exercises and pressurized suits to maintain health
      during that time, Feoktistov said the mission results offered hope that
      orbital stations and piloted space flights would be further developed.
      (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 May 76)


                                       92
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

12 May: NASA announced a first-time use of satellite relay of medical data
    from a moving ambulance to a hospital. Scientists and engineers at the
    National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) at Bay St. Louis, Miss.,
    worked with General Electric’s Science Services Laboratory to develop
    a special portable transmitter and antenna that could continuously trans-
    mit voice and medical data-including electrocardiograms-from a
    moving ambulance to the satellite and down to a hospital receiving
    station. During demonstrations of the system on a highway near Bay St.
    Louis, communications from the ambulance had been received as far
    away as N. Mex. The NSTL system, using the data-collection system on
    Goes 3, was similar to a telemedicine system being demonstrated by
    Johnson Space Center at the Papago Indian Reservation in N. Mex., and
    use of the Ats 6 for medical communications in Alaska. Use of an
    inexpensive receiver at the medical center could make remote health
    care economically feasible; the system might eventually lead to devel-
    opment of a special medical satellite to relay emergency data from
    remote hospitals, ships, offshore oil platforms, and other remote locations
    to major medical centers for consultation. (NASA Release 76-86)
* A joint n.S.-British astronomy project to study the remnant of an exploded
    star failed when a rocket-motor malfunction kept the x-ray telescope
    aboard from acquiring its target, a supernova remnant called Puppis A
    some 10 trillion km from earth. An English Skylark sounding rocket fired
    from the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia carried a NASA-designed
    flight telescope, fabricated and assembled at Marshall Space Flight Cen-
    ter, to obtain information on evolution of stars and the formation of
    neutron stars. Although the telescope assembly, as well as the detectors
    and electronics supplied by the United Kingdom, worked perfectly, a
    hole burned through one side of the rocket’s aft end produced more spin
    than the despin device could offset, said Richard Hoover of MSFC, prin-
    cipal US. investigator for the project. “Even with the residual spin, we
    scanned a portion of the sky in the area of the prime target and acquired
                                                                   .
    data on the diffuse x-ray background [a secondary objective] . . but we
    couldn’t lock on Puppis A in order to get a high-resolution map as
    desired.” The payload was recovered by parachute about 160 km down-
    range in excellent condition, Hoover said. (NASA Releases 76-62,
     76-92; MSFC Release 76-54; MFSC Star, 17 Mar 76, 3)
* NASA announced plans for a 2-day course, “Technology Exchange Be-
    tween the Textile Industry and Government,” to be held at Clemson
     University, Clemson, S.C., to acquaint industry executives with new
     developments in textile research stemming from government-sponsored
    programs. Co-sponsored by NASA’s        Technology Utilization Office, the
    College of Industrial Management and Textile Science at Clemson, and
    the Economic Development Administration, the course would offer dis-
     cussions by experts from industry, government, and the academic com-
    munity on a wide range of subjects including new fiber developments,
     fire-retardant materials, and innovations in textile manufacture. Course
    themes would include industry -government cooperation, new needs and


                                     93
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May
    opportunities for cooperation, industrial developments adopted by the
    government, industry-government information systems presently avail-
    able, and consumers’ choices at retail. (NASA Release 76-88)
13 Muy: Ames Research Center announced award of a $939 000 contract
    to Battelle Memorial Institute of Columbus, O., for aid in administering
    an early-warning aviation safety system for the Federal Aviation Admin-
    istration. Under the 2-yr contract, Battelle would implement a reporting
    system to obtain from persons in the national aviation system information
    on potential threats to flight safety; the reports would be processed to
    preserve anonymity of the informants and to make the data quickly
    usable to avoid or reduce aircraft accidents. An aviation-safety reporting
    system instituted by FAA in May 1975 had met with reluctance on the
    part of the public to report directly to a regulatory agency. NASA, invited
    to act as a third party, agreed to act as collection point for safety reports
    to encourage participation by pilots, controllers, and others using the
    nation’s airways. (NASA Release 76-52; ARC Release 76-34)
* Successful testing of a solar receiver developed with heat-transfer tech-
    nology used by Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International Corp., for
    the U S . space program was “a major step forward in development of
    solar electricity generating systems,” said Dr. Jack Silverman, director
    of energy systems for Rocketdyne. Using a large field of mirrors individ-
    ually focusing the sun’s rays to a central receiver on a high tower, where
    the concentrated heat served to boil water into superheated steam, the
    system generated the steam at 1366 K and 738 newtons per cm’. The
    central receiver was exposed to high heatflows approaching those en-
    countered in rocket engines, and many times higher than those in con-
    ventional steam boilers. The development program was sponsored by the
    Energy Research and Development Administration; Rocketdyne was also
    under contract to McDonnell Douglas and ERDA to develop a similar
    receiver and thermal storage subsystems for a 10 000-kw solar
    electricity-generating pilot plant to be in operation by the end of the
    decade. (Rockwell Release RD-9)
13-15 May: NASA launched Comstar 1A-1, first of a series of three Comsat
    General Corp. satellites planned to provide 14 400 two-way high-quality
    voice circuits in a telephone-communications network serving Hawaii,
    Alaska, Puerto Rico, and contiguous U.S. An Atlas-Centaur fired from
    ETR at 6:28 pm EDT 13 May put the Hughes Aircraft-built comsat in an
    elliptical transfer orbit; firing of the apogee motor at 6:42 pm 15 May
    would put the Comstar on station over the equator at 128OW, south of
    San Francisco, at just over 35 000-km altitude, by 4 June. The spin-
    stabilized cylinder 6.1 m high and 2.4 m in diameter, weighing about
    816 kg in orbit, with 1 4 000 solar cells mounted on the cylinder surface,
    would carry 24 radio repeaters each capable of handling 1200 one-way
    voice channels in the 4- to 6-ghz range, using a technique of cross
    polarization that would double satellite capacity by more efficient use of
    the frequency spectrum. Comsat General Corp. would own and operate
    the satellites and associated earth facilities, leasing to American Tele-
    phone and Telegraph Co. and to GTE Satellite Corp., a subsidiary of
    General Telephone and Electronics Corp. The $43-million satellite was

                                      94
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       May
    called Comstar D-1 after achieving orbit. (NASA Release 76-75; NYT,
    13 May 76, 51; Comsat General Release CG 76-115; MOR M-491-
    201-76-01 [postlaunch] 27 May 76)
14 M u y Dryden Flight Research Center announced it would begin a series
    of YF-17 test flights in mid-May to aid designers of future highly maneu-
    verable aircraft. The YF-17, built by Northrop Corp. for the Air Force’s
    lightweight fighter program, is a twin-engine aircraft incorporating many
    innovations to give it high performance and maneuverability. Objectives
    of the NASA research program would be to collect in-flight data on
    pressure around the engine nozzles and afterbody, for comparison with
    wind-tunnel data to improve prediction techniques for future fighter-
    aircraft design; and to continue NASA studies on improved maneuvering
    for fighter aircraft in the areas of buffet, stability and control, acceler-
    ation, and handling. Under a $255 000 contract funded jointly by NASA
    and the U.S. Navy, the Y~-17would be flown for about 8 wk by Gary
    Krier, 1)FKC’s YF-17 project pilot. (DFRC   Release 7-76)
15 Muy: A U.S.-European Space Shuttle project starting in 1980 would
    recruit 30 more astronauts-including women and participants from the
    USSR-for the planned 200 flights in the project, u.s spokesmen said at
    a Paris news conference held at the end of a 3-day meeting between NASA
    and European Space Agency officials. John F. Yardley, NASA Associate
    Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told newsmen that NASA was
    already training more than 30 astronauts for this program. Each flight,
    carrying 3 U.S. astronauts and up to 4 Europeans on space-science
    missions lasting between a week and a month, would cost between
    $18 million and $2 1 million; European scientists had expressed concern
    that the flights would cost so much that less money would be left for
    scientific experiments than they had hoped. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s
    Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, when asked if the
    Soviets might be involved in the project, said, “We have made it clear
    in informal discussions that this would be available to them.” Those using
    the Shuttle would be expected to foot the bill, officials emphasized. (NYT,
     1 5 May 76, 2; W Post, 15 May 76, A-15; W Star, 16 May 76, A-3)
1 7 Muy: SPAR 11, a Black Brant VC sounding rocket carrying materials-
    processing experiments, was launched from the White Sands Missile
    Range in the second of a series of 15 planned during the next 5 yr in the
    SPAR (space-processing applications rocket) program managed by Mar-
    shall Space Flight Center. The 225.7-kg payload consisted of 10 experi-
    ments, 6 similar to those carried on SPAR I launched 11 Dec. 1975; the
    rocket reached an altitude of 188 km, providing about 5 min of near-
    weightlessnessduring the coast phase, and the payload was recovered by
    parachute and delivered to the investigators for analysis. MSFC employees
    Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston were principal investiga-
    tors for 2 experiments, both on dendrite remelting and macro-
    segregation. Other experimenters were Robert B. Pond (Johns Hopkins
    University), 2 experimenls on solidification of lead antimony eutectic;
    Dr. James W. Patten (Battelle-Northwest Research Institute), 2 experi-
    ments on producing closed-cell metal foams; Dr. SA. Gelles (Battelle

                                     95
                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

      Memorial Institute), agglomeration in immiscible liquids; Dr. H. Ahlborn
      (University of Hamburg), behavior of aluminum alloys under zero grav-
      ity; and Dr. Louis Raymond (Aerospace Corp.), 2 experiments in casting
      thoria dispersion-strengthened composites at zero gravity. (MSFC Release
      76-83, 76-94)
    Payload responsibilities for the first 6 flights of the Space Shuttle had been
0
      allocated by NASA, according to Aviation V and Space Technology
                                                        k
      magazine. The first 6 orbital missions scheduled for 1979-1980 would
      be verifications of the overall Shuttle system; the first flight would carry
      no payload except a 45 000-kg data-analysis system, but the other 5
      flight-test missions would carry scientifically meaningful payloads. NASA
      had assigned the second and fifth flight tests to its Office of Applications;
      the fourth and sixth, to the Office of Space Science; and the third, to the
      Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. The Office of Applications
      would be involved with space-processing hardware, and the Office of
      Space Science would oversee the use of existing research instruments;
      the OAST had been considering a space “workbench” on which various
      instruments could be deployed for 3- to 9-mo periods. The orbital
      flight-test missions would begin with a duration of only a few orbits, which
      should increase to about 7 days by the sixth flight mission; the first 4
      flights would land at Dryden Flight Research Center, and the latter 2 at
      Kennedy Space Center. (AvWk, 17 May 76, 21)
    Astronaut Paul J. Weitz, Captain, USN, would retire from military service
0
       1 June but would remain in his present job with the space agency as a
      civilian, NASA announced. Weitz, pilot on Skylab 2 (the first manned
      mission 25 May to 22 June 1973), was part of the crew who saved the
      mission by erecting a “parasol” shade to reduce overheating caused by
      damage to Skylab 1 during its launch, and by unjamming a solar-power
      wing to provide enough electrical power for their mission and 2 follow-on
      missions of 59 and 84 days respectively. Retiring after 22 yr Navy
      service, Weitz was currently working on payloads and flight-crew docu-
      mentation for the Space Shuttle. (JSC Release 76-33)
    International golfing great Arnold Palmer was scheduled to pilot a Learjet
      36 “business aircraft” from Denver, Colo., for an assault on the speed-
      around-the-world record that had not been surpassed for 10 yr. A Learjet
      24 had circled the earth in 1966 in 65 hr 38 min 39 sec elapsed time,
      at an average speed of better than 563 kph (50 hr 20 min actual flying
      time) including 17 intermediary stops. The National Aeronautic Associ-
      ation had sanctioned the new attempt, designating journalist Robert
      Serling as official onboard observer. Two additional pilots would accom-
      pany Palmer and Serling on their 2-day flight, scheduled to cover nearly
      37 000 km, under the auspices of the Aviation Space Writers Associ-
      ation. Nine stops were planned for the new flight: Logan Airport at
      Boston; LeBourget at Paris; Mehrabad Airport at Tehran, Iran; Band-
      anaraike International Airport at Colombo, Sri Lanka; Kemayoran Air-
      port, Jakarta, Indonesia; Manila International Airport; Wake Island;
      Honolulu International Airport; and Arapahoe County Airport, Denver.
      Besides NAA sponsorship, the flight was sanctioned by the American


                                        96
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    Revolution Bicentennial Association and the Aviation Historical Founda-
    tion. (NAA newsletter, May 1976, 1)
18 May: Ames Research Center had contracted with Goodyear Aerospace
    Corp. of Akron, O., for studies of 2 lighter-than-air vehicle concepts for
    civilian use, NASA announced. New requirements for transporting heavy
   loads in power-plant construction, transferring ship cargoes to shore
    points, and providing quiet energy-saving intercity transportation had
    revived interest in lighter-than-air vehicles, formerly the only means of
   nonstop rapid travel across the world‘s oceans. Use of airships for
    military missions also had come under consideration; principal potential
    use was transport of ship cargoes over a beach to shore points. NASA, in
    conjunction with the u.S. Navy, was also studying military applications
    for conventional airships that would use the great endurance potential of
    the airship in activities such as antisubmarine warfare and sea control.
        One of the concepts under study, a feeder airliner 60 m long carrying
    80 passengers, would be used as a short-haul transport system, landing
    and taking off vertically and cruising at 160 knots. The other concept,
    a vehicle to transport large heavy payloads over comparatively short
    distances, would combine features of large dirigibles and helicopter
    rotors to provide lifting capacity far beyond that of either type of vehicle
    alone; the dirigible buoyance would lift the empty weight of the vehicle,
    and the total lifting capacity of the rotor system would lift and support
    the payload. The heavy lifter would be most likely to have immediate
    application, NASA said, because of the need for transport of heavy power-
    generating equipment or other outsize industrial equipment to a remote
    destination not served by any other heavy transport systems. Increased
    engineering knowledge and better understanding of weather phenomena,
    as well as substituting inert helium for the volatile hydrogen used in
    German airships of the 1920s, would make a modern airship safe. (NASA
    Release 76-93)
4 The European Space Agency announced completion of the launcher inte-
    gration site for its Ariane launch vehicle on schedule. The site-a
    building near Paris measuring 105 m long, 50 m wide, and 33 m
    high-constructed on its own land by Aerospatiale, the contractor called
    “the industrial architect of the Ariane programme,” was for devel-
    opment tests and assembly, integration, and acceptance of the complete
   launcher before its dispatch to the launch site. Four Ariane flight tests
   were scheduled for 1979 and 1980. (ESA release 18 May 76)
4 Marshall Space Flight Center and Dryden Flight Research Center officials
    signed an agreement to conduct jointly a comprehensive program of tests
    on the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel
    rocket booster. The program, to begin early in 1977, would consist of
    drogue-parachute tests and main-parachute tests, using single para-
    chutes, and test deployment of the 3-parachute cluster (actual flight
    configuration) to be used in recovery of the solid rockets, largest ever
    flown. The parachutes, some 36.5 m in diameter, would be the largest
    used in the space program; Apollo spacecraft parachutes were about
    24.5 m in diameter. The Dryden center would provide the B-52 aircraft

                                      97
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

    for the test drops, as well as the flight and maintenance crews, and would
   perform the tests over the National Parachute Test Range about an
    hour’s flight from Edwards AFB in Calif. MSFC engineers would evaluate
    the test data to determine the adequacy of the system. (NASA Release
    76-94; DFRC Release 6-76; MSFC Release 76-87)
19 May: Arnold Palmer, piloting the Learjet “200 Yankee” named in honor
    of the U.S. Bicentennial, landed at Arapahoe County airport near Denver
    after a record-setting flight around the world that took 57 hr 25 min 42
    sec and covered 37 000 km. Palmer’s flight was 28 hr 4 3 min 19 sec
    faster than the longstanding record set by Arthur Godfrey and Dick
    Merrill in 1966. Accompanied by the official observer and timer for the
    National Aeronautic Assn., Robert J. Serling, and by copilots James E.
    Bir and L.L. Purkey, Palmer averaged better than 770 kph on the
    2.5-day flight that made 9 stops in 7 countries. In meeting officials at
    each of the stops, Palmer presented Bicentennial flags and bronze repli-
    cas of the Declaration of Independence; at Wake Is., he left a silver
    plaque commemorating the U.S. Marine Corps defense of the island in
    World War 11. In addition to the speed-around-the-world record, NAA
    planned to claim for the Palmer flight 18 additional records for speed
    over recognized course: e.g., Boston to Paris, Paris to Tehran, etc. Since
    he took up flying in the 1950s, champion golfer Palmer had logged about
    4500 hr as a pilot. (NAA News, July 76, 1)
* Ground-based equipment incorporating computers that would work with
     components aboard a Shuttle orbiter to guide it to a safe landing had been
     shipped from the contractor, Cutler Hammer’s AIL Division, NASA an-
     nounced. The equipment, called a microwave scanning-beam landing
     system (MSBLS), would be installed on a runway at Dryden Research
     Center, where initial flight tests of the orbiter would begin in mid-1977;
     a second set would be installed on a newly constructed runway at
     Kennedy Space Center, where initial Shuttle orbital missions would be
     launched in 1979. Both locations would be equipped for approach from
     either direction, and each system would be fully redundant, including a
     comprehensive monitoring system with automatic switchover and an
     uninterruptible power supply. As the Shuttle orbiter would descend in a
     steep glide moderated to a soft touchdown, onboard computers would
     direct the vehicle through commands to the control surfaces and must
     know the vehicle’s precise position at every instant; standard instrument-
     landing electronics could not provide this information, so that the type
     of beam created by the MSBE would be needed.
         The MSBLT system would cover a total field of positions through all
     possible paths the orbiter would take, instead of providing a siigle
     straight path for the orbiter to follow; its scanning beam would sweep a
     wide flat course across the landing sector, and pulses from a ground
     transmitter would be coded to identify the exact angle at which the beam
     pointed at each instant of the sweep. A receiver in the descending orbiter
     would pick up the pulses and decode them to determine the track; the
     onboard computer would accurately compare the orbiter’s location with
     the desired location and automatically correct any discrepancy. The

                                     98
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         May
      MSBLS would provide an unprecedented degree of position-guidanceaccu-
      racy. (NASA Release 76-97; JSC Release 76-35)
    Isaac T. Gillam Iv, NASA Hq Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles,
0
    was designated Director of Space Shuttle Qperations at Dryden Flight
    Research Center, effective 23 May. In his new position, Gillam would be
    responsible for development of test support facilities, institutional sup-
    port of test operations, and flight and industrial safety for test operations
    in support of Shuttle carrier-aircraft testing and orbital approach and
    landing tests conducted at DFRC. Before coming to NASA Hq in 1963,
    Gillam served in the US. Air Force as pilot, missile launch crew com-
    mander, and ROTC instructor; he had done graduate work at Tenn. State
    Univ. while serving as assistant professor of military science. From 1963
    to 1966, he was resources management specialist at NASA Hq and was
    then appointed Assistant Delta Program Manager in the Launch Vehicles
    Directorate. Named Delta Program Manager in Sept. 1968, he became
    Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles (including Delta and Scout)
    in June 1973. He received NASA’s      Distinguished Service Medal for his
    work in the launch-vehicle program. (NASA Release 76-96)
0 The Air Force announced award of a $2 067 113 cost-plus-fixed-fee con-
    tract to Teledyne McCormick Selph of Hollister, Calif., for unsymmetri-
    cal dimethyl hydrazine, a chemical used in Titan missiles and NASA-USAF
    space boosters. The contracting activity was the San Antonio Logistics
    Center at Kelly AFB, Texas. (Don Release 223-76)
  In an address to the American Institute of Industrial Engineers, meeting in
    St. Louis, W.F. Rockwell, Jr., chairman of Rockwell International Corp.,
    warned that the u.S. in its search for energy independence should not “go
    driving up the wrong street” but should make use of nuclear power.
    Claiming that solar power, nuclear fusion, or other exotic power sources
    were solutions for the distant future, Rockwell described nuclear energy
    as “the bridge that will allow us to make a smooth transition to those
    future energy sources” and as being “safe, clean, abundant and eco-
    nomical.” Rockwell noted the 6- to IO-yr period needed between the
    concept and the start-up of a power plant, adding that today’s Americans
    have roughly 36 mo to “get it all together if we’re going to have enough
    power in 1990.” (Rockwell Release R-20)
0 Dr. Wernher von Braun was admitted to hospital in Alexandria, Va.,
     14 May and was reported in fair condition yesterday, the Washington
    Post reported. Hospital spokesmen refused comment on von Braun’s
    illness, citing requests from his doctor and family. Von Braun, who left
    the government in 1972 to become a vice president of Fairchild Indus-
    tries, Inc., in nearby Germantown, Md., underwent an operation for
    cancer last year at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, a hospital
    official there said. The German-born scientist, now 61, had led devel-
    opment of the US. space program in the early 1960s. ( W Post, 19 May
    76, B-4)
20 May: The US. Navy launched an experimental ocean-surveillance
    satellite-part of the Whitecloud system developed by the Naval Re-
    search Laboratory-on 30 April from Vandenberg AFB aboard an Atlas

                                       99
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

      launch vehicle, reported DefenselSpace Business Daily. The satellite
      was in a near-circular orbit of 1122-km apogee, 1100-km perigee,
      inclined 63.5’, with a period of 107.5 min. (SBD, 20 May 76, 21)
    NASA Hq conducted a news conference on the Viking mission to Mars, with
0
      Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science; Robert
      Kraemer, director of planetary programs; Walter Jakobowski, Viking
      program manager; James Martin, Jr., Viking project manager; and
      Dr. Gerald S. Soffen, Viking project scientist, to review the mission and
      answer questions. Dr. Anthony Calio, NASA’s   Deputy Associate Adminis-
      trator for Space Science, opened the session by recalling the work done
      on Viking over the past 7 yr that would culminate in Viking’s reaching
      Mars within the next few weeks. The U.S. for the first time would be
      operating 4 spacecraft simultaneously, 2 in orbit and 2 on the planet’s
      surface. Kraemer mentioned Galileo’s sighting of Mars in 1609, the
      detection of ‘‘can&” on the planet’s surface by Schiaparelli and others
      in the 1800s, and Percival Lowell’s founding of the Lowell Observatory
      in 1894 followed by his publication of reports on “Mars and Its Canals”
      and “Mars as the Abode of Life.” Edgar Rice Burroughs, author of the
      Tarzan stories and “grandfather of science fiction writers,” began writ-
      ing stories about civilization on Mars that had kept the public “waiting
      ever since to get down to the surface and see what is there.” Although,
      as Kraemer pointed out, 4 Mariner missions had shown that civilization
      did not actually exist on Mars, nothing had ruled out the existence of life,
      and that was a purpose of the Viking mission.
          Jakobowski reviewed the history of Voyager, Surveyor, and Viking,
      especially the 1971 Mariner flyby that revealed Mars as a dynamic
      planet. Martin, Viking project manager at Langley Research Center, said
      the 2 Viking spacecraft had been flying for a long time and had turned
      in “exceptionally good” performance; this would be the first mission to
      use optical navigation to confirm radio-tracking data, and the first set of
      results had shown the spacecraft to be “right on course.” Martin added
      that-as an expression of confidence in his team-a quiet period had
      been declared the coming week when most of the flight team would be on
      vacation; “the team needs that time off to get ready for a pretty active
      and hectic summer,” he said. A.T. (Tom) Young, Viking mission director
      at LaRC, showed slides of mission operations and possible landing sites,
      reviewing the reasons for site selection and what NASA hoped to learn in
      both scientific and engineering areas, concluding with a summary of
      expected activities during the first 20 days on Mars. Viking-mission
      audio from JPL would be available starting about 15 June.
          Dr. Soffen noted that the scientific questions about Mars covered
      more than the presence of life there, which was only one of 13 in-
      vestigations to be conducted by Viking, and suggested that the press
      representatives “ought to prepare yourselves from an educational point
      of view about all the experiments other than just the biology.” The first
      question raised by the press was on the indicators of a safe landing;
      Martin replied that there would be 5-telemetry from a footpad switch;
      startup of the lander computer, accompanied by turnoff of the descent-
      engine heaters; drop on equipment-power bus with shutoff of entry
                                       100
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         May
      equipment; and switch in data rate from the orbiter-to-lander 4-kilobit
      rate to a 16-kb rate for sending pictures to the orbiter. A question about
      turning on the backup lander computer got a detailed response involving
      detectors and switches in a complex procedure that occur when “the
      second computer hollers for help,” as Young put it. Other questions
      concerned dust storms, camera resolution, and chances of success;
      Soffen concluded by noting “if we knew the answers, we wouldn’t have
      to do this mission.” (Text, 20 May 76; NASA Releases 76-90, 76-98)
*   NASA announced delivery of experiment hardware for the first of three High
      Energy Astronomy Observatories (HEAO) to the prime contractor, TRW
      Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif. The hardware consisted of 4 experi-
      ments to survey and map x-ray sources during the 6-mo mission of
      HEAO-A in 1977. A Naval Research Laboratory experiment (Dr. Herbert
      Friedman, principal investigator) would use a large-area survey instru-
      ment to locate x-ray sources and obtain data for studying the physics and
      evolution of energy sources. An experiment built by Goddard Space
      Flight Center with assistance from the Calif. Institute of Technology
      would measure emissions and absorptions of diffuse x-rays and correlate
      results with radio and visible light ray emission; principal investigators
      were GSFC’S Dr. Elihu Boldt and Caltech’s Dr. Gordon Garmire. A third
      experiment, for the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and MIT, was
      a scanning modulation collimator to determine precise celestial positions
      of selected x-ray sources and investigate their size and structure; prin-
      cipal investigators were SAO’S Dr. Herbert Gursky and MIT’S Dr. Hale
      Bradt. The fourth experiment, for the University of Calif. at San Diego
      and MIT, would determine the position, spectrum, time variations, in-
      tensity, and other properties of hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays;
      principal investigators were UCSD’s Dr. Laurence Peterson and MIT’S
      Dr. Walter Lewin. Data gathered by the HEAO missions could lead to new
      theories about energy production and high-density nuclear matter. Mar-
      shall Space Flight Center, which would manage HEAO for the Office of
      Space Science, directed TRW in designing and building the observatories
      and integrating and testing the overall system, including the experi-
      ments. (NASA Release 76-100; MSFC Release 76-86)
    NASA announced signature of an agreement between the Universities Space
      Research Association (USRA) and the Langley Research Center to provide
      university participation in the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF)
      space research program managed by L~RC,which would use the Space
      Shuttle to launch and retrieve an earth-orbiting multipurpose-
      experiment carrier starting late in 1979. USRA was established in 1969
      through the National Academy of Sciences as a consortium of 50 univer-
      sities in the US., through which the academic community could work with
      NASA on scientific and technological developments in the space program;
      its headquarters was at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. The
      agreement with LaRC called for USRA to solicit, select, and implement
      university experiments for each LDEF mission, with funds provided by the
      sponsoring organizations. NASA would also seek participants in the LDEF
      program through a formal announcement of opportunity inviting private

                                       101
May                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
    companies, research and engineering institutes, and other government
    agencies to provide space experiments for LDEF missions. (NASA Release     ,

    76-99)
22 May: The A r Force’s P76-5 satellite was successfully launched by NASA
               i
    from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle at 0041 am PDT. The
    72.6-kg spacecraft, designed to evaluate propagation effects of dis-
    turbed plasmas on radar and communications systems, was placed in a
    near-circular sun-synchronous orbit with apogee at 935 km and perigee
    at 863 km, inclination of 99.6’, and period of 105.9 min. The launch
    was requested by the Air Force Nov. 75 and agreed to by NASA 3 Dec.
    1975, under a 1962 memorandum of understanding on joint NASA-DOD
    use of the Scout vehicle, and costs of the launch would be borne by the
    USAF. Mission objectives would be achieved, according to a postlaunch
                                         21 Apr 76, [prelaunch] 5 May 76,
    report. (MOR M-490-602-76-01,
    [postlaunch] 24 Sept 76)
* NASA announced issuance of a patent to engineers of Scott Aviation for a
    new type of breathing apparatus invented under NASA contract, suitable
    for use as emergency equipment for firemen [see 17 May]. The appara-
    tus included an alarm system working on the compressed air delivered to
    the wearer through a face mask, warning by a whistle audible only to the
    wearer if the air pressure fell. The equipment was also lower in weight
    and bulk, more comfortable, highly visible, and easier to operate. The
    weight of the apparatus, fitting over the face and around the head, was
    supported from the hips. Scott Aviation had planned to deliver 50 sets
    of the equipment to the Boston fire department in July. (NYT, 22 May
    76, 31)
  Two engineers working for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had reported that
    windmills could supply up to a fifth of US. energy needs by 1995, the
     Wushington Post said. The engineers, Michael Dusey and Ugo Coty,
    reporting on a year-long investigation funded by the Energy Research
    and Development Administration, said that large wind-turbine gener-
    ators could save 2 billion barrels of oil a year; construction of 54 000
    generators with rotor blades more than 160 m end-to-end could furnish
     1 trillion kw hrs of electricity annually. Other benefits would include
    reduction of air pollution and creation of a new industry that would
    employ thousands, they said. The Lockheed researchers put no price tag
    on their findings, but an earlier study by the University of Hawaii had
    said such windmills could cost up to $50 000; the price would be re-
    gained within 7 yr and the windmills could remain in operation up to
    50 yr, according to the 1974 report by Hawaii’s Donald Grace. A
    professor from the Univ. of Mass.-William Heronemus-had proposed
    some years ago a network of 957 windmills each about 113 m high just
    to meet the needs of the state of Vermont. ( W Post, 22 May 76, F-1)
24 Muy: Commercial supersonic transatlantic transport service began with
    the arrival of Concorde aircraft from London and Paris at Dulles airport
    near Washington, D.C. The Anglo-French plane had been barred from
    New York’s John F. Kennedy airport under a ruling by the Port Author-
    ity of N.Y. and N.J. after Transportation Secretary william T. Coleman,

                                    102
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                                  May




British Airways Concorde rolling out at Dulles Airport near Washington, D.C., after first
touchdown 24 May 1981. (Photo courtesy British Airways)

    Jr., granted limited scheduled flights into the u.S. for a trial period not
    to exceed 16 mo [see 5 Jan.-4 Feb.]. The Concordes arrived at Dulles
    2 min apart, British Airways arriving at 11:54 am EDT and Air France
    at 11:56, taxiing into a nose-to-nose position in front of the main termi-
    nal building. About 8000 persons were on hand for the landing, many of
    them leaving their cars and walking in on the limited-access highway
    because of the traffic backup; of the crowd, airport officialsestimatedthat
    only about 20 were there to protest the Concorde landings. The French
    flight carried 80 passengers, the British flight 75; both Air France and
    British Airways had limited passenger payloads to 80 on Concorde flights
    until they gained more experience with the aircraft’s fuel consumption.
        The two carriers had selected Monday for the inauguration of North
    Atlantic service because neither would ordinarily offer a Washington-
    bound flight that day. Air France planned 3-per-wk flights, leaving Paris
    on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday and returning to Paris on Monday,
    Thursday, and Saturday. British Airways would offer 2 trips per wk,
    leaving London’s Heathrow on Thursday and Saturday and returning on
    Friday and Sunday. One-way fare London to Washington would be
    $633.60; Paris-Washington, $827. The difference would arise from
    fluctuations in currency exchange. The trip took 3 hr 50 min for the Air
    France plane, spending 2 hr 5 3 min at supersonic speeds on the way. The
    British plane timed on its return flight took 3 hr 57 min. The Federal
    Aviation Administration had instrumented the Dulles airport with 8
    permanent and 5 portable recorder units to measure the perceived noise
    in decibels (pndb) for a data base on all airport noise and especially
    Concordenoise. ( N V , 25 May 7 6 , l ; WPost, 25 May 76, A-1, Av Wk,
    24 May 76, 27; 31 May 76, 22)
24-26 Muy: A “new view of Jupiter,” as the New York Times called it, was
    the subject of a 3-day Ames Research Center symposium on Pioneer
    discoveries. Scientists from NASA, the Smithsonian Institution, and 15

                                          103
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

      universities were resource persons for 4 news briefings per day, each
      scheduled for an hr or more, and 5 science workshops, meeting in the
      morning and afternoon each day, with a wrapup session the afternoon of
      the third day. Topics discussed were Jupiter’s atmosphere and weather;
      magnetosphere and radiation belts; origins, characteristics, and com-
      position of the planet and its moons; origin of life on the planet; and
      Pioneer 11 targeting toward Saturn upon its departure from the vicinity
      of Jupiter.
          Pioneer findings about Jupiter-characterized by low density and
      high mass, 318 times that of earth, containing three quarters of the
      planetary material in the solar system-included discovery that Jupiter’s
      Great Red Spot, three times the size of earth, was not the only such spot;
      several smaller ones detected in the atmospheric flow around Jupiter
      moved in and out of the area occupied by the Great Red Spot without
      losing their own identity. Pioneer measurements of Jupiter properties-
      internal heat, composition of its moons-permitted the first detailed
      calculations of the process that formed the planet. Its history was appar-
      ently that of a failed star: it went from a gas cloud to a body heated
      red-hot by gravitational contraction, then to a 4.5-billion-yr cooling,
      still in process, that made it resemble a “white dwarf.” The four planet-
      size inner moons-Jupiter’s “Galilean” satellites-proved scientifically
      the most interesting; they exhibited a regular density gradient and com-
      position that constituted the best direct evidence for Jupiter’s history.
      The protostar phases deduced for both Jupiter and Saturn indicated that
      the outer solar system underwent 2 different periods of relatively high
      temperature. Jupiter had retained for 4 billion yr its primordial heat,
      which could be neither radiated nor conducted away because of the
      planet’s composition. A “new metal”-liquid metallic hydrogen, sim-
      plest of the alkaline metals-identified only inside Jupiter is thought to
      constitute the planet’s interior, beginning about of a quarter of the
      distance from the surface to the center. As the substance has low thermal
      conductivity and is opaque to radiated energy, the heat cannot be dissi-
      pated, and the temperature at Jupiter’s center is about 30 OOOO, 6 times
      that of the surface of the sun. As Jupiter’s liquid regions are too hot for
      life, living organisms would have to exist in its gaseous atmosphere.
      Between the temperatures for freezing and boiling water, Jupiter’s
      atmospheric pressure increases with depth from 5 times earth’s atmos-
      pheric pressure to 10 times.
          Pioneer data suggest slow atmosphere-turnover times of months or
      years that would permit survival of atmosphere-borne life, said Dr. Cyril
      Ponnamperuma of the Univ. of Md. Jupiter was 1000 times as large a
      region for forming complex organic molecules as earth, and a wide
      variety of environments would be available. The origin of life on a planet
      would depend less on huge time periods than on how often nature mixed
      the proper ingredients in the proper environment, Dr. Ponnamperuma
      said; enough billions or trillions of attempts could produce a highly
      complex molecule able to replicate itself. The fact that Jupiter’s atmos-
      phere might provide hospitable sites for life raised the problem of con-

                                      104
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         May
    tamination of that atmosphere by earth organisms riding on atmosphere
    probes launched by the U.S. and other countries.
         Pioneer also found that Jupiter acted as a giant vacuum cleaner,
    sucking small dust particles from a vast region of space (comparatively
    little dust was present in the Asteroid Belt), and 170 times as many
    meteoroids were striking Jupiter’s atmosphere as struck the earth in
    areas of similar size. Concentrations of these particles at Jupiter would
    be the result of the planet’s enormous gravity field. Jupiter’s magnetos-
    phere-a million times the volume of earth’s-was found to leak high-
    energy electrons; Jupiter was the major source of such electrons in the
    solar system, and the sun and Jupiter were the only known important
    sources of high-energy particles in the solar system. The energy of these
    particles was constantly increased by recirculation through the planet’s
    radiation belts, said Dr. James Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa. Earth-
    orbiting satellites and other spacecraft had detected Jupiter electrons as
    far away as Mercury, said Dr. John Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago; an
    input of more than 100 billion watts would be needed to maintain the
    observed energies. Jupiter was also known to be the strongest radio
    source in the sky, except for the sun; the massive radio bursts were
    caused by the moon Io moving through the Jovian magnetic field, said
    Dr. David Morrison of the Univ. of Hawaii. Scientific detective work
    revealed that the bursts occurred every 21 hr-half           of Io’s orbital
    period-and one of 3 places on Jupiter’s visible surface had to face the
    earth, which Pioneer data proved to be true. (NASA Releases 76-80,
    76-91; NYT, 31 May 76, 14)
25 May: The Environmental Protection Agency, at a Washington briefing for
    science writers, described its techniques of airborne remote sensing-
    combined use of aerial photography and heat-sensing instruments-to
    detect 98%of water-pollution discharge points in the U.S. John Moran,
    EPA director of monitoring, said the agency had long used aerial photos
    to map the extent of oil spills; other devices in EPA’S “growing arsenal”
    included a laser system to measure ground contours and determine
    whether strip-mined land had been properly restored; an airborne laser
    firing energy pulses toward the ground to define particle layers in the
    atmosphere below the aircraft and thus measure the air -inversion ceiling
    during urban air-pollution alerts; and a system for laser fluorosensing
    that would monitor water pollution by measuring surface oils, dissolved
    organic matter, and even algae, by sensing responses to an ultraviolet
    beam. An earlier EPA report described use of techniques or devices
    developed for other purposes by NASA or DOD, to detect smoke drift in the
    atmosphere, oil spills, runoff from illegal stock feedlots, and sick vegeta-
    tion. (W Star , 26 May 76, A-l l )
26 May: NASA announced plans for a 3-mo demonstration this summer of
    using Ats 4-known as the “teacher in the sky”-to help some of the
    world’s poorest people boost food production, improve health and nutri-
    tion, expand family planning, and raise income levels, through applica-
    tions of remote sensing, space communications, and high-resolution
    aerial photography. The program, a joint effort of NASA and the Agency

                                      105
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
May

    for International Development, would consist of both filmed and live
    portions broadcast to as many as 30 countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin
    America. AID would provide $3 million to finance the demonstration. At
    a UN conference in Nairobi 6 May on trade and development, Secretary
    of State Kissinger emphasized the use of satellite technology to improve
    cooperation between industrialized and developing nations; depending
    upon the response to the broadcasts, AID would be prepared to propose
    to Congress a long-range follow-up technology program. As-6 was
    completing a year-long program of instructional television for India;
    upon completion of this mission 31 July, NASA would move the satellite
    to a location over the Western Hemisphere where it would beam audio
    or audiovisual presentations in black and white or in color to special
    receivers on the ground. AID officials and NASA specialists would set up
    one transmitter-receiver unit in the capital of each participating country,
    and up to 5 receivers in outlying locations; each receiver terminal would
    be equipped with color-television monitors. The live portion of the
    demonstration would feature 2-way discussions between U.S. personal-
    ities and representatives of the recipient countries; a local program would
    be developed in the host country to demonstrate the communications
    abilities of the ATS. NASA would be responsible for moving the equipment
    from country to country and for operation of the satellite and associated
    equipment. (NASA Release 76-101)
  A new device developed by the WAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at
    Edwards AFB, Calif., would permit an annual “physical examination” of
    the motors of intercontinental ballistic missiles while the missiles were
    still in the silo. The practice of removing the motors for inspection had
    resulted in high costs for handling and transportation as well as high risk
    of damage to the motors. The AF Space and Missile Systems Organization
    (SAMSO) at Los Angeles asked AFRPL to find a compact, safe, and eco-
    nomical means of inspection, and acoustical holography was selected.
    The system when fully developed would be able to scan the outside of an
    intact missile top to bottom, probing the propellant inside its motors. The
    device worked much like sonar, transmitting high-frequency sound
    waves and registering reflected vibrations; the reflected waves, processed
    electronically, would reproduce any flaws in the propellant on a cathode-
    ray tube for instant viewing or photographing, and the information would
    be stored in a computer for later evaluation. Future uses of acoustical
    holography might be made in medical science, improving on current
    x-ray techniques. (AF Release OIP 174.75)
26-27 May: John H. Disher, Director of Advanced Programs, NASA Office
     of Manned Space Flight, was keynote speaker at a space industrialization
     symposium at Marshall Space Flight Center sponsored jointly by MSFC
    and the Alabama section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and
     Astronautics. Defining space industrialization as “the use of spacs- to
     produce a salable/profitable product or a service which companies as a
     business expense or citizens through their taxes are willing to pay for,”
     Disher reviewed uses of space for communications, weather prediction,
     navigation and mapping, and earth-resources survey; he then described

                                    106
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      May

    the advantages of space environment-earth overview, zero gravity,
    vacuum, heat and waste disposal, and uninterrupted solar energy-for
    future uses, concluding with a prediction of a growing tourist industry in
    space. The symposium concluded 26 May at the annual banquet of the
    Ala. AlAA with an address on “Space Industrialization as a Concept” by
    Dr. Krafft Ehricke, science advisor for North American Space Division,
    Rockwell International Gorp. Sessions of the symposium dealt with space
    habitation, space transportation, space processing of materials, and
    space power. The symposium was organized to disseminate recent infor-
    mation on expanded space operations after the advent of the Space
    Shuttle to all segments of the scientific and technical community; par-
    ticipants included NASA centers, other government agencies, industry
    and universities. (NASA Release 76-8 1; MSFC Release 76-64, 76-79;
    Disher text)
28 May: Marshall Space Flight Center announced a new approach to issu-
    ance of 2 parallel contracts, to be awarded for studies of a space indus-
    trialization effort that would run from 1980 to 2010. One of the study
    contracts would be awarded to an aerospace firm, the other to a research
    or “think-tank” firm, to obtain different viewpoints. The proposed work
    would consist of 2 phases, each lasting about 8 mo, and each contract
    would cost about $200 000. Replies to today’s requests for proposals
    were due 29 June, and contracts were to be awarded this fall. Whereas
    the space program had so far emphasized scientific and other exploratory
    activities, space industrialization would emphasize production of goods
    and services for economic benefit. First phase of the study would define
    goals, establish the rationale for a space program on the basis of terres-
    trial alternatives, and set up a time frame with options and budgetary
    considerations. The second phase would study future mission oppor-
    tunities and the optimum role of man in the program, responsiveness of
    the concepts to national and industrial needs and goals, and technological
    implications as against costs. (MSFC Release 76-98; NASA Release
    76-107)
30 May: Third Century America, the US. Bicentennial exposition on science
    and technology, opened to the public with 30 000 persons attending;
    32 000 employes of the Kennedy Space Center had attended a preview
    the day before. Built within 4 mo, after President Ford in Feb. called on
    NASAto create a Bicentennial fair at Cape Canaveral, the exposition
    occupied 30 acres and 15 geodesic domes clustered around the mam-
    moth Vehicle Assembly Building, so large that the U.N. Secretariat could
    be mounted on wheels and rolled easily through its doors. “The message
    from NASA, 16 other federal agencies, and a conglomeration of defense
    contractors,” said the Washington Post, was that America had spent
    her technology tax dollars well. The show was put together with
    $3 million in grants from the Dept. of Commerce, a $500 000 loan from
             budget, and an $800 000 advance from the KSC visitor center
    NASA’s
    account. Before it opened, the show was expected to draw 800 000 to
    2 million persons; in July, average daily attendance was about 5000, and
    expectations were reduced to 500 000 before the fair closed 7 Sept.

                                     107
May                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    Many Fla. attractions reported a drop in attendance this summer.
    ( W Post, 25 July 76, 6-5)
During May: Rockwell International Corp. awarded contracts for the Air
    Force B-1 strategic bomber program. On 18 May, Rockwell awarded a
    $2.4-million contract to Hamilton-Standard Division, United Tech-
    nologies Corp., for air conditioning and pressurization equipment and
    air-recirculation loops for the fourth B-1 in the 4-plane prototype
    program. The firm had supplied similar equipment for 3 earlier B-1s. On
    24 May, Rockwell awarded a $1.8-million subcontract to Martin Mari-
    etta Aerospace for tail assemblies, consisting of 2 horizontal stabilizers
    and a single vertical stabilizer, for the fourth B-1 prototype aircraft.
    Martin Marietta had supplied stabilizers for the other 3 B- 1s. Rockwell,
    system contractor on the B-1 program, had developed the B-1 to
    modernize the strategic bomber force; its advantage over previous heavy
    bombers was the design ability to avoid enemy defense by flying at nearly
    sonic speed at treetop height to avoid radar detection. The first 2
    prototypes were in flight test, and the third was scheduled to fly later in
    1976. (Rockwell Releases LA-3, LA-4)
* SpaceJlight, publication of the British Interplanetary Society, announced
    that Soviet authorities after a 2-yr delay had released a photograph of
    Capella-the brightest star in the constellation Auriga-obtained by the
    “Orion 2” observatory aboard Soyuz 13. Capella is a yellow giant star
    150 times as luminous as the sun and 47 light-years away. Soviet
    scientists believed they had found a “new association of stars” in the
    several dozen hot stars of extremely low radiation discovered around
    Capella; they claimed this was the first time in the history of astronomy
    that a telescope had obtained a spectrogram of a planetary nebula-a
    huge gaseous formation with a high-temperature star at the center-and
    had obtained pictures of a known star with a gaseous envelope rich in




Third Century America, sole Bicentennial exposition paid for b y the U.S. government,
opened to the public 30 May 1976 at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA 76-H-445)

                                       108
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        May
      silicon. The Orion 2 equipment could make precision study of stellar
      objects in the ultraviolet spectrum and provide spectrograms of stars of
      13th magnitude “to extend the limits set by the American Skylab, whose
      crews took pictures of stars down to 7.5th magnitude,” the Russians said.
      (Spacejight, May 1976, 177)
*   The National Aeronautic Association reported that Karl Striedieck and
      L. Roy McMaster were jointly claiming a world soaring record for out-
      and-return distance of 1299 km, for flights they each made on 17 March
      along the Allegheny Mountains. Striedieck, an Air National Guard pilot
      from Port Matilda, Pa., flew in a Schleicher AS-Wl7 sailplane from Lock
      Haven, Pa., to Mendota, Va., and back, on course for 11 hr averaging
      more than 117 kph, claiming by this flight the world out-and-return
      record for the fifth time. McMaster, an accountant from Elmira Heights,
      N.Y., flew the same course in a Schempp-Hirth Standard Cirrus sail-
      plane, landing about an hour later than Striedieck. If approved by NAA
      and the Federation Aeronautique Internationale, the world-record claims
      would give McMaster a U.S. National Standard Class record for out-and-
      return distance; Striedieck‘s AS-W 17 would not qualify under standard-
      class rules. (NAA Newsletter, May 1976, 3)




                                      109
                                 June 1976

1June: Recently published criticism by columnist John Keats of “a modest NASA
      effort to provide meals for elderly people” not only “managed to mis-
      understand just about every aspect of what we are doing” but also “put
      down the elderly and [raised] my ire in the process,” astronaut Joseph P.
      Kerwin wrote in a letter to the New York Times. Kerwin pointed out that
      the NASA program was‘a response to the Texas Governor’s committee on
      Aging, which had asked the agency for help in developing good-tasting
      easy-to-prepare and easy-to-deliver meals for people not reached by pro-
      grams such as Meals on Wheels or group meals sponsored by Congress in
      various city centers. Kerwin said NASA’s     engineers “know a little about
      packaging and shelf life,” and “we care because we have relatives who are
      old, and because we’ll be old ourselves soon-if we’re lucky.” The tech-
      nology being used to do a job for the old was good, Kerwin concluded, “but
      it’s the caring of which I am most proud.” (NYI’, 1 June 76, 34)
*   During its 3 most active yr, NASA had awarded only 19%of its procurement
      funding to concerns in the industrialized Northeast, according to a Library
      of Congress study commissioned by Rep. Michael J. Harrington (D-Mass.),
      whereas the Sunbelt states-ranging from Maryland to Texas-received
      33% of the total awards. Of $8.7 billion spent by NASA in procurement
      contracts for 1968, 1971, and 1975, the Northeast received $1.7 billion
      and southern regions received $2.9 billion, the report said. “While the
      aggregate populations in these combined regions are roughly comparable,”
      Harrington said, “the NASA procurement contracts run almost 2 to 1
      against us . . . NASA’s contract award procedures now join that long and
      growing list of federally funded activities which discriminate against the
      industrialized Northeast states.” (NJrl: 2 June 76, 40)
*   NASA announced an agreement with the Indian Space Research Organization
      (ISRO) to add a solar-energyexperiment to the cooperative satellite instruc-
      tional television experiment (SITE) now under way using Ats 6, the applica-
      tions technology satellite. In May, ISRO was sent 2 solar arrays capable of
      producing 260 watt-hr of power a day under Indian sunlight conditions; the
      arrays would provide electricity to run 2 of the SITE TV receivers during the
      4 hr each day that Indian programming would be broadcast to some 5000
      villages using Ats 6. When India’s National Committee for Space Research
      studied power alternatives for the SITE terminals in 1969, solar cells were
      used almost exclusively in spacecraft and were considered too expensive for
      use on the ground; since that time, demand had increased sharply, the price
      had come down, and the sharp rise in petroleum prices had made the price
      of solar power more attractive. Although current cost of a solar-power
      system for a SITE terminal was estimated as $31 1 per yr (26%higher than
      the $247 cost of kerosene generators), research and production should

                                       111
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
June

    bring the cost down to about $139 a yr by 1979, while the price of
    kerosene-generatedelectricity could well be higher. Also, arrays from solar
    cells could be produced in India and other developing countries by using
    existing technology, which would add to the advantages of solar power for
    use throughout the world.
        Solar power had proved desirable for use in areas not having central
    power stations; the solar-power systems were simple to install, had no
    moving parts, and needed only cleaning of array surfaces and maintenance
    of electrolyte levels as operational maintenance. NASA’s    Lewis Research
    Center had demonstrated a solar array as a power source for an Ats 6
    ground station last year; the India project would be one of many conducted
    by L R C to support the U.S. Energy Research and Development Administra-
    tion (ERDA) in demonstrating terrestrial applications of solar-cell-generated
    electricity. An ISRO engineer would visit LeRC for training in assembly and
    operation of the solar arrays. (NASA Release 76-95)
2 June: NASA announced selection of IBM Corp., Gaithersburg, Md., for award
    of a $24-million 44-mo cost-plus-award-fee contract to supply a Space
    Shuttle data-processing complex for the mission control center at John-
    son Space Center. The complex would consist of 3 computers and periph-
    eral equipment for support of the Shuttle program; work to be performed
    would include design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of
    the computer complex and associated software. Control Data Corp. of
    Minneapolis also submitted a proposal. (NASA Release 76-104; JSC Re-
    lease 76-37)
  The USSR would probably put men on the moon within 10 yr to do more
    ambitious exploration than that done by US. astronauts, according to a
    report on Soviet space programs 1971-1975 by the Science Policy
    Research Division of the Library of Congress’s Congressional Research
    Division. Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, 11, chief of the Science Policy Research
    Division, stated in the report that the USSR did not abandon lunar plans
    when Apollo 11 got to the moon in July 1969, but that the Soviet
                                                                .
    program had been plagued with “hardware and systems . . quite inad-
    equate by our standards.” In a summary of Dr. Sheldon’s report, the
     Washington Star noted his statement that the “race for the moon” was
    closer than many believed at the time; “the Soviets probably wanted to
    send the first manned flight around the moon by November 1967, when
    a test failed.” Although a Soviet Apollo would probably not appear for
    the next 3 yr, Dr. Sheldon said, “within the decade there will probably
    be a Soviet landing on the moon that will be a generation beyond the
    Apollo flights . . . .” Describing the extensive Soviet military uses of
    space in addition to scientific and economic purposes, the report noted
    “the seriousness and steadiness with which the Russians are adding to
    their space facilities and their space operations, building versatility and
    experience in depth.” The report did not mention the absence of this
    element in the u.s., the Star noted. The report would be published later
    in 1976 by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences,
    for which it was prepared. (VStar, 2 June 76, A-3)


                                      112
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         June

3 June: NASA announced plans to roll out the first of 2 rotor systems research
    aircraft (RSRA) June at the Sikorsky Aircraft Division in Conn. The
                      7
    RSRA, capable of conventional cruise flight as well as typical helicopter
    performance, was the product of a joint NASA-Army research program
    to reduce rotor noise and vibration-with attendant high maintenance
    costs-and improve performance and cruise speed of future civil and
    military helicopters. The RSRA was the first helicopter designed with
    research capability in mind; devices in the main rotor-support structure
    would permit accurate measurement of rotor forces in flight, and force-
    measurement systems were also incorporated in the wing, tail rotor, and
    auxiliary engine to permit measurement and control of the lift and drag
    of the rotor system. The Army, world’s leading user of helicopters, would
    make the RSRA available to the U.S. helicopter industry for rotor-systems
    tests; most of the technology would also be applicable to civil vehicles.
    NASA’s would be to meet predictions of increased usage in the civil
             goal
    helicopter industry to enable the US. to compete favorably in the growing
    world market. (NASA Release 76-105)
4 June: Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $40 214 contract
    extension of 12 mo to Ky. State Univ. for continuing its studies of the
    effects of oxygen atmospheres on animals. The animal under study was
    the vinegar fly-Drosophila melanogaster-which was grown and tested
    under 5%, 20%, and 60% oxygen concentrations (normal oxygen con-
    tent of earth’s atmosphere is 2 1%). Studies over 2 yr showed that, at the
    5% and 20% oxygen levels, survival rates of the initial generation of the
    flies were the same. Flies in a 60% oxygen environment had a survival
    rate like that of the flies in the 20% environment, for up to 20 days; after
    20 days, flies in the 60% atmosphere died. Tissue studies indicated that
    exposure to a 60% oxygen environment resulted in physical changes,
    including accelerated aging and problems in the nervous system. The
    contract extension would permit studies of the mortality, fertility, and
    gene frequencies of the flies over 10 or more generations. The data would
    aid in establishing proper oxygen content in manned spacecraft atmos-
    pheres during future manned missions, and in selecting humans to par-
    ticipate in manned missions and in deep-sea dives. (KSC Release 198-76)
0 A fully metallic replica of the Spacelab-called       a “hard” mockup-had
     begun assembly near Bremen, West Germany, at the plant of ERNO, a
    subsidiary of VFw-Fokker and prime contractor for the Spacelab. The
     role of the replica was to ensure that all nonelectrical elements of the
     complex craft would be compatible; 4 additional Spacelabs would be
     constructed, including the flight unit, only one of which would be con-
     structed. The next model would be the “high fidelity” model, to be built
     after final design details are agreed on later in 1976; it would be used for
     crew training. The next-Engineering Mockup 1-would be sent to the
     U.S. in 1978 for fitting into the Shuttle. The flight unit would be sched-
     uled for shipment to Kennedy Space Center a year later; finally, En-
     gineering Mockup 2 would be built and kept in Europe to help members
     of the European Space Agency (ESA) prepare missions over the 10-yr
     operational period. The single flight version, designed to make at least 50

                                      113
June                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

     flights, would carry a wide range of scientific and technological ex-
     periments for which the experimenters would be expected to pay a fee.
     The Europeans hoped to modify this policy in view of their nearly
     $400 million investment in the project. (YW,June 76, A-15)
                                                         4
7 June: NASA announced selection of Computer Sciences Corp. of Falls
     Church, Va., for negotiation of a 2-yr $6 million cost-plus-award-fee
     contract to provide technical support services at the National Space
     Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss. The contractor would
     provide support services for NASA’s     on-site launch-vehicle and rocket-
     engine static testing and certification programs, and for NASA and other
     resident agencies working in space and earth-environment programs.
     (NASA Release 76-1 11)
8 June: The communications Research Centre (CRC)of the Canadian govern-
     ment’s Communications Department in Ottawa announced successful
     demonstration of a new satellite-aided search-and-rescue concept that
     could reduce time, fuel-dollar, and other costs associated with con-
     ventional ways of finding downed aircraft. The demonstration was funded
     by the Canadian Department of National Defence. The project, begun in
     May 1975, used the Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation’s Oscar 6
     satellite with simulated distress signals to show that crash sites in
     Canada-and elsewhere in the world-could be pinpointed with accu-
     racies as good as 1.6 km, generally within 3 km, in as little as 15 to
     20 min after the spacecraft first heard the signal. The conventional
     emergency locator transmitter (ELT) mandatory for aircraft in Canada
     and the U.S. would automatically signal on crash impact, as designed,
     providing a signal on the international distress frequency of 121.5 hz for
     at least 100 hr for search-and-rescue aircraft to home into. The search
     range until now had been within 50 km of a crash site, flying crisscross
     patterns involving many planes and dozens of costly as well as risky flying
     hours.
         The satellite system would depend on two things: highly precise orbit
     predictions (knowledge of the satellite’s exact position at any instant) and
     sophisticated computer processing of distress signals relayed to a ground
     station. The system works by measuring the Doppler shift in the ELT
     signal frequency as the satellite at about 1100 km altitude passes over
     the crash site; locations of about 60 “crashes” simulated by transmitters
     as far away as Winnipeg had been fixed by processing Oscar 6 signals
     with increasing degrees of accuracy. An operational system would in-
     clude 3 satellites with a design lifetime of 7 to 10 yr, with total spacecraft
     and launch costs about $30 million. When the satellite nearest to a crash
     site appeared over the visible horizon, it would alert ground stations that
     it had received an alarm; 15 min later, at the conclusion of its pass, an
     immediate fix accurate within 112 km would be possible, and a position
     fixing the site within 3 km would be delivered within 2 to 15 min
     depending on the capacity of the computer. A $3 million annual cost over
      10 yr would be only a small part of what Canada was now spending on
     aerial searches. (CDC release 8 June 76)


                                       114
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        June
  Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had used aerial thermal-
0
    scanning techniques to locate high heat-loss areas as part of its energy
    resources management program to reduce energy consumption agency-
    wide. The Lewis Research Center had made thermal scanning flights for
    all NASA centers, and MSFC had been scanned twice, once in October 1975
    and again in February 1976, using a C-47 aircraft with onboard scan-
    ners that recorded on digital tape the average temperature of each area
    covered. Fed into a computer, the digital tape produced printouts and
    live mosaic maps projected on a television monitor to show areas where
    excessive steam-line losses occurred and to identify buildings losing
    excessive heat through roof structures. The MSFC facilities office vali-
    dated the data through visual inspection of steam lines and roof insu-
    lation, and issued work requests for repair and replacement of insulation
    in 88 steam-line locations. Longer range action was planned to repair and
    replace deteriorated roofing and replace sections of the steam lines. (MSFC
    Release 76- 104)
9 June: NASA launched Marisat 2, second in a series of ComSat maritime
    communications satellites, at 8:09 pm EDT from the Eastern Test Range
    on a Delta vehicle, into a transfer orbit with apogee of 36 924 km,
    perigee of 185 km, and 26O inclination. The apogee boost motor fired
     11 June would put the spacecraft into a 36 000-km-altitude syn-
    chronous orbit at 176’E over the Pacific. Marisat was designed to
    transmit voice, data, facsimile, and telex messages to and from ships at
    sea, through special stations in Conn. and Calif. interconnected with
    existing domestic land networks; initially, the system would be used by
    the U.S. Navy, until its requirements terminated in the late 1970s. The
    cylindrical satellite, weighing 655 kg at liftoff and 317 kg in orbit,
    measured 2.1 m in diameter and was 3.6 m long. Like Marisat 1 , which
    had been operating over the Atlantic since its launch 19 February, it
    carried 3 UHF channels for government use, activated or deactivated by
    ground command, and 2 4-hz channels operating in the L- and C-bands
    respectively to carry ship-to-shore and shore-to-ship signals; the full
    ship-to-shore capacity would always be available independent of govern-
    ment use of the UHF channels, which would use separate receiving
    facilities. (NASA Release 76-83; MOR 492-205-76-02 [prelaunch]
     7 June 76, [postlaunch] 14 Oct 76)
0 Johnson Space Center announced “the most successful balloon flight of its
     type ever conducted” when a football-field-sized balloon carried a
    scientific instruments package at a 40-km altitude across the central
    Texas night sky for 12 hr to gather information on far distant giant and
    super-giant stars. The 589-kg package known as BUSS-for balloon-
    borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer-gathered data on 16 separate
    stars, including Arcturus, a giant star in constellation Bootes; super-giant
     Antares (alpha Scorpii); Vega (alpha Lyrae); and Spica (alpha Virginis),
     super-hot star and one of the brightest observed during the flight. Of
    special interest was super-giant Deneb in constellation Cygnus, 1400
    light years distant, whose light recorded by BUSS was emitted before the
    Anglo-Saxons settled in England; Deneb was so large that, if the sun were

                                     115
June                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      located in its center, the earth would orbit the sun entirely within the
      star’s outer limits. The BUSS payload was the culmination of a 3-yr
      international collaboration between Jscand the Space Research Labora-
      tory of Utrecht in the Netherlands. Dr. Yoji Kondo of JSC was U.S.
      coprincipal investigator, with Dr. Thomas H. Morgan and Dr. Jerry L.
      Modisette of Houston Baptist University; the Dutch team was led by
      Dr. Cees de Jager. Purpose of the balloon flights in a series of star studies
      that began in 1971 was to evaluate the experiment systems for use on
      the Space Shuttle; the BUSS package was designed to obtain data on
      spectral variations of a variety of stars and aid scientists in determining
      their structure and evolution. Previous flights had obtained some infor-
      mation but only a fiftieth of the spectral range covered by the BUSS
      payload. The package was landed by a parachute about 26 m in di-
      ameter, similar to those used on the Apollo command module; the pay-
      load, chute, and balloon were recovered between Abilene and Ft. Worth
      by NASA engineers who returned the material to Houston. The data would
      be analyzed by the U.S. team and by the Dutch scientists, who had
      returned to Holland, in preparation for another balloon flight scheduled
      for the fall of 1976. (JSC Release 76-39)
    Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of 11 industrial firms to
0
      negotiate for award of contracts totaling $200 000 for marketable solar-
      heating and cooling subsystems-solar collectors and control systems-
      to be tested and evaluated for inclusion in complete solar-heating systems
      that would be installed in residences and commercial buildings through-
      out the U.S. Data gathered from these installations would be used in a
      national solar-energy development program administered by the Energy
      Research and Development Administration (ERDA), for which MSFC is
      managing the heating and cooling demonstration. Of the 11 companies
      selected, 8 were small businesses. The companies were: Northrup, Inc.,
      Hutchins, Tex.; Rho Sigma, Van Nuys, Calif.; Solar Energy Products
      co., Avon Lake, 0.; Solar Energy Systems, Inc., Pennsauken, N.J.;
      Solargenics, Inc., Chatsworth, Calif.; Solaron Corp., Commerce City,
      Colo.; Sunworks, Inc., Guilford, Conn.; Ying Manufacturing Corp., Gar-
      dena, Calif.; Honeywell, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn.; Libbey-Owens-Ford
      Co., Toledo, 0.;and Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, Colo. (NASA Release
      76-109; MSFC Release 76-106)
    Lewis Research Center announced the first of a number of solar-cell demon-
0
      strations it would conduct as part of the national photovoltaic conversion
      program directed by the Energy Research and Development Adminis-
      tration: a solar-powered refrigerator, standard-size camper’s model,
      fitted with 3 panels of photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight into elec-
      trical energy. Designed for use in remote locations, the solar cells would
      run the refrigerator during daylight hours and charge conventional
      automobile batteries located under the unit; the batteries would power
      the refrigerator during darkness and on overcast days. With the cooper-
      ation of the Interior Department’s National Park Service, the refrig-
      erator was being used for perishable foods at a trail-construction camp
      at Isle Royale National Park in Michigan, a roadless area near northern

                                       116
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          June

      Lake Superior accessible only by boat or floatplane and typical of places
      that have no regular electric power. The solar-cell arrays, although
      relatively expensive, cost less to use in remote locations than the fuel and
      transportation would cost for alternative power sources. (NASA Release
      76-1 10)
    Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, named the Ames Research
0
      Center to lead a program to strengthen helicopter research and devel-
      opment and serve as a focal point for industry participation and program
      management. A special helicopter management advisory group had made
      a presentation to Fletcher 28 May reviewing research needs and stress-
      ing the need for improvements in helicopters if the US. industry were to
      get a fair share of the market. Overall direction of the program would
      come from ARC; Lewis Research Center would conduct research on
      propulsion, and Langley Research Center would do research in struc-
      tures and materials, avionics, and noise. ARC would also conduct research
      in aeromechanics, including technology integration and large-scale test-
      ing and simulation. (NASA Release 76-1 12)
    Successful completion of the Da Vinci 11 scientific balloon flight by 4 crew
0
      members was announced by the Energy Research and Development
      Administration. Launched west of St. Louis on 8 June, the balloon had
      flown over the city during the day and moved eastward across the
      Mississippi River toward evening; it had flown across 111. and landed near
      Griffin, Ind., a distance of more than 240 km in 24 hr. Purpose of the
      flight-a joint project of ERDA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
      Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency-was to fol-
      low industrial and urban air pollution across the surrounding countryside
      and to record its changing concentration and chemistry. The crew re-
      ported excellent scientific data, especially on concentrations of sulfur
      dioxide. The crew, its 3m-square gondola, and more than 900 kg of
      scientific equipment landed safely and in good condition. (ERDA Release
      76- 170)
    An article in Moscow’s Krasnaya Zvezda reviewed the increasing use of
0
      satellites for military communications, especially in the U.S. Space com-
      munications had become available in Britain, France, the Federal Repub-
      lic of Germany, Canada, Brazil, and Norway, as well as other countries,
      and though basically designed for commercial purposes “there is no
      doubt” that most of the channels were used by the military, the article
      said. As an example, the national system of space communications in
      Iran was said to be developed to provide guidance for combat aircraft.
      Not satisfied with the potential of commercial systems, the Pentagon and
      the NATO command had established communications satellites exclusively
      for military purposes, the article said, quoting U S . News and World
      Report as saying that since 1960 “the Pentagon has sent 83 commu-
      nications satellites . . . into orbit but has not got what it wanted. Of all
      these satellites only 1 3 still continue in orbit, and not all 13 are func-
      tioning normally.” The Soviet magazine also pointed out that 6 launches
      of DSCS-2 satellites had been planned, but 2 had been lost during launch
      and 2 more had broken down in orbit; the 2 currently operating were

                                       117
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
June

    over the Pacific and the Atlantic at about 36 000 km, and another 6 had
    been ordered, the first pair due for launch in spring 1977. As press
    statements showed that two thirds of the military communications with
    foreign countries were going through commercial systems, “foreign ob-
    servers” had concluded that the military systems had proven less reliable
    than Intelsat; the Pentagon had explained that requirements on military
    satellites were considerably higher, as they had to work with small mobile
    stations in widely scattered locations, needed increased protection
    against jamming, and must be durable to withstand possible combat
    effects. The Russian commentator said the U.S. had begun developing a
    third generation of military satellites-the DSCS-3-with     launch sched-
    uled for 1981, and that these new spacecraft would be powered by
    radioisotope thermoelectric generators with longer working life and
    greater capacity. Elimination of bulky solar panels would also make the
    new craft more difficult to detect in orbit. After describing the Fleetsat-
    com and Afsatcom systems, the article pointed out that “the creation of
    a manned multipurpose transport spacecraft” [the U.S. Space Shuttle]
    would have a major impact on communications-satellite systems; such
    spacecraft would be able to launch large mass and capacity comsats,
    eliminating “complex operations and devices [needed to prepare] the
    satellite for work following its injection into orbit,” and would simplify
    technical servicing and repair of the comsats while in orbit. Although
    many technical problems remained, space facilities had become the basis
    of military communications abroad, the article concluded. (FBIS, Kras-
    naya Zvezda, 26 May 76, 3)
10 June: Johnson Space Center announced delivery of the first of 2 training
    aircraft to Ellington AFB, Tex., for JSC’s use in training Space Shuttle
    crews. The aircraft (STA) was a modified Grumman twin-engine Gulf-
    stream 11 jet designed to simulate flight characteristics of the Space
    Shuttle orbiter, using thrust-reverser engines and direct lift control to
    vary the jet plane’s dynamics to resemble those of the orbiter. After JSC
    personnel conducted a receiving inspection on the plane, it would be
    returned to Grumman at Bethpage, N.Y., for installation of an electric
    aileron-trim system; this modification should take about a week. The
    second STA, scheduled for delivery in late July, would remain at Bethpage
    to ensure that the plane could duplicate the various landing flight modes
    of the orbiter during the flight tests. Remaining tests would verify STA’S
    ability to match orbiter trajectory during the period from 10-11 km
    altitude through touchdown and would check out recent engineering
    changes. (NASA Release 76- 108; JSC Release 76-38)
11June: A 2-wk experiment to observe the Gulf Stream about 580 km east
    of NASA’s   Wallops Flight Center used a combination of spacecraft, air-
    craft, and water craft to check the ability of remote sensors to measure
    the magnitude and boundaries of the Gulf Stream from space. Gulf
    Stream measurements would aid in planning more effective use of coastal
    waters, as in cooling nuclear power plants, or in constructing offshore
    drilling rigs or airports located on manmade islands. Scientists also
    wanted more data about the Gulf Stream, which carries heat energy that

                                     118
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         June
     influences the global balance of energy in the atmosphere and the ocean,
     affecting weather and climate as well as coastal water movement, besides
     carrying nutrients important to the fishing industry. Traditional methods
     using closely spaced ship stations or buoys to obtain data had proved
     inadequate for studying fast-changing or large-scale phenomena. Sat-
     ellite measurements used in the experiment included infrared signatures
     that identified the Gulf Stream boundary from space photographs. A
     precision altimeter on NASA’s 3 (geodynamic experimental ocean
                                     Geos
     satellite) measured surface deviations in the ocean within 20 cm, from
     which velocity of a current could be calculated; the experiment also used
     the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 4 weather
     satellite. A C-54 research plane from Wallops carried instruments on 3
     flights to measure the current by observing wave interactions; surface
     measurements were taken by the research vessel Advance 11 from Cape
     Fear Technical Institute at Wilmington, N.C., manned by ocean scientists
     from N.C. State University at Raleigh. The project was part of a scientific
     research task directed by NASA Hq’s Office of Applications. (NASA Release
     76-1 15; WFC Release 76-7)
    Detente, to be meaningful to U.S. scientists, must include progress toward
0
     more intercommunication and openness, said Dr. Bruce Murray of Cal-
     Tech and Merton E. Davies of RAND Corp. in an article in Science
     magazine. Noting that for nearly 2 decades the space program of the U.S.
     and the USSR were bound together through rivalry, competition, and-
     most recently-cooperation, the authors found it appropriate upon com-
     pletion of the Apollo-Soyuz mission to review relationships between the
      2 countries and focus on areas of possible common interest. The inter-
      relationship with the Soviet space effort had stimulated both societies and
     had influenced the character of individual programs, the authors said.
      Future joint activities could take three forms: data exchange, cooper-
     ative experiments, and joint operations. Examples cited were exchanges
      of weather-satellite pictures, lunar soil and rock samples, and limited
      data on Mars obtained during simultaneous missions in 1971; the US.
     biological experiments carried on Cosmos 782, launched and returned
      to earth in 1975; and the joint operation of Apollo-Soyuz, which demon-
      strated the practicality of such missions despite differences in language,
      institutions, technology, and style. Joint scientific progress in space
      would depend on broader social objectives and activity, supported by
      popular enthusiasm for intellectual and generally human adventure, the
      authors said. (Science, 11 June 76, 1067)
    The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite
0
      Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The
      Hague 19-27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station
     to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’S
      global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m
      antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller
      stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control,
      monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations.
      Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries

                                       119
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
June

    that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some
    years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier(SCPC)
    equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis
    instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss
    associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation,
    which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service
    only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for
    international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the
    satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to
    receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of
    traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground
    stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT
    Release 76-17-1)
11-30 June: The scheduled Fourth of July landing of Viking 1 on the
    planet Mars was briefly complicated by 2 problems announced in the news
    media 11 June: a mechanical problem with a leaky valve in the Viking’s
    fuel tank, and a threatened strike by about 200 technicians at a desert
    tracking station at Goldstone, Calif., one of 3 in the world that relayed
    signals to and from the Viking. Neither proved insuperable; by 1 8 June,
    John D. Goodlette, chief Viking engineer, was describing the mission as
    “shooting right down the pickle barrel.” “If we do nothing to the
    spacecraft from here on out,” he added, “we’d miss our target by less
    than 60 miles [95 km].” Wushington Post staff writer Thomas O’Toole
    explained that the target was a spot about 9600 km from Mars, where
    the onboard braking engine would slow the spacecraft from about
     1 4 200 kph to about 9600 kph, putting it into an elliptical orbit to survey
    possible landing sites.
         Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would
    photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other
    instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars
    atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the
    planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The
    2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at
    Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since
    launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot
    for their &ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first US.
    try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made
    5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera
    spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1
    picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and
    the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than
    300 kph.
         After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight direc-
    tors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered
    again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The
    firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a
    690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL
    said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball
    in Los Avgeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden
                                      120
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          June

   in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around
   Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight
   directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area
   20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land
   4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life
   that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S.
   Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said
   that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry
   valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their
   banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors.
   Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years
   of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and
   his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules,
   signs of a once-existent lifs on Mars.
       A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June,
   showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up-
   parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on
   earth, would reach from Calif. to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km
   deep, 6 4 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km
   wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on
   earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only
   350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with
   haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of
   the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days.
       Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday,
   2 1 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin
   to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential
   obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin an-
   nounced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing
   area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous
   to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras
   could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet
   invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance
   of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars,
   some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Pre-
   vious closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from
   Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more
   obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly.
       The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an
   area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the
   original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at
   Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened,
   the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August.
   Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it
   were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away)
   arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting
   simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were
   insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously,
   and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required
                                     121
June                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times
    that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other
    alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by
    the rugged Martian terrain”-the primary landing area being heavily
    pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike
    features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon.
         On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest
    of Chryse-the “northwest territory”-after pictures of the prime site
    showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a
    landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it
    offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The
    alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting
    scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released
    29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked
    as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the
    plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf.
    Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with
    lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale”
    according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding . . . on
    earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few
    kilometers across.”
         Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instru-
    ments on Viking registered differences of more than 6OoC (140’F)
    between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H.
    Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmos-
    phere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little
    water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet
    gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the
    atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when
    day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it
    measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence
    when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the
    atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,”
    according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for
    its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for
     Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites
    for that spacecraft also. (WPost, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3;
    20 June, A-1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A-17; 2 8 June, A-3; 29 June,
    C-4; 30 June, A-27; NYT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av W7c, 28 June
    76, 14)
13 June: Photographs from US. remote-sensing satellites had revealed the
    existence of water, oil, uranium, and other minerals in the Egyptian
    Sahara and the Sinai peninsula, the Washington Post reported. Egyp-
    tian scientist Ahmed Abdel Hady, head of an Egyptian-American scien-
     tific team in charge of a remote-sensing project that had been receiving
    data from satellites since 1972, said in an A P interview that the satellites
     revealed enough water in the Sinai desert “to turn most of it green.”
     (Most of Sinai was still occupied by the Israelis, who seized it in 1967.)

                                     122
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        June

    The Egyptian government, working in cooperation with Okla. State
    Univ. and the Univ. of Mich., had an annual budget of $1.2 million for
    study of the untapped resources, Abdel Hady said.
        Although the satellite data had shown that highlands in northern Sinai
    and the coastal strip of Wadi el Arish, totaling more than 770 km:,
    concealed a huge water potential, he declined to go into details because
    “I don’t want to make it difficult for Egypt when it negotiates the next
    Israeli pullout.” However, he described photographs of an area about
    1350 km’! in Sinai that showed three different areas rich in petroleum
    and natural gas: the Gulf of Suez, with oil reserves already proven; the
    Mediterranean offshore area in northern Sinai, not yet explored; and q
    large area in southern Sinai marked by sedimentary rocks carrying
    natural gas. Uranium was also detected in northwest and southern Sinai,
    and west central Sinai contained huge amounts of silica that could lead
    to a glass industry, Abdel Hady said. Besides the desert potential, he
    added, the images also showed significant food-growing potential in a
    previously unnoted fertile area measuring about 965 km2 near the Nile
    basin; the images were also used to study the Qattara Depression in the
    desert west of the Nile, site of a huge proposed hydroelectric project.
    (W Post, 13 June 76, G-2)
14 June: Marshall Space Flight Center-lead NASA center for Spacelab
    development-announced that the full-scale model of the Spacelab mod-
    ule developed by the European Space Agency for orbital research and
    applications missions in the Shuttle orbiter had been shipped from Ger-
    many and was on display at the U.S. Bicentennial exposition on science
    and technology at Kennedy Space Center, open until 7 Sept. The Space-
    lab access tunnel and pallet section manufactured at Huntsville for MSFC
    had been shipped to KSC for assembly with the module. The pressurized
    module would be used by U.S. and European scientists working in space
    in a shirtsleeve environment; the unpressurized pallet would contain
    unmanned equipment such as telescopes, antennas, and instruments
    requiring direct exposure to space; and the access tunnel would be used
    by the crew to transfer from the orbiter to the module and return.
    Spacelab was designed to be fully reusable for an operational lifetime of
    50 missions or 5 yr, whichever is reached first; nominal mission duration
    would be 7 days, but could be extended as long as 30 days. Spacelab was
    managed jointly by ESA, NASA Hq, and MSFC. (MSFC Release 76-1 10)
0 The Air Force announced that its third prototype B-1 bomber successfully
    completed its maiden flight, having left Air Force Plant 42 at Palmdale,
    Calif., at 3:37 pm PDT and landed at nearby Edwards AFB after a flight
    of 2 hr 9 min. Since its rollout 11 May, the prototype built for USAF by
    Rockwell International’s B- 1 Division had undergone fuel and
    propulsion-system checkout, subsystem tests, low- and high-speed taxi
    tests, and a complete review of flight readiness. The B-1 was the first
    large swing-wing aircraft to complete a complex 8-mo series of struc-
    tural integrity testing so early in its design life. The third B-1’s primary
    flight-test objective was to acquire data to verify predicted design loads
    in test missions at both subsonic and supersonic speeds. Highest altitude

                                      123
June                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    reached during the maiden flight was about 3 km, with top speed at
    .45 mach. Crew members were Doug Benefield of Rockwell, pilot; AF Lt.
    Col. Ed McDowell, copilot; and Rockwell flight-test engineer Jack Bald-
    win, who was riding in the B-1 for the first time. (USAF release 14 June
    76)
15 June: Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., proposed a
    $1 billion program to muffle noisy jet engines and replace older planes
    with quieter new ones, the Washington Post reported. The proposed
    program, part of a comprehensive aviation-noise policy submitted to the
    Office of Management and Budget, would be paid for by a surcharge on
    airline tickets-probably 2%--that would go into an escrow fund to be
    used by the nation’s airlines over a 6- to 8-yr period. The “retrofit”
    program-most controversial part of the noise-abatement policy-
    would consist of modifying older 2- and 3-engine jets (such as the
    McDonnell-Douglas DC-9 and Boeing 727) by surrounding them with
    sound-absorbent materials to make them quieter. The fund could be used
    as part of the cost of replacing older 4-engine jets (the Boeing 707 and
    the McDonnell-DouglasDc-8) with newer, quieter planes. Although the
    Air Transport Association (ATA) representing most U.S. airlines had long
    favored replacement of the 4-engine planes, the Post said, it had vigo-
    rously opposed retrofit of 3-engine planes because the cost would out-
    weigh the benefits. Retrofit had been advocated by the Environmental
    Protection Agency, the Federal Aviation Administration, and many
    citizens’ groups to reduce noise levels around airports and take advan-
    tage of the useful life left in many of the older planes; however, the Post
    noted that opposition to retrofit in the administration had been based on
    expense, its possible contribution to inflation, and the fact that newer
    quieter planes would eventually solve the problem anyway. The Post
    quoted “no better than 50-50” chances that Congress would go along
    with providing public financing to help privately owned airlines make
    their planes quieter, according to a Capitol Hill source. Under Secretary
    Coleman’s proposal, the 8%surcharge on airfares now going into a trust
    fund for improving terminal and navigational facilities would be reduced
    by2%, which would go into the retrofit fund, so that no actual increase
    in ticket prices would occur. ( W Post, 1 5 June 76, A-3)
e Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar-simulator
    test facility, believed to be the largest of its kind in existence, to compare
    the efficiency of solar-energy collectors in MSFC’S program of assisting the
     Energy Research and Development Administration in its solar energy
    program. Designed to provide variable levels of energy similar to ground-
    level solar radiation, the simulator contained a lamp array with 405
    tungsten halogen 300-watt lamps paired with the same number of Fres-
    nel lenses to provide an illuminated area for solar collectors up to 1.2 by
     2.4 meters. After a 6-wk checkout of the lamp array, power equipment,
     and solar-collector fluid-flow systems, the simulator would serve to test
     solar-energy collectors that used either air or liquid as the heat-transfer
     medium. (MSFC Release 76-1 11)
e The Energy Research and Development Administration announced selec-
     tion of 2 firms, one in Mass. and the other in Calif., to study potential
                                      124
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        June

    wind-power use by utilities to generate electricity in their own localities.
    The JBF Scientific Corp., a small research company in Wilmhgton,
    Mass., would study potential wind-power use by the Cambridge Light Go.
    and the New Bedford Gas and Edison Light Co. in New England; the
    utilities would provide information about their power needs and other
    data. The Aerospace Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., would assess potential
    wind-power use by the Hawaiian Electric Co., which serves most of that
    state; the Univ. of Hawaii would also participate in the study. Besides
    examining the utilities and their power needs, the contractors would
    study other ways of generating electricity (such as coal and nuclear
    plants), comparing them with wind energy to see if conversion would be
    practical and economical. The regional studies would last 1 yr each and
    would cost about $500 000 overall. The resulting data would supply a
    model for utilities throughout the country to assess the use of wind
    energy in their own regions. (ERDA Release 76-180)
16 June: Western Union announced that it had signed a 7-yr contract with
    the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) for transmission services
    via the Westar satellite. Duration of the contract was a possible 15 yr.
    Contingent upon approval by the Federal Communications Commission,
    Western Union would begin 31 December 1978 to provide CPB with
    service on 3 fulltime fully protected transponders for $800 000 per
    transponder per yr, or $2.4 million annually, permitting CPB to offer
    national distribution of programs to 165 public-television stations
    through its manager, the Public Broadcasting Service (PBs). The contract
    would give CPB an option on a fourth Westar transponder and establish
    rates for both scheduled and unscheduled service, and anticipated sat-
    ellite distribution of radio programs to about 170 public radio stations
                                             Use of a 3- or 4-channel satellite
    through National Public Radio (NPR).
    system would serve many of the Congress’s policy goals for public
    broadcasting, CPB officials said: autonomy of local public stations, in-
    creased flexibility in programming, and lower cost of expanding public
    broadcasting coverage. (Western Union release, 16 June 76)
0 Dr. John L. McLucas, head of the Federal Aviation Administration, pre-
    dicted that the U.S. would produce a second-generation supersonic trans-
    port, probably in cooperation with the Europeans, as a followup to the
    Concorde program. Speaking at a luncheon of the Air Force Association
    and in a subsequent interview with the New York Times, Dr. McLucas
    said that Congress probably would enact legislation to sharply reduce
    aircraft noise over the next 6 to 10 yr by modifying and replacing present
    aircraft. Biggest question would be how much financial help the airlines
    would get to carry out the plan: McLucas predicted that the airlines
    would have to settle for loan guarantees rather than outright subsidy.
    Calling the aviation industry “an endangered species,” he said it was
    threatened by low profits, lack of capital for new equipment, and absence
    of a national aviation policy; he asked for more cooperation between
    industry and government, and exploration of joint projects with Euro-
                                                    .
    pean partners. “A joint effort to advance . . the design of the next-
    generation SST would be in keeping with this new spirit of international

                                     125
June                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

     cooperation,” he added. Dr. McLucas w s secretary of the Air Force
                                                 a
     until President Ford transferred him to head the FAA. (MT, 17 June
     76, 49)
1 7 June: NASA studies in the year past had shown that 5 of 6 types of products
     considered for space processing could be expected to become profitable,
     Dr. William R. Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told the
     subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Sen-
     ate’s Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s            space-
     processing program had deliberately pursued a policy of performing
     experiments on available missions and sponsoring formal experiments by
     members of the scientific community, Lucas said; the experiment pro-
     gram had been “reasonably representative” of the scientific potential
     that scientists foresaw for materials processing in space. Although avail-
     able mission capabilities had severely restricted what could be done, the
     program had included demonstrations of crystal growth, solidification of
     homogeneous mixtures of immersible materials, processing biological
     materials for medical application, and other phenomena relating to phys-
     ical metallurgy and fluid physics. Potentials identified with glasses and
     ceramics had not yet undergone experimentation.
         Citing the success of experiments in electrophoretic separation and
     crystal growth on the Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions, Lucas empha-
     sized the necessity of developing novel techniques for virtually every
     experiment; experience so far had justified the early interest in materials
     processing in space, although many lines of investigation had not been
     completed because of the program’s operational constraints. Wide re-
     sponse to the program both in the U.S. and abroad was evidence of the
     scientific community’s interest, he said. Next steps in development would
     be to finalize payloads for early Shuttle missions, then proceed with design
                                                                       .
     and development; “We expect to proceed with research . . both
     through the SPAR [rocket] project and through an expanded program of
     ground-based research,” he added. “We shall need to reemphasize the
                              .
     ground-based program . . to replenish the fund of new ideas in space
     processing and build a base of technical support with the breadth that
     Shuttle experiment operations will need.” (MSFC Release 76-1 12)
18 June: NASA launched the Gravitational Probe-A (GP-A) from Wallops Flight
     Center at 7:41 am EDT on a scout vehicle into a trajectory with peak
     altitude of 889 km and total flight time of 6960 sec. The 102.5-kg probe
     was designed to measure the gravitational red shift predicted by the
     equivalence principle laid down by Einstein in 1907 as the cornerstone
     of the general theory of relativity: GP-A would directly determine the
     effect of gravitation on time by comparing the rate of a rocket-borne
     clock to an identical clock on earth. During the flight, the probe clock
     would be in a weaker gravitational field than the identical clock on earth;
     as the probe clock rose through increasingly weaker gravity to its max-
     imum altitude, it would appear to run increasingly faster, and its rate
     would slow as it returned to the stronger gravity at lower altitudes. The
     experiment required not only extremely accurate telemetry throughout
     the probe’s ascent and descent, but also an extremely accurate set of

                                      126
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      June
   clocks; those used were atomic-hydrogen masers of extraordinary sta-
   bility, according to Dr. R.F.C. Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical
   Observatory, principal investigator. (“Maser” is an acronym for micro-
   wave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.) The clocks were
   expected to provide measurement accuracy within 5 thousandths of 1%
   (5 x           of the predicted effect. The experiment and its support
    systems performed normally, but Dr. Vessot said that 1 to 3 mo of data
    reduction would be needed to determine whether the scientific objective
    had been met. (NASA   Release 76-106; MOR S-879-76-01 [prelaunch]
    1 4 June 76, [postlaunch] 2 3 June 76; MSFC Release 76-1 13)
  A 2-mo study this summer at the Ames Research Center would bring
    together a specially chosen panel of a dozen scientists--“authorities on
    every aspect of space exploration”-to make an in-depth examination of
    problems anticipated in the colonization of space. Sponsored by NASA, the
    group would also consider whether satellite power stations for earth could
    be built by space colonists. In a report by James Barron for the Washing-
    ton Star, Princeton physicist Gerard K. O’Neill detailed his ideas for a
    kilometer-plus-widecylinder with living quarters for 10 000 colonists on
    its outer rim, the length to be determined by the number of colonists
    desired; O’Neill emphasized that the colony could be ready by 1990
    using existing technology and materials mined from outer space. O’Neill
    last year took his theories to a NASA-sponsored study group at Stanford
    University that included 28 physicists, engineers, and social scientists;
    the panel recommended that the U.S. move toward the colonization of
    space, saying that it “would represent ‘cashing in’ on the scientific
    information returned to us by Apollo.” ( W S t a r , 18 June 76, A-1)
0 The USSR Venera 10 spacecraft, launched a year ago and in orbit around
    the planet Venus for the past 8 months, was continuing its research work
    although its companion, Venera 9, had ceased to function, a Tass broad-
    cast announced. Venus was passing behind the sun “from the point of
    view of an observer on earth,” and a radio beam sent to earth by Venera
     10 had passed only 1.5 million km from the sun’s surface. Analysis of
     Venera 10 signals had shown that streams of near-solar plasma were
    very heterogeneous and subject to rapid changes in time; also studied
    were the possibilities of receiving information and controlling spacecraft
    depending on conditions of radio beams passing near the sun. (FBIS,   Tass
    in English, 18 June 76)
18-30 June: Johnson Space Center announced its plan to use a space-
    environment simulation chamber to dry records and documents damaged
    in Houston’s flood 15 June. The first batch, scheduled to be dried
     19 June, consisted of medical records from Methodist Hospital and
    valuable irreplaceable books from the Contemporary Arts Museum, as
    well as museum records. The material would be put inside the chamber
    on shelves that would be heated to 48OC, and the chamber would be
    pumped to a vacuum; the process would take from 48 to 72 hr. The
    technique was pioneered by McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp. for the
    USAF when the latter’s records were water-damaged in a fire. A later
    announcement said the drying was successful and that JXwas in process

                                    127
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
June

    of drying material from St. Joseph’s Hospital and the Univ. of Houston’s
    law library. (JSC Release 76-42; JSC release 30 June 76)
20 June: The USSR launched Intercosmos 15 on 19 June, a Tass broadcast
    announced, as an example of “socialist countries’ cooperation” in space
    research. The spacecraft orbital parameters were 52 1-km apogee,
    487-km perigee, 74’ inclination, and 94.6-min period. Intercosmos 15
    was designed to “test new systems and units,” including a telemetry
    system developed and manufactured with the participation of specialists
    from Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the German Democratic
    Republic, as well as the USSR. Satellite data would be transmitted to
    receiving stations in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and the CDR. (FBIS, Tass
    in English, 20 June 76)
  An official Indian government press release broadcast from Bombay said
    that 2 Centaur rockets and 2 M-1008 rockets would be fired from the
    equatorial rocket-launching station at Thumba on 28 or 29 June, and
    1 July respectively. (FBIS, Samachar News Agency in English, 20 June
    7 6)
21 June: The US. Senate by unanimous vote of 88 ratified the multination
    convention on registration of objects launched into outer space. All 37
    countries now members of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful
    Uses of Outer Space-which drafted the convention-were expected to
    ratify it; France and Bulgaria had already ratified, and 24 nations
    including the USSR had signed it. Registration would be with the secretary
    general of the UN, reporting was mandatory, and the information to be
    provided “as soon as practicable” included the name of the launching
    state (or states), appropriate designator of the space object (or its regis-
    tration number), date and territory or location of the launch, basic orbital
    parameters (apogee, perigee, orbital period, inclination), and general
    functions of the space object. The convention embraced objects launched
    into earth orbit or into space transit-lunar or deep-space probes-but
    did not require reporting on objects in brief transit through outer space,
    such as sounding rockets or ballistic-missile test vehicles. The convention
    would supersede the voluntary system that had been in operation since
    1962; the U.S. State Department had told the Senate Foreign Relations
    Committee that, although nearly all countries launching objects into
    outer space had respected the voluntary system, there had never been
    agreement on the kinds of information to be supplied and the information
    conveyed to the secretary general had never been uniform.
        The committee’s only question regarding cooperation was the Peo-
    ple’s Republic of China, which had not reported on its outer space
    launchings; Senator Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.)had asked Secretary of State
    Henry A. Kissinger to find out if mainland China would register under the
    new convention. NASA had told the committee that the U.S. would not
    incur substantial costs from the convention’s requirement that partic-
    ipating states with space tracking facilities help in identifying a space
    object, when requested by another participant on the grounds that the
    object to be identified was “hazardous or deleterious.” NASA was already
    tracking nearly 5000 space objects, some as small as a dinner plate, and

                                     128
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         June

    knew which nation owned most of them. (NASA Ofc Legis. Affairs, report
    for 21 June 76; Av Wk, 2 8 June 76, 63)
* President Ford announced his intention to nominate Alan M. Lovelace,
            Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology,
    NASA’s
    to succeed George M. Low as Deputy Administrator. Lovelace had
    occupied his position since September 1974. Before coming to NASA, he
    had been director of research and development for the Air Force Systems
    Command at Wright-Patterson AFB, o., 1967-1972; director of science
    and technology for Air Force R&D, assigned to Andrews AFB; and acting
    Deputy Assistant Secretary for Research and Development for the Air
    Force in October 1973. The nomination required Senate confirmation,
    but no opposition was expected; if the Senate did not act by the end of
    the week, before its 4 July recess, confirmation might be delayed until
    after 19 July. (Pres Doc, 21 June 76, 1072; Av Wk, 2 8 June 76, 21;
    NASA Release 76- 118)
0 NASA would buy the Department of Defense’s 2 Space Shuttle orbiters if the
    administration would give NASA an extra $835 million or so for that
    purpose, Aerospace Daily reported after a meeting between George M.
    Low, departing NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Malcolm R. Currie,
    DOD’S chief of research and engineering. The 2 agencies reportedly
    agreed that the nation needed 5 orbiters-2 more than NASA had planned
    to buy-and that NASA should buy them. NASA Administrator James c.
    Fletcher and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were reported
    ready to meet to “firm up a proposal” to the Office of Management and
    Budget and to President Ford; OMB might contest the need for 5 orbiters,
    Aerospace Daily said. (Aero Daily, 21 June 76, 22)
22 June: Tass announced the launch of the Salyut 5 orbital scientific station
     (6
      under the program of studying the outer space.” Parameters were
    260-km apogee, 2 19-km perigee, 5 1.6’ inclination, and 89-min per-
    iod. Control posts inside the Soviet Union as well as vessels of the USSR
    Science Academy “sailing in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean” were
    tracking the flight, receiving telemetry, and controlling the station, the
    announcement said. Although the official announcement did not mention
    manned flights as part of the Salyut 5 program, the Washington Post
    reported that a Western specialist in Moscow had predicted the new
    station would be manned “sooner or later.” The Washington Star noted
    that 2 visiting cosmonauts-Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, who
    lived aboard Salyut 4 for 63 days last summer-speaking at an inter-
    national meeting in Philadelphia 2 wk ago said the new station would be
    able to accommodate 6 cosmonauts for as long as 3 mo, and would have
    2 entry ports, so that 2 spacecraft could dock with it at the same time.
    The 2-mo flight of Klimuk and Sevastyanov set a Soviet record for time
    spent in space; however, the 84-day flight of 3 Americans (Gerald P.
    Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. P o p e ) aboard Skylab 4 had
    set the overall endurance record in early 1974.
        A USSR manned mission would be the first launching of cosmonauts
    since the joint Apollo-Soyuz flight with the U.S. in July 1975; the last USSR
    orbital station, Salyut 4 , was launched 26 December 1974 and was still

                                      129
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
June

    performing experiments, according to official announcements. The Star
    said that the Soviets were directing their resources toward perfecting
    permanent stations in contrast to the u.S. approach of developing a
    reusable space shuttle. (FBIS, Tass in English, 22 June 76; W Post,
    23 June 76, A-1 1; W Star, 23 June 76, A-15)
* Switzerland and the U.K. became the first 2 countries to sign a protocol
    authorizing the European Space Agency to “undertake the exploitation
    phase” of its meteorological satellite Meteosat. The agreement, signed in
    Paris, would remain open until 30 September for signature by the other
    participants (Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden)
    and for other countries to participate. Meteosat, being developed for ESA
    by the Cosmos consortium with Aerospatiale (France) as prime con-
    tractor, was one of four current ESA applications programs; it covered the
    design, development, construction, launch, management, and control of
    a preoperational satellite. ESA’S responsibility for checking out Meteosat
    in orbit for the first 6 mo after launch (scheduled for the third quarter
    of 1977) would be extended by the protocol to include the subsequent
    2.5-yr “exploitation phase” of the satellite to be carried out with
    meteorological authorities in the participating countries. Other ESA appli-
    cations programs were OTS (telecommunications), MAROTS (maritime
    communications), and Aerosat (air traffic control). (ESA release 23 June
    76)
23 June: Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $209 368
    contract to a small business firm, Northern Research and Engineering
    Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., for designing, assembling, and demonstrat-
    ing a portable self-contained firefighting module conceived as a joint
    effort of NASA’s  Technology Utilization Office and the U.S. Coast Guard.
    The module would be a lightweight unit complete with pump, hose,
    firefighter suits, and other equipment that could be transported by heli-
    copter to the deck of any medium-sized boat in the area of a shipboard
    or dock fire; it would be able to pump about 5700 liters of sea water per
    min for an uninterrupted 3 hr. (MSFC Release 76-1 16)
0 The USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center operated in Tenn. by
    the Air Force Systems Command announced that it was using infrared
    equipment, designed in Europe to locate tumors in the human body,
    for studying heat patterns on the surface of the Space Shuttle manned
    orbiter vehicle under simulated flight conditions. Infrared cameras
    were known to detect a tumor because its heat-radiation characteristics
    differed from those of normal tissue. In the USAF tests, a model
    heated in a wind tunnel’s supersonic airflow produced infrared
    radiation received by a camera and transferred to a detector that
     could record infrared radiation from 7000 points in the field-of-view.
        Earlier Shuttle tests had shown the need for a protective system when
    the vehicle plunged into the dense atmosphere and for data on expected
    temperature levels, important to the selection of structural materials and
    to the design of internal parts. Ceramic-like tiles had been used in a
    scanning test to see the effect of a slight misalignment on the overall heat
    distribution, on the orbiter’s underside; the resulting data had demon-

                                     130
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        June

    strated advantages over more traditional methods. Standard procedures
    required the application of surface coatings-either a paint that changed
    from solid to liquid at a specified temperature, or compounds whose
    ultraviolet radiation changed with temperature-but such materials
    could create a surface roughness that would alter the results. Also the
    melting-paint technique required washing and repainting the model after
    each test. The infrared camera could transmit its findings to a computer
    for analysis within minutes, and could provide a permanent color record
    if required. Use of mechanical heat-measuring devices was limited by the
    number of sensors that could be installed, and the time required to do so.
    (Although the infrared system would minimize the need for mechanical
    instrumentation, tests calling for simultaneous temperature data from all
    portions of the model surface would still require installation of sensors.)
    About 90% of the system used at AEDC was off-the-shelf hardware;
    computer programs and methods of interconnecting components were
    devised by ARO, Inc., the center’s operating contractor. (OIP 114.76)
25 June: NASA announced selection of 8 scientists as a team to develop
    experiments for a proposed unmanned lunar mission in 1980, under
    study at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The mission would use a low-cost
    instrumented polar-orbiting spacecraft with a smaller companion sub-
    satellite, launched together from Cape Canaveral on a single Delta
    vehicle, to orbit the moon for a yr and examine nearly the entire lunar
    surface from pole to pole, on both near and far sides, to expand knowl-
    edge gained from the small areas visited by previous u.S. and Soviet
    missions to the whole of the moon. This first US. lunar mission since
    Apollo 1 7 in 1972 would also be the first global survey of a body other
    than earth.
         The 8 experiment areas would provide measurements for scientists to
    determine the moon’s gravity, magnetism, and heat flow, and the chem-
    ical and mineral composition of the moon’s surface. Advanced remote
    sensing-gamma-ray, x-ray, and reflection spectroscopy-would be
    used in 3 of the experiments to create chemical maps of the lunar
    surface; a fourth experiment, spectrostereo imaging, would provide pho-
    tographic data to match these maps with individual features of the lunar
    landscape. Magnetometer and electron reflector experiments would map
    electrical and magnetic properties of the lunar surface and subsurface;
    the remaining 2 experiments-heat flow and gravity field-would pro-
    vide information on the deep interior of the moon. The gravity field would
    be mapped by tracking the polar-orbiting spacecraft circling at an alti-
    tude of 100 km above the lunar surface; the subsatellite, in a higher orbit
    up to 5000 km, would track the orbiter when it was hidden from earth
    by the moon. Mascons (mass concentrations) on the near side of the moon
    had been discovered by analyzing similar tracking data during the early
    lunar-orbiter flights in the 1960s; the proposed experiment would deter-
     mine whether such mascons existed on the far side of the moon, besides
     providing information on the lunar interior.
         Principal investigators named were: gamma-ray spectrometry,
     Dr. James R. Arnold, Univ. of Calif. at San Diego; spectrostereo imaging,

                                     131
June                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      Merton E. Davies, RAND Corp.; electron reflection, Dr. Robert P. Lin,
      Univ. of Calif. at Berkeley; infrared spectrometry, Dr. Thomas B.
      McCord, MIT; microwave radiometry, Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman, Cal-
      Tech; gravity and altimetry, Dr. Roger J. Phillips, JPG magnetometry,
      Dr. Christopher T. Russell, Univ. of Calif. at Los Angeles; x-ray spec-
      trometry, Dr. Jacob L. Trombka, Goddard Space Flight Center. Each of
      the 8 principal investigators would be accompanied by groups of co-
      investigators; the 7 1-member science team would be aided by JPL staff
      members. JPL scientist in charge of the study was Dr. T.V.Johnson. (NASA
      Release 76- 1 19)
    NASA announced it would use starlight that left the surface of a nearby star
      ZOO yr ago to signal the lighting of a giant ZOO-candle Bicentennial
      birthday cake at the new Superdome stadium in New Orleans just before
      midnight on 3 July. Photons of light that left Gamma Bootes just before
      midnight 3 July 1776-when the signers of the Declaration of Indepen-
      dence were officially witnessing the birth of the u.s.-would arrive on
      earth to activate a 1000-cycle tone at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
      The tone, transmitted to New Orleans on commercial telephone lines,
      would signal the lighting of the cake. GSFC’S orbiting astronomical obser-
      vatory Copernicus, passing over Hawaii in its 740-km orbit, would
      receive the photons on its star detector and transmit a digital signal to
      the NASA ground station in Hawaii; this signal, retransmitted to the West
      Coast and via microwave to GSFC, would activate a relay connecting the
      tone to New Orleans, where it would be heard on the stadium’s public
      address system for 1 min before the candles would be lighted. Astronaut
      Story Musgrave would participate in the Superdome activities. (NASA
      Release 76-121)
    Kennedy Space Center announced a broad program of research projects to
0
      use the KSC spaceport and its resources to obtain information on thunder-
      storms and the hazards they offered to launch operations. Meteorological
      and electronics scientists from the US. and abroad converged on the
      center for sessions of observing the thunderstorms, whose incidence is
      high in Fla. during the summer months. More than 70 scientists, many
      of them graduate students, would participate in experiments under the
      program; 19 principal investigators would represent organizations such
      as the Naval Research Laboratory, the National Oceanic and Atmos-
      pheric Administration’s environmental research laboratory, the Atlantic
      Science Corporation, Mass. Institute of Technology, N. Mex. Institute of
      Mining and Technology, S. Dak. School of Mines and Technology, and
      the Universities of Miami, Arizona, Florida, New York at Albany, and
      Manchester (England). NASA’s    Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space
      Flight center also were participating.
          Experiments would investigate precipitation formation, lightning be-
      havior, air motions in thunderstorm clouds, and intracloud electrical
      discharges, among the numerous projects beginning this June and con-
      tinuing through the summers of 1977 and 1978. Experimenters would
      provide their own instruments for the experiments, but much KSC equip-
      ment and material would be available, such as the instrumented aircraft
      used in previous lightning studies; weather radars; the detection and
                                      132
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       June

     ranging system and electric-field measuring system used to monitor
     buildup of electrical charges that might interfere with launches; a
     weather-information network display; a satellite imagery acquisition sys-
     tem, with equipment for processing weather pictures, and an automatic
     picture-transmission (APT) recording system with timing and camera
     devices. An earlier program in 1948 studied dynamics of thunderstorms;
     the current program would emphasize electrical characteristics. (KSC
     Release 279-76)
  NASA announced that one of its c-54 aircraft based at W d o p s Flight
     Center had photographed several Long Island beaches at the request of
     the Environmental Protection Agency. The beaches, recently polluted by
     waterborne trash, were flown over and photographed 23 June with 2
     T-1 1 aerial cameras-one for natural color and one for infrared-and
     the films were developed a m and delivered to EPA’S Region 1 Surveil-
                                                                    1
                               t
     lance and Analysis Division in N.J. EPA would interpret the photographs
     to obtain information about the extent and expected duration of the
     problem; NASA would also determine whether recent Landsat imagery of
     the area would be useful in EPA’S analysis. (NASA Release 76-120)
@ Dr. John F. Clark, scheduled to retire 1 July as Director of Goddard Space

    Flight Center, had been selected to serve after that date at NASA Hq as
    specialassistant to the AssociateAdministrator, according to anannounce-
    ment by Dr. Robert S. Cooper, GSFC deputy director and Dr. Clark’s
    successor. Dr. Clark agreed to stay at GSFC through 14 August to review
    actions needed to finalize design activities associated with a stability
    problem in the Delta second-stage engine, Dr. Cooper said, and would
    also serve as adviser on the Delta’s readiness for the Palapa and Itos
    launches later in 1976. (GSFC announcement 1997)
  The European Space Agency announced that Bernard Deloffre, who began
    serving as director of ESA’S Spacelab program 1 March 1975, had
    tendered his resignation 22 June to the chairman of the ESA council,
    through the Director General. A forthcoming meeting of the council
    would discuss a replacement. (ESA release 25 June 76)
26 June: The USAF launched an early-warning satellite from Cape Canaveral
    at 1 1 am EDT on a Titan IIIC. The satellite-product of the TRW/Aerojet
    Defense Support Program-was reported to be a replacement for a
    satellite launched 14 Dec. 1975 that malfunctioned. Orbital parameters
    were: apogee, 35 600 km; perigee, 35 600 km; inclination, 0.5O; per-
    iod, 1433 min. DOD, which had 10 launches in 1975, had launched 7 so
    far in 1976. ( S B D , 29 June 76, 6-F)
28 June: Dr, William H. Pickering, who retired as director of the Jet
    Propulsion Laboratory at CalTech 31 March, was named to receive a
     1975 National Medal of Science, reported Aviation r e e k & Space
    Technology magazine. The medal is the U.S. government’s highest award
    for distinguished achievement in science and engineering. (Av W7c,
    28 June 76, 1 1 )
30 June: In a foreword to Volume 2, Program Implementation, of the Energy
    Research and Development Administration’s massive report, A National
    Plan for Energy Research, Development & Demonstration: Creating

                                    133
June                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    Energy Choices for the Future, ERDA Administrator Robert c. Seamans,
    Jr., called attention to the 30% increase in funding for ERDA in the 1977
    budget, whose purpose was to speed the achievement of long-term energy
    independence, encourage cost-sharing with private industry (to avoid
    federal funding of projects “more appropriately the responsibility of the
    private sector”), and support commercial demonstration of synthetic fuel
    production through loan guarantees. The plans contained in the more
    than 400 pages of Vol. 2, he said, represented the agency’s considered
    judgment as to which were reasonable to pursue based on current infor-
    mation, but left room for frequent reassessment in view of technical
    development, economic situations, and environmental and social condi-
    tions. (Text, ERDA 76-1)
0 Bernard Deloffre, director of the European Space Agency’s Space-
    lab program since 1 March 1975, resigned his position. ESA announced
    that the Director General, Roy Gibson, would personally manage the
    program with the assistance of Prof. Massimo Trella, ESA technical
    inspector, until appointment of a new Spacelab director. (ESA newsletter
    Aug 76, 3)
During June: Prompted by the crash of an Overseas National Airways DC-10
    at Kennedy International Airport in Nov. 1975, when a General Electric
    CF6 engine on the plane disintegrated after a massive encounter with
    seagulls, Webster B. Todd, Jr., chairman of the National Transportation
    Safety Board, wrote to Federal Aviation Administrator John McLucas
    that the GE engine was the only one in operation that had disintegrated
    completely on several occasions after bird ingestion. Todd asked that the
    CF6 engine be modified and that bird patrols be set up where known
    problems existed at airports served by CF6-powered aircraft.
         FAA bird-ingestion tests allowed certification of engines that could
    absorb the impact of only 10 birds weighing 0.67 kg each (1.5 lb); Todd
    said that the FAA’s   birds were too light and that they should have been
    fired into the engine simultaneously instead of one at a time. The gulls
    that caused the ONA crash weighed more than 2.2 kg each (5 lb).
     Although GE immediately protested the letter, only the CF6 had been
    implicated in a massive bird-strike explosion, whereas Pratt & Whitney
    and Rolls Royce engines in similar occurrences did not explode.
         CE said it was planning to use aluminum honeycomb to replace the
     phenolic-resin shroud on the abradable seal around the compressor-
    booster stages; fan blades detached by bird ingestion had scraped off the
     resin, which accumulated in the combustion chamber and mixed with the
     fuel, creating overpressure and ultimately an explosion. Aircraft using
     the CF6 included the USAF’S C-5A Galaxy, 190 DC-lOs, 6 B-747s, and
    the A300 Airbus. ONA had decided on CF6 engines for a recent order of
     3 m-10s. (hnteruvia, June 76, 502)
  The 50th anniversary of scheduled airline service in the US. had brought
     little or no traffic growth in a declining economy, the Air Transport
     Association reported in its yearly review €or 1975. When airline pas-
     senger travel began in 1926, no more than 6000 persons were carried
     between a handful of markets. In 1975, the nation’s scheduled airlines

                                    134
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        June

      carried more than 205 million passengers 0ver.a network of 58 000
      city-pairs (pairs of cities between which a scheduled service carries
      people, mail, or freight on more than 13 000 daily flights). The pas-
      senger total in 1975 was 2 million less than for 1974, although miles
      flown remained constant; increased traffic during the last quarter of
       1975 had brightened the outlook for the Bicentennial year, ATA said.
      Freight service in 1975 totaled more than 4.7 billion ton-miles, down
      2.5% from 1974. Airline safety improved, with only 3 fatal accidents in
       1975 (fewest recorded since records began in 1949) and 124 fatalities,
      lowest number since 1957. Scheduled airline travel was statistically 10
      times safer than by private automobile; in the early 1930s, it was
      considered 8 times as dangerous. (ATA report, 1976)
    Symphonie 2, the Franco-German telecommunications satellite that
0
      drifted out of its normal geostationary orbit late last month, was gradu-
      ally repositioned by using its cold-gas stabilization system, Aviation
       Week and Space Technology magazine reported. French and German
      space technicians determined that the malfunction was caused by a still
      unidentified defect in one of 4 valves feeding the exhaust nozzles of the
      satellite’s hot-gas stabilization system. Transmissions normally handled
      by Symphonie 2 were shifted to Symphonie 1 while the repositioning
      went on; both satellites were reported working normally again. (Av Wk,
      2 8 June 76, 11)
    The USAF announced that use of a new tool made of a graphite-epoxy
0
      composite material in fabricating 3 YF-16 fuselages of the same material
      had exceeded design requirements and saved both time and money.
      Materials and processes used to make the 227-kg 18.5-m‘ composite
      tool replaced a multiple-step method used to construct large, complex,
      highly contoured aircraft fuselage skins or structural shells of graphite-
      epoxy materials; the new concept eliminated 2 steps in fabrication,
      saving up to 50% of total tool cost. Steel curing tools used for smaller,
      less complex components were extremely expensive and could damage a
      contoured part because of incompatible thermal expansion; parts made
      with the new tool had mechanical properties and dimensional tolerances
      that exceeded those made with conventional tools. Whereas 23.5 man-
      hours per 0.09m2 were needed to make the previous tool, only 9.7
      man-hours were needed for the new tools, for a total saving of 2660
      man-hours. Elimination of materials used in the multiple-step procedure
      meant additional savings. (OIP Release 096.76)
    Articles in 2 successive issues of Aviation Week & Space Technology
      magazine reviewed progress in changing to the international metric
      system of units, and concluded that industry would look to the U.S.
      government for the spur required to convert, and the funds to defray
      expenses of converting. The Department of Defense, which was pre-
                                                 ...
      paring a directive that would “fall short of     a substantive push to the
      industry” by stating that WD’s aim was to keep pace with industry, was
      said to be reluctant to take the lead-and be presented with a bill for the
      costs-in converting to metrics for a major new weapons system. The
      magazine had surveyed a dozen firms in the aerospace industry, none of

                                      135
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
June

    which had plans to “metricate on their own without a requirement by
    their government or commercial customers.” Most industry spokesmen
    said metrication was inevitable, although a mixed system with metric-
    English capabilities would probably be in effect for the period during
    which tools and supplies’would be used up or replaced with the new
    measurements. ( A v m , 7 June 76, 44; 1 4 June 76, 100)
  lnteravia magazine printed a photograph of Dora, a solar.generator being
    manufactured by AEG-Telefunken under contract to the German Insti-
    tute €or Space Research to provide power for 1980s communications
    satellites. Dora was designed as a “variably deployable array,” meaning
    that it could begin its service life partially deployed; unfurled gradually
    at intervals, it could maintain a constant output over the years. It could
    also be folded down and brought back to earth at the end of a Spacelab
    mission. It consisted of two 22- by 2.8-m array panels carrying 46 000
    solar cells. (Znteravia, June 26, 504)
  The government of Nigeria awarded a $150-million contract toTCOM Corp.,
    a subsidiary of Westinghouse Electric, for a balloon-borne telecommuni-
    cations and broadcast system to be installed by the end of 1979, and for
    training of Nigerian personnel. Ten tethered balloons supporting trans-
    mitting and receiving equipment at altitudes of 3 to 5 km would provide
    an expanded telephone, television, and radio service for the whole of
    Nigeria. (lnteravia, June 1976, 573)




                                     136
                                July 1976

1 July: In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and
    Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in obser-
    vance of the US. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rock-
    efeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum
    director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft.
    At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit
    around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and
    blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive
    scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication.
    The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people
    to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the Amer-
    ican adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve
    the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn
    space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of world-
    wide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop
    new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease.
    The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first
    publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured
    “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of
    all that remains to be discovered.”
        Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a
    chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von
    Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a
    modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the
    Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The
    first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor
    contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a
    structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink
    marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the
    building was divided into 7 bays-4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-
    glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, ‘LMilestonesof
    Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’
    Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit ofst. Louis, the Bell X-1 (first
    supersonic plane), and the North American X- 15. The problem, said the
    New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold”
    all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high
    as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s
    width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets
    formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug
    and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton
    backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the

                                      137
July                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    astronauts’ living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more
    than 100 spacecraft and 6 4 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were
    previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building.
        Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered
    in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the
    opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The
    Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with
    a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial
    exposition; its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph
    Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon
    ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use
    balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun
    its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Goddard, father of the
    liquid-fuel rocket.
        The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been
    changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected
    in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to
    the public since 2 Feb. (CSM, 14 May 76; W S t a r , 25 June 76, C-1;
    1 July 76, A-1; W Post, 27 June 76, E-1; 1 July 76, B-1; 2 July 76,
    A-1; N I T , 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16;
    Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76)
2-12 July: By “unanimous” vote among nearly 30 Viking project scientists,
     Viking 1 would land 17 July in a site called the “Northwest Territory”
    on the Plain of Chryse that would be safer than the original choice, said
    Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr. A mosaic of more than 40 photos
    released by JPL showed the plains area more hospitable than the Valley
    of Chryse, which turned out to be a network of dry riverbeds too steep
    and too rough to risk a landing. The scientists hoped that the new choice
    of site would feature sediments, deposited by ancient Martian rivers, that
    might contain fossils or other traces of life. Being at a lower altitude, the
    site could harbor water in a liquid form; “snow, ice, and even liquid water
     are possible on the site we picked,” said Dr. James C. Fletcher, Admin-
    istrator of NASA, in announcing the new plan. (W Post, 2 July 76, A-2;
     W S t a r , 2 July 76, A-8)
        A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking
    and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alterna-




Mall view of the National Air and Space Museum, opened to the public 1 July 1976.
(NASM Photo)

                                      138
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       July
   tive landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the poten-
   tial of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20)
       Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested
   that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in
   progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars
   atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar
   molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in
   atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than
   had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was
   a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures,
   identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but
   Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8%argon
   above the south polar cap. ( W Post, 3 July 76, A-2)
       The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was
    about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters
    rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. ( WPost, 4 July
    76, A-4)
        New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than
    answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian tempera-
    ture and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than
    earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had
    as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than
    expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient mois-
   ture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. ( W Star, 4 July 76,
    A- 12)
       The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal
   urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little
    immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might
   worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said
   Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product
   itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day
   it was proper to remember that the US. was a product of the urge to
    explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there
    was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1)
        Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space
    program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he esti-
    mated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that
    the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in
    limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists
    believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added.
    (NYT, 6 July 76, 15)
       JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand
    Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but rela-
    tively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as
    32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no
    deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 2 1 km wide, and about 350 km end
    to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars
    had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the

                                    139
July                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor
    impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists
    said. ( W Post, 7 July 76, A- 10)
        The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after
    radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher
    than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit
    would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously
    selected landing point. ( W Post, 8 July 76, A-2)
        An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the
    Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar
    echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse
    invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as
    smooth as the plains.” ( W Post, 7 July 76, A-2)
        A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site
    proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2
    spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photo-
    graphs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that control-
    lers last wk said was too rough for a landing. ( W Star, 12 July 76, A-6)
6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the
    Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry
    out “joint experiments’’ with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit,
    launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during
    the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight
    engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space.
    Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km;
    inclination, 51.6’; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred
    7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 4 8 days, the crew
    returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experi-
    ments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and
    growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April
    1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, report-
    edly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful
    in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered
    few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making
    it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated
    that the mission might try to break the record of 8 4 days in space set by
    the third crew of Skylab in 1974.
        Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an
    exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer
    space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a
    mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space
    through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the
    flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their
    training on the running track and other activities producing ‘‘micro-
    shocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS,
    Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; W Post, 7 July, A-22; WStar, 7 July
    76, A-2; NYT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2;
    SpacefEight, Jan 77, 36-37)

                                     140
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        JdY
8 July: A “Big Bird” reconnaissance satellite, built by Lockheed, was
    launched by the USAF from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., on a Titan IIID. A
    previous Big Bird launched 4 Dec. 1975 had remained in orbit until 1
    Apr. 1976. (Av E%, 19 July 76, 243)
e NASA launched Palapa I , first of a series of Indonesian comsats, into a
    synchronous transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 7:31 pm EDT
    on a Delta vehicle. Orbital elements were 36 504-km-apogee, 231-km
    perigee, and 24.6’ inclination. At the 10th apogee, the boost motor was
    fired (4:30 pm EDT on 11 July) and the s acecraft was maneuvered into
    a position above the equator at about 832 Satellite status was reported
                                                E.
    satisfactory. The satellite’s name came from a 14th-century prime min-
    ister, Gaja Mada, who vowed not to eat a popular delicacy called palapa
    until Indonesia was united. The 8 July launch date was selected to ensure
    that the satellite would be operational on 17 Aug., when Indonesia
    celebrated its 3 1st anniversary of independence. Produced by Hughes
    Aircraft, the Palapa satellites would be identical to the Telesat Canada
    and Westar satellites except for antenna modifications; each satellite
    could relay 12 color TV channels or up to 4000 telephone circuits. A
    second Palapa was scheduled for launch in 1977. (NASA Release 76-1 17;
    MOR M-492-208-76-01,            [prelaunch] 24 June 76, [postlaunch]
    1 4 Oct 76)
0 Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 3 different solar collectors
    procured from industry in an ERDA-sponsored program on technical
    management and support of solar-energy development were undergoing
    tests of efficiency versus cost. The collectors, after exposure to weather-
    ing, were put into an active situation in which the heat-transfer medium
    (usually water) passed through them, and measurements were made to
    determine their efficiency. At the same time, 4 low-cost collectors devel-
    oped by MSFC were being tested to evaluate the thermal performance of
    black-nickel and black-chrome absorber coatings that could reduce the
    amount of collector area required, and thereby lower the cost of a specific
    application. (MSFC Release 76-1 21)
  Discrepancies in forecasting the size of the 1976 Soviet grain crop under-
@

    lined the difficulty of accurately predicting worldwide harvests and food
    needs, the Washington Post reported. The u.S. Dept. of Agriculture
    estimated 22 June that the USSR would produce 190 million tons of grain;
    other sources objected that the estimate was several millions of tons
    below the figure set by the Central Intelligence Agency and between 4
    and 10 million tons higher than estimates by 2 private firms (Cargill
    Investor Services of Chicago, and Schnittker Associates of Washington).
    The size of the Soviet crop was a crucial statistic, the Post noted,
    because-if low enough-it could send world grain prices on a rapid rise;
    the price of grain would affect the U.S. economy, triggering higher food
    prices and adding to domestic inflation. The world had had no excess food
    stocks since 1972, so that faraway droughts or political developments
    affecting food trade could make U.S. grain prices fluctuate wildly. Gov-
    ernment and industry had invested millions of dollars to get information
    from satellites, computer banks, private weather consultants, transla-

                                     141
July                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    tions of foreign broadcasts, and tipsters, the Post said. Banks, shipping
    companies, railroads, and other enterprises in agricultural trade or in-
    vestment had increased their research in crop data to be ready for price
    changes or sudden shifts in markets. Despite the flood of information,
    global agricultural predictions remained inexact.
        A satellite equipped for crop surveys swept across the Soviet Union
    last year and “helped government analysts assess a major Russian crop
    disaster,” the Post noted. The information, fed into complicated com-
    puter models that collated soil moisture and temperature data with other
    inputs, produced a projection of Soviet grain production; however, the
    computer models of the Dept. of Agriculture and the CIA last year
    produced differing estimates. (W Post, 8 July 76, A-2)
                                                                    5 pilots and 15
0 NASA issued a call for Space Shuttle astronaut candidates-1
    mission specialists-to be selected by Dec. 1977. Applications would be
    accepted through June 1977, and candidates would report to Johnson
    Space Center in July 1978 for 2 yr of training. Appointment as an
    astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. Minority
    and women candidates were encouraged to apply. NASA spokesman Bob
    Gordon said the agency expected no problems if a woman were selected;
    the Space Shuttle was “designed to accommodate women astro-
    nauts.. .the waste management system is the only problem really and that
    has been designed for both males and females.” Since the astronaut
    program began in 1959, 7 3 pilots and scientists had been selected; 31
    persons were available as Space Shuttle crew, 28 astronauts assigned to
    JSC and 3 holding government positions in Washington, D.C. Pilot astro-
    nauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and
    would maintain vehicle systems; mission-specialist astronauts would co-
    ordinate orbiter operations in flight planning, use of consumables, and
    management of the payload. (NASA Release 76- 122; JSC Release 76-44;
    DOD Release 310-76; NYT, 8 July 76, 12)
9 July: Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of 3 firms to
    negotiate contracts for development of solar heating and cooling systems
    for residential and commercial use, under an agreement with the Energy
    Research and Development Administration to install and demonstrate
    such systems in a substantial number of residential and commercial
    structures in a wide range of geographic locations [see 1 July]. Firms
    selected were AiResearch Manufacturing Co. of Calif., General Electric
    Co. Space Div., and Honeywell Inc. Each of the contractors would
    deliver prototype solar heating or heating-and-cooling systems, at an
    estimated cost for the 3 contracts of about $14 million over 3 yrs. (MSFC
    Release 76- 125)
0 NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for
    Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L.
    Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for
    the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting
    of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere,
    ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s
    proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding
    ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument
                                      142
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       July
    for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in
    the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight
    team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing
    a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123)
9-18 July: NASA announced plans to launch a 4-stage Javelin sounding
    rocket from Wallops Flight Center carrying a 76-kg payload that would
    release red, white, and blue chemical clouds visible along the East Coast
    from Charleston, s.c., to Boston and as far inland as Cleveland, 0.
    Observation of the rocket’s trails would enable the measuring of winds
    and magnetic and electrical fields in space. The rocket, launched at 9:23
    pm local time 18 July from Wallops, fell into the Atlantic before releasing
    its chemicals. According to a spokesman at the center, “We really won’t
    know what happened for several days, after we’ve studied ground track-
    ings, but ground observation indicates there was a mechanical failure of
    some sort.” (NASA Release 76-124; wsc Release 76-9; WPost, 18 July
    76, B-2)
9-10 July: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, carrying greetings
    from President Ford, was among foreign dignitaries attending the cele-
    bration in Yugoslavia of the 120th anniversary of the birth of inventor
    Nikola Tesla. Born in 18% in Croatia (then part of Austria-Hungary),
    Tesla emigrated to the U.S. in 1884, became naturalized, and worked for
    a time at the Edison company in N.J. His concept of a rotating magnetic
    field led to many improvements in the fields of radio and electricity: the
    Tesla coil, the Tesla reduction motor and system of alternating-current
    transmission, generators of high-frequency current, a transformer to
    increase oscillating currents to high potentials, and systems for wireless
    communication and wireless transmission of electric power. Tesla de-
    signed the power system at Niagara Falls, N.Y., and lived to be 93.
        At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President
    Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his
    compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War
    11. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged
    the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to
     remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting
     Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a
     U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden
     plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford.
     President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work
     ?tands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable
     accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic
     Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)
11 July: Tass announced that the yachts Rodina and Rossiya had left the
     port of Vladivostok in an attempt to repeat the route sailed by Russian
     navigators 250 yr ago on 2 expeditions to Kamchatka under the lead-
     ership of Vitus Bering (1681-1741). The 7-man crews of the ships
     would begin by visiting Okhotsk, the port where Bering built the ship that
     went to Kamchatka, then proceed to Kamchatka about 3700 km away.
     In 1977 and 1978, the expedition would cruise to the Bering Strait and

                                    143
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

    go ashore in North America where Bering’s ship St. Peter visited 17 July
     174 1. (FBIS, Tass in English, 1 1 July 76)
12 July: First flight tests of a unique oblique-wing aircraft model designed for
    future supersonic use would begin early in Aug. at the Dryden Flight
     Research Center, NASA announced. The remotely piloted research vehi-
    cle (RPRV) to be tested had a wingspan of 6.7 m, weighed 400 kg, and
    was powered by a 4-cylinder 90-hp engine; its wing angle relative to the
     fuselage could be varied during flight, and angles up to 45’ would be
    tested. The RPRV would be flown by radio control from a ground cockpit,
     with a TV camera in the aircraft nose giving the ground controller a
     pilot’s-eye view. Use of the oblique wing was a proposal of Dr. Robert T.
     Jones, senior scientist at Ames Research Center, to alleviate sonic boom
     and increase energy effectiveness of supersonic aircraft; positioned at
     right angles to the fuselage in slower flight, the wing would allow landing
     and takeoff with minimum power and less noise, but rotated with respect
     to the fuselage it would provide the high speed possible with the swept-
     wing design. Studies indicated possible fuel savings even at speeds up to
     1600 kph. (DFRC Release 13-76)
13 July: Marshall Space Flight Center announced that MSFC engineers had
    developed an optical processing system that could use earth pictures
     taken by satellites such as Landsat or Seasat to survey highway traffic.
     When the New Orleans, La., planning commission asked the Center if
     space technology could provide an automated way to conduct thorough,
     reliable, and inexpensive traffic surveys, MSFC responded with a tech-
     nique used several years ago of scanning phototransparencies with a
     laser beam; the new laser scanner would sense differences in intensity of
     the filtered beam, recognize vehicle sizes and shapes, and store size and
     location data for later use. Data from an aerial traffic survey using the
     system could be in the hands of users within hours. The new method must
     start with aircraft photographs, said MSFC engineer Joseph H. Kerr, who
     patented the rapid survey system; present Landsat satellites passed over
     a target only once in 18 days, but the project gave NASA a chance to
     refine the method for use on satellites in the 1980s. Whereas processing
     of satellite data might now take months, Kerr said his system could
     produce data 100 times faster. (NASA Release 76-128)
  Solar power would charge batteries in 2 electric vehicles used by the
     National Capital Parks, Dept. of the Interior, during this summer’s
     Bicentennial Festival of American Folklife in Washington, D.C., NASA
     announced. The golfcart-like vehicles, each equipped with 6 standard
     traction batteries, would get energy from photovoltaic cells capable of
     providing 1.7 kwh of electricity during peak sunlight; the array was
     prepared by Lewis Research Center as one of several demonstrations of
     solar energy it was conducting as manager of ERDA’S photovoltaic test and
     demonstration project. Cells were provided by NASA’s Propulsion
                                                                 Jet
     Laboratory, to which ERDA assigned responsibility for the low-cost silicon
     solar-array project. The solar-powered vehicles would be used from July
     through Sept. at the festival, one for transportation of festival workers,
     the other fitted with a vacuum cleaner for refuse pickup. (NASA Release
     76-129;,ERDA Release 76-218)
                                     144
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         July

14 July: Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $2 250 000 contract
    to the Beech Aircraft Corp., Boulder, Co., for development of a Space
    Shuttle orbiter fuel-cell servicing system. An orbiter would carry 3 fuel
    cells using cryogenically stored hydrogen and oxygen to provide elec-
    trical power; each cell would connect to a separate power bus, but only
    2 cells would be used during minimum power load. Peak or average
    power load would use all 3 cells. The contract called for Beech to design,
    fabricate, test, and deliver a complete cryogenic remotely controlled unit
    that would provide liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen for the fuel cells,
    delivery to be completed by 1 Dec. 1977. (KSC Release 333-76)
15 July: NASA announced appointment of Robert A. Newman as Assistant
    Administrator for Public Affairs, effective 26 July. Newman was vice-
    president of community affairs for TRW, Inc., and president of the TRW
    Foundation at Cleveland, 0. In his new NASA post, he would be re-
    sponsible for all information services of the space agency except for
    technical publications. He had received bachelor’s degrees in journalism
    and sociology from the Univ. of Mo., served in the USAF during the
    Korean War, and had been a member of the board of directors of the Air
    Force Academy Foundation. (NASA Release 76-13 1; Fletcher anno.
    15 July 76)
16 July: NASA announced selection of Hamilton Standard Division, United
    Aircraft Corp., for negotiations leading to award of contract for devel-
    opment and production of space suits to be used by men and women
    during Space Shuttle flights. The basic cost-plus-award fee contract
    would cost about $15 million through Sept. 1980. The suit system,
    consisting of a basic suit and built-in support system including breathing-
    atmosphere and cooling components, would be adjustable instead of
    custom-made for each astronaut (as in earlier programs) and would come
    in small, medium, and large sizes to fit candidates varying in height from
    1.5 to 2 m. Hamilton Standard would provide hardware and spares
    needed for 7 suits and support equipment, as well as training, manpower,
    and equipment needed to support the program at NASA field centers.
    Johnson Space Center would have technical direction of the contract. (JSC
    Release 76-46)
* NASA announced that its Nimbus 6 weather satellite would be monitoring
    the cross-country progress of a 1914 Dodge participating in the Bicen-
    tennial world antique auto race that began 15 June in Istanbul, Turkey,
    and wound through 11 countries in Europe. Having crossed the Atlantic
    by ship, the four entrants-all American-were scheduled to rally
    16 July at Times Sq., New York City, to begin the final leg of the race-
    New York to San Francisco-that would recreate the first leg of the
    Great Race of 1908. The tracking device carried on the Dodge belonging
    to Ed Schuler of Morrison, Ill., had been checked out last May on a run
    from 111. to the Goddard Space Flight Center in Md. The device, a rugged
    self-powered unit normally carried on balloons, buoys, and ice packs, is
    one of more than 800 such instruments assigned to experimenters since
    the launch of Nimbus 6 in mid-1975. Valued at about $1800, the
    device would be returned to GSFC after the race for checkout and future
    use on another,platform. A similar device used in 1971 to track a light
                                      145
July                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    plane that flew around the global poles had previously been carried
    around the world on a balloon that came down in Central Africa, where
    a French member of the World Health Organization found it hanging in
    a tree and returned it to NASA; after the airplane trip, the unit served
    another year on a buoy before being retired from service. A 1914 Model
    T Ford originally scheduled to carry the tracking device [see 15 Feb.]
    was withdrawn from the race by its owner. (NASA Release 76-126)
17-19 July: Project scientists said the high proportion of argon in the Mars
    atmosphere might damage the life-detection instruments on Viking 1. In
    March 1974, a spectrometer pump on a Mars-bound spacecraft failed to
    work properly and Russian scientists concluded the problem was caused
    by argon, an element reluctant to form chemical compounds; the Russian
    pump apparently could not handle the high argon content of the Mars
    atmosphere. Viking 1 ’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer con-
    tained filter material to screen out carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide
    in the search for organic compounds in Mars air and soil samples, which
    would be heated in the instrument to produce gas for analysis by the
    chromatograph; the high argon content might interfere with the read-
    ings. (NYT, 17 July 76, 24)
        JPL flight directors were checking out the instruments on Viking 1 for
    its Mars landing scheduled for 20 July. Immediately upon landing, the
    spacecraft would measure air temperature and pressure and wind speed
    and direction, and would detect any interior motions of the planet such
    as moving lava or shaking of the crust. It was also scheduled to take 2
    photographs, one downward to record the terrain of the landing site and
    the other a panorama shot to show the general surface of Mars. Life-
    detection experiments would not begin until about a wk after the landing.
    ( W Post, 1 8 July 76, A-10)
        Commands from JPL to turn on the $153-million instrument package
    to be landed by Viking 1 on the Plains of Chryse took between 17 and
    1 8 min to reach the spacecraft nearly 346 million km away from earth.
    First spacecraft responses to the signals indicated the instruments and
    navigational equipment were in working condition. Landing was sched-
    uled for 8 am EDT on 20 July; Viking 1 would separate early in the
    morning into 2 components, 2300-kg orbiter and 590-kg lander. The
    orbiter, powered by purple solar cells on panels, would remain in orbit to
    serve as a radio relay for the lander and to photograph nearly half the
    Martian surface over the next 12 mo. The lander, powered by an atomic
    battery, would coast for about 3 hr, slowed by a parachute and braking
    engines, and land on 3 aluminum legs at about 8 kph, more gently than
    most parachutists land on earth. (W Post, 19 July 76, A-3)
        Odds were heavily against existence of any form of life on Mars, said
    a Washington Post editorial, and against Viking 1’s finding evidence of
    it even if it were there. The Viking flights were “in some ways more
    remarkable an undertaking’’ than the Apollo flights because the space-
    craft was on its own with no humans to correct errors and a sizable time
    lapse between sending and receipt of radioed instructions. The mission,
    said the Post, was “already a stunning accomplishment.” (W Post,
    20 July. 76, A- 16)
                                    146
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                                   July
       The Viking spacecraft was “a breed apart,” the Wash. Post re-
    ported, as different from previous spacecraft “as a Cadillac from a
    Pinto.” Almost nothing on the lander had flown in space before; almost
    everything had to be built super-small to save weight. As the first US.
    spacecraft to land on another planet, the Viking had to be designed to
    withstand chemical and heat sterilization to avoid contaminating Mars
    with earth organisms. The tape recorder, for instance, had to be made
    of bronze coated with phosphor, because no plastic tape could have
    survived the heat. ( W Post, 20 July 76, A-2)
19 July President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to
    coincide with the date 7 yr ago when US. astronaut Neil Armstrong
    became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s VzXing 1 lander was
    expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,,
    reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first pic-
    ture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclama-
    tion, the President said, “We begin our third century with . . . the most
    ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will
    have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to
    NASA employees, Administrator James c. Fletcher said “the President
    has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space
    agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76)




First panoramic view ofMars surfacefrom Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper halfofpicture
is left halfof view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking
sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication
with earth. (NASA 76-H-557)

                                          147
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

  Marshall Space Flight Center announced that about 80 scientists from
    universities, medical facilities, and industry, serving as th.e Universities
    Space Research Association, would meet at Huntsville 26-30 July to
    evaluate experiments proposed for the first Spacelab mission. NASA’s
    Space Science Steering Committtee would use the evaluations in select-
    ing experiments to be carried on Spacelab 1, scheduled for launch in the
    3rd quarter of 1980. The 10 categories in which experiments were
    proposed were: astrophysics, upper atmosphere, space plasma, bio-
    medicine, atmospheric observations, biology, technology/behavior,
    communications/navigation, drop dynamics/atmospheric cloud physics,
    and technology experiments. MSFC was assigned management responsibil-
    ity for defining, integrating, and operating the payloads for the first 3
    Spacelab missions. (MSFC Release 76-130)
20 July: The Viking 1 lander touched down safely on a plain at the western
    edge of the Chryse region of Mars at 7:53 am EDT, 1 1 mo to the day after
    its journey of more than 700 million km through space began at KSC
    Launch Complex 4 1. Landing was within 17 sec of the predicted time;
    velocity at impact, predicted to be 2.4 ? 0.9 kps, was actually 2.49 kps.
    Within minutes of the landing, the Viking began relaying a photograph
    of one of its footpads on the nearby surface up to the Viking orbiter for
    transmission to earth; a panoramic view of the landing site followed.
     Distance from earth to Mars at landing time was more than 322 million
    km, and radio waves took 19 additional minutes to travel back to earth
    to signal touchdown. Spacecraft controllers at the Jet Propulsion Labora-
    tory broke into applause and cheers when the data arrived showing a
    successful landing; telemetry showed the descent curve fitting pre-
    planned values as the lander’s aeroshell, supersonic parachute, and
    terminal descent engines braked the descent to the surface of Mars. The
    site at Chryse Planitia was chosen for the landing after Viking orbiter
    data and the giant telescope at Arecibo, P.R., showed that the primary
    landing site and the first alternative were too hazardous. NASA Adminis-
    trator Dr. James C. Fletcher, who was at JPL for the landing, said that
    the intensive search for a safe landing site “really paid off.”
        The Mars landing came on the 7th anniversary of man’s first landing
    on the moon 20 July 1969 during the Apollo 11 mission. President Ford,
     who telephoned JPL with congratulations after the landing, asked Viking
     Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC if there were plans for a
     Viking 3. Martin replied that there were not, but that his team was
     “ready to take on Viking 3 plus Viking 4, 5, and 6.” The Viking 2 was
    expected to go into orbit around Mars about 7 Aug. (Mission Status
     Bulletin 35, 20 July 76; Spaceport News, 23 July 76, 1)
  The Tass news agency reported the soft latr‘ding of “the automatic inter-
     planetary station” Viking 1 on the surface of Mars, adding that the first
     pictures of the surface showed “a foot-pad of the craft on . . . dust-
                                                       .
     covered terrain strewn with small sharp stones . . According to the
     preliminary assessments, the ground consists of basalt rocks and volcanic
     lava. It is believed to be comparatively soft.” Tass noted the post-
     ponement of the Viking landing, originally scheduled for 4 July, and the

                                     148
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                            July

      search for bacterial life on Mars which was “one of the aims of this
      exploration.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 20 July 76)
    Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corp. announced it had
0
      been awarded a $10.8-million contract by Lewis Research Center for 8
       Atlas MA-5 propulsion systems, with an option for 2 additional systems.
      The contract would run through August 1978. The engines would be
       used to launch high-energy astronomical observatories (HEAO), or com-
      mercial comsats for the Communications Satellite Corporation on a
      .reimbursable basis. Originally developed by Rocketdyne for the USAF’S
       first intercontinental ballistic missile, the Atlas had flown space missions
       since 1958 when it launched Echo, first U.S. comsat. Atlas had powered
       more than 400 payloads with launch reliability of more than 99%.
      (Rockwell Release RD- 18)
    “Eventually there will be an American SsT program,” Dr. John L. McLucas
       wrote in a letter to the Phila. Inquirer. Dr. McLucas, Administrator of
       the Federal Aviation Administration, agreed with an Inquirer editorial
       that stated, “Concorde hasn’t made it yet,” but pointed out that costs of
       research and development and other expenses of producing a new
       aircraft had virtually halted the introduction of new aircraft designs
       “suitable to the major airlines.” New transport aircraft would offer
       advantages such as greatly reduced noise, a high level of safety, and 30%
       improvement in fuel efficiency; however, continued development of new
       planes and their purchase by the carriers “is moving beyond the financial
       scope of private investors singly or collectively,” Dr. McLucas wrote.
       Some combination of government and private initiative would be needed
       to finance the next generation of air transports; “it’s more likely to be
       the result of a cooperative American-European effort,” Dr. McLucas
       concluded. ( P Inq, 20 July 76, l-E)
    India had used deuterium from the U.S. to detonate its first atomic ex-
0
      plosion, said acting Assistant Secretary of State Myron Kratzer at an
       “unprecedented” hearing by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on
      licensing of future sales of reactor fuel to India. The State Dept. said that
       stopping the sale of the reactor fuel would constitute “severe social and
      economic hardship” to 80 million Indians dependent on power generated
      by a plant that had been operating since 1969. Adrian Fisher, “former
      high official in the 11,s.Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,” said
       India had broken its word to Canada and the U.S. by using nuclear
       materials to create an atomic device in 1974; India said the device was
       “peaceful” and did not contravene US. bans on use of the material to
       build weapons. Herbert Scoville, another former disarmament official,
       said India’s nuclear generating stations were producing enough pluto-
       nium to build 10 to 20 bombs per year, and that India now had a 4-yr
       stockpile. Scoville and Fisher said India shpuld be required to sell back
       its plutonium and accept further restrictionwn use of nuclear material.
       A strong 7 1 5 stand on nuclear materials to India was the only hope-
       “perhaps a vain hope,” Scoville said-of stopping the spread of nuclear
       weapons. Rep. Clarence D. Long (D-Md.) said that Iran, Egypt, South
       Africa, and Argentina were countries that would be encouraged to de-

                                        149
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

    velop nuclear weapons if the U.S. did not impose sanctions on India and
    restrict the flow of nuclear material. The commission was examining a
    large pile of documents on the history of the U.S. nuclear relationship to
     India; some petitioners (e.g., the Sierra Club) had claimed that evidence
     as far back as 1963 showed India preparing to develop a nuclear ex-
     plosive device for political purposes. ( W S t a r , 21 July 76, A-8)
21 July: The Marshall Star reported on a Bicentennial celebration at MSFC’s
    Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., that included planting
    of a “moon” tree to commemorate the 7th anniversary of the first Apollo
    landing. Michoud was the place where giant Saturn moon rockets were
     fabricated. Participating in the program were Lt. Gov. James Fitzmorris
     of La.; MSFC Director Dr. William R. Lucas; and Robert Littlefield,
     manager of the Michoud facility. The tree was a pine grown from seed
     carried to the moon and back in 1971 on the Apollo 1 4 mission as part
     of research into effects of weightlessness on seed germination. The U.S.
     Dept. of Agriculture had planted the returned seeds, and the seedlings
     had been set out in various public areas over the U.S. such as in Philadel-
     phia’s Washington Square. As the tree was planted in front of the
     Michoud administration building, a time capsule was deposited to be
     opened during the nation’s Tricentennial in 2076. The capsule coptained
     documents, tapes, and pictures relating to the space program. (Marshall
     Star, 21 July 76, 4)
0 Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Martin Marietta’s
     Denver division of a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-feecontract for
     $9 282 667 to deliver parachute decelerator subsystems for recovery of
      12 solid-fuel rocket boosters from 6 Space Shuttle flights. The contract,
     effective through Dec. 1980, covers design, development, manufacture,
     and refurbishment of the subsystems. Work was authorized to start
     6 July at Martin’s plant in Colorado and at Pioneer Parachute Co. of
     Manchester, Conn., subcontractor. (MSFC Release 76-1 35)
0 An enormous radiotelescope “the size of the earth” to be used in studying
     the process of star formation in earth’s galaxy had been constructed by
     linking installations in Washington, D.c., California, Australia, and the
     Soviet Union, the Naval Research Laboratory announced. Four large
     radiotelescopes distributed around the world had joined in using very
     long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) to record microwave signals received
     at each antenna on videotape, and comparing the recordings. The re-
     sultant huge antenna would be able to resolve a source less than
     2 ten-thousandths of a second of arc, comparable to the thickness of a
     human hair at a 161-km distance, or a man’s footprint on the moon. An
     instrument this size would be needed to study primordial clouds in the
     constellation Aquila containing water-vapor molecules that emit intense
     microwave radiation through maser amplification, analogous to the oper-
     ation of optical lasers. These water-vapor masers seem to be associated
     with star formation taking place in giant clouds in the galaxy; sizes of the
     individual masing sources, which may number more than 100 in a single
      cloud, range from half to 3 times the distance between the sun and the
      earth. The masing radiation offered a way to study the clouds that

                                      150
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        JdY
    obscure radiation at other frequencies and to estimate the physical
    conditions that surround star formation. Installations in the experiment
    were NRL’S 26-m antenna at its Maryland Point, Md., observatory;
    NASA’s Deep Space Network 64-m antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia;
    the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory’s 22-m antenna at Semeiz,
    USSR; and the Calif. Institute of Technology’s 39-m antenna at Owens
    Valley, Calif. The maximum spacing achievable is the earth’s diameter
    (12 600 km), a distance approximating the separation between the Md.
    and Australian antennas (12 091 km). (NRL Release 45-7-76B/HF;
    NYT, 20 July 76, 13)
22 July: Images from 2 Landsats circling the earth 912 km up had helped
    the state of Md. monitor strip-mining damage and inventory its surface
    coal-mining activities, NASA announced. The state did not know the
    location or extent of orphan mines-those abandoned before 1967-and
    began a mapping program to determine the extent of the disturbed land
    and the procedures and expense that would be required to reclaim it. A
     1967 law required private companies to operate under state-approved
    reclamation plans; acreage disturbed before 1967 would be reclaimed by
    the state. The Landsat images showed from 25 to 30% more acreage
    affected by the mines than anyone had realized. Arthur T. Anderson of
    Goddard Space Flight Center’s information transfer laboratory com-
    pared Landsat images taken over a 3-yr period ending in 1974 to
    identify and measure effects of strip mining in Western Md. with an
    accuracy better than that obtainable from aerial photography or
    field-inspection techniques. Other states using Landsat imagery for rec-
    lamation projects were Ohio, Tenn., W. Va., Ky., Pa., s.c., Fla., and the
    Great Plains states. (NASA Release 76-1 34)
  President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National
    Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished
     White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times
     reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago
     “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it,
     particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the
     Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had re-
     ported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned Pres-
     ident Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress;
     the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding
     projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other
     candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change
     in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss
     (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropria-
     tions Committee had just cut $ 1 million from a $3.3-million budget
     estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76,37;
     Av V k , 5 July 76, 13)
21-31 fuly: The Wush. Star “Portfolio” column reported that television
    was “barely there” as the Viking 1 spacecraft touched down on Mars
    and began to relay “those sharp, stark pictures to earth.” Hardly had
    reporters began asking explanations from scientists “who looked stunned

                                     151
                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

       with pleasure at the accomplishment,’’ when “it was commercial
            .
       time . . and the 9 a.m. pmgrams.” Viewers were “left wondering
       whether theri: was really an event of such magnitude being televised or
       more science fiction,” the Star commented. ( WStar, 21 July 76, B-1)
            Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune
       hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement
       is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we
       were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.”
       (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7)
            The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for man-
       kind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . .
       Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons
       aboard . . . Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more
       eloquently than words.” (P lnq, 21 July 76, 5-A)
            The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage;
       Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louis-
       ville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being
       blase about space exploration, this was just incredible . . . I think the
       population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s
       kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had
       given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by
        Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC
       said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more;
       ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls
       was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have under-
       stood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That
       was it.” ( N I T , 21 July 76, 12)
            The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “spec-
       ulate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking 1 landing on Mars
       was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks
       that %pent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on
       record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was
       sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However,
       those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless
       Viking’s cameras pick up ‘‘ something interesting, like a local resident,”
       would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated
       application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, ad-
       vanced managerial skills as triumph of human organization,” and left
       mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet.
       L L . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same

       again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22)
            A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended
       generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was
       worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what
       our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much
       too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we
       have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in
       scientific if not in fictional terms.” ( W Star, 22 July 76, A-14)

                                       152
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        July

       The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky
   against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists
   announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the
   wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image
   on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The
   seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would
   impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland,
   deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been
   issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. ( WStar, 22 July
   76, A-1)
       Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot,
   Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would
   be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with
   less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the
   Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater
   likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking
   project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different
   physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more
   than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug.
   and land about 4 Sept. if all went well. Debate on the second landing site
   focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the
   radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan
   said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success
   calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising.
   However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly €or Cydonia
   because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the
   significance of success” that merited consideration. ( WStar, 22 July 76,
   A-6)
       Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on
   Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on
   luck . . . . I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself.
                                       .
   It’s people doing that extra job . . ” Martin’s management approach
   during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details
   of everything . . . . I’ve never known any other way to be
   successful . . . . It inspires and motivates the next level of management
   to get involved.” (NYT, 22 July 76, 24)
       The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since
   the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3%
   nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times.
   Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most
   compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars;
   now this argument had been removed. (NYT, 22 July 76, 30)
       JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after
   announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might
   have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the
   “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for
   Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking


                                    153
July                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

       imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color
       reconstruction could take another wk or two. ( WStar, 2 3 July 76, A-1)
           Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference
       that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an
       error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the
       arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free
       the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and
       drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology
       experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops
       would be used for chemical analysis. ( N U , 24 July 76, 1)
           Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was
       having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two re-
       ceivers getting direct communications from earth was not working prop-
       erly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was
       operating in a low-powermode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-
       quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander
       despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see
       if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the
       electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3)
           Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and
       waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and
       virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a
       nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time
       of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A-16)
           “I really do not know what the fuss is all about-landing on Mars, I
       mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both
       Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won
       the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games,
       was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and went/on to star
       in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old
       Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space
       travel . . . . I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go
       through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s
       in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk
       men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily
       Star, 30 July 76, A-19)
            Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth
       because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald
       in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff,
       as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place
       to set down the camera.” If thelMartians sent a camera to earth, the
       smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on
       Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was
       happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their
       canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given
       us the greatest show ever seen on television.” ( WPost, 25 July 76, H-1)
           A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on
       the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extend-

                                        154
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       July
   able arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the
   second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the
   Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its
   arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a
   locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in
   space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede trans-
   mission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the
   command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded
   to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture
   came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a
   surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight direc-
   tors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3
   delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that
   had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft com-
   puter signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a
   second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. De-
   tection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to
   land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (W Post, 26 July 76, A-1)
       The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas
   than it is today, and L‘wecould breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer
   in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member
   of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking
   1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95%
   carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2%argon, 0.3%oxygen; earth’s
   atmosphere is 78%nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9%argon-40, and 0.03%
   carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and
   the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology,
   but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian
   surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the
   original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands
   exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was
   richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration
   of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S.Binder. “We propose to
   test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks . . . to see if
   there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-1; J Star, 27 July
                                                              V
   76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5)
       Viking 1’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars
   surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture
   transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube
   about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig
   into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover
   snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the
   sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container,
   about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed
   to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were
   the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules
   and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials,
   Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient.

                                   155
July                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

           The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment
       of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun
       as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic
       compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon diox-
       ide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert
       Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by
       tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to
       see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be
       detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s
       Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid
       form-“chicken soup”-to the Mars sample and look for changes in gas
       composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food
       was being used.
           The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 1 2 days before
       results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by
       subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long
       wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers
       might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking,
       pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put
       yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown
       in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment
       chambers. ( W Star, 28 July, A-1, A-5)
           One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive
       enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts
       to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample
       apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were
       not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm
       apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instru-
       ment. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a
       strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still
       be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the
       sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet
       sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves.
       After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechan-
       ical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spec-
       trometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either
       time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the
       swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in
       the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded
       properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the
       x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (NY”, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29
       July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1)
           Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample
       that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening.
       Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohe-
       sive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission
       Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunc-
       tion were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or

                                      156
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                         July
    failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly.
    Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment,
    said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping
    for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would
    take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland
    said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet
    clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil.
    The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally,
    and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spec-
    trometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomor-
    row. (Nm,30 July 76, A-22; W S t a r , 30 July 76, A-5; C Trib,31 July
    76, 2)
        The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking
     1’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon,
    titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a
    few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very
    thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or
    rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald SoiTen,
    one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the
    inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be
    analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the
    surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an
    analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-
    chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like
    vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth;
    this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like
    arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do
    not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results
    from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a
    few days. ( N M ; 31 July 76, A-1)
22-24 July: NASA launched the second in a series of Comstar satellites at
    6:04 pm EM’ 22 July from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on an
    Atlas-Centaur AC-40 into a transfer orbit with 42 171-km apogee,
    2930-km perigee, and 21.8” inclination. Like its predecessor launched
     1 3 May, Comstar-B ( called Comstar 0-2 in orbit) was owned and would
    be operated by Comsat General Gorp. under lease to American Tele-
    phone and Telegraph Go. as part of a three-satellite domestic commu-
    nications system. Comstar 0-2 went into orbit lacking FCC approval for
    its operational use; ATeT engineering director Robert Latter said details
    for use of the system had not been worked out. On 24 July at 6:12 pm
     EDT, Comsat General commanded firing of the apogee kick motor to put
    the Comstar into station at 95OW, above the equator for coverage of the
    southwestern U.S., at approximately 35 793-km altitude. A third Com-
    star would be launched in 1978 to allow for growth of service, and a
    fourth Comstar would be built as a spare. (NASA Release 76-127; Comsat
    General Release CC-76-1 17; NASA MOR M-491-201-76-02;                 [pre-
    launch] 20 July 76, [postlaunch] 13 Dec 76; D/SD 26 July 76,
    127)

                                     157
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

23 July: Proponents of the B-1 strategic bomber, “vigorously opposed for
    years by people inside and outside of government,” seemed likely to win
    their struggle to get approval for the $22-billion program, said Science
    magazine. A House-Senate conference committee voted in mid-June to
    spend $960.5 million in procurement funds for the first 3 B-1 planes,
    although the Senate had passed an amendment delaying spending of the
    money until a new administration should take office.
        This year’s fight to procure the B-1 was the culmination of a 15-yr
    effort that began with the shooting down of a U-2 plane over the Soviet
    Union in 1960; the USAF projected the building of a low-flying manned
    bomber, the ideas converging in 1969 with AMSA (advanced manned
    strategic aircraft), a project opposed by then Secretary of Defense
    Robert McNamara. In 1969, when Melvin Laird became President
    Nixon’s Secretary of Defense, AMSA studies were concluded and the final
    design “metamorphosed into the B- 1,” Rockwell Intl. Corp. becoming
    prime contractor. At the same time, other Pentagon planners were
    backing a strategic armed cruise missile decoy system (SCAD), assuming
    that Congress would not approve both programs. At the urging of the
    IISAF, Secretary Laird canceled the SCAD program in July 1973, but the
    chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Sen. Thomas McIn-
    tyre, D-N.H.) ordered it reinstated.
        Both the bomber and the cruise missile had encountered development
    problems and increased expenses; internal Rockwell documents from
    Jan. 1974 showed company concern about “competitive threats in the
    form of the standoff missile and . . . the launch aircraft” that other
    companies might seek to build. A massive public-relations campaign was
    mounted to protect the B-1; ultimately, Science said, the B-1 would win
    but the cruise missile would also have its day, quoting John B. Walsh,
    Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E) at the
    Pentagon, as saying “YOU need both bombers and cruise missiles.”
    (Science, 23 July 76, 303)
0 Marshall Space Flight Center announced that Barbara S. Askins, a chemist
    in MSFC’s Astronomy Branch, had applied for patent on an improved
    process, autoradiographic film intensification, that would improve photo-
    graphic images after films or plates had been developed. Exposing silver
    or other imaging material on a developed film or plate to a radioactive
    environment would convert the material to a radioactive compound;
    placing the radioactivated material in contact with a receiver emulsion
    on an unexposed film or plate would reproduce the original image with
    increased contrast and density. The hazards and complexity of handling
    radioactive material had limited the use of such a process, but the new
    process did not require special training, expensive equipment, or extraor-
    dinary safety precautions, as it used an isotopic organo-sulfur 35 com-
    pound and could be adapted easily to an ordinary photographic labora-
    tory. Askins said the process would be used in astronomy and other
    scientific research where low light levels were encountered. (MSFC
    Release 76-1 3)
0 The U.S. had the smallest Air Force since the beginning of the Korean War,
    General, William J. Evans told a luncheon of the National Security
                                    158
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                           July
      Industrial Association in Los Angeles. Gen. Evans, commander of the Air
      Force Systems Command, said that the Air Force, in an effort to reverse
      this trend, was in the midst of the greatest modernization period of its
     short history, citing “the effective combination’, of “land-based termi-
     nals and spaceborne satellites to provide attack warning, weather data,
      communication links, and positioning and navigation for American forces
      wherever they may be.” The US. was building a modern Air Force “with
      inefficient equipment that would be at home in a museum,” he said,
      calling on industry for more investment in modern equipment and ad-
     vanced technology. Contractor testing had not been realistic, and
      performance of contractor products had failed to meet operational re-
      quirements; the government presence in contractor plants, to which
      industry objected, could be reduced with better designs, streamlined
      operations with better visibility, and measures such as greater use of
      computers to reduce inefficiencies. (AFSC Release OIP 152.76)
*   The organizational structure of a large earth-orbiting space station was the
      topic of a doctoral study at Fla. State Univ. for Dr. James Ragusa of
      Kennedy Space Center’s Science and Applications Office. The study was
      an offshoot of work on future space projects (with Gene McCoy of KSC’s
      Shuttle Payload Integration Office) before Dr. Ragusa left to work on his
      Ph.D. The topic was one about which little had been written, and was
      timely in that the structure should be included in plans for such a mission.
      Spacelab, with a 7-man crew, needed no complex organizational struc-
      ture; a space colony with a projected population of thousands would
      require a government rather than an organizational structure. A space
      base housing 50 to 100 persons would bring together people of varying
      backgrounds for extended periods of time-the station being designed
      with a 1O-yr operating life-and large-group behavior would be a factor
      in considering the best type of organization. Ragusa investigated the
      organizational structures used on submarines and destroyers, inter-
      viewing the submarine captains and taking cruises on the nuclear sub
      Nathanael Greene and the research sub Benjamin Franklin.
          Among those interviewed for the study were Dr. Wernher von Braun;
      Arthur Clarke, author of 2001 and father of the communications satel-
      lite; several astronauts; and Gene Roddenberry, creator of the TV series
      “Star Trek.” Ragusa found that the organization on Roddenberry’s
       U.S.S. Enterprise was modeled after that used on 18th century English
      ships, which in turn was based on that used on Phoenician ships 2500
      years ago, in which the ship was considered an extension of the country
      itself and abided by the laws and traditions of the homeland; the captain
      was king, and his word was law. The structure best fitting the needs of
      a space base was the “total matrix model” with four levels of hierarchy,
      best for efficient and orderly management of the crew because of its
      adaptability. Of 8 models, the “Star Trek” structure ranked fifth be-
       cause of it; lack of flexibility and efficiency. (Spaceport News, 2 3 July
       76. 5)
*   NASA announced that the U.S. Government Printing Office had published the
       3-volume English edition of the joint U.S.-USSR Foundations o Spacef
       Biology and Medicine, summarizing biological and medical results of
                                       159
July                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    the first 15 yr of space flight. The work was produced by a joint editorial
    board on space biology and medicine formed in Oct. 1965 by NASA and
    the Soviet Academy of Sciences; the USSR had published a Russian-
    language edition in Moscow. The text consisted of 45 chapters, 19
    authored by 0.s. scientists, 20 by USSR scientists, and 6 by teams of
    authors from both nations. Volume I was called “Space as a Habitat”;
    Volume 11, “Ecological and Physiological Foundations of Space Biology
    and Medicine,” responses of man, plants, and animals to space flight;
    Volume 111, “Space Medicine and Biotechnology,” technology and pro-
    cedures needed to sustain life and permit living creatures to function in
    space. (NASA Release 76-135)
23-24 July: The scientific balloon D a Vinci 111, launched west of St. Louis,
    Mo., at 7:25 am CI)T on 23 July, landed safely at about 9 am EDT on
    24 July about 80 km east of Lexington, Ky. Purpose of the flight was to
    follow industrial and urban air pollution into the surrounding country-
    side, recording the changes in concentration and chemistry of the pollut-
    ants. Early findings indicated that high levels of ozone and sulfur
    dioxide-2 major air pollutants-persisted throughout the flight. The
    4-member crew of D a Vinci Ill included 3 who manned both the D a
     Vinci I flight in Nov. 1974 and the D a Vinci I1 flight in June 1976:
    Dr. Rudolf J. Engelmann of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
    Administration; pilot and project originator Ms. Vera Simons; and pilot
    Jimmie Craig of the U.S. Naval Weapons Center. The new member of the
    crew was Preston B. Herrington of Sandia Laboratories, Energy Re-
    search and Development Administration, which would collect and ana-
    lyze the flight data as well as conduct all flight operations. Da Vinci was
    a joint project of ERDA, NOAA, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
    (ERDA Releases 76-21 1, 76-245)
25 July: Blueprints for future Mars explorations, triggered by the Viking 1
    landing on Mars, included not only the dispatch of roving robot vehicles
    to the surface of Mars but also collection and return of Mars samples by
    a “sailing ship”-a       spacecraft carrying an onionskin-thin sail of
    aluminum-coated plastic measuring more than 185 m‘ and powered by
    the pressure of solar electromagnetic radiation. Space flight would be-
    come possible with less reliance on heavy and expensive rockets, said
    John Noble Wilford in the New York Times; a space-sailer could be
    launched from an earth-orbiting Shuttle, deploy landers to collect and
    return samples, and return to earth with larger amounts of Martian
    samples than possible by other methods. JPL’S plans for future missions
    might include a fleet of the sailers (to be called Yankee Clippers) “flying
    the routes from earth orbit to the vicinity of Mars, hauling supplies and
    portable habitats, and finally explorers, to a Mars base.” ( N U , 25 July
     76, 44)
  Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) charged that the US. Navy planned to spend
     $187.6 million to repair F-14 Tomcat jet-fighter engines that it planned
    to replace at an additional cost of up to $1.9 billion. “. . . The Navy
    hopes to pull a double whammy on the taxpayers by replacing the
     repaired engine with a brand new one,’’ Aspin said. The Navy conceded

                                     160
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        JdY
    that replacing engines in the jet fighters would cost $1.6 to $1.9 billion,
    but claimed the planned repairs to current engines would cost only
    $86 million. The Navy said it wanted new engines for installation begin-
    ning in 1981. ( W P o s t , 26 July 76, A-1)
25-31 July: An almost equal division of opinion in the U.S. Senate on whether
    to go ahead with production of the B- 1 bomber was occupying politicians
    and commentators in Washington. The New York Times Magazine
    story headed “Will It Bomb?” asked if the B-1 were really needed and
    concluded that it was not, admitting that the project had a “seemingly ir-
    reversible momentum” and already had “a backhanded commitment to
    production.” Election-year oratory was calling for a decision to be
    postponed until a new administration took office. A lobby group called
    Campaign to Stop the B-1 Bomber, claiming to represent 26 national
    organizations, sent a telegram to Democratic presidential nominee
    Jimmy Carter asking him to send back Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-
    Minn.), vice presidential nominee, who was meeting with Carter in Ga.,
    for a “crucial” vote in which Mondale’s presence was “essential.” The
    vote to postpone in the Senate Appropriations Committee was 15 to 14;
    the House of Representatives had voted twice, in April and again in June,
    to proceed with the B-1, but on both votes the nonvoters could have
    changed the outcome. (The April vote in the House was 2 10 to 177, with
    46 not voting; the June vote was 207 to 186, with 37 not voting.) A
    spokesman for Rockwell Intl. Corp., which would be prime contractor for
    the B-1, warned that postponement would increase costs by at least
     $500 million, cost 3000 workers their jobs, and shelve plans to hire
    another 7700 workers. Defense Secretary Donald F. Rumsfeld said delay
    in producing the B-1 would be “unsound from a cost standpoint, from
    a management standpoint,” and Air Force Secretary Thomas C. Reed
    said delay would add “half a million dollars to the cost of the program
    for no purpose.”
        A New York Times story 30 July said that a breakfast meeting with
    Secy. Reed for a group of Senate aides had been paid for by the Air Force
    Association, a private group with 155 000 members-largely retired Air
     Force personnel-and chartered as a veterans organization not required
    to register as a lobbyist. The Air Force Legislative Liaison Office, which
    arranged the breakfast, seemed to have been “concerned that it might
    be engaged in a form of lobbying of doubtful legality,” said the N f l ,
     pointing out that a 1948 law “specifically provides that no funds appro-
    priated by Congress can be used by a Government agency directly or
    indirectly ‘to influence in any manner’ the vote of a member of Con-
     gress.” (NYT magazine, 25 July 76, 7; W Post, 26 July 76, A-13;
     C Trib, 2 9 July 76,lO; NYT,30 July 76, A6; Av Wk, July 76,23)
                                                            26
26 July: Johnson Space Center announced delivery and acceptance of the
     Sperry Rand computer system, Univac 110/46, that would drive the
     Shuttle mission simulators. Dr. Bruce B. Johnson, technical manager of
     the contract, said that JSC had tested the computer complex round the
     clock for 30 days before its acceptance, and that the complex had
     demonstrated reliability “far in excess of contractual requirements.”

                                     161
July                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    Completed 3 wk ahead of schedule, the Univac 1100/46 contained 10
    processors, making it one of the most powerful digital computers built to
    date, with 900 000 36-bit words in the main memory and 2 billion
    characters in mass storage capacity. The computer would simulate a wide
    range of mission situations-prelaunch, ascent, aborts, orbit rendezvous
    and docking, entry, and landing-in the process of training flight crews
    and ground personnel in all phases of the Shuttle program. Total cost of
    the computer complex was $7 934 876. (JSC Release 76-47)
* The US. Air Force announced production of a new material with electrical
    properties suitable for solid-state laser applications: anisotropic yttrium
    aluminate doped with neodymium (Nd:YAlO,,), a substance difficult to
    make into high-quality single crystals. The new material would replace
    neodymium YAG in solid-state lasers because it loses less heat than
    conventional lasing materials, requires no external component to polarize
    the laser light, and stores more energy for electro-optical switched-laser
    operations. The USAF sponsored the research at a pilot plant of Lambda-
    Airtron Division of Litton at Morris Plains, N.J. which produced 4 0 rods
    of the new material; the longest, about 100 mm long, was valued at
    $4000. The high cost resulted from the cost of the raw materials and the
    iridium crucibles used in production, as well as the large amounts of
    power needed. The Air Force Materials Laboratory at Wright-Patterson
    AFB, O . , would lend the tested rods to qualified government agencies and
    contractors. (AFSC Release OIP 118.76)
27 July: The Viking 1 orbiter photographed a tiny moon of Mars called
    Phobos at a distance of just over 8000 km, providing a picture so clear
    that more than 100 craters were visible on the surface only 22.5 km
    across. At least 6 craters measured nearly 2 km across, meaning that
    meteorites the size of small towns had crashed into Phobos during the last
    3 or 4 billion yr. The face of Phobos in the picture released by JPL was
    the same one photographed in 1971 and 1972 Mariner 9, first space-
    craft to orbit Mars. “This means that Phobos always shows its same side
    to Mars,” said Dr. Thomas C. Duxbury of JPL, as earth’s moon always
    shows the same side because of the pull of earth’s gravity. Another
    Viking 1 picture showed small channels in the Argyre basin of Mars’s
    southern highland that were the best evidence yet for heavy rainfall on
    the planet in past ages. Present atmospheric pressure on Mars was only
    about 7.7 millibars, 1/200th of that on earth and insufficient for liquid
    water to form or rain to fall. (W Post, 28 July 76, A-8)
* Johnson Space Center announced that NASA had awarded the Singer Co.
    Simulations Products Division, Binghamton, N.Y., a $6.5-million 2-yr
    contract for maintenance, modification, and operational support of JSC’s
    simulation complex at Houston to be used in training flight crews for the
    Space Shuttle program. Initially, the simulation complex would consist of
    the Shuttle procedures simulator and the crew procedures evaluation
    simulator; later, an orbiter aeroflight simulator would be added, followed
    by the Shuttle mission simulator. In addition to systems and hardware
    engineering, configuration control, installation and tests of modifications,
    and development, drafting, and illustration of software, the contract

                                    162
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          July

      would require maintenance, servicing, and operational support of the
      equipment as well as documentation and logistics support. Extensions of
      24 and 6 mo would be optional. McDonnell Douglas Corp. also negotiated
      for this contract (see 10 May). (JSC Release 76-48)
*   NASA announced the appointment of Harold E. Pryor as Deputy Adminis-
      trative Assistant for Technology Utilization in the NASA Hq Office of
      Industry Affairs. Pryor had been with NASA since 1964, serving as di-
      rector of the management systems office, the staff operations division in
      the Office of Procurement, and the NASA/DOD Contract Administration
      Services Office in the Defense Supply Agency Hq. He was also executive
      assistant to the Director, Manned Space Flight Management Operations,
      until July 1973, when he became director of the Scientific and Technical
      Information Office. Pryor earned bachelor’s degrees in naval science and
      tactics and in aeronautical engineering; he served in the U.S. Navy during
      World War 11. He would succeed Clare F. Farley, recently retired from
      NASA. (NASA anno. 27 July 76)
    Tass reported from Moscow the launch of Intercosmos 16, carrying
      scientific apparatus developed in the German Democratic Republic,
      Czechoslovakia, and Sweden, as well as in the USSR. Orbital parameters
      were said to be 523-km apogee, 465-km perigee, 94.4-min period, and
      50.6” inclination. The probe was to study ultraviolet and x-ray radiation
      from the sun and the effects of this radiation on upper-atmosphere
      structure. Observatories in Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, and Czechoslo-
      vakia were making ground observations of the sun simultaneously with
      measurements taken aboard the satellite. (FBIS, Tass in English, 27 July
      76)
    Reporting on the opening of the new National Air and Space Museum in
0
      Washington, D.c., Pru& mentioned the life-size model of the docked
      Soyuz and Apollo spacecraft, saying that it “arouses the greatest interest
      among the museum’s visitors” and adding, “The USSR and the United
      States must continue cooperation.” The news story, headlined “First
      Anniversary,” quoted both Dr. James Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and
      his deputy Dr. George M. Low on the technical and political importance
      of the ASTP mission. (FBIS, quoting Tass in Pruvda, 16 July 76, 5)
*   U.S. intelligence sources reported the third failure of the USSR this year in
      testing an antisatellite system, when a Russian Hunter satellite failed to
      stay in orbit 21 July. The Hunter’s mission was to destroy the Cosmos
      839 launched into orbit 12 days earlier; u.S. analysts did not know what
      was causing the Soviet problem. Soviet efforts to develop an antisatellite
      system dated back about 10 yr, with only 5 successful launches out of
      more than 20 attempts before testing stopped in 197 1. All 3 attempts
      since testing resumed in Feb. 1976 had been failures, the U.S. intel-
      ligence sources said. The satellite-destroyer was reported to be about
      8 m long and to weigh about 2.5 tons at launch; equipped with 5 main
      rocket engines, the interceptor was said to be able to close on a target
      at about 4 km per sec and to get as close as 30 m to the target before
      exploding on ground command. The Associated Press report noted that
      the U.S. had not tried to develop a similar system since the 1960s;

                                       163
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July
    Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering,
    said last winter that “we are very much concerned about satellite vulner-
    ability.” ( W Post, 27 July 76, A-2; C Trib, 27 July 76, 2)
27-28 July: NASA’s      Flight Research Center announced that Edwards AFB,
    Calif., was the scene of 3 air records set by pilots in the SR-71. Maj.
    Adolphus (Pat) Bledsoe, Jr., pilot, with Maj. John Fuller as recon-
    naissance system manager, flew the SR-7 1 at 3400 kph, surpassing the
    previous “absolute” (on a straight course) speed record of 2981 kph as
    well as a world-class speed record of 2920 kph set by Soviet pilots, both
    in Oct. 1967. Next day, Capt. Robert C. Helt, pilot, with Maj. Larry A.
    Elliott as recon officer, flew the SR-7 1 to an altitude of 26 km, surpassing
    the previous record of 24.4 km (in horizontal flight) set in 1965 by USAF
    Col. K.L. Stephens in a Lockheed YF- 12A interceptor (prototype sister
    ship of SR-71). On the same day, Capt. Elden Joersz, pilot, with
    Maj. George T. Morgan, Jr., as recon officer, flew the s ~ - 7 1 a speed
                                                                       at
    of 3530 kph to surpass the previous record of 3331 kph over a closed
    course set by Col. Stephens in 1965 in the Y F - ~ ~ A . National
                                                                    The
    Aeronautic Association verified the speed and altitude measurements,
    but the records would be unofficial until accredited by the Paris-based
    Fhd’eration Aeronautique Internationale. (FRC issuance 27-28 July 76;
     W S t a r , 28 July 76, 5)
28 July: Kennedy Space Center announced that Mae Walterhouse, coordi-
    nator of the Federal Women’s Program at KSC and recently elected
    national president of Federally Employed Women, Inc. (FEW),would
    participate in the 1976-1 977 Career Development Program at NASA Hq.
    Ms. Walterhouse would report to Washington 7 Sept. for a yr of experi-
    ence in the Office of Resources Management. The NASA program would
    assist the centers in developing potential supervisors and managers at all
    levels throughout the agency, foster understanding of Hq functions on
    the part of center personnel, and provide training in specific disciplines
    or functional areas. Ms. Walterhouse, who received a national award this
    summer for service to the FEW organization, planned to return to KSC and
    join the Administration Directorate after the yr at NASA Hq. (KSC Release
    376-76)
* The Department of Defense authorized development and testing of 2 pro-
    totypes of an improved STOL (short takeoff and landing) aircraft for the
    Marine Corps by McDonnell Douglas Corp. at a cost of about $400
    million, the Wall Street Journal announced. The prototype, called the
    A V 8 B Harrier, would be an adaptation of the existing AV8AHarrier built
    by Britain’s Hawker Siddeley Aircraft Ltd. The Marine Corps had pur-
    chased l 10 earlier Harriers from the British firm; if McDonnell Douglas
    could develop a stronger version, the Corps would buy “several hun-
    dred” from that company. The new versions were expected to cost about
    $5 milllion each. The Hawker Siddeley group had been authorized to
    build an improved Harrier for the Royal Navy; the Pentagon said it
    expected “mutual cooperation in the procurement of supplies and the
    exchange of information” as the 2 programs proceeded. (WSJ, 28 July
    76, 6)

                                     164
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       JdY
                                                  500 Sidewinder missiles and
        announced plans to sell West Germany
    1101)
@

    support equipment valued at $43 million. The announcement was one of
    several made by the Pentagon on foreign weapons sales, since law
    required that Congress must be notified and have 2 0 days in which to
    disapprove such sales. DOD also planned to provide $26 million in pilot
    training under a Northrop Corp. contract to upgrade the Saudi Arabian
    air force, through the sale of F5E jet fighters and construction of support
    and training facilities. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 3)
  Under a 3-nation agreement announced by Britain, West Germany, and
@

    Italy, the Tornado MRCA (multi-role combat aircraft) dubbed “the spear-
    head of Europe’s coming offensive against the United States for equality
    in the skies” would go into production and would be operational by 1980.
    The agreement provided for construction at a total cost of $10 billion of
    809 swing-wing “wonder weapon” planes that could fly just under the
    speed of sound at treetop level, and twice the speed of sound at higher
    altitudes; it was designed to replace 2 of the most profitable planes ever
    produced by U.S. makers, the Phantom used by Britain’s RAF and the
    F104 Starfighters used by West Germany and Italy. The Tornado car-
    ried terrain-following radar that could fly it under enemy radar, and
    could vary its wingspan from 8.5 to 14m. Panavia (consisting of British
    Aircraft Corp., Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm, and Aeritalia) would
    build the Tornado airframe and Turbo-Union (Rolls Royce, Motoren-
    und-Turbinen Union, and Fiat) would build the engine. The U.S. press
    noted that, for the first time, American aerospace firms would be facing
    a competitor as formidable as themselves. ( W Post, 15 Aug 76, A- 14;
     W S t a r , 18 Aug 76, A-4)
29 July: NASA launched ITOS-H, fifth operational spacecraft of the second-
    generation improved Tiros operational satellite (ITOS) series, from the
    Western Test Range at 1:07 pm EDT (10:07 am PDT, local time) on a
    2-stage Delta vehicle into a synchronous polar orbit with 1523.6-km
    apogee, 1512.5-km perigee, 102.1 inclination, and 116.2-min per-
    iod. After successful injection into orbit, the satellite was redesignated
    Noaa 5; upon completion of in-orbit checkout, spacecraft control would
    be transferred to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
    (NOAA) as part of that agency’s National Operational Meteorological
    Satellite System (NOMSS). Of 4 previous Noaa polar-orbiting spacecraft,
    2 still provided limited information but had deteriorated after 2.5 and
    1.5 yr in orbit respectively because of harsh environmental conditions in
    space.
        ITOS spacecraft were designed to provide complete global coverage or*
    earth’s cloudcover and atmospheric structure on a daily basis, using both
    daytime and nighttime instrumentation. The 345-kg boxlike spacecraft
    measured roughly 1 x 1 x 1.25 m and carried 3 winglike panels cov-
    ered with solar cells, as well as earth-orientation devices and 4 commu-
    nications antennas. Sensor systems included 2 vertical-temperature
    profile radiometers, 2 very high-resolution radiometers, and 2 solar-
    proton monitoring systems, as well as a scanning radiometer system to
    provide both stored picture coverage for transmission on demand and


                                    165
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

    direct transmission of images to receiving stations within range. Visible-
    channel resolution was 3.7 km, infrared resolution 7.4 km. (NASA Release
    76-130; MOR E-601-76-17 [prelaunch] 28 July 76, [postlaunch] 30
    July 76, 1 Oct 76; NOAA Releases 76-143, 76-152)
* US. airline traffic increased more than 12% in the first half of 1976, the
    Air Transport Association reported; increasing numbers of passengers
    plus increased fares and cost-cutting would produce better profits for the
    airlines. Analysts said Americans were flying in unprecedented numbers
    because they felt the recession was over; even “ailing international
    carriers” like Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines
    were trimming their operating losses and might show some profit for the
    year, the Wall Street Journal reported. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 15)
30 July: NASA announced that its Viking Undergraduate Intern Program,
    permitting U.S. college students to participate in the Viking mission to
    Mars, was under way at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,
    Calif. Fifty-eight students from about 600 applicants had been selected
    to spend 30 days during the summer working with Viking scientists in a
    number of scientific areas at JPL, where more than 72 science teams were
    conducting a detailed examination of the planet, including a search for
    life. The program was the idea of Prof. Thomas Mutch of Brown Univ.,
    leader of the Viking imaging team, who was assisted by a teammate,
    Prof. Carl Sagan of Cornel1 Univ.; the 2 professors reviewed each of the
    applicants’ qualifications and selected the 58 students for the summer’s
    work. The program, designed to directly involve undergraduates with a
    strong interest in planetary science, was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan
    Foundation and by NASA’s Planetary Geology Office. (NASA Release
    76-139)
  A “tethered” satellite-suspended by a cable from the Space Shuttle
    orbiter’s cargo bay-could serve to deploy and control materials used in
    constructing a space station, or to transfer articles from one manned
    vehicle to another, said NASA scientists at the Marshall Space Flight
    Center. The orbiter could also “troll” a tethered satellite through a
    low-altitude earth orbit to explore the atmospheric region between 80
    and 120 km above earth’s surface; previous exploration vehicles-
    sounding rockets and low-altitude satellites-could not remain in that
    region long enough for extensive studies before being forced back to
    earth by atmospheric drag and gravity. The Smithsonian Astrophysical
    Observatory would aid NASA in system-dynamics studies for the tethered
    satellite system. MSFC would manage program development, integrate
    experiments, and support orbital operations. If the tethered system
    proved feasible, MSFC would begin spacecraft system design, and the first
    mission could be scheduled as early as 1980. (NASA Release 76-138)
* NASA announced it had awarded a $300 000 grant through its Office of
    Aeronautics and Space Technology to the Univ. of Wash., Seattle,
    Division of Ceramic Engineering for research into the nature and prop-
    erties of ceramic materials. The grant would help educate engineering
    design students in the search for new materials capable of sustaining high
    temperatures and exhibiting physical properties needed in an increasing

                                     166
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          July

    number of applications. Engineering contributions to the field of ce-
    ramics had led to improvements in fiberglass, optical communication%,
    nuclear fuels, catalytic converters, self-cleaning ovens and ceramic-top
    ranges, eyeglasses that darken in the sun, and human implants not
    susceptible to reaction with body mechanisms. Principal focus of the
    Univ. of Wash. program would be development of gas-turbine engine
    components that could withstand high temperatures and severe mechan-
    ical stress, and economical production of such components. (NASA Re-
    lease 76-137)
  NASA announced selection of a team consisting of General Electric co. and
     Hamilton Standard Division of United Technology Corp. for negotiating
    with NASA and ERDA a $?-million contract to design, build, and test by
     1978 a 1.5-Mw wind-turbine electricity-generating system, biggest in
     history. The experimental system, a windmill with 2 horizontally rotating
     fiberglass rotor blades about 61 m long mounted on a 45-m tower, could
     produce annually enough energy to supply more than 500 homes at a site
     with average winds of 29 kph. Located at a utility-company site, the
     NASA-ERDA system would supply electricity to the local utility for public
     use, to determine the economics and operating characteristics of large
     wind turbines coupled to conventional power plants. Utility companies
     had proposed 17 sites across the U.S.; ERDA would measure their wind
     characteristics over the coming year and would choose the site late in
     1976. Lewis Research Center would manage the project for ERDA. The
     new system would be bigger than the 1.25-Mw system, 53 m in di-
     ameter, built near Rutland, Vt., in the 1940s; that project could not
     compete economically with the then low cost of fossil fuels, and had been
     abandoned. (NASA Release 76- 136)
0 officials of the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO)
     threatened a slowdown at major U S . airports in the form of strict adher-
     ence to rules on spacing of aircraft, the Chicago Tribune reported. The
     union, in a salary dispute with the US. Civil Service Commission, would
     use the slowdown to protest failure to raise flight controllers’ pay. Federal
     Aviation Administration rules would permit a separation between air-
     planes of from 4.8 to 8 km; if controllers spaced flights the full 8 km
     apart, schedules could be delayed by as much as 6 hr at busy airports
     such as Chicago’s O’Hare. The tactics, although inconveniencing travel-
     ers, would not affect air safety, said PATCO president John Leyden. FAA
     had issued a request that controllers ignore the slowdown. (C Trib,
     30 July 76, 5)
31 July: Johnson Space Center employees Herbert A. Zook and Richard W.
     High received a patent this week for invention of a “capture cell,” a
     device to capture meteoroids traveling through space and preserve them
     for scientific analysis. The cube-shaped cell had an open side covered by
     a thin membrane; a meteoroid striking the membrane would enter the cell
     and shatter, but the remnants and any vapor created by the heat of
     impact would remain inside the cell, which was constructed of a material
     like polyethylene. Large arrays of the cells would be exposed on a
     spacecraft for a long time, up to a year, to allow time for a number of

                                      167
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

    strikes to occur. Interest in the composition of meteoroids springs from
    the possible information on larger bodies such as comets or asteroids on
    which they originated. (NYT, 31 July 76, 27)
During July: Scientists at JPL completed a list of “purple pigeons”-bright
    birds of the future-as unmanned planetary missions considered feasible
    for the period 1980-1 990. In hopes that Viking 1’s successful landing
    on Mars might prompt wider support for such missions, JPL proposed 7
    advanced missions that would probably be reduced to 3 or 4 to be
    forwarded to NASA Hq. The list includes: return to Mars with rover
    vehicles to extend exploration of the Martian surface; a lander for one
    of Jupiter’s moons, accompanied by a satellite around the planet; a
    similar mission to Saturn and its moon Titan; asteroid rendezvous and
    near-range photographic mission; a radar-mapper satellite for Venus;
    flight to Halley’s Comet with a solar-sailer satellite (propelled by solar
    radiation); and establishment of an automated station on the moon for
    extended study of the lunar environment, probably by an international
    scientific group. (Av Wk, 26 July 76, 16)
  Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered
    on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of
    facilities.
        -During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled
    more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155)
        -MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space
    Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames
    Research Center wind tun els (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m
    transonic facility). MSFC ,! ad used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller
                                I
    trisonic (over mach 3) widd tunnel to develop preliminary environmental
    data; the smaller tunnel $vas cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was
    cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component
    vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test crite-
    ria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for
    reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120)
        -Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale mod-
    els of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch
    pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a
    scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle
    model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the
    same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but
    MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150
    test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the K X launch pad
    would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests
    were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition
    overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch;
    uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its
    payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC
    Release 76- 1 17)
                  announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s
        -MSFC
    Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank

                                    168
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        July

   options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight
   capability. (MSFC Release 76-1 18)
       --MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the
   Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div.
   had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the
   nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement;
   the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to
   a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter,
   weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the
   main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain
   maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release
   76- 128)
       -MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to deter-
   mine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements
   of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch
   would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the
   brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed
   constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants
   and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of elec-
   trical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered
   for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for
   7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely
   simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test
   bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover
   the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion
   or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed
   would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC
   Release 76- 1 31)
       -MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on develop-
   ment of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2
   booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a
   total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system
   that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a mal-
   function at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times,
   recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing
   before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release
   76-132)
       -MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external
   tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans.
   Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space
   Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use
   in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use
   the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual
   firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system.
   The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min
   duration. (MSFC Release 76-137)
                announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space
       -MSFC
   Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSWs dynamic test

                                    169.
July                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop
      a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the
      ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel,
      who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the
      Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time
      all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from
      spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141)
          -MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small alumi-
      num tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the
      Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen
      contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of
       1 3 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the
      effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encoun-
      tered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vac-
      uum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding
      tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a
      7-hr idle period on a full tank‘s insulation system. The test period of
      7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to
      wait on a launch pad before lift          FC Release 76- 142)
          -MSFC announced completi                only totally new structure built
      exclusively for testing the Spa               external tank: the pneumatic
      test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which
      would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the
      length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would
      weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof
      tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof
      test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series
      of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify
      that no out-of-specificationleaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was
      prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release
      76- 143)
*   Johnson Space Center announced it had awarded to Klate Holt Co. of
      Houston a 1-yr 961.5-million extension of contract for custodial support
      services at JSC. The cost-plus-award-fee contract was originally awarded
      in July 1975. The contractor had provided custodial services in 8 2
      buildings at JsCand to buildings occupied by JSC at nearby Ellington AFB.
      (JSC Release 76-45)
*   The Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, reported
      that a long-winged U-2 aircraft on loan to NASA had successfully com-
      pleted tests in the “icy grip” of the main chamber at McKinley Climatic
      Laboratory during which it underwent exposure to temperatures as low
      as -57°C. The laboratory, operated by the USAF Armament Devel-
      opment and Test Center at Eglin AFB, Fla., conducted the tests at NASA’s
      request to isolate flight-control malfunctions occurring in the cold tem-
      peratures of high altitude. The U-2, a single-seat single-engine jet
      designed to operate at altitudes above 2 1 km, had been used by NASA as
      an earth-resources survey tool, making observations in astronomy, high-
      altitude atmospheric physics, and geophysics in addition to supporting
      general earth-resources programs. (AFSC Newsreview, July 76, 6)
                                      170
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        JdY
 Gene Sivertson of Langley Research Center’s Space Systems Div. had
   developed a new idea for search and rescue‘ operations using passive
   reflectors with imaging or side-looking radar to locate persons in
   emergency situations. The passive reflectors could be rigid, inflatable, or
   erectable structures that would show up on a radar system as bright spots
   easily distinguishable from clutter signals of the terrain. The reflectors
   could be carried as standard equipment by aircraft, ships and small boats,
   earth vehicles, and individuals; different packages could be tailored to
   the user’s needs. The inflatable concept would use a balloon containing
   a reflector structure of aluminized mylar, with a small helium or hydro-
   gen gas generator in the canister holding the mylar-saran balloon. De-
   ployed in an emergency situation, the reflector would mark a distress site
   and provide a radar target. The concept had been field-tested in Mich.
   and Fla. .with excellent test films as a result. Sivertson hoped to have the
   imaging radar on satellites with continuous global monitoring, and to test
   the system on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. (Langley Researcher, 9
   July 76, 3)
0 Dr. John A. O’Keefe, geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, pub-
    lished a book, Tektites and Their Origin, which noted that a piece of the
    moon could be purchased for a small amount. Tektites, the glass pebbles
    that fall from the sky, are ejecta from lunar volcanoes and not debris of
    meteorite impacts on the moon or the earth as previously suggested.
    Lunar missions that discovered tektite-like glass in the dust at some sites,
    the study of microscopic tektites from the bottom of earth‘s seas, and the
    volcanic appearance of some layered tektites caused the change in ideas.
    (Goddard News, July 76, 3 )
  Calling the Landsat photographs “some of the most fascinating, most
    valuable photographs ever taken,” Readers Digest magazine said the
    satellites “will have enormous effect on our lives and on the lives of our
    children,” as they revealed “things never before known about the earth
    and man’s activities on it, vastly improving our ability to make the planet
    more habitable.” The article quoted NASA Administrator James C.
    Fletcher: “If I had to pick one Space Age development most likely to
    save the world, I would pick the Landsats and the satellites that will
    evolve from them later in this decade.” The article described the process
    by which Landsat images were collected, processed, and used for a
    number of purposes: detecting oil and mineral deposits, finding sources
    of fresh water, assessing crops, forcecasting and minimizing damage
    from natural disasters, and monitoring population growth and pollution,
    among others. The Landsats, despite their importance, were still “in
    their infancy,” the article said, looking toward the day when “few
    activities will be undertaken on.. .the globe without first consulting these
    electronic oracles in space.” ( R D , July 1976, 13)
9 An unusually high loss of total blood hemoglobin after the first 16 days of
    flight was one of the medical findings from the Salyut 4-Soyuz 18
    mission reported by Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Lt. Col. Pyotr
    Klimuk to the 19th annual meeting of the Committee on Space Research
    (COSPAR) of the International Council of Scientific Unions. If valid, the
    Soviet data would represent a “significant departure” from earlier data
                                     171
                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
July

    on body mechanisms governing red cells in zero gravity, said Aviation
    Week and Space Technology magazine. Klimuk told the Phila. meeting
    that hemoglobin had decreased 16% in his blood and 25% in Sev-
    astyanov’s by the 16th day of the flight; although past data showed
    hemoglobin loss averaging 1% daily, Sevastyanov must have had a
    mechanism that “destroyed more cells than normal” to achieve the 25%
    deficiency. US. Skylab missions reported that crewmen normally recov-
    ered their ability to produce red blood cells with more time in orbit; the
    cosmonauts did not discuss their recovery from the hemoglobin
    deficiency, but reported that nothing medical had ben discovered during
    their 63-day flight to prevent increased duration of Soviet space flight.
    (Av ?T’%, 5 July 76, 49)
  New federal policies deriving from the Occupational Health and Safety Act
    and. the National Environmental Policy Act would affect about 30% of
    the USAF’s Aerospace Medical Division investment in biotechnology re-
    search and development, said an article in Aviation Week magazine.
    “WAF has yet to appreciate ...  how important these two laws are going to
    be. The day is rapidly coming when even major weapons systems wl        il
    never get through [a Defense System Acquisition Review council] with-
    out having to come to grips with ...the occupational safety of the people
    that have to work around the system and the impact of ...noise, electro-
    magnetic radiation effects and toxic effluents,” said Col. George C. Mohr,
    director of AMD research and development.
        Among items of special interest were the rocket fuels-unsymmet-
    rical dimethylhydrazine and monomethylhydrazine-and the hydro-
    chloric-acid fallout expected from Shuttle motor exhaust during launches
    at Vandenberg AFB; effects of laser exposure on eyes and skin; effects of
    multiple stress, including that caused by locating or operating equipment;
    and development of hardware, such as a lightweight 1-kg helmet to
    replace the standard 2-kg helmet that caused “high moment” effects on
    the wearer during sustained high-gravity maneuvers in the new genera-
    tion of fighter aircraft. Another environmentafsafety hardware item was
    a new 9-layer 25-mm windshield for planes to overcome the bird-strike
    problem, in place of the standard 2-layer 8.5-mm-thick windshield.
        A major problem, Col. Mohr said, has been that biotechnology stand-
    ards and criteria often were not considered until after the system concept
    had been finalized; another problem is the W D policy of tri-service
    planning, an attempt to ensure that the services do not duplicate re-
    search. Use of mathematical modeling in biotechnology had tended to
    “drive aerospace medicine research toward an engineering discipline,”
    the article said; the data output is usable by design engineers, while new
    legislation prevents use of humans in hazardous testing, and cost of
    laboratory animals has soared. (Av E%, 19 July 76, 219)
  “To prove that enthusiastic but untrained high school and college-age
    students can build a 5-kw solar generator,” a project called Sunfire
    managed by JPL’S Space Exploration Post would build such a generator
    for inhabitants of Pitcairn Is. in the South Pacific about 8000 km east
    of Australia. In 1974, Howard Broyles of JPL became interested in using
    solar energy to supply power at low cost, and discovered that the Pitcairn

                                    172
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       JdY
  residents could use the power; he interested a physics teacher at the local
  high school in the actual construction of a solar electric generator, and
  work began as a class project. When the site of construction became
  unavailable at the end of the school year, the project, under the name
  Seep (solar energy experimentation project), was offered to the JPL Space
  Exploration Post and approved by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Direc-
  tor. Sunfire-backward acronym for Energy for Remote-Islands From
  the Sun-would be a 5-kw generator converting solar rays into elec-
  tricity by using a parabolic mirror to focus the rays on a boiler that makes
  steam, turning a double set of turbines that run alternators to produce
  the power. The Pitcairn residents, fewer in number “than JPL’S Building
  180 has employes,” are mostly descendants of the crew of HMs Bounty,
  which mutinied in 1790 and found refuge on the small remote island,
  (Laboratory, 1976-4, 8)




                                   173
                             August 1976

1 August: Scientists at JPL, where the Viking 1 mission was being directed,
    were startled at responses from 2 of 3 instruments reporting on the first
    Mars surface samplings. The labeled-release instrument, designed to
    count radioactive molecules released by a process feeding tagged nutri-
    ents to a soil sample, had counted 4 times as many radioactive releases
    as would have resulted from a similar earth sample: 4537 per min for the
    first 9 hr 20 min it counted, compared to about 100 counts per min from
    Calif. soil sampled in a prelaunch test, and no more than 750 per min
    fiom soil gathered in the dry valleys of Antarctica. The rapidity and
    magnitude of the response were “quite surprising,” said Dr. Gilbert
    Levin of Biospherics, Inc., which built the instrument.
        Another Viking instrument, the gas-exchange experiment that damp-
    ened a surface sample with nutrients and monitored the resultant release
    of gas, detected an increase in oxygen released by the sample 15 times
    greater than was explainable by the Mars atmosphere or by oxidation of
    minerals similar to earth soils. The same instrument 24 hr later reported
    an increase in oxygen release 30% greater than that detected the first
    day. Scientists said the results might be attributed to superoxides, pro-
    duced by intense ultraviolet solar radiation on the Mars surface, reacting
    with the extemely iron-rich Martian soil, not shielded by atmosphere as
    earth’s surface is. Further information would be needed to reach firm
    conclusions, said Dr. Harold Klein of Ames Research Center, chief
    Viking biologist. ( W Post, 1 Aug 76, A-1; NYT, 1 Aug 76, 4-8)
@ Having completed a yr of service to India’s Satellite Instructional Tele-

    vision Experiment (SITE), Ats 6 began a 4-mo journey back to an orbital
    location over the Western Hemisphere to take part in experiments using
    direct broadcasting for education and health care. During its journey, it
    would be used by NASA in a project with the U.S. Agency for Intl.
    Development (AID) to demonstrate the potential of direct broadcasting to
    officials in more than 24 developing countries.
        The first set of demonstrations-known as AIDSAT, for AID space-age
    technology-would begin between 1 and 26 Aug. for 11 developing
    countries and one international conference; the program would consist of
    3 films created especially for the purpose, one on communications tech-
    nology for national development, one on use of satellites for natural
    resources monitoring, and one on use of satellites for disaster prediction
    and relief. After these films the host country would transmit a 30-min
    program originated in the terminal in each nation’s capital; then a 2-way
    discussion would be shown in which US. officials conversant with space
    technology and US. assistance would talk with representatives of the host


                                     175
August                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      country. President Ford would present an initial greeting, and astronaut
      Owen K. Garriott would be moderator of the first 5 programs.
          Of the 12 programs planned, those to Thailand, Pakistan, and Ban-
      gladesh were broadcast first, and subsequent ones were scheduled 9 Aug.
      to the United Arab Emirates, 10 Aug. to Oman, 16 Aug. to Jordan, 17
      Aug. to Kenya, and 18 Aug. to Yemen. On 2 3 Aug. the program would
      address the Conference on Applied Science and Technology in the Arab
      World at Rabat, Morocco; programs to Libya, Sudan, and Morocco
      would be broadcast during the remainder of August. A second group of
      demonstrations would begin in late Sept., and 15 more countries in
      Africa, Central and South America, and the Caribbean had been invited
      to participate. (NASA Release 76-140)
    By the yr 2000, mankind would have chosen between global cooperation
0
      and mutual destruction, said biochemist Isaac Asimov, professor at the
      Boston Univ. School of Medicine and one of the most prolific science-
      fiction writers. In an article copyrighted by the Phila. Bulletin, Asimov
      set forth his predictions which envisioned a single world power: a global
      community would grow in which more and more of the world’s activities
      would be under control of multinational organizations, approaching a
      2 1st-century global government, unless the nations were willing to settle
      for mutual suicide. The U.S. population would be less than now predicted,
      Asimov said, about 265 million, with government policies keeping growth
      to a minimum. The world population would have reached about 6 billion,
      a 50% increase from that of 1976. The U.S. would be searching for ways
      to use its food supplies to encourage a saner population policy; it would
      not be able to hoard its food for profitable sales because the welfare of
      the U.S. would depend on a strong world economy and “as non-desperate
      a world population as possible.” The U.S. would be more nearly a vege-
      tarian nation, both because of the higher yield per acre of grain and other
      plant food than if used for animal raising and because of the adverse
      effect on world opinion if the U.S. continued its wasteful eating habits
      while others starved.
          World opinion would have more power to affect national policy in the
      yr 2000; improved electronic communications would hring peoples
      closer and make them effectively part of a global community. Petroleum
      fuels would diminish and no longer serve as the major energy source; coal
      would become more important, as would windpower and solar and geo-
      thermal energy. By the yr 2000 the world would embark on new tech-
      nological advance, whatever the apparent benefit, with more caution and
      foresight. A space colony would be under construction, to serve both as
      a human habitat and as a solar-power station. As the number of such
      colonies increased, population expansion might again be possible, plus
      sufficient energy to satisfy a hungry world. The yr 2000 would probably
      be a dark time, Asimov said, but would offer hope to all those alive for
      a brighter future for their children. (C Trib, 1 Aug 76, 23)
*   Tass, the official Soviet press agency, said that permanent monitoring of
      earth from space would soon be a possibility because of advances in
      manned space missions, citing a prgress report on the cosmonauts (Boris

                                      176
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     August

    Volynov and Vitaly Zholobov) who had been orbiting the earth in the
    Salyut 5 space laboratory since 7 July. Major tasks of the cosmonauts,
    Tass said, were to survey Soviet territory below the 52nd parallel and
    compile detailed maps; analyze geological formations for possible gas, oil,
    and ore deposits; and study seismic activity or storms and forest fires. A
    previous report described a photographic search for minerals by the two
    cosmonauts, who photographed the southern Ukraine, Moldavia, the
    Altai territory of Soviet Central Asia, and the Caspian lowlands. Tass did
    not say whether a permanent monitoring service would be automatic or
    man-operated, or if the USSR planned to inaugurate such a service. (LA
    Times, 31 July 76, 1 Aug 76)
2 August: An early burst of activity recorded by an instrument aboard Viking
    1 on the surface of Mars had begun to slow down, said biologists at JPL
    who had been startled by the high rate of reaction indicated by the
    labeled-release experiment. The instrument used a sample of Martian
    surface, fed with a nutrient of amino acids, sugar, and vitamins, plus a
    radioactive-carbon tracer that would produce radioactive carbon dioxide
    if the sample used the nutrient to grow or metabolize. A geiger counter
    in the instrument had counted as many as 4500 radioactive molecules
    per minute being released from the sampler over 8 hr, going as high as
    8000 per min over the period of a day. Dr. Harold P. Klein of Ames
    Research Center, head of the Viking biology team, said the origins of the
    activity were not clear, and scientists were not sure whether “something
    is metabolizing” or not. It would take a wk to reach any conclusion from
    these results or those of the other two biology experiments, team mem-
    bers said. (NYT, 1 Aug 76, 1; W P o s t , 1 Aug 76, 1; 2 Aug 76, C-5;
     W Star, 2 Aug 76, A-1; WSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
3 August: Cloud-brightness images from orbiting satellites would enable the
    National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to predict the
    difference between relatively “dry” hurricanes and destructively wet
    ones such as Agnes (1972), Fifi (1974), and Eloise (1975), said Dr. Neil
    Frank of the Dept. of Commerce’s National Hurricane Center. For years,
    said Dr. Frank, meteorologists had known that some hurricanes were
    wetter than others, with those having highest potential rainfall also
    highest in damage over land. A new technique would estimate hurricane-
    rainfall potential from cloud images calibrated with computer models of
    river-basin flooding; the technique would be “a predictive tool” for
    inclusion in hurricane warnings. Heavy rains from Fifi in 1974 caused
    one of the worst natural disasters of the Western Hemisphere when
    heavy rains brought unexpected flash flooding that killed thousands in
    and around Honduras. Besides killing 118 people, Agnes caused a n
    estimated $2.1 billion in property damage from torrential rains and
    flooding; Eloise caused an estimated $200 million in property damage,
    again mainly from rain-caused flooding.
        The satellite technique was used retrospectively to estimate the rain-
    fall from 7 hurricanes for which radar and rain-gauge measurements
    were available; results disclosed little or no relationship between the
    volume or intensity of a storm and its rainfall. However, the rainfall

                                     177
August                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      potential calculated by the new procedure for the 7 hurricanes in the
      study agreed well with actual experience. Although estimates obtained
      through the new technique were relative, not absolute, the NOAA
      scientists viewed the procedure as a valuable tool for developing nations,
      an inexpensive system to monitor rainfall and improve the meteorological
      basis of agricultural and water-management planning. (NOAA Release
      76-158)
    The rate of production of radioactive gas from a Mars sample monitored
      by an instrument on Viking 1 had “plateaued,” said Dr. Gilbert V.
      Levin, who designed the instrument, and the slowdown in activity was
      puzzling from both a biological and a chemical standpoint. A biological
      response would generally evolve gas for a longer period, whereas the
      count-if recording a merely chemical reaction--“took place at a very
      rapid rate initially and then, uncharacteristically, slowed down and took
      a long time to plateau.” A special team of scientists from several fields
      was convened to consider all possible nonbiological explanations for the
      unusual readings from Viking 1, and various laboratories around the
      US. were being enlisted to help test the theories. (NIT, Aug 76, 18;
                                                                  3
      W S t a r , 3 Aug 76, A-7; WSJ, 2 Aug 76, 1)
    Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr., second person to walk on the moon, told an
0
      audience at Orange, Calif., that he had become an alcoholic several years
      before the 1969 Apollo 11 moon mission and stopped drinking only 2
      days before the flight. He had resumed drinking shortly after the mission.
      Aldrin said that, as a West Point cadet, he had been “caught in the
      alcohol trap”: having decided to give up alcohol when he was sent to
      Korea as a combat officer, he resumed drinking when he perceived that
      his military image was measured by “who could drink the most.” Aldrin
      spoke at a hospital where he stayed during a month-long recovery
      program in the summer of 1975; he had not mentioned his alcoholism in
      his 1973 book “Return to Earth” although he did discuss his post-Apollo
      psychiatric treatment, confirmed by the Air ,Force in 1972. ( W Star,
      3 Aug 76, A-2; NIT, 3 Aug 76; W Post Parade, 26 Sept. 76, 6)
    NASA announced that a French team of experimenters, using very high-
      resolution sensors on the Os0 8, had observed an oscillation in the sun’s
      atmosphere every 1 4 min very like seismic activity on the earth, during
      which the atmosphere moves up and down as much as 1300 km. No one
      had expected “this huge movement of gas which might well involve the
      entire solar atmosphere,” said Dr. Roger Thomas of GSFC, one of the Os0
      8 project scientists. “However, it may prove possible to use the waves
      to learn more about the sun’s interior, in a manner analogous to using
      seismic activity to study the structure of the earth or moon.” Dr. Roger
      Bonnet of the Centre National de la R’echerche Scientifique in Paris,
      principal investigator, agreed that the discovery could be one of the most
      important results from the French instrumentation. Os0 8 was launched
      21 June 1975 carrying 8 onboard instruments for solar research-the
      most sophisticated and ambitious ever flown, according to NASA-and
      preliminary results indicated the spacecraft’s mission could be consid-
      ered successful. (NASA   Release 76-1 41)

                                      178
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                        August

  Lockheed Aircraft Corp. reported a 24.2% decline of earnings in the 2nd
    quarter, and 10.1% decline in the first half of 1976, blaming the drop
    on substantial writeoffs and costs related to the TriStar L-1011 and
    reduced levels of production. The company had hoped to apportion
    startup costs of tooling and production over sales of an estimated 300
    TriStars; only 13 planes were delivered in the first 6 mo of 1976 and only
    3 more were scheduled for delivery during 1976, with firm orders for 22
    more. However, 3 of the remaining order were subject to approval by the
    Japanese government, which was investigating Lockheed bribes paid in
    Japan to promote its sales there. Robert W. Haack, Lockheed chairman,
    said that the company was in an “overall stronger position” this year
    despite the lower earnings, pointing to debt reduction, a new bank-
    lending agreement, and contracts signed during the second quarter of
    1976, which included a $625-million contract with Saudi Arabia for an
    air-traffic control system and a $697-million order from Canada for 18
    of its F3 Orion aircraft. (NYT, Aug 76, 41; WSJ, 4 Aug 76, 9)
                                        4
  INTELSAT-the International Telecommunications Satellite organization-
    announced award of an $8840 contract to the Univ. of Oulu, Finland,
    for measurements of low-elevation-anglescintillation. The 1-yr contract
    covered investigation of the slow fluctuation in received-signal strength
    from a satellite to earth stations in humid localities, at elevation angles
    of 5” above the horizon. Water vapor in the lower atmosphere could
    cause fluctuations in signal strength, intensified where the look-angle
    from station to satellite is as low as 5 ” , causing the signal to pass through
    more of earth’s atmosphere than if the elevation angle were greater.
                 Release 76-2 1-M)
    (INTELSAT
4 August: Johnson Space Center announced signing of a supplemental agree-
    ment with Lockheed Electronics Co. of Houston for $2.57 million, for
    additional scientific and technical support at the Slidell Computer
    Complex of the Earth Resources Laboratory in La. The supplemental
    agreement brought the total value of the contract to $7.1 million. (JSC
    Release 76-49)
  MSFC reported an unprecedented amount of data distributed to and used by
     the scientific community as a result of rapport, established under an
     arrangement known as the Skylab solar workshops, among principal
     investigators in the Skylab Apollo telescope mount (ATM)           project and
     other scientists. The workshops, supported by NASA, had provided a
     means of “intense interaction and collaboration” by the participants,
     MSFC said.
         The first workshop, held in Oct. 1975 on coronal holes, was attended
     by 60 scientists representing 19 universities and other institutions; a
     second workshop in Feb. and the last this wk would conclude the series.
     The workshops met near the High Altitude Observatory at Boulder,
     Colo., under fairly isolated conditions; the scientists were together most
     of the time, passing on information, explaining discoveries, and talking
     shop from breakfast until late at night. Jack Zirker of the Univ. of
     Hawaii’s Institute of Astronomy, director of the first workshop series,
     said the workshop procedure was “an ideal way to deal with the topic”

                                       179
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

   because participants collaborated closely between meetings, planning
   and carrying out projects that otherwise might have languished.
       The next workshop in the series, on solar flares, was scheduled to
   begin with a first meeting in the last week of Oct. 1976. Discussions at
   the first meeting would define the total effort; participants would return
   home to work on individual pieces of the problem. A second meeting 4
   or 5 mo later would be a midterm status review and working meeting,
    with participants contributing information relevant to the total project.
    At the final workshop, participants would sum up their findings and
    identify unsolved problems, preparatory to publishing their results. The
    workshop would produce a monograph summarizing the state of the art
    at that point. Scientists taking part in the solar workshop series said the
    system could be adapted readily to research in other scientific fields and
    was highly productive. (MSFC Release 76-1 45)
6 August: The jumbo jet-“a        revolutionary class of elephantine airliner”
    carrying twice as many passengers as the biggest narrowbodied air-
    craft-was a jumbo bust, said the Wall Street Journal reporting on
    declining business in the aircraft industry, especially on a 3-way battle
    among U.S. manufacturers for British Airways orders. The government-
    owned British airline would buy 6 widebody jet liners valued at about
    $165 million with possible options on 3 more, to replace an aging fleet
    of Boeing 707s and Vickers W O s on its long-distance routes, and there
    was no British-made aircraft of the size British Airways needed.
        McDonnell Douglas had been advertising in London papers “the
    difference to Britain” of $537 million and 13,000 jobs if the DC-10 were
    chosen, because it would use the Rolls Royce engine now used in Lock-
    heed’s slightly smaller TriStars. Lockheed, also competing for the order,
    said the engines on its L- 10 1 1 TriStars had already provided more than
    $750 million of business for Britain, and buying a long-range version of
    the TriStar for overseas routes would be simply an extension of a proven
    relationship. The Boeing Company had also been competing for the
    order, although its 747 was said to be too big for the British Airways’
    long-distance routes: it would carry about 400 passengers, compared to
    260 for the Dc-10 and 240 for the L-1011. Boeing, however, had been
    talking with Aerospatiale of France on a smaller version of the latter’s
    widebody twin-engine jet, to be marketed in the US. with a revised
    Boeing-built wing in return for French participation in a bigger version
    of Boeing’s 737; the French were reported wary of Boeing and leaning
    toward an agreement with McDonnell Douglas on a modification of the
    French 150-seat Mercure.
        The WSJ reported 10 Aug. that U.S. manufacturers’ sales of wide-
    body aircraft had fallen “billions of dollars behind original projections.”
    McDonnell was producing DC- 1 O at only 20% of capacity; Boeing had
                                        s
    cut output of 747s from 84 a yr to 18; and Lockheed’s production of
    L-101 1s was “even lower.” U.S. airlines, for which the widebodies were
    originally designed, had not placed a single new order for passenger
    jumbos since 1973, and planned to buy “only a handful” before 1980.
    The jumbo was industry’s answer to the problem of carrying the pas-
    senger load predicted for 2 decades without clogging runways, skyways,
                                    180
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    August
    and-airports; the traffic growth had been curtailed by economic recession
    and the oil embargo that increased fuel prices unexpectedly. Also, the
    rise in nonstop service between medium-size cities whose traffic formerly
    was funnelled through major airports had cut into the traffic of the jumbo
    jets. Makers of the widebodies were far from breaking even on their
    design and development costs, which had run over $4 billion; about 1200
    planes would have to be sold to cover that investment, the WSJ said, and
    so far the 3 makers reported only about 700 firm orders and deliveries,
    with another 80 options that might or might not materialize. (WSJ,
    6 Aug 76, 12; 10 Aug 76, 1)
* NASA announced award of a $7-million contract to General Electric Co. and
    the Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for design and
    construction of the world’s largest windmill to be located at one of 17
    possible utility-company sites where it could produce energy for as many
    as 500 homes a yr [see 30 July]. Sponsored by the Energy Research and
    Development Administration and NASA, the project would be directed by
    LeRC’s wind-power office. Richard L. Puthoff, program manager of LeRC’s
    wind-power office, said that wind as an energy source could provide 5 to
     10% of U.S. needs at maximum efficiency and usage. The 100-kw
    system built in 1975 at LeRC’s Plum Brook test area had been used as an
    experimental apparatus in developing the large windmill. ( N U , 8 Aug
    76, 20; WSJ, 6 Aug 76, 6)
* INTELSAT (International Telecommunications Satellite Organization) an-
    nounced that its board of governors, meeting in Washington 21-28 July,
    had approved the loan of a cesium ion thruster to NASA under a I-yr
    no-cost arrangement, for use in research on inert gases (argon and
    xenon) as propellants for auxiliary propulsion in spacecraft and ground-
    based applications. Like the nickel-hydrogen battery for the Navy’s
    navigation-technology satellite to be launched later this year and an echo
    canceller to be licensed for use in satellite communications, the INTELSAT
    thruster was developed under a series of contracts managed by COMSAT
    Laboratories at Clarksburg, Md. It had exhibited higher electrical and
    propellant efficiency than other thrusters of comparable size. (INTELSAT
    Release 76-22-M)
  The board of governors of INTELSAT-the                 International Tele-
    communications Satellite Organization-announced award of a 14-mo
     $2.9 million contract to the Sociht’e Des T616comrnunicationsInter-
    nationales du Cameroun for additional tracking, telemetry, command,
    and monitoring services to be provided by a new antenna collocated at
     Zamengoe, Cameroon, with existing standard communications and an-
    tennas. The new facilities, to be operational by October 1977, would
    augment service as the global satellite system became more complex,
    providing redundant service especially in the Atlantic and Indian Ocean
    areas. The contract included an option for extended service for an
    additional 24 mo. The Cameroon facilities had monitored lntelsat IV-A
    satellites since 1 April 76. (INTELSAT Release 76-23-1)
8 August: A new political-economic battle between the U S and Britain was
                                                           ..
    expected as bilateral talks were scheduled in London for Sept. on rene-
    gotiation of the “Bermuda Agreement” of 1946 regulating airline oper-
                                    181
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

    ations between the U.S. and Britain, in the Caribbean, and in and out of
    Hong Kong. Britain had announced 22 June it would withdraw from the
    agreement. The pact (which originally settled wrangling between wartime
    allies over peacetime air commerce, and served as model for more than
    60 bilateral air-travel agreements between the U.S. and other nations)
    specified the routes the two countries’ airlines could fly and prevented
    competition on prices. At the time, U.S. carriers had the advantage of new
    equipment to fly the North Atlantic, and Britain and other war-poor
    European countries were looking to tourism to bolster their economies.
         Britain’s objectives in renegotiation would be an equal share of traffic
    instead of the present 65 to 35% split in favor of the U S . , as well as a
    cutback in the number of North Atlantic flights. Constantine Menges,
    director of the international division of the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board,
    said the British were interested in equality of results rather than equality
    of competition, and warned that encouraging airlines to equalize their
    shares of the market would endanger consumer interests by allowing the
    airlines to neglect measures that would increase their markets. Political
    factors would govern any decision: most non-American airlines (includ-
    ing Britain’s) were state-owned and symbols of national prestige. On
    many international air routes, competing airlines pooled operations and
    shared revenues and expenses. This cartel philosophy had not applied to
    North Atlantic routes because of the Bermuda principles; however,
    Britain now wanted to reduce the number of flights (now involving 28
    airlines) that had became destructively competitive, with an estimated
    equivalent of 8 jumbo jets flying empty between the US. and Britain
    every day. The British view was that restricting the number of flights
    would enable each nation’s airlines to fly more profitably, eventually
    benefitting the consumer by easing the pressure for higher fares.
         On the other hand, U.S. legislation that created the CAB in 1938 had
    exempted international routes from regulation by subjecting CAB deci-
    sions affecting them to presidential review, leaving room for political
    influences. Whereas the U.S. airlines would be sympathetic to restrictions
    on flight numbers, the u.S. ideological commitment would uphold free
    enterprise and unrestricted competition. However, renegotiation might
     offer the U.S. some advantages: changes on other transatlantic routes
    where it was now at a disadvantage against European national carriers,
    increasing the use of charter groups to fill empty seats on scheduled
     flights, and securing greater equality in so-called fifth and sixth freedoms
     that permitted European carriers to lure transatlantic passengers with
     cheap stopovers in and transport to and from other cities besides the
     basic destinations. Dr. Menges suggested that the U.S. might best nego-
     tiate with the European Common Market as a whole, instead of with any
    one nation; the British rejected this idea as an affront to national sov-
    ereignty. ( N V , 8 Aug 76, 3-1)
9-25 August: At 15:04 GMT (18:04 Moscow time) 9 Aug., Luna 24, an
     automatic space probe, was launched toward the moon “from the orbit
     of an artificial earth satellite” as the official USSR news agency Tass
     described it. A course correction 1 1 Aug. permitted the probe to reach

                                     182
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  August

   a preset point in near-moon space; a braking operation 14 Aug. put the
   probe into a circular selenocentric orbit 115 km from the moon’s sur-
   face, with 120° inclination and 1 hr 59 min period. (AX”, 11 Aug 76,
   37; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 9 Aug 76, 14 Aug 76; Spacewarn
   bulletin, 17 Aug 76, 1; P lnq, 10 Aug 76, 6; LC S&T Alert #3407,
   31 Aug 76)
        At 6:36 GMT (9:36 Moscow time) 1 8 Aug. the probe landed on the
   moon in the Sea of Crises (Mare Crisium) at 12’45’N and 62”12’E,
   about 40 km from a northern isthmus between the moon’s 2 seas, where
   the oldest rocks (about 4.5 billion yr) on the moon might be sampled. The
   area differed from the Sea of Felicity-site of landings by Luna 16
   (1970) and Luna 20 (1972)-not only in age but also in the presence
   of mascons, gravitational anomalies caused by mass concentrations of
   extremely dense materials. (The US. Lunar Orbiter 5 had discovered 5
   such concentrations on the moon in 1968.)
        The USSR’s 8th successful unmanned landing on the moon in 6 yr was
   expected to make up for the failure of Luna 23, which sustained damage
   when it landed on the moon 8 Nov. 1975 and was unable to carry out
   its mission. The US. had not probed the moon since 1972, date of the
   last of 6 manned lunar landings. Luna 24 weighed 1880 kg upon
   landing; early reports contained no description of the probe, but photo-
   graphs of it appeared in Oct. in Aviation E% and Space Technology
   magazine, with comparisons of the earlier probes. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in
   English, 18 Aug 76, 1 3 Oct 76; UPI, Denver Post, 19 Aug 76, 14-F;
   NYT editorial, 26 Aug 76; Science News, 2 8 Aug 76; Av Wk, 11 Oct
   76, 53)
        Tass announced 19 Aug. that, after being on the moon 22 hr 49 min,
   Luna 24 had blasted off the moon’s surface at 5:25 GMT (8:25 am
   Moscow time) and was on its way back to earth with a sample of moon
   soil obtained by a device that drilled to a depth of about 2m and put the
   core sample into a hermetically sealed container in the return module.
   The bulk of the spacecraft remained on the moon’s surface; the New
    York Times noted there was no mention of a robot vehicle like the
   Lunokhods landed previously. Lunokhod 1 (on Luna 1 7 ) had spent
    10 mo on the moon in 1970-1971, traveling about 10 km; Lunokhod
    2 (on Luna 21 ) roamed the Lemonnier crater in the Sea of Serenity for
   6 mo in 1973. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 19 Aug 76; AX”, 20 Aug
    76, A-19; UPI, Denver Post, 20 Aug 76, 10; L A Times, 20 Aug 76, 3)
        On 22 Aug. the Luna 24 return craft parachuted to earth in a “forest
   site” 2400 km northeast of Moscow, soft-landing at 17:55 GMT (20:55
    Moscow time). The landing craft and sample were flown to Moscow from
   the site. Research on the comparatively large moon sample would pro-
    ceed at the Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry Institute of the USSR
   Academy of Sciences in Moscow, where lunar samples returned by Luna
    16 and Lunar 20 had been studied. Pravda was quoted as stating that
   the 1970 mission of Luna 16 brought back particles of lunar iron that
    Lb
       does not rust”; learning how to manufacture such a metal under earth
   conditions “would repay all the expenditures for space study,” the

                                   183
August                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    newspaper said. Metallurgy stations might be established in space or on
    the moon to make nonrusting iron in commercial quantities, a process
    requiring a powerful vacuum like that in space which would be difficult
    to establish on earth. The gray-brown lunar material was said to resemble
    the Luna 16 sample, also taken from a lunar “sea” area. Mineralogists
    studying the top of the 30-cm-wide column of material said they ex-
    pected to find the same Mendeleyev elements existing on the moon as on
    the earth, but in different proportions because of fewer volatile ma-
    terials. Scientists would search the lunar sample for any sign of water
    vapor, regarded as important “not only for space physics but also for the
    future exploration of space,” Tass said.
        The Luna 24 landing craft, still on the moon, would continue to
    function and flight controllers were still communicating with it. (FBIS,
    Moscow Tass Intl Serv in Russian, 21 Aug 76; Tass in English, 25 Aug
    76; CSM, 24 Aug 7 6 , l ; B Sun, 24 Aug 76,5; SBD, 31 Aug 76,223)
9 August: McDonnell Douglas Gorp. announced award of a $63.9-million
    contract to Hughes Aircraft Co. for research, test, and development of
    radar for the Navy F-18 strike fighter, including 3 renewal options for
    additional production beyond the development phase. Current Navy and
    Marine Corps plans called for procurement of 800 F- 18s in addition to
    the test-flight planes; major assembly was to be completed late in 1977
    and early 1978, with first flight scheduled for mid-1978, McDonnell
    said. Hughes Aircraft received Army and Navy contracts totaling
    $16.5 million a wk later for a location-reporting system and for develop-
    ment of a missile fire-control system for the F- 1 4 fighter plane, the Wall
    Street Journal reported. (WSJ, 9 Aug 76, 11; 17 Aug 76, 6)
0 More trouble developed for the mD’s controversial^' F-1 1 1 and F-14A
    jet fighter planes, the Wall Street Journal reported, as the Air Force
    announced grounding of 183 General Dynamics F-1 11s at Nellis AFB,
    Nev., and Cannon AFB, N.M. The groundings, ordered after inspections
    showed defects in fan blades, would continue to midmonth and would not
    affect F-1 11s stationed elsewhere. A General Accounting Office report
    on the Grumman F-l4A, 14 of which had crashed at a loss of
    $161.6 million, questioned the plane’s ability to cope with attacks by
    antiship missiles. The GAO said that problems with equipment and inade-
    quate supplies of parts had reduced the readiness of the F-14A to 37.2%
    during 1975, and that the electronic equipment’s reliability was ex-
    tremely low, some of the major systems exhibiting only 6% to 14% of the
    desired objective. Cost of the F-14A had risen from $18.2 million each
    in 1973 to $20.2 million. Designed to defend the Navy against assaults
    by antiship missiles, the F-14A could engage current Soviet fighter jets,
    said GAO, but the Navy itself feared the plane’s ability to cope with the
    missiles might be “marginal.” (WSJ, 9 Aug 76, 11)
0 The U S Senate, by a vote of 78 to 6, confirmed the nomination of
        ..
     D . H. Guyford Stever to be director of the newly created OfKce of Science
      r
    and Technology Policy in the White House. Dr. Stever, director of the
    National Science Foundation, had been under criticism for NSF actions in
    reviewing applications for research grants; also, conservative senators

                                     184
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     August

   had objected to social-science textbooks prepared under NSF,auspices in
   the 4 yr that Dr. Stever headed that agency.
        The confirmation marked reestablishment of aWhite House science
   advisory post after its elimination by President Nixon early in 1973. On
   7 Nov. 1957 President Eisenhower had announced appointment of
   Dr. James R. Killian as special assistant to the President for science and
   technology, whose prime role was to speed rocket and missile develop-
   ment in the wake of the first satellite a month earlier. Dr. George B.
   Kistiakowsky, who succeeded Dr. Killian, wrote later that the science
    advisory committee set up in the White House helped President Eisen-
    hower make major military decisions.
        The Natl. Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Prior-
    ities Act of 11 May 1976 would also provide 4 new executive-branch
    agencies: the Office of Science and Technology Policy, whose director
    would advise the National Security Council upon request, but would
    mainly assist the OEfice of Management and Budget in decisions on
    funding federally supported R&D and would prepare an annual science
    and technology report for Congress as a counterpart of the State of the
    Union Message; the President’s Committee on Science and Technology,
    consisting of 8 to 14 specialists in a wide range of fields who would study
    for 2 yr and report on the nation’s science, engineering, and technology
    policies, and disband after submitting the report unless the President
    chose to continue it; the Federal Coordinating Council for Science,
    Engineering, and Technology, to deal with interagency problems,
    chaired by the Science Adviser; and the Intergovernmental Science,
    Engineering, and Technology Panel, consisting of the Science Adviser as
    chairman, the Director of the NSF, and at least 10 members representing
    state interests, to define civilian problems at state, regional, and local
    levels which could be resolved by science, engineering, and technology.
    Dr. Richard T. Atkinson, Deputy Director of NSF, would act as Director
    until the end of the present administration in January. (CR, 9 Aug 76,
    S 13954-13963; NYT, 6 Aug 76, A l ; 10 Aug 76, A3; 15 Aug 76,4-6;
     24 Aug 76, 28)
10 August: By a vote of 8 2 to 6, the US. Senate approved a $104-billion
    defense appropriations bill that prohibited expenditure of $1 billion voted
    by the House for the controversial B-1 bomber, until after 1 Feb. 1977,
     when the next President would be in office. The House had included funds
     for initial orders for a fleet of 244 supersonic B-1s that would eventually
     cost more than $22 billion. The bill would go to conference where the
     House-Senate differences would be settled, after Congress returned
     2 3 Aug. from a week’s recess for the Republican convention. The date
     of the production decision would be important because the current
     Republican administration proposed to place orders for the first 3 planes
     in Nov.; the Democratic presidential nominee, Jimmy Carter, opposed
     B-1 production and wanted a review of prototype test data early next yr.
     The Senate bill was $3.9 billion less than President Ford’s budget pro-
     posal and $1.4 billion less than the House voted; however, it was
     $11.6 billion more than appropriated for FY 1976, which ended 30 June.

                                      185
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

      (MT, 10 Aug 76, 8; WSJ, 10 Aug 76, 3; WStar, 10 Aug 76, A-2)
    The U.S. Air Force announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Corp., a
      unit of the Boeing Company, to design and produce an interim upper-
      stage (IUS) solid-fuel rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, to lift Shuttle
      craft from low earth orbit to higher mission altitudes. Boeing, chosen
      over Martin Marietta, Lockheed, and General Dynamics Corp., still had
      to negotiate a contract, estimated to be ultimately worth about
      $300 million. (NYZ’, 10 Aug 76, 45; WSJ, 1 0 Aug 7 6 , 3 )
    Aeronutronic Ford Corp. would probably win a $250-million contract to
0
      build Intelsat V, the next generation of seven global comsats owned by
      INTELSAT (the %-nation Intl. Telecommunications Satellite Organiza-
      tion), said the New York Times. Scheduled for launch starting in 1979
      to expand message-handling capacity of the I N T E E A T network, particu-
      larly across the North Atlantic, Intelsat v would be first to use both a
      spatial separation technique used on Intelsat IV and a cross-polarization
      technique used on two ComSat domestic satellites leased to American
      Telephone & Telegraph and the General Telephone and Electronics
      Corp. INTELSAT’S board at its July meeting chose Aeronutronic for final
      negotiations over Hughes Aircraft, which had build all but one of the
      preceding generations of Intelsat spacecraft; other competitors elimi-
      nated earlier were TRW Systems (which had built one previous generation
      of the Intelsats) and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. All the competitors
      had selected West European or Japanese subcontractors.
          Unlike previous Intelsats, which were cylinders coated with solar
      cells, Intelsat V’S would be boxlike containers with flat solar-cell panels
      stretching from each side like windmills; weighing nearly a metric ton
      apiece, the spacecraft would be stabilized by a 3-axis system similar to
      those used on the Franco-German Symphonie satellites over the Atlantic
      Ocean, and on the U.S. domestic satellites built and operated by RCA.
      Each Intelsat v would carry 27 signal-transmitting transponders with
      capacity of 12 000 two-way telephone conversations, compared to 6000
      through Intelsat IVA and 4000 through Intelsat Iv; each satellite would
      also transmit color TV. Intelsat V would replace Intelsat IVA which had
      replaced the Intelsat IV, seven of which were in orbit above the Atlantic,
      Pacific, and Indian Oceans. (NYZ’, 10 Aug 76, 37)
    Robert G. Deissler, technical consultant to NASA’s   Lewis Research Center,
0
      received the 1975 Max Jakob Memorial Award at the 16th National
      Heat Transfer Conference in St. Louis. The award, established in 1961
      by the American Society for Mechanical Engineering and the American
      Institute for Chemical Engineering, commemorated a pioneer in the
      science of heat transmission, and was given for distinguished service in
      the field of heat transfer. Deissler, who joined Lewis in 1947 and gained
      early recognition for work in turbulent flow and heat transfer of variable-
      property fluids in pipes or tubes, was cited for “outstanding contributions
      to the theory of turbulence and turbulent transport ...for his ability to
      perceive and derive the fundamental theory required to advance applied
      research and development in convective heat transfer.” Author of about
      7 0 technical papers, Deissler had received an Exceptional Service Award

                                       186
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    August

                                  predecessor. ( L R C News, 6 Aug 75, 1; c1
    in 1957 from NACA, NASA’s
    PD, 10 Aug 76)
* Both the Boeing Co. and Japan’s official transport-development corporation
    announced pending agreement on Japanese participation in a billion-
    dollar project to develop a new medium-range Boeing jet liner in the
     1980s. The new plane, temporarily designated the 7 x 7 (middle number
    to be given later), would be a 198-passenger 2-aisle craft, probably with
    3 jet engines: one under each wing, and a third on the tail. It would be
    low-noise and fuel-conservative, with a high-performance bent wing to
    operate close to the speed of sound. The medium-range jet would fly
    one-stop trips between N.Y. and San Francisco. The pending agreement
    was announced separately, Reuters news agency reporting from Tokyo
    that the Civil Transport Development Corporation representing govern-
    ment and leading aerospace manufacturers had said the parties were
    ready to proceed; Boeing headquarters in Seattle termed the announce-
    ment premature, but verified progress in negotiations. Proposed Japanese
    share in the venture had ranged from 50 to 30 to 20%, the last amount
    currently being discussed. Aeritalia, the Italian aerospace-development
    concern, had agreed to put up 20% and Boeing had favored French,
    British, and West German participation. (NYT, 11 Aug 76, 43)
12 August: NASA announced plans for rollout of the first Space Shuttle orbiter
    on 17 Sept. at NASA’s   Rackwell Intl. Space Div. at Palmdale, Calif. The
    ceremony was scheduled for 9:30 am PDT, and media representatives
    were alerted. (JSC Release 76-51)
@ WFC announced launch of a rocketborne experiment to investigate effects

    on the upper atmosphere of metal ions from a meteor shower. A 2-stage
    solid-propellant Nike-Tomahawk was launched at 11:54 am ED”, lifting
    a 149.3-kg payload to a peak altitude of 147.5 km. The payload
    included 2 experiments, one for the Univ. of Ill. and the other for the
    Univ. of Bern, Switzerland, as well as a solar-aspect sensor and a clam-
    shell nosecone provided by WFC. The Illinois experiment also carried an
    instrument for GSFC. The meteor shower (the Perseids) deposited metallic
    debris in the atmosphere from about 120 to 90 km; measurements of the
    relative concentration of the different metals-magnesium, iron, cal-
    cium, potassium-could help identify the nature and origin of the mete-
    or. A second objective would be to study the dispersion and concentration
    of metal ions in the atmosphere, thought to cause unusual propagation
    of radio and TV signals. The meteor shower was predicted to last for 4
    days beginning 11 Aug. (WFC Release 76-12)
0 McDonnell Douglas Corp. would join Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet of
    France in a transatlantic consortium to develop and market a new
    medium-range jetliner for the 1980s, announced France’s Trans-
    portation Secretary Marcel Cavaill’e at Toulouse, capital of the French
    aerospace industry. Tentatively named Mercure 200, the 160-to
     180-seat twin-jet aircraft would have a range of about 3000 km; a
    modification of the current Mercure plane, it was estimated to cost about
    $240 million to develop, whereas a totally new plane would have cost
    more than $1 billion. The new plane, designed to save about 20% of fuel

                                     187
August                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    costs over the current Mercure, would be powered by a CFM 56 engine
    jointly designed by General Electric and France’s government-owned
    Snecma (Soci’et’e Nationale d’Etude et de Construction de Moteurs
    #Aviation). Aerospatiale-the state-owned National Society of Aero-
    space Industry-would get 40% of the construction work, which would
    cushion it from layoffs when construction of the Concorde ended this
    year; Dassault, the private company that designed the plane, would get
    5%, probably the final assembly. McDonnell would get 15%, the rest to
    be offered to other European manufacturers.
        Including McDonnell Douglas in the consortium would give the Mer-
    cure 200 an unprecedented entry into the American market, which
    amounted to half the world market, noted the New York Times.Although
    the new aircraft would compete with Boeing’s 727 and 737, which
    previously had a monopoly on the medium-range market, exploratory
    talks with Boeing had come to nothing because French officials feared the
    size of Boeing’s operation would relegate the French to little more than
    a subcontractor. the preliminary agreement with McDonnell Douglas
    awaited a McDonnell promise not to build a plane competing with the
    French-German passenger-transport Airbus. (NYT, 13 Aug 76, D3;
     V S J , 13 Aug 76, 4)
0 NASA announced it would cosponsor a conference 21 Sept. at the Univ. of
    Conn. on transfer of biomedical instrument technology. The conference,
    also sponsored by the New England Research Applications Center, the
    Conn. Dept of Commerce, the Conn. Product Development Corp., and
    the Univ. of Conn. Health Center, would display technology developed
    by NASA for the manned space program to manufacturers and show how
    the technology could be applied to develop improved medical equipment
    and techniques. Hundreds of improvements based on NASA technology
    were already in use by the medical community, ranging from bio-isolation
    garments to a rechargeable cardiac pacemaker. At the conference,
    medical experts from NASA Hq, JSC, and NASA’s        biomedical and tech-
    nology applications teams would describe the types of technology avail-
    able to industry and the medical community, and the role NASA could play
    in helping to commercialize new products. NASA’s      program of licensing
    patents would also be explained. (NASA Release 76-144)
13 August: MSFC announced completion of 2 of 8 major facilities for pro-
    duction of Space Shuttle solid-propellant rocket motors at Thiokol
    Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Brigham City, Utah. Thiokol was selected as
    prime contractor by MSFC for development of the solid-fuelrocket motor,
    main element of the reusable solid-fuelrocket booster being developed by
    MSFC. The 2 completed units were a nozzle-bearing test facility, used to
    test a flexible bearing allowing the rocket-motor nozzle to turn up to 8’
    in any direction for thrust-vector control in steering, and an x-ray facility
     for inspecting propellant after casting into the motor-case segments. A
     case-preparation building, where motor cases would be prepared for
     propellant loading by sandblasting, cleaning, relining, and painting, was
     reported 95% complete. Three facilities for loading the propellants-
     casting pit 1, a casting house, and casting-pit covers-were about half


                                      188
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      August

    completed. A case-refurbishment facility to handle the motor cases after
    recovery would be under construction shortly. ( F Release 76-1 5 1)
                                                      mC
15 August: In an attempt to predict the weather on the planet Jupiter,
    Dr. Gareth P. Williams, researcher at NOM’S Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
    at Princeton Univ., applied a computer model of earth‘s atmosphere to
    Jupiter and found that it not only reproduced patterns known to exist
    there but also provided new explanations of visible features such as the
    Great Red Spot and horizontal stripes, as well as revealing a 4-yr cycle
    of heat transfer.
        Using a set of equations describing physical processes that produce
   atmospheric behavior on earth, Dr. Williams fed in conditions known to
   exist on Jupiter-the planet’s enormous size, amount of sunlight it
   receives, and rate of rotation (which dominated the behavior of the
   Jovian atmosphere)-and found that the basic behavior of atmosphere
   was “quite similar.’’ The purpose of atmosphere, he said, was to transfer
   heat from the equator to the poles; the terrestrial heat cycle took about
    a month, but the NOAA model revealed a corresponding cycle on Jupiter
   that took 4 yr. Whereas the earth received its heat from the sun, Jupiter
    received only 4% as much solar heat as earth, but the infrared meas-
   urements showed that the planet was warmer than it should be if its only
   heat source were the sun. Scientists believe that the planet generates
    heat of its own in an amount about equal to what it receives from the sun;
   this extra heat complicated the job of modeling Jupiter’s atmosphere
    because there was no way of telling how it might be distributed, but it also
    provided a confirmation for the model.
        Atmospheric motions on Jupiter tended to perpetuate themselves
    instead of dying out, as they do on earth because of interaction with the
    earth‘s surface. Jupiter has no “surface” as we know it, Dr. Williams
    noted; “it just gets denser toward the interior and motions gradually
    dissipate downward....” Circulation patterns producing eddies in the
    planet’s atmosphere seem to be stable; the Great Red Spot had been
    apparent since the 17th century, when it was first sighted. The research-
    ers hoped that Pioneer 11, now about halfway between Jupiter and
    Saturn, might provide a positive test of the Princeton model; “we think
    Saturn is like Jupiter, but we don’t know,” said Dr. Williams. “Maybe
    it has a red spot.” (NOAA Release 76-170)
9 Because supersonic aircraft are inherently dirtier than those flying slower
   than sound, the Environmental Protection Agency’s emission standards
   for future generations of supersonic aircraft would allow SSTs to emit 4
   times more air pollution than subsonic jets. EPA described the standards,
   scheduled for issuance 16 Aug., as “the most stringent that can be
   imposed” by the 1980 effective date; additional requirements for reduc-
   ing amounts of oxides of nitrogen would take effect 1 Jan. 1984. EPA
   recommended new ground procedures to reduce duration of SST engine
   operation-and       resulting pollution-while  the planes were on the
   ground.
        New standards for 1980 engines would allow carbon monoxide emis-
    sion at 58% below the current Concorde level, and hydrocarbons 77%

                                      189
August                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    lower, with nitrogen oxides at about the current level; 1984 levels would
    be 88% less for carbon monoxide, 94% less for hydrocarbons, and 44%
    less for nitrogen oxides. The 1984 allowances would still be much higher
    than those for subsonics. EPA estimated it would cost the aircraft industry
    about $10 million to meet the new emission levels for a fleet of 70 planes,
    and that the standards would cost airlines about $5 per hr per plane for
    increased maintenance. ( WPost, 15 Aug 76, A-12; WSJ, 17 Aug 76,
    8)
16 August: MSFC announced that NASA had extended for 8 mo an existing
    contract with Sperry Rand of Huntsville, Ala., for continued engineering
    support services to MSFC’S Science and Engineering Directorate. The
    $3,479,844 extension would run through 31 March 1977. (MSFC Re-
    lease 76- 152)
17 August: A large scientific balloon released 1 3 Aug. in Sicily by German
    and Italian scientists discharged a package of equipment for gamma-and
    cosmic-ray experiments and dropped it to earth near Rutland, Mass.,
    said a meteorologist of the Natl. Weather Service at Worcester Airport.
    The radio-controlled balloon came down in Gardner, Mass., after a
    separation explosion at 40.2-km altitude. A spokesman at Hanscom AFB
    in Bedford said the balloon was owned by the Natl. Center for Atmo-
    spheric Research in Palestine, Tex. (NYT, 18 Aug 76, 13)
e The 2 Soyuz 21 cosmonauts aboard space station Salyut 5, first manned
    space mission since last July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, were experi-
    encing “a state of sensory deprivation, a sort of sensory hunger,”
    according to the government newspaper Zzvestia. Although Col. Boris
    Volynov and Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov continued to carry out their
    scientific and medico-biological experiments as they entered the 7th wk
    of their stay on Salyut 5-the halfway mark toward breaking the US.
    endurance record of 8 4 days in space set by 3 Skylab 4 astronauts in
     1973-and despite their years of training to combat the problem, Zz-
    vestia said “the organism still reacts in a peculiar way to space condi-
    tions.” One symptom of “the increase in their need for communication”
    was that the cosmonauts were asking ground control more and more
    often for news from earth. On the advice of psychologists, ground control
    had begun playing music to the cosmonauts, Zzvestia said. (UPI, in
     W Star, 17 Aug 76, A-4)
18 August: NASA announced appointment of Jerry Hlass, Director of Space
    Flight Facilities at NASA Hq, as Manager of the Natl. Space Technology
     Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Mo., effective 1 Sept. Hlass came to Hq
    from GSFC, where he was head of the Data Acquisition Facility Section
    between 1961 and 1963. He received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical
    engineering in 1949 from N.C. State Univ., and a master’s i engineering
                                                                 n
     administration from Geo. Washington Univ. in 197 1. As manager of
     NSTL, Hlass would report to the Hq Associate Administrator for Center
    Operations. (NASA anno. 18 Aug 76; NASA Release 76-147)
e Lockheed Aircraft Corp. won a significant contract for construction of 6
    new widebody jets when British Airways announced selection of the new
    long-range TriStar L-1011 for delivery starting in 1979 to replace

                                     190
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     August

    Boeing 707s and vC- 1Os on routes where the older planes were too small
    but the Boeing 747 was too large. Selection of Lockheed followed an
    intense competition with McDonnell Douglas over the past 6 wk, in which
    Lockheed was plagued by questions of finance following its near-
    bankruptcy in 1971 and its role in alleged bribery in the sales of military
    and commercial planes overseas. Lockheed chairman Robert 91,. Haack
    said market research indicated a need for 244 aircraft like the new
    TriStar by 1985, offering the company improved chances for reest-
    ablishing itself in the jetliner field. (NYT, 19 Aug 76, 51; WSJ, 19 Aug
    76, 3; W Post, 19 Aug 76, C13; C Trib, 19 Aug 76, 4-9)
  A federal judge ordered NASA to reinstate with back pay and benefits the
    federal employees who lost their jobs at Marshall Space Flight Center to
    private contractors, the Washington Star reported. In a suit filed in
    1967 in the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., by the AFL-CIO
    American Federation of Government Employees, the union contended
    that 22 MSFC contracts with private companies resulted in the layoff of
    about 3000 federal workers. Judge Joseph Waddy agreed that the
    contracts were illegal and ordered that federal employees who lost jobs
    as a result of work going to the private companies should be rehired, and
    that any similar contracts be canceled. The decision upheld Civil Service
    Commission standards that forbid a private contractor from assuming an
    employer-employee relationship over federal workers. NASA attorney Sid
    Masri said as many as 2000 employees could be terminated as a result
    of the decision, which NASA was sure to appeal. ( W Star, 18 Aug 76,
    A-2, B-2; WSJ, 19 Aug 76, 17)
        officials reported that Peru planned to buy 36 late-model
0 US.
    fighter-bombers from the USSR, a deal that might jeopardize a
    $200-million short-term loan being negotiated between Peru and a
    group of U.S. banks. The Soviet Union was said to have offered Peru good
    terms for a $250-million purchase of 2 squadrons of Sukhoi-22 planes;
    the price would be paid over 10 yr at 2% annual interest, with a yr of
    grace. A spokesman for the u.S. banks said they were unaware of the
    pending deal and could not comment on the effect it might have on the
    proposed loan, considered essential to enable Peru to pay for a recently
    expropriated u.s.-owned mining company valued at $100 million; Peru
    had offered $12 million in compensation. Peru had a foreign debt of
    about $3.7 billion, one of the highest of any developing nation. u.S.
    officials said Peru’s motive for seeking the fighter-bombers might have
    been to apply political and military pressure on neighboring Chile, which
    was dealing with Bolivia to obtain access to the Pacific through territory
    seized by Chile from Peru in 1883. (NYT, Aug 76, 5)
                                                    19
19 August: The National Science Foundation reported that U.S. spending for
    research and development (R&D) would reach $38.1 billion in 1976,890
    above the 1975 level. R&D expenditures would account for 2.2% of the
    gross national product in 1976, down from 2.3% in 1975. Of the total
    R&D spending, federal agencies would account for $20.1 billion; indus-
    try, about $16.6 billion; universities and colleges, about $800 million;
     and other nonprofit institutions, about $600 million. The figures ap-

                                     191
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

    peared in a NSF report, National Patterns ofR&D Resources: Funds and
    Manpower in the United States 1953-1976, updated annually in a
    continuing analysis of the nation’s scientific and technological resources.
    (NSF Release ~ ~ 7 6 - 6 8 )
e The space share of federal R&D funding for FY 1977 would increase only
    slightly, according to a Natl. Science Foundation report, An Analysis o    f
    Federal R&D Funding by Function, Fiscal Years 1969-1977. The
     1977 estimate of $2940 million was considerably less than the 1969
    level of $3732 million; the space share-13%-was           much lower than
    the 24% for the earlier year. Manned space flight, always the leading
    subfunction, remained predominant with the Space Shuttle accounting
    for more than 40% of all space activities. Space science, with 20% of the
    total, reflected a decline from 1976 and showed effects of lower funding
    for NASA lunar and planetary exploration as Viking and outer planet
    missions moved into the launch stages. Space technology and NASA
    support activities would increase during FY 1977. (NSF, space Science
    Resources Studies, 19 Aug 76, 1)
e The European Space Agency announced that its exhibit at the Farnborough
    International Aerospace Exhibition in Sept. would include a full-scale
    model of the Spacelab, to be exhibited for the first time in Britain to give
    the British public a better idea of Europe’s space activities and to extend
    contacts with science and industry. ESA’S exhibit would also include
    full-size models of Meteosat and the OTS comsat, plus a tenth-scale model
    of the Ariane launcher. British firms were prime contractors for the OTS
    (orbiting test satellite) scheduled for launch in 1977 and for the maritime
    satellite Marots to be launched early in 1978. (ESA release 19 Aug 76)
20 August: Noaa 5, launched by NASA 29 July for the National Oceanic and
    Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) into a sun-synchronous polar orbit at
     1505 km, was turned over to NOAA after checkout and would become the
    primary operational satellite providing weather forecasters with a wide
    variety of environmental data. Noaa 5 would replace an earlier version,
    Noaa 4, which would become the backup spacecraft; an older polar
    orbiter launched in 1973 would be deactivated. NOAA’S Natl. Environ-
    mental Satellite Service operates 2 satellite systems: one polar-orbiting,
    the other consisting of 2 geostationary satellites remaining in the same
    relative position to earth’s surface at all times. The polar-orbiting craft
    would scan any spot on earth twice every 24 hr and return visual and
    infrared imagery of cloudcover, sea-surface temperature, and other
    environmental indicators. (NOAA Release 76-199; MOR E-601-76-17
    [postlaunch] 1 Oct 76; telcon, NOAA P O 5 Oct 76)
                                               A,
24 August: Aerospace contracts valued at,about $1 billion were hanging fire
    as DOD and NASA struggled over which agency would ask Congress for
    funds (beyond those already appropriated for development and testing)
    to pay for 2 additional Space Shuttles, said the New York Times. NASA’s
    commitment of 1971 was to develop the Shuttle system at a cost of about
     $6.9 billion, to include 2 Shuttles, the start on a third, and a series of
    preoperational flights into orbit beginning in 1979. The NASA plan envi-
    sioned a total of nearly 600 Shuttle flights in the 12 yr beginning with


                                     192
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      August
     1980, with a fleet of 5 Shuttles averaging an annual 60 flights starting
    in the mid-80s.
        DOD had earmarked $1.5 billion for Shuttle expenses by 1981, includ-
    ing $700 million for refurbishment of Vandenberg AFB in Calif. for
    polar-orbit Shuttle launches and $190 million for facilities at Cape
    Canaveral, Fla., plus $178 million for development of an interim upper
    stage ( a solid-fuel rocket to be ordered by the Space and Missile Systems
    Organization of the USAF from Boeing Aerospace, for boosting Shuttle-
    payload spacecraft into extremely high orbit). DOD had been maintaining
    for 2 yr that it would not have money for the 2 final Shuttles; Dr.
    Malcolm Currie, DoD Director of Research and Engineering, told Con-
    gress during budget testimony 3 March that paying for the orbiters would
    exceed what DOD considered “cost effective” amounts for participation
    in the shuttle program.
        DOD’S refusal to pay had caused “consternation among planetary
    scientists,” the NYT said, because NASA might be forced to cut much of
    its scientific space program in the 1980s to pay for 2 more Shuttles
    within a fixed budget. However, the matter should be resolved within a
    few wk, the article added. (NYT, 24 Aug 76, 37)
e The Soyuz 21 manned mission to space station Salyut 5 ended abruptly
    after cosmonauts Vitaly Zholobov and Boris Volynov had been in orbit
     48 da. Although the first manned space flight since Apollo-Soyuz failed
    to break the US. 84-day record, no problem was mentioned by the Tass
    news agency; the first hint of termination came about 10 hr before the
    landing. The Soyuz 21 descent module landed by parachute on the Karl
     Marx collective farm near Tselinograd in Kazakhstan at 9:33 pm Mos-
    cow time (1:33 pm EST); general condition of the cosmonauts was “sat-
    isfactory,” said Tass. Experiments returned to earth for analysis were of
     3 kinds: geophysical and astrophysical observations, technological, and
    biological. Technology experiments used processes potentially useful in
    constructing a larger space station, such as studies of the behavior of
     gases and liquids in space and a soldering technique using a chemical
     reaction to produce the necessary heat. Cytological and genetic experi-
     ments should provide additional data on the nature and hazards of solar
    radiation in prolonged space flight. (Nature, 26 Aug 76, 735; Av Wk,
     30 Aug 76,23; F B B , Tass in English, 24 Aug 76; NYT, 25 Aug 76,20;
     W Post, 25 Aug 76, B-9)
25 August: NASA announced the appointment of Carl E. Grant as NASA
    Director of Personnel, effective 5 Sept. For the past 5 yr, Grant had been
    personnel director for the Small Business Administration; previously he
    was associate director for personnel administration at the Smithsonian
    Institution, and had held personnel positions at the Civil Service Commis-
    sion, Department of Defense, and US. Army. He received a B.S. in
    economics and business administration from the Univ. of Detroit in
     1960. In his new post, Grant would be responsible for personnel admin-
    istration agencywide. (NASA anno. 25 Aug 76)
26 August: First flight of a new fly-by-wire control system for jet aircraft was
    scheduled for 27 Aug. at Dryden Flight Research Center, NASA an-
    nounced. The system would use 3 digital computers for primary control
                                      193
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

     (and a 3-channel analog system for emergencies) to translate pilot
     signals to aircraft-control surfaces by lightweight wires instead of the
     conventional control systems, reducing the aerodynamic load as much as
     20% and saving up to 10% in production costs. In Phase I of the
     program, a modified G-8 jet was flown 42 times to establish the feasibility
     of digital fly-by-wire control, using a single-channel digital computer
     developed for the flight-control system of the Apollo lunar module. Phase
     11 would use a triplex system that could be modified to use Shuttle
     software, leading to a digital system with applications both to Shuttle and
     to other advanced transport systems. Project pilot Gary Krier would fly
     the checkout tests, scheduled to last through 1978 with about 30 flights
     planned. (NASA Release 76-150; DFRC Release 74-76)
2 7 August: NASA’s    Scientific and Technical Information Office announced
     publication of the first formal report on early scientific results from the
     Viking mission to Mars: an 80-p book, “Viking 1 Early Results.” The
     book, a concise description of the Viking mission, its scientific experi-
     ments, and its objectives, told the story of the Viking 1 lander’s first 25
     days of operation on the surface of Mars and gave “a preliminary and
     tentative account of early conclusions.” The book also contained 50
     photographs of Mars taken from the surface and from orbit. (NASA
     Release 76-151)
0 A Spacelab simulation mission known as ASSESS 11 would be flown jointly
     next spring by NASA and the European Space Agency, and the payload
     specialists for the 4-engine jet mission would be named shortly, NASA
     announced. ASSESS was the acronym for airborne science Spacelab
     experiment-systems simulation. Carlos 6 . Hagood, NASA mission man-
     ager for Spacelab 2 and ASSESS, said two U.S. candidates would be named
     as prime payload specialists, with a third as backup; ESA would also select
     prime and backup specialists. Launch date of the 10-day mission had
     been set for 1 5 May 1977. The mission would be flown in the Galileo 11,
     a Convair 990 operated by Ames Research Center, one of several ARC
     flying laboratories supporting research activities internationally. The
     aircraft would fly 6.5 hr each day, and the payload specialists would
     remain in the plane and work another 6 hr on the ground; their off-duty
     time would be spent in a van containing living quarters connected to the
     aircraft.
         ASSESS was developed to involve individual principal investigators (PI)
     in defining and operating the scientific payload; to study the investigator
     working-group (IWG) concept, providing PIS a means of full and direct
     visibility into mission management and a direct channel for making
     recommendations; to evaluate the concept of PI selection of payload
     specialists; and to validate a concept for training and cross-training
     PI-selected payload specialists. MSFC was lead center for the ASSESS 11
     mission. Dr. Anthony C. DeLoach was MSFC mission scientist; ESA mission
     scientist was Dr. John Beckman of the European Space Research and
     Technology Center at Noordwijk, The Netherlands. ESA mission manager
     was Johannes de Waard, based in Porz-Wahn, West Germany. NASA
     candidates for payload specialist would be selected by NASA members of

                                     194
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     August

    the investigator working group, and European candidates by the ESA
    members; the selections would be recommeded to the ASSESS program
    manager, Bernard T. Nolan of NASA Hq Office of Applications. (MSFC
    Release 76-1 58)
  A Soviet-American symposium of oceanography experts in the Black Sea
    town of Yalta ended as scientists agreed on a 2-yr program of joint effort
    in the Atlantic aimed at compiling a theoretical model of the ocean. The
    model would aid in more accurate weather forecasting, in predicting
    climate fluctuations several yr in advance, and in combating environ-
    mental pollution. Cooperating in the work would be 10 Soviet and Amer-
    ican vessels, earth satellites, and meteorological ground stations. (FBIS,
    Tass in English, 27 Aug 76)
29 August: French interests had spent as much as $2 million to pressure the
    public, the news media, and various legislators into granting permanent
    U.S. landing rights to the controversial Concorde supersonic transport,
    wrote Robert Walters in the Washington Post Parade magazine. By the
    time a decision would be made next year, the expenditure would probably
    reach $3 million. The French producer of Concorde-Aerospatiale-
    signed up influential Americans and engaged as principal in its campaign
    a firm called DGA International, whose chairman was Charles E. Goodell,
    former Republican senator from N.Y. The US. Dept. of Justice found that
    DGA had a contract calling for a bonus of $500 000 if commercial
    Concorde service were authorized; US. law prohibited representatives of
    foreign interests from signing contracts in which financial compensation
    “is contingent in whole, or in part, upon the success of any political
    activities.” The Dept. of Justice in a civil suit filed in federal court in
     1975 charged that the contract was illegal; the case was settled without
    a trial when the defendants agreed to elimination of bonus clauses and
    to full labeling of their public-relations and propaganda materials. The
    lobbying, however, continued unabated, the Parade article noted, as did
    employment of former legislators and public officials on behalf of Con-
    corde. (W Post, Parade, 29 Aug 76, 17)
* An article in the Baltimore Sun magazine reported that more than 3000
                                                 90 countries had pooled their
     amateur radio operators-“hams”-in
     efforts to design, build, and finance the ham satellite series known as
     OSCAR, for orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio. The first OSCAR rode
     into space from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 12 Dec. 1961, sixtieth anniver-
     sary of the first transatlantic wireless transmission, as a piggyback pay-
     load on the Thor-Agena carrying the USAF Discoverer 36 into orbit.
     Oscar 1 weighed about 4.5 kg and consisted of a battery, a small
     transistor, and an antenna packed into a metal case; constructed by radio
     hams working for companies building satellites, it operated on a tenth of
     a watt power and transmitted the greeting “hi” in Morse code before it
     stopped functioning 3 wk later. NASA agreed to provide launches as
     deadweight ballast for government satellites to advance public interest in
     space science, after the hams pointed out the OSCAR’S potential use in
     educational programs and emergency communications.


                                     195
August                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

        In 1959 the hams had formed the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.
    based in Washington and affiliated with the American Radio Relay
    League, national association of ham radio operators: After launch of
    Oscar 4, satellite activity shifted east, where AMSAT members working
    for CSFC and ComSat were eager to undertake assembly projects. By
    using volunteer efforts and parts donated as tax-deductible contributions
    by various companies, the hams could produce a satellite for about
    $60 000, compared to the commercial cost estimated at $2 million.
    Oscar 6, oldest active ham satellite, was about to celebrate its 4th
    anniversary; Oscar 7, most recent (and largest, at nearly 30 kg), had
    been in use for nearly 2 yr.
        Baltimore engineer Jack Colson, an employee of the Johns Hopkins
    Applied Physics Laboratory, had received an award as the first amateur
    to be in touch with hams in all 50 states; he took 8 mo to achieve this,
    4 mo for Hawaii alone because the satellite path permitted commu-
    nications with the islands for only 2 min every 3 wk. Colson had also
    talked with hams in 43 countries and had bounced signals off the moon;
    he estimated that his ham contacts over the past 25 yr numbered about
    30 000. The 750 000 radio amateurs all over the world came from all
    walks of life and ranged in age from 8-yr-olds to elderly men and
    women; about 20 000 amateurs were joining the U.S. ham network every
    year, the article said. Use of the satellite was free to all hams, whether
    or not they belonged to an amateur organization; OSCARs had transmitted
    medical data, weather bulletins, and emergency communications such as
    search-and-rescue mission information. Although shortwave radio could
    outdo the satellite on sheer distance, its transmissions-unlike those of
    the satellite-could be upset by atmosphere conditions or solar emis-
    sions. To improve OSCAR’S time and distance limitations, AMSAT members
    were working on a new satellite that could transmit continuously over a
    greater geographical area for up to 10 hr, because of a higher elliptical
    orbit. Launch was planned for 1980. ( B Sun Magazine, 29 Aug 76,lO)
30 August: The Peoples Republic of China launched its sixth satellite, refer-
    enced as China 6, from its facility at Shuang-Cheng-Tze into a highly
    elliptical orbit with 2147-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 69.1 inclina-
    tion, and 108.7-min period. An announcement from the China press
    agency Hsinhua said the satellite was functioning normally, but gave no
    details on the spacecraft or its mission. (MT, 31 Aug 76,7; SBD, 8 Dec
    76, 203; SSR, 31 Aug 76, 31; SF, Feb 77, 78)
  Return of the USSR’s Luna 24 to earth with a load of material drilled from
    nearly 2 m below the surface of the moon might be a dress rehearsal for
    a round-trip Mars probe to offset world headlines gained by Viking 1,
    said the Christian Science Monitor. The question why the Soviets would
    expend more effort on moon samples when they already had three sets
    (two from previous probes, Luna 16 and Luna 20, and one from the US.
    Apollo program) would be answered if the Luna 24 mission were being
    used to perfect techniques for obtaining Mars samples, a move “which
    would vault the Soviet Union back into the lead in planetary research,”
    said the CSM. The USSR had landed unmanned spacecraft on the surface

                                    196
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          August

    of Venus and obtained information for a short period, and had sent,to the
    moon in 1973 an unmanned vehicle Lunokhod 2 that crisscrossed the
    Lemonnier crater for 6 mo, reporting back data on magnetic fields and
    laser direction-finding. The CSM noted that, although the USSR auto-
    mated machines worked well, the Soviets still lacked boosters to propel
    cosmonauts to the moon. (CSM, 30 Aug 76)
e The 26-m “Venus dish” at NASA’s        Goldstone tracking station near Bar-
    stow, Calif., normally used to communicate with interplanetary space-
    craft, was serving as a research tool to study conversion of solar energy
    from satellites to electricity for use on earth, Goldstone researchers
    reported. In the tests, the big antenna represented an energy satellite
     collecting and converting sun energy into microwaves; more than a km
     and a half away, a set of receiver panels called a “rectenna” played the
     part of a ground station. The 7.6-m-high receiver panels contained
     more than 4500 aluminum T-shaped rectenna elements about 100 mm
     high, working like a TV antenna to gather and filter the microwave
    energy, converting it to AC or Dc that could be fed directly into a utility.
     Results had been promising, with collection and conversion of microwave
    beams to usable electricity at an efficiency of 82%. (NASA PAO,
     76-H-685, caption)
e Scientists all over the world had been invited to propose experiments for the
    second Spacelab mission, NASA announced, asking that they submit by
    1 Oct. their letters of intent to propose, with actual proposals due by
    3 Dec. Final selection of experiments would be made in Aug. 1977;
    proposals would be evaluated in the areas of space science (including life
    sciences), applications, and space technology.
        Primary intent of the second Spacelab mission would be to evaluate
    the laboratory’s system and subsystem performance, but space and
    resources would be available for experiments. Second objective of the




 The 26-m “Venus dish” at NASA’s Goldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calg:,in use
 with rectenna (in background) for solar-energy conversion experiments. (NASA
 76-H-685)


                                         197
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

    mission would be to demonstrate the broad capabilities of Spacelab for
    scientific research, especially in astrophysics (astronomy, high-energy
    astrophysics, and solar physics). Proposals should designate a principal
    investigator as the point of contact with NASA, to manage the efforts of
    any other persons involved in the experiments.
        As the second mission payload would not include a pressurized module
    as the design for Spacelab 1 did, instruments would be mounted on
    pallets exposed to space with a remote manipulator system available if
    needed. Experiments would be controlled remotely by persons at the
    payload-specialist station in the Space Shuttle orbiter’s aft flight deck.
    Power, data distribution, and thermal control would be available from
    flight subsystems in a pressurized igloo on the forward pallet. Spacelab,
    a reusable space laboratory, was under construction in Europe by the
    European Space Agency for NASA. Marshall Space Flight Center was the
    lead center for Spacelab development, as well as for the Shuttle main
    engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster. (NASA Release
    76- 152)
  A slowdown ordered by the 14 000-member Professional Air Traffic
    Controllers Organization 25 Aug. had caused disruptions in air travel
    nationwide, airline officials told the New York Times. Eastern Airlines
    experienced 1-to 2-hr delays in rush-hour traffic at La Guardia Airport,
    and similar snarls were reported by other carriers at other airports, the
    most severe at Los Angeles. Union president John F. Leyden had asked
    members to start handling traffic “by the book” and adhere rigidly to
    rules that required planes to stay about 5 to 10 km behind aircraft ahead
    of them, omitting efforts to expedite traffic flow as is normally done. The
    controllers were protesting delay in completion of a Civil Service Com-
    mission study of controller job classification, which held hope of higher
    pay levels, and a csc announcement that its investigation had found both
    undergrading and overgrading in the jobs. (NYT, 30 Aug 76, A-9)
  Information from space satellites orbiting more than 900 km above the
    earth was being regularly evaluated in US. attempts to measure crops in
    the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China, and other countries,
    officials of the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture said. The information had been
    incorporated with other data in a project known as the Large-Area Crop
    Inventory Experiment (LACIE) that had been going on since 1974 and
    would be completed by mid- 1978. The disclosure of crop-watching
    appeared in a weekly issue of Foreign Agriculture published by the
    department’s Foreign Agricultural Service. (W Star, 30 Aug 76, A-5)
31 August: NASA selected 3 firms for negotiations leading to award of a single
    contract for assembly, checkout, launch operations, and refurbishment
    of the Space Shuttle solid-fueled booster, MSFC announced. The firms
    were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and United Space Boosters Inc. of
    Sunnyvale, Calif., a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technology Corp.
     The contract would extend through March 1980 to include the first 6
    development flights of the Shuttle, with option for renewal through Feb.
     1982. The contractor would be responsible for assembling and checking
     out the booster (forward and aft skirts, attach structures, nosecone, and

                                     198
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   August

    various subsystems) with the solid-fueled motor. Two solid-fueled boost-
    ers would be used to launch the Shuttle, in conjunction with the orbiter
    main engines; after launch, the boosters would be jettisoned, lowered into
    the ocean by parachute, retrieved, and returned to KSC for refurbishment
    and reuse. Work would be performed at M s F c and KSC except for the
    solid-fueled motor, which would be returned to Thiokol facilities in Utah
    for reloading with propellant. (MSFC Release 75-1 59)
0 Johnson Space Center announced selection of Mason-Reguard, Lexington,
    Ky., for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract
    for protective support services, including security, operation of police
    and fire departments, safety engineering, and emergency ambulance
    service. Proposed tost of the services from 1 Oct. 1976 through 30 Sept.
    1977 would be $1 837 000, with option for extension over two more
    1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-52)
During August: The U.S. Air Force files for Project Blue Book, a 20-yr
    investigation of unidentified flying objects, had drawn many visitors since
    they were opened to the public at the National Archives in Washington,
    D.C., on 14 July, according to Science magazine. The USAF investigation
    had been closed in 1969 after the government decided that none of the
    1 2 618 cases in the file indicated the existence of extraterrestrial vehi-
    cles. Only 701 of the total number remained unexplained. Biggest year
    for sightings was 1952, with 1501 reported; only 146 were reported for
    1969, last year of the project, and only 1 of the objects sighted that year
    remained unidentified. The national preoccupation wt UFOS LLcur-
                                                              ih
    rently seems to be at a low ebb,” said Science, adding that the most
    promising investigations might be in the behavioral or subjective aspects
    of UFO sightings. (Science, 20 Aug 76, 662)
  “Enticing hints but no firm answers” to the question of life on Mars were
    the product of an increasing volume of scientific data from the Viking
    1 lander; “practically faultless operation” for more than 5 wk had
    produced enough information to keep the Viking scientists busy, es-
    pecially the data from the 3 bioexperiments and a related molecular
    analysis of Martian soil. Results were “certainly not what would be
    expected” if earth-type organisms were present, but they were not
    explainable in terms of “simple” nonbiological chemistry, said Nature
    magazine.
        The labeled-release (LR) instrument added a small amount of water
    containing nutrients “labeled” with carbon 14 to its Mars sample, and
    incubated it at 15’C, warmer than the surface temperature of Mars.
    “Totally unexpected” was a massive and rapid release of radioactivity
    into the gas phase-presumably carbon monoxide or dioxide-and the
    radioactive count reached 4500 in 10 hr, leveling off at about 8500 in
    48 hr. A second dose of radioactive nutrient produced an initial burst
    followed by a drop in radioactivity, and the graph “almost” flattened out
    for the remaining 4 days of the experiment; however, scientists were
    surprised to discover a possible trend to very slowly accelerating release
    of radioactivity. “Unfortunately,” said Nature, “the experiment (was)


                                    199
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
August

      stopped for performance of a control test ...” A repetition of this experi-
      ment later would extend incubation over wk or mo rather than days;
      “results certainly do not look like anything one would expect” from an
      earth sample in the same situation. Most popular explanation for the
      initial burst of activity was oxidation of the labeled nutrients.
           The gas-exchange (GE)   experiment used gas chromatography to mon-
      itor a Mars sample wetted with a “soup” of nutrients to detect any
      changes in the instrument’s content of gas. First dampening of the
      sample produced “a remarkable burst of oxygen” that leveled off after
      several hr but remained stable for days. The experiment would continue
      bb
         for some time,” to see if further changes occurred. Viking scientists
      were trying to duplicate results of the LR and GE experiments in earth
      laboratories using simple catalysts and oxidizing agents.
           The pyrolytic-release (PR) experiment, most technologically complex,
      proved “least equivocal when it comes to interpretation” of the results,
      Nature reported. A Mars sample incubated in a “Martian atmosphere,”
      with added water vapor and irradiation from a xenon lamp to simulate
      solar radiation, was heated to 625’C to drive off and account for un-
      reacted carbon monoxide and dioxide and to pyrolyze any organic com-
      pounds trapped as vapor. The vapor trap, heated to 7OO0C, would
      release and oxidize any remaining organic compounds. A sterile sample
      should provide a peak ratio of about 500 to 1; the results from the Mars
      sample were about 75 to 1, “several times more active” than non-
      sterilized soil from the dry valleys of Antarctica. Results from the control
      experiment with heat-sterilized soil would be “crucial” because a high
      peak ratio would indicate that biological, rather than chemical, processes
      were going on in the soil that could fix atmospheric carbon monoxide or
      dioxide in the presence of light. If life were present on Mars, science
      would expect a high peak ratio from a surface sample strongly illu-
      minated in atmosphere of about 90% carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, the
      initial run of the organic-chemistry analysis was spoiled by a failure of
      the surface-sampling arm to deliver a full load to the gas-chromatograph
      mass spectrometer. A further analysis would be performed on a full load
      obtained subsequently. Lack of detectable organic compounds in this
      sample would further complicate interpretation of the 3 biology experi-
      ments. (Av E%, 30 Aug 76, 22; Nature, 26 Aug 76, 734)
    The 1976 summer Olympic games at Montreal 17 July-1 Aug. were the
0
      most widely telecast event in history, INTEEAT announced, having been
      viewed by more than 1 billion persons according to press estimates.
      Record use of the global system for satellite coverage included more than
      930 transmissions during the games, more than 70 telecasts on some
      days. During peak periods satellites transmitted as many as 5 programs
      simultaneously across the Atlantic Ocean. The global television coverage
      used 2 Intelsats over the Atlantic, 1 over the Pacific, and 1 over the
      Indian Ocean; the 4 satellites sent 2585 half-channel hours of Olympic
      and related transmissions, more than twice the number of hours of the
       1972 Olympics at Munich. Teleglobe Canada, the Canadian commu-
      nications authority that arranged for the global services, used earth

                                       200
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    August

     stations at Lake Cowichan, B.C., and Mill Village, N.S., as well as a
     transportable station at Montreal; other transmissions went through
     ComSatCorp’s Andover, Me., ground station. (INTELSAT Release
      76-24-1)
*   The Natl. Science Foundation announced that federal funding for research
      and development would increase in FY 1977, ahead of expected inflation.
      The long-term trend of the R&D portion of the budget had been down-
      ward, with a steady decline from 1967 to 1971; a slight rise in 1972
      preceded another decline to a 1975 low that represented the smallest
      federal support for R&D for the 10-yr period. The estimated increase for
      FY 1977 would restore “real performance” to a level close to that of
      1972, although about 20% below that of 1967. Estimated shares of the
      FY 1977 total would be 11% for basic research, 23% for applied re-
      search, and 66% for development. (The NSF noted that most major NASA
      projects had been categorized as development, as they primarily gener-
      ated outer-space transport technology. Substantial parts of these pro-
      grams were classified in former years as basic or applied research. The
      shift in NASA categories resulted in lower shares of federal R&D funding
      for basic and applied research, and a larger share for development.)
      About 60% of development funds would be accounted for by DOD, which
      with NASA and ERDA would account for more than 90%. NASA’s
      $99-million increase put its share of the total 1977 R&D budget at about
      15%; DOD accounted for an estimated 48% of the federal R&D total in
      1977, and ERDA would account for 14%. HEW would account for about
      11%, NSF 3%, and USDA about 2%. The next 4 agencies in size of R&D
      support-DOT, Dept. of Interior, SPA, and Dept. of Commerce-all
      showed decreases in their federal R&D funding from the 1976 level. (NSF,
      Science Resources Studies, 10 Aug 76, 1)




                                     201
                           September 1976

1 September: NASA launched a Navy Transit Improvement Program (TIP-111)
    spacecraft on a scout vehicle at 2:14 pm PDT from the Western Test
    Range into an elliptical polar transfer orbit with 787-km apogee, 341 -km
    perigee, 90.2O inclination, and 96-min period. Although orbit was
    achieved, the spacecraft’s solar panels failed to deploy and the Navy was
    reported planning corrective action. The NASA portion of the launch
    was adjudged successful 2 1 Sept. (MOR 490-60 1-76-02 [prelaunch]
    17 Aug 76, [postlaunch] 24 Sept 76; SSR, 31 Oct 76, 31; Pres Rpt
    76, 99)
* Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Science Applications,
    Inc., of Los Angeles and Rockwell Intl. Corp. for negotiation of contracts
    to study space industrialization. The study program would lead from
    Shuttle Spacelab and early space-station experiments to permanent,
    practical, commercial use of space. The space-industrialization accom-
    plishments so far achieved would be expanded into disciplines other than
    communications and meteorology; the study program would attempt to
    define a balance between future opportunities (satellite power systems)
    and relatively immediate benefits (space processing of materials). Possi-
    ble areas of activity would include development of new techniques and
    materials, new development of earth resources, and eventually the move-
    ment of people to space for tourism or medical purposes, and the indus-
    trialization of the moon. The parallel studies would proceed in two
    phases, each requiring about 8 mo, and would cost about $200 000
    each. (MSFC Release 76-160)
2 September: Something found by Viking 1 on the surface of Mars behaved
    as if it were alive, said 6 biologists on the science team at JPL, who
    nevertheless refused to confirm the presence of life on Mars until results
    from Viking 2 were in. Viking 2 was on its way to a landing scheduled
    for 3 Sept. on Utopia Planitia (the Utopian plains) above which the air
    was found by Viking 1 ’ s orbiter to contain 5 to 10 times as much water
    as that over the Chryse area where Viking 1 landed. A surface sample
    of Chryse itself dug by a mechanical arm was found to contain a sur-
    prising amount of water that boiled off when it was heated by an instru-
    ment on the Viking 1 lander. Four other instruments, 3 built to look for
    life, received samples of the Mars soil: one to look for photosynthesis, the
    second to look for signs of metabolism, the third to detect “breathing”
    or “sweating” characteristic of earth-type life forms. All 3 instruments
    appeared to detect what they were looking for, but the biologists ex-
    plained the results as an exotic chemistry not connected with biology.
        Having quoted odds of a million to 1 against fmding life on Mars, the
    biologists now said they could never state with 100% certainty that

                                     203
September                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

      Viking had found life until they could return a Mars sample to earth,
      which some were afraid to do: Nobel prizewinner Dr. Joshua K. Leder-
      berg of Stanford University had told associates that Martian life forms
      brought to earth might threaten the 2 million species of life here by
      competing in unknown ways for food, water, or air needed to survive.
      (Thomas O’Toole, W Post, 3 Sept 76, A-2)
    Marshall Space Flight Center announced that the Space Div. of Rockwell
0
      Intl. Corp. at Palmdale, Calif., had received delivery of three dummy
      main engines for the Space Shuttle-known officially as flight mass
      simulators-for mounting on Shuttle Orbiter 101, which would be used
      for approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center and for
      ground vibration tests at MSFC. The simulator engines, resembling the
      real main engines in size and weight, could be adjusted in weight and
      center-of-gravity and gimballed to provide various positions for testing.
      Orbiter 101, after vibration testing, would be returned to Palmdale for
      replacement of the simulators with flight engines and placed in flight
      status. (MSFC Release 76-162)
    The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that a
0
      team of fishermen, engineers, physicists, oceanographers, biologists, and
      computer specialists had used a satellite to find fish off the coast of
      Louisiana in a government-industry cooperative program begun by NOAA
      last year. Water turbidity, measured by Landsat sensors as variations in
      color, would reflect the distribution of fish; the fishing vessels, working
      with spotter aircraft, confirmed the presence of fish in most areas pre-
      dicted by the Landsat data. This technique of locating concentrations of
      fish would aid in better understanding of coastal fishery ecology and
      better resources assessment and management, NOAA said. On 19 July,
      Landsat 1 had passed over a selected study area, sending multispectral
      scanner data to Goddard Space Flight Center; the data tapes were
      hand-carried to NASA’s  Earth Resources Laboratory in La. for processing.
      Less than 21 hr after the scan, the spotter pilots and fishing-vessel
      captains were being called to check their findings with predicted loca-
      tions. The satellite reports were valid, NOAA said. Installation of an
      operational system would require 3 to 5 yr to develop special computer
      programs and facilities. (NOAA Release 76-196; JSC Release 76-50; JSC
      Roundup, 10 Sept 76, 4)
    Soyuz 21 cosmonauts Boris Volynov and Vitaly Zholobov, who landed
0
      safely 24 Aug. from a 48-day mission to Soviet space station Salyut 5,
      returned to Moscow from the Baykonur cosmodrome near Tyuratam
      where they had been resting after their flight. The two received the title
      of Hero of the Soviet Union, Volynov for the second time. The news
      agency Tass reported that Salyut 5 was flying in a “controlled automatic
      regime.” In a Pravda interview, Academician Georgy Petrov empha-
      sized the importance of orbiting stations, which he said would serve in
      preparing for space flights to other planets as well as in studying the earth
      from outer space. Petrov predicted the building of space stations with
      changeable crews of 20 to 30, serving for periods of time up to decades,
      and later the establishment of “super-large multipurpose orbital com-

                                       204
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  September

    plexes with crews consisting of a hundred members and more.” A special
    role would be that of stations for moon study in selenocentric orbits, from
    which crews would land on the moon’s surface in “small expeditionary
    spacecraft.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 1-6 Sept 76)
3 September: Viking 2 apparently touched down at about 6:39 EDT in a field
    of windswept sand dunes on the Utopian plains of Mars at the edge of its
    northern polar cap, after a communications breakdown that left JPL
    scientists without contact during the last 3 hr of the spacecraft’s journey
    of more than 650 million km through space. The stabilization system on
    the orbiter, which served as a relay link between the lander and the deep
    space tracking network on earth, lost power 26 sec after separation of
    the lander at 3:40 pm EIYT, and the high-power antenna on the orbiter
    no longer pointed at the earth. The blackout lasted nearly an hr, while
    mission personnel tried to reestablish communications. A low-power
    transmitter on the orbiter, installed to provide limited 2-way commu-
    nications with earth, finally sent engineering data at 6:59 pm indicating
    that the lander had touched down. Lander signals were strong for 17 min
    until the orbiting relay link passed out of range.
        First pictures from the lander would be relayed about 3 am EDT on 4
    Sept. as the first step in a “recovery plan” to put the experiments and
    systems back on schedule. All pictures and data taken by the lander were
     being stored on tape in the orbiter for later playback. Except for the
     orbiter malfunction, the pictures would have been available within 2 hr
    of the touchdown.
        The landing date of Viking 1, originally 4 July, had been postponed
     for 2 wk in order to ensure a safe site; the spot for Viking 2 was chosen
     because indications of frost or fog in the area made it likely to encourage
     the presence of life, scientists said. Results from Viking 1 suggested
     either that chemical processes never observed in earth laboratories oc-
     curred on Mars, or that life forms existed on Mars that were unknown
    on earth. Life search by Viking 2 would not begin for a wk; the 2 landing
     craft were about 7400 km apart on the surface of Mars, Viking 1 at
     Chryse near the equator (at a latitude comparable to that of Mexico City)
     and Viking 2 in a warmer area (at a latitude comparable to that of
     Montreal) more than 1600 km northeast of the Viking 1 site. (W Star,
     4 Sept 76, A-1; B Sun, 4 Sept 76, A-1; NIT, 4 Sept 76, 1; W Post,
     4 Sept 76, A-1)
   Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for
     the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organi-
     zation (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and
     negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO-the Inter-
     governmental Maritime Consultative Organization-had been respon-
     sible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The
     UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972
     noted IMCO’S interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress
     systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of
     maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and
     improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international

                                     205
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and
    facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’S Maritime
    Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study
    and recommend a program of experiments and development work that
    would be necessary to form a new organization.
        The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational
    problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety commit-
    tee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO
    assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international con-
    ference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite sys-
    tem. IMCO’S secretary general was to invite all U N member states and
    interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations.
        The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended
    by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agen-
    cies and other organizations. The conference set up two working com-
    mittees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their
    telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers
    between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second work-
    ing group would consider procurement and financial policy. The confer-
    ence concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was
    needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to
    reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft
    recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and
    designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council,
    type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procure-
    ment policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation
    that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in
    certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters
    within national jurisdictions.
        As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European
    countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organi-
    zational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The ar-
     rangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to
     assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a
     strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their
    use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the
     basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had
     been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed,
     however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, mari-
     time unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the
     presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations
     composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed”
     organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT.
         The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included
     representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The
     U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of govern-
     ments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also devel-
     oped a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31
     countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session
                                     206
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  September

    discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The
    third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands,
    was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international
    organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the
    other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on
    &L
       the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions.
         The international conference resumed in London in February 1976
    with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agen-
    cies and international organizations. Texts of two documents-a con-
    vention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be
    signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)-were
    adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the
    convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council
    member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and
    the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to
    ‘ third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory commit-
     i
    tee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT.
         The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was
    attended by deIegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia,
    as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed
    that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating
    agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the con-
    vention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling
    permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting
    participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the confer-
    ence. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new
    convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen
                             .
    E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77)
4-8 September: Soviet news agency Tass reported the successful touchdown
    of the Viking 2 lander, adding that no data were coming from the lander
    “owing to failures in the Viking station’s orbiting vehicle” that relayed
    lander communications to earth. (FBIS, Tass in English, 4 Sept 76)
         As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing
    site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks
    and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand
    dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the
    Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the N f l ,
    The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site
    might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports
    from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted
    with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were
    transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the
    horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the
    lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head
    of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope
    (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed
    concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the
    difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had
    been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained
                                     207
September                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for
    about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when
    one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the
    rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking2 lander, which Martin
    said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio
    signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show
    whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems.
    Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornel1 Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites
    had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from
    geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were
    evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.”
        Meanwhile, two of Viking 1’s three biological instruments repeated
    their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous
    results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the
    soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting
    that the nutrient was being metabolized)as the first trial had. The photo-
    synthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first
    sample, however.
        The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its
    instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia,
    nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer
    of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian
    summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a
    better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobi-
    ologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life,
    they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from
    Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable.
    ( N W , 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A-1; WPost, 5 Sept 76,
    A-1)
        An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government
    and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings
    in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb
    design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled
    many problems. ( N W , 6 Sept 76, 14)
        Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept. that what had appeared to
    be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2
    landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with
    cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time
    since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a
    seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point
    on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic dis-
    turbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions
    about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity.
    He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less
    active than the earth.” ( W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3)
        As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists
    speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and
    collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S.
    Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a
                                     208
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  September

    candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the
    Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with
    wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and
    sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar
    features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission
    could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup
    lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to
    make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center
    for the Viking missions managed by L R C for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the
    NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from
    the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on
    over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21)
        The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars
    weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics
    this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more
    often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking
    weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in
    patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temper-
    atures on the Utopia plains-warmer than at Chryse, where the nights
    were longer-were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at
    night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photo-
    graphs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted
    from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of
     14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists
    theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of
    water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or
    sulfates with other minerals in the soil. ( W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
6 September: Aviation Week magazine reported that the State Superior
    Court of Ariz. had found against aeronautical chartmaker Jeppesen
    Sanderson, sued by insurance underwriters for failing to include on the
    map of the Philippines a peak near Manila-Mt. Kamunay, nearly 1050
    m high-where four crewmen were killed in July 1971 when a Pan
    American Boeing 707 flew into the mountain. More than $5.8 million
    was awarded in damages for value of cargo and aircraft in a ruling called
    a “landmark in product liability litigation.” The suit had been brought
    originally by three of the four widows, whose damage awards had not
    been set. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 47)
0 Leadership of Europe’s comsat programs had gravitated toward the
    U.K.-“more      by accident” than by design, said an ESA official-since
    prime contractorship for those programs had fallen to Britain’s Hawker
    Siddeley Dynamics within the European consortium known as MESH
    (Matra of France, E R N 0 of W. Germany, Saab-Scania of Sweden, Aeri-
    talia of Italy, and Fokker-vFw of Holland). Current programs included
    oTS, the orbital test satellite scheduled for launch in 1977 to evaluate
    items for an operational European telecommunications system; Marots,
    to be launched in 1978, an experimental maritime comsat; and ECS, the
    European comsat that =A hoped to fly in the early 1980s. Aviation
     Week & Space Technology magazine reported that potential markets
    worldwide for prime-contractor capability had become so numerous that
                                     209
September                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    MESH had divided marketing responsibilities among its members accord-
    ing to their influence in various regions, HSD being strongest in Arab
    League areas and in Africa. An HSD official noted that Europe was ahead
    of the U.S. in three-axis stabilization and in higher frequencies for satellite
    communications; demonstration of effective project leadership would
    assure future success in the world market. (Aw Vk, 6 Sept 76, 96)
6-8 September: A MK-25 (Foxbat) Soviet mach 3.2 fighter plane made an
    emergency landing at 1:57 pm (457 CMT) at the Hakodate commercial
    airport on Hokkaido, northernmost of Japan’s three main islands. Pilot
    of the MI(;-25, Soviet Air Force Lt. Victor I. Belenko, initially asked for
    an interpreter and a canvas cover for the plane because it contained
     bb
      military secrets.” Japanese officials, who said at first that the pilot
    would be returned to the Soviet Union if his landing was merely an
    emergency, later said Belenko had asked for political asylum and would
    be transferred to the U S . on 8 Sept.
        Japan’s Natl. Police Agency announced that Belenko was the 15th
    Soviet national to seek protection in Japan with a view to taking political
    asylum in some other country; of the previous 14, 11 went tu the US.
    and 1 each to Italy, Israel, and West Germany. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFB
    in English, 6 , 7 Sept; Tokyo Kyodo in English, 6 , 7 Sept; Aw Vk,1 3 Sept
    76, 25; W Post, 7 Sept 76, A-1)
7 September: Third Century America, the bicentennial exposition on science
    and technology that opened in May at KX, closed its gates with a
    ceremony that included music, fireworks, and cannon salutes. More than
    600 000 visitors had seen displays prepared by government agencies,
    educational institutions, and industry firms, many of which had represen-
    tatives on the outdoor stage during the closing exercises. A time capsule
    dedicated during the ceremony would remain on display at the visitor
    center with duplicates of the items contained in the capsule: 1976 coins,
    stamps, and medals; items representative of 1976 technology and life-
    style, including space-related materials; newspapers, letters, and a mail-
    order catalog. The stainless steel cylinder, enclosed in a stainless steel
    cube with a lexan plastic top, would be opened in 99 yr (on 4 July 2075)
    in preparation for the U.S. Tricentennial. (Spaceport News, 3 Sept 76,
    8; 17 Sept 76, 4)
8 September: NASA announced that the rollout of Orbiter 101 had been set
    for 17 Sept. at the Rockwell Int’l Space Div. assembly plant at Palmdale,
    Calif. [see 11 Aug.]. First of NASA’s  Shuttle spacecraft off the assembly
          OV-101was not yet scheduled for orbital flight: its first job, begin-
    line,
    ning in Jan. 1977, would be as a test vehicle. It would be launched from
    a modified Boeing 747 jetliner on which it was riding piggyback, in a
    series of approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center.
    It would then be ferried early in 1978 to Marshall Space Flight Center
    for ground vibration tests. Mated in a test stand to the 46-m external
    tank as if for an actual launch, Orbiter 101 would undergo extended
    vibration and stress loading equal to that experienced during a launch
    phase, when all the main engines-ov- 101’s three main engines and the
    two solid-fuel boosters-would produce up to 30 million newtons of

                                       210
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     September

      thrust. After the testing at MSFC, Orbiter 101 would bereturned to Calif.
      to be prepared for space flight; Orbiter 102 would be used in initial orbital
      flights from Kennedy Space Center, scheduled for 1979.
          Under construction since June 1974, the Orbiter’s main parts came
      from various contractors: crew module and aft fuselage from Rockwell
      at Palmdale, mid fuselage (cargo bay) from General Dynamics in San
      Diego, wings from Grumman Aerospace in N.Y., and tail assembly from
      Fairchild Republic in N.Y. Orbiter’s three main engines (each providing
      2 11 500 kg of thrust at launch) were constructed by Rockwell’s Rock-
      etdyne Div. under contract to MSFC. (NASA Release 76-143; Marshall
      Star, 8 Sept 76, 1)
*   President Ford named Shuttle Orbiter 101 the Enterprise, over the objec-
      tions of NASA officials who preferred the name Constitution and had
      planned the Orbiter rollout ceremonies for 17 Sept., Constitution Day.
      NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had paid a 45-min visit to the
      White House to brief the President on the Shuttle program and to discuss
      the naming. The name Enterprise, illustrious in u.S. naval history, had
      been given to the first nuclear-powered carrier, to a World War II
      carrier, and to an American sloop in the Revolutionary War. The name
      Constitution had met with objections that the Shuttle was considered an
      international effort in which several countries would participate. Avi-
      ation Week magazine commented on the “power of an aroused involved
      public-especially in an election year” in getting nearly 100 000 fans
      of the TV series Star Trek to sign letters and petitions asking the White
      House to have the first Orbiter named Enterprise (after the space ship in
      the series) rather than Constitution, the name favored by NASA officials.
      Av Wk said the officials were concerned about commercialization of the
      name Enterprise in association with the TV show. The Washington Star
      in an editorial said it was “pathetic” that the public desire for drama in
      outer space had not been killed by the mundane discoveries on Mars,
      Venus, and the moon, and predicted that “nothing exciting will happen
      in the real-life Enterprise,” even though the naming incident confirmed
      a public desire “to associate space with adventure and suspense.”
      ( WPost, 9 Sept 76, E-9, A-2; W S t a r , 19 Sept 76, E-1; Av Wk, 13
      Sept 76, 26; 27 Sept 76, 1 1 ; Marshall Star, 15 Sept 76, 1)
*   Lewis Research Center announced award of a $73.6 million contract
       to General Dynamics Corp.’s Convair Div. for 8 Atlas-Centaur launch
       vehicles to be used in NASA missions over the next 4 yr. Launches
       would include Intelsat V comsats, High Energy Astronomical Obser-
       vatory (HEAO) satellites, FLTSATCOM satellites for a worldwide DOD
       communications system, and the Pioneer Venus mission to provide
       details on the Venus atmosphere. The fixed-price incentive contract
       would run from 3 Sept. 1976 through Sept. 1980; work would be done
       at the contractor’s plant in San Diego, Calif. (NASA Release 76-154)
    The Space Segment Board for Aerosat met at Frascati, Italy, to review
0
       proposals for development, production, launch, and 7 - yr operation
       of two satellites [see 22 Jan.]. The space segment of the Aerosat
       program, conducted jointly by the European Space Agency, the

                                        21 1
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, and the government of Canada,
    would provide an experimental system of satellite communications be-
    tween transoceanic aircraft and the ground, leading to guidelines for an
    operational system to be established by the Intl. Civil Aviation Or-
    ganization (ICAO). During the program, two satellites would be launched
    into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic Ocean, separated by about 2 5 O
    longitude, with a 7-yr lifetime; the first launch would occur in 1979, and
    the second 8 mo later. The space board, representing ESA, Canada, and
    Comsat General Corp., reviewed the proposals submitted by General
    Electric, Radio Corp. of America, and TRW; all were reported to be of “a
    commendably high technical standard,” but the price submitted by GE
    was below that of the other two. The board therefore authorized nego-
    tiation with GE toward award of a fixed-price contract. (Comsat General
    Release CC 76-120; ESA release 10 Sept 76)
8-1 7 September: About 70 French officials, mostly from the Centre National
    d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), and about 140 Soviet representatives of the
    Cosmic Research Institute at Moscow and the Intercosmos Council of the
    Soviet Academy of Sciences met in Leningrad to review current joint
    programs and to discuss new collaborations, especially a joint in-
    vestigation (possibly in 1983)of atmospheric and surface characteristics
    of the planet Venus. Under a new protocol of 1975, the two countries
    were to work together in 11 specific areas including lunar and planetary
    studies. France had provided some of the equipment carried on Venera
    9 and Venera 10 to study the Venusian atmosphere; on the future
    mission, a Soviet Venus orbiter would drop French-supplied pressure
    balloons to within 55 km of the planet’s surface. Joint projects included
    space biology experiments supplied by France for Cosmos 782, and a
    French spacecraft called Signe 3 to be launched by the USSR late in 1977
    and used with a Prognoz satellite for localizing and studying gamma-ray
    sources. The meeting marked the tenth anniversary of the signature of
    an intergovernmental agreement between France and the USSR on space
    cooperation. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 26; FBIS, Tass in English, 9 Sept 76)
Y September: An aviation-policy declaration issued by the Ford adminis-
    tration today went beyond a similar policy issued in 1970, the New York
    Times reported, quoting Transportation Secy. William T. Coleman, Jr.,
    who drafted the policy, as saying the timing of the declaration was “85%
    coincidental” with current talks between the US. and Britain on Britain’s
    plan to withdraw unilaterally from the Bermuda agreement on trans-
    atlantic air passenger markets. The new policy emphasized the U.S. view
    that private carriers operating without subsidy could offer the most
    efficient service to air travelers. Britain wanted a new Anglo-American
    agreement to reduce the number of transatlantic flights, giving the
    government-owned British Airways about half of what remained; it cur-
    rently had about 34% of the market. Charles Robinson, Deputy Secre-
    tary of State, had told a press conference that unilateral withdrawal from
    the Bermuda agreement was an “improper and illegal” way to force the
    reduction in flight numbers. The new U.S. statement endorsed the idea of
    trimming excess passenger capacity [see 8 Aug.] but opposed a rigid
    division of the market into equal shares, pointing out that two thirds of
                                    212
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                September
    the passengers originate in the US. The statement also called for more
    flexibility in charter rules, the addition of domestic feeder routes to
    strictly international carriers such as Pan Am to fill seats between
    domestic cities, and elimination of cross-subsidization (promotional dis-
    counts) so that economy-fare passengers would not subsidize bargain-
    fare customers. ( N U , 9 Sept 76, 5)
e A nickel-zinc battery improved by space technology, installed in a utility
    van and tested against a regulation lead-acid battery, ran the delivery
    vehicle nearly twice as far at a constant speed of about 32 kph, Lewis
    Research Center announced. The improved battery would be able to
    meet the needs of 95% of the nation’s drivers for a full-service urban
    vehicle and could help to reduce dependence on petroleum. The improve-
    ment consisted of an inorganic separator adapted from space battery
    technology. L,.Rc planned further studies of the battery’s life, perform-
    ance, and competitive cost, using sample batteries in mail pickup and
    delivery vans with the cooperation of the US. Postal Service. (NASA
    Release 76-155)
e The European Space Agency (ESA) announced opening of a new ground
    station near Michelstadt/Odenwald, West Germany, that would include
    two 15m-dia parabolic antennas that would be operational for the
    launches of ESA satellites Geos and Meteosat in 1977. Geos, first geo-
    stationary scientific satellite, and Meteosat, Europe’s first meteoro-
    logical satellite, would remain in uninterrupted contact with the
    Odenwald station because of their geostationary orbits. The two antennas
    represented an innovation in the field of telecommunications, ESA said,
    because of a special construction: To avoid mutual interference with
    ground-to-ground links operated by the W. German post office, the
    special construction resulted in an exceptionally low sidelobe level here-
    tofore unattained, without reducing the station’s telecommunications
    performance. The station would be inaugurated 14 Sept. by Hans
    MattKhfer, German minister for research and technology, and Roy Gib-
    son, ESA’S director general. (ESA release 1 3 Sept 76)
10 September: Scientists using a NASA S-band radar obtained the first detailed
    pictures of the surface of Venus, NASA announced. Installed at the
    Arecibo radar observatory in Puerto Rieo under a $3-million NASA
    contract, the S-band system was 50 times more sensitive than equipment
    previously available for radar observations of Venus. Optical telescopes
    had been unable to penetrate the dense cloudcover of Venus, but the
    Arecibo radar had produced high-quality photograph-like images with a
    clarity like that of optical photographs of the moon taken from earth.
    Data were obtained during a series of daily 2-hr observations in the
    months before and after the close approach of Venus to the earth in late
    August 1975.
        Radar echoes of the signal from a powerful transmitter operating at
    a 12.6-cm wavelength were measured for strength, precise frequency,
    and time of arrival by a 330-m radiotelescope at Arecibo and an auxil-
    iary 30-m telescope about 10.5 km distant; the two telescopes consti-
    tuted an interferometer that enabled mapping of areas with detailed
    definition and precise location of the echoing regions. Venus features as
                                     213
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    small as 19 km could be distinguished. In the area about 10.25 million
    sq km mapped by the radar, scientists had observed a large basin bor-
    dered by ejecta suggesting its formation by impacts like those that
    created the maria on the moon, as well as a very bright area “about the
    size of Oklahoma” tentatively named Maxwell (for the 19th-century
    physicist) which appeared to result from processes internal to Venus-
    possibly a large eruption of lava-with long parallel ridges unlike fea-
    tures on either the earth or the moon. (NASA Release 76-153; NYT, 10
    Sept 76, A-1)
                                    rocket body from Cosmos 854, tracked by
0 Part of a Soviet satellite-the
    North American Air Defense Command radar-had fallen in Montana
    earlier this week, DOD sources reported. The rocket body, which had not
    been recovered, looked like a meteor as it passed over Washington State
    and Idaho and fell south of the Canadian border. DOD said debris from
    Soviet space vehicles had dropped on the US. previously, but usually in
    small pieces. ( W S t a r , 10 Sept 76, A-5; Av Wk, 1 3 Sept 76, 30)
0 The European Space Agency announced selection of General Electric Go.
    to produce and launch two satellites for the Aerosat program [see
    8 Sept.], saying that the GE bid was “significantly below” that of the
    other two contenders, the RCA Corp. and TRW h c . A GE spokesman esti-
    mated the value of the contract at $60 million, half to be spent in the US.
    and half to go to a consortium of foreign companies known as the Cosmos
    Group, which had formed a bidding team with GE. ( N U , 11 Sept 76,33)
  A British Airways Trident 3 collided with an Inex-Adria McDonnell Douglas
    DC-9 near Zagreb, Yugoslavia, at 11:34 am local time in good weather;
    the midair collision killed 176 persons. Three major airways converged
    over Zagreb, and four air-traffic controllers had been arrested and were
    being held on suspicion of responsibility for the disaster. Crash recorders
    from both aircraft and cockpit voice recorders were to be used in an
    initial hearing to show whether the Yugoslav transport, taking German
    tourists from Split to Cologne, was being controlled in the Serbo-Croat
    language instead of in English (the official international aviation lan-
    guage). Zagreb control had cleared the DC-9 to climb to the point where
    the collision occurred; a British Airways official said after hearing a tape
    that the Trident crew may not have seen the DC-9 or known of its
    approach. (Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 32)
11 September: The Air Force launched the first Block 5D advanced mete-
    orological satellite from Vandenberg AFB on a Thor-Burner 2 at 1:Ol am
    local time into an orbit with 848-km apogee, 818-km perigee, 98.6O
    inclination, and 101.5-min period. The RCA-built research satellite was
    a 450-kg cylinder 6.4m long and 1.7m in diameter. W A F later reported
    that a power-system failure had apparently occurred because no commu-
    nications were coming from the Ams 1; no cause of the malfunction had
    been determined, and “chances of correcting it are grim,” USAF said.
    ( S S R , 31 Oct 76, 31; SBD, 21 Sept 76, 24; Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 26)
  The USSR launched the second operational satellite in its Statsionar 1 series,
    also known as Raduga (Rainbow), into a circular orbit at 35 900-km
    altitude, 0.3’ inclination, and 1436-min period, Tass announced. Car-

                                      214
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   September

    rying retransmitting equipment for continuous telephone and telegraph
    communications, Raduga would also transmit color and black-and-white
                                                        m,      1 4 Sept 76, 28;
    TV programs to Central Asia and Siberia. (UP1 in
    S Mar 1977, 117)
    ’
12 September: Vandals who damaged the moon rock on display at the
    National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., were not success-
    ful in obtaining a piece of the rock, said the Washington Post. The lunar
    sample, a 40-gram triangular chuck of basalt, had been imbedded in a
    block of glass so that it might be touched by museum visitors; about 2
    cubic mm had been chipped away and a missing corner of the triangle
    and a scratch over the surface had become visible in the single beam of
    light that illuminated the sample. NASA had sent experts to photograph
    the damage and to vacuum the exhibit area for any dust or small chips
    that might have come off the sample. Electronic security measures were
    being increased, and a fulltime guard had been stationed near the display,
    as a result of the incident. ( W Post, 12 Sept 76, B-3; Av W7c, 27 Sept
    76, 16)
@ As Viking 2’s lander was preparing for its scoop-and-analyze sequence on

    the rocky Utopia site of Mars, the Viking 1 orbiter fired its engines to
    shift orbit around the planet in 40’ longitude jumps each day for 9 days
    before taking over the relay of communications from the Viking 2
    lander. Viking 2’s orbiter would then begin a polar-orbital scan of Mars
    to search for traces of organic materials-carbon-based molecules found
    in all life forms on earth-not yet detected by Viking 1 experiments.
     Viking 1’s lander would remain in standby mode after its weeks of
    testing at the Chryse site. Project scientist Dr. Gerald A. Soffen, com-
    menting on the confusing results of the Viking 1 experiments (which
    hinted at the existence of life but offered no evidence of organic chem-
    icals), said he had been prepared for the discovery of organic chemicals
    without life, but the suggestion of Martian life without organics was
    totally unexpected.
        Just after 6 a.m. EDT on 12 Sept., the 3-meter arm of Viking 2 dug
    its first sample of Mars soil and dropped it into the hopper leading to three
    biology instruments. First cycle of the pyrolytic-release experiment
    began when the soil reached the test chamber, to be incubated in a carbon
    monoxide-carbon dioxide atmosphere containing a radioactive tracer;
    after 5 days, the atmosphere would be flushed out and the soil sample
    heated to vaporize any organic material. A detector would measure the
    radioactive carbon that had been ingested by any organisms. The gas-
    exchange detector-looking for signs of photosynthesis in the dark-
    would reveal the presence of organisms that might exhale gases such as
    oxygen or carbon dioxide through the night as well as in the daytime.
    (The first results of the same experiment on Viking 1 at Chryse had
    showed the soil was releasing six times as much gas as it would have in
    the absence of photosynthesis; a second trial had produced a signal a
    third as strong as the first, but still twice what it would have been if no
    photosynthesis were going on. Neither the readings nor their differences
    had been explained to everyone’s satisfaction.) The third biological

                                      215
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    instrument-the labeled-release experiment-would add a nutrient liq-
    uid to the test chamber on Tuesday and monitor over 10 days the release
    of radioactive tracer from any metabolized nutrient.
        A second soil sample would be used beginning Monday, 13 Sept., for
    an organic-chemistry analysis to detect carbon molecules, and for an
    x-ray fluorescence experiment to learn the composition of inorganic
    chemicals in the Mars soil.
        Scientists believed chances of finding definite traces of life would be
    better at Utopia, where five times more water had been measured in the
    air than at Chryse. They also planned to reduce chances of ambiguity in
    the Utopia readings by conducting the photosynthesis search at night,
    and by moving a rock to take a sample of Mars soil that was shielded from
    the killing solar ultraviolet constantly impinging on the planet’s surface
    and that was deeper than the sample taken at Chryse. ( W S t a r , 12 Sept
    76, A-14; W Post, 13 Sept 76, A-5; C Trib, 13 Sept 76, 6-16)
13 September: A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences,
    named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a
    2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The
    group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regu-
    late fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling
    of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using
    them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies
    to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant
    melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15%a year,
    about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal.
        An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone,
    meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the
    URiV. of Mich. report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine
    and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as
    abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available
    when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban
    on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr.
    The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the
    air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel
    combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a
    threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone re-
    duction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases
    obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the
    catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had
    permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the
    Univ. of Mich. had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous
    oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons.
        Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Law-
    rence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better
    methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the
    effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport
    operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not
    enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at

                                    216
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 September

    high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H.
    Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the
    chemistry were pinned down, the effect of S T operations could not be
    determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted
    for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratos-
    pheric processes, the team said. (NYT, 14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14;
    W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-1; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49)
13-16 September: The soil-collectingarm of the Viking 2 lander apparently
    jammed some time between delivering a sample of Mars soil to the
    biology-experiment hopper on Sunday and delivering the rest of the soil
    to a second hopper leading to an x-ray analysis chamber. The first indica-
    tion of trouble came when a routine picture transmission of the sampling
    sequence failed to show the collector head, although another picture
    showed that the collector had dug a trench and collected a soil sample.
    The lander had been programmed to halt the arm motion if something
    went wrong; Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said more than a day
    might be needed to define the problem. (The arm on the Viking 1 lander
    had jammed twice while digging at Chryse, and both times the flight
    directors at JYL were able to get it moving again.) A command would be
    sent to the Viking 2 lander Tuesday morning, 14 Sept., to extend the
    arm from its arrested position to be photographed so the flight directors
    could see what went wrong. The halt in operations meant that the gas-
    chromatograph spectrometer intended to analyze the soil for organic
    molecules never got a sample for analysis.
        The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were
    progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already
    indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber
    than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high
    oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity.
    Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic
    chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the
    lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances
    at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating
    their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation
    for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use
    radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms.
        After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated
     180’ instead of 45O as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the
    problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be
    possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday,
     17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery
    of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument.
        At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the
    first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33%
    more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from
    the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20
    times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of
    metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was

                                     217
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients
    in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The
    gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in
    the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample,
    apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory
    because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber.
    Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which
    might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accom-
    panied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No
    decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, consid-
    ered the least ambiguous of the detectors.
        Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from
    both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of
    Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on
    earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth
    in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent
    features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth
    would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough
    to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the
    Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest,
    earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the US. Geological Survey
    suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack
    of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into
    two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher,
    therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother,
    considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of
    the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared
    on the moon and on earth. ( W S t a r , 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2;
     W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-1; 17 Sept 76, A-4; Nm,
     17 Sept 76, A14; G Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
14 September: Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for a day-long
    meeting 16 Sept. at MSFC to review the status of the spinning solid upper
    stage (SSUS) that would deliver spacecraft from the Space Shuttle in low
    orbit to their operational synchronous orbits. The SSUS, carrying a sat-
    ellite of the type now being launched by expendable Atlas-Centaur or
    Thor-Delta vehicles, would be launched from earth in the cargo bay of
    the Space Shuttle. In orbit, the ssus with its payload would be extended
    from the cargo bay on a cradle with a spin table that would stabilize the
    ssus as it ejected from the cradle, before its own engine ignited to send
    it and its payload into the proper orbit. After reaching the required
    altitude, the payload’s propulsion system would position it in the desired
     orbital attitude. Industry representatives invited to the status review
    would hear presentations by NASA and Aerospace Corp. on concepts and
     current mission models for the SSUS. MSFC planned to issue requests for
     proposals for Phase B (preliminary design definition) about 1 Oct., with
     contracts being issued in Feb. Plans were to have the ssus ready for flight
     in Dec. 1979. (MSFC Release 76-166; Av Kk, 6 Sept 76, 46)
0 The General Services Administration goofed in agreeing to an exchange of
     California property with Rockwell Intl. Corp., said Rep. Jack Brooks
                                     218
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 September

    (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Government Operations.
    GSA agreed 3 yr ago to accept a $19.5-million piece of property on the
    former Rockwell AFB at Canoga Park, Calif., in exchange for a surplus
    $16-million building. No other agency had been found willing to occupy
    the Rockwell AFB property, and the corporation had claimed $1.8 million
    worth of special installations at the former base. Rep. Brooks urged GSA
    to fight the corporation’s attempt to get more out of the trade. (C Trib,
     14 Sept 76, 4-7)
0 The price of solar cells had come down, the Energy Research and Devel-
    opment Administration announced. Cells that would have cost about
    $210 ($21 a watt) 6 mo ago today cost $155 ($15.50 a watt). “This
    26% price drop in just 6 mo shows that our research and development
    program is making significant progress,” said Dr. Henry H. Marvin,
    director of ERDA’S division of solar energy. “However, we have a long
    way to go to meet our 1986 goal of SO$ a peak watt.” At the goal price,
    Dr. Marvin said, solar cells could compete with electric power from
    conventional sources; even at the present high cost, solar cells were
    competitive for special uses, such as recharging batteries at remote
    microwave stations operated by railroads and highway departments in
    southwestern states. Manufacture and sale of solar cells for such uses
    doubled in the past 18 mo, and the price during that period had dropped
    almost 50%. NASA’s Propulsion Laboratory would manage solar-cell
                           Jet
    purchase contracts for ERDA, the announcement said, to establish tech-
    nical feasibility of uses ranging from remote power sources to integration
    with existing power systems. (ERDA Release 76-290)
  Cosmonauts from 8 “socialist member-countries of the Intercosmos pro-
    gram” would join crews from the USSR in space beginning in 1978, the
    official Soviet news agency Tass announced. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov,
    chief of training for the cosmonaut program, said that timing of such
    flights would depend on the readiness of technology and preparedness of
    the crews: the crew commander would be a Soviet flyer, and the flight
    engineer and research engineer would represent another participating
    country. Crewmembers from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Cuba,
    Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia would train at the Yuri
    Gagarin Center near Moscow where Soviet cosmonauts have trained.
    Intercosmos is an association of Communist nations that had already
    cooperated in launching 16 unmanned satellites, the New York Times
    noted; the only men in space so far had been either Soviet or American.
    (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 15 Sept 76; NYT, 15 Sept 76, 72;
    W Post, 15 Sept 76, A-14)
15 September: The US. Air Force launched a Lockheed-built photo-
    reconnaissance satellite into a polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB on a
    Titan IIIB-Agena D. Initial orbital elements were 342-km apogee,
     132-km perigee, 96.4’ inclination, and 89.2-min period. The space-
    craft was a 3000-kg cylinder 8m long and 1.5m in diameter. The last
    previous satellite of this type, launched 22 March, had reentered
     18 May. (Av m, 4 Oct 76,26; USAF anno. 15 Sept 76; s March 1977,
                                                             ’
     117)

                                     219
September                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

  Johnson Space Center announced receipt of delivery on the second of two
0
    Space Shuttle training aircraft. The first had been delivered 8 June
     1976. The modified Grumman Gulfstream I1 twin-engine jet, flown to
    Ellington AFB from the plant in N.Y., would simulate Shuttle Orbiter
    handling qualities, performance, and flight-control procedures during
    subsonic flight phase, from 10.6-km altitude to simulated Orbiter touch-
    down. Crew training for approach and landing tests of the Shuttle Orbiter
    would begin late in Oct. (J% Release 76-58)
e Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. officially opened a facility in Sunnyvale,
    Calif., to manufacture a unique all-silica insulation refined from common
    sand from which 3 4 000 “tiles” would be made to cover 70% of the
    Shuttle Orbiter’s surface. The material was said to be so efficient that it
    could be held with bare hands while red-hot; it could be taken from an
    oven at 1533K and plunged immediately into cold water without dam-
    age. The tiles would be expected to survive such temperatures through
    100 flights with only minor maintenance, making the Shuttle a truly
    reusable space transportation system. Each tile would be milled to match
    the curvature of the Shuttle surface at the exact point to which it would
    be attached; the JSC Roundup said the task of fitting the tiles to the
    spacecraft skin would be like assembling a three-dimensional jigsaw
    puzzle twice the size of a basketball court. No two tiles in a “shipset”
    would be exactly alike. (JSC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 2)
0 Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of
    Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increas-
    ing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had
    processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from vari-
    ous observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to
    revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was
    in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the
    years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars,
    and meant that--“in several tens of millions of years from now”-it
    would fall on to the planet. (FBIS,15 Sept 76)
15-27 September: The USSR launched Soyuz 22 into earth orbit 15 Sept. at
    12:48 pm Moscow time (5:48 am EDT) from the Baykonur cosmodrome
    near Tyuratam. Orbital parameters were: apogee 280 km, perigee
    250 km, inclination 6S0, period 89.6 min. The spacecraft, carrying
    cosmonauts Col. Valery Bykovsky and civilian Vladimir Aksenov, was
    the first manned Soviet craft to carry foreign-made equipment-a “mul-
    tizonal” photographic instrument made by the “state-owned enterprise”
    Karl Zeiss Jena of East Germany. In a preflight interview, Bykovsky said
    the camera would occupy “a whole section of the Soyuz spaceship.”
    Previously, “Intercosmos” instruments developed by other socialist
    countries had been installed only on unmanned Soviet satellites. The
    Zeiss MKF-6 photographic unit was designed “to simultaneously photo-
    graph the earth‘s surface in six different wave bands,” four visible and
    two infrared, according to a Tass broadcast. Journalists were permitted
    to inspect the spacecraft’s interior, where the “photographic section”
    had been installed in the space usually occupied by the docking compart-

                                     220
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                September

   ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed
   and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut
   5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been
   constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight,
   lzvestia said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Intl Service in
   Russian, 15 Sept 76; WStar, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; N U ,
                                                       m,
   16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A l a ; Av           20 Sept 76, 25)
       Moscow radio said 16 Sept. that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s
   surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multi-
   spectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the
   Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology re-
   search; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
   said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those
   fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study
   of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of
   the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record
   changes in its composition during the flight.
       Tass reported 20 Sept. that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects
  that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern
  regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photog-
  raphy to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phe-
  nomena and processes.
       The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions
   22 Sept. in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic
  service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the
  landing module and checking its engine.
       After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed
  23 Sept. at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km
  northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and
  Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being
  processed and studied.                   1
       Soyuz 22’s East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not
  survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jetti-
  soned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut
  Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure
  of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various
  investigations.’’ Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said
  that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 2 2 ) oriented and stabilized the
  ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the
                                                       .
  camera. The crew “carried out all operations . . by heart, so to say,
  without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported.
      Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome
  near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health,
  Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said
  that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were
  in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount
  of research” in space during their week-long expedition.


                                    22 1
September                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

        Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching
    Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station
    contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, com-
    mander of the soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4 , who had told a COSPAR
    meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions indepen-
    dent of the Salyut stations. (Av Iwc, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow
    domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76,27 Sept
    76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 2 3 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
17 September: The Enterprise-Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by
    NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen.
    Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the US.
    Congress has ever made”-was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly
    facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EDT, to the strains of the
    theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000
    spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep.
    Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science
    and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “represent-
    ing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were
    test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton,
    and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter
    through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests
    were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene
    Roddenberry [see 8 Se t.].
         NASA Administrator Tames C. Fletcher told those attending that the
    ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to
    man in space-not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve
    as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up
    to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a
    shirtsleeve environment.) WiIlard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of
    Rockwell Intl., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American
    history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make
    possible.
         The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to
    measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the
    last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg
    or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km.
         Resembling space-bound DC-9,”according to Thomas O’Toole in
    the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and
    weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the
    past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors,
    parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle devel-
     opment had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning
     that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars)
    estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy
     composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save
     112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with
     titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than
     200 kg of weight.

                                     222
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                          September

        Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S.
    manned orbital flight (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred
    1 4 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle
    would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release
    76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8;W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; WStar,
    18 Sept 76, A-1; C Trib, 1%     Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76,
    12; 27 Sept 76, 12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76, 1; JSC Roundup,
    24 Sept 76, 1)
0 NASA announced plans to launch a third maritime satellite, Marisat-C, for
    Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral on a Delta rocket 1 4 Oct.
    Marisat 1, launched 19 Feb., was in orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at
    15OW; Marisat 2, launched 9 June, was in orbit over the mid-Pacific
    at 176.5O. The two Marisats currently provided communications ser-
    vices to the US. Navy as well as fulltime commercial voice and data
    communications to the maritime industry; Marisat-C, which would be in
    synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean, would be used initially only by
    the Navy, which planned to lease UHF capacity it found to be surplus.
    Comsat General would reimburse NASA for the cost of launch vehicle,
    launch, and other administrative expenses, and would supply all ground-
    station support. (NASA Release 76-1 56)
18-20 September: The Viking 2 lander signaled to mission scientists at JPL
    that its sample-collecting arm was working and had moved toward the
    x-ray instrument that would analyze the mineral content of the Mars soil.
    If the collector had delivered its sample and the analysis was proceeding,
    the signal expected on the next relay would confirm that the arm was
    available for further sampling. The mission scientists said they planned
    to instruct the arm to turn over a rock on the surface and take a sample




Enterprise-Space Shuttle Orbiter IO1-on public displayfor t h e j r s t time at Rockwell‘s
Palmdale, Cali$, facility, 17 Sept. 1981. (NASA 76-H-854)


                                          223
September                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    from the underlying soil that had not been exposed to lethal ultraviolet
    rays. Geologists had characterized the appearance of nearby soil struc-
    ture as resembling “caliche,” a calcium carbonate crust formed on earth
    surfaces by evaporation of water that deposited mineral salts on the soil
    particles and cemented them together. The cementing action might
    increase the difficulty of dislodging a rock with the lander arm, but
    scientists noted the ease with which the arm had taken the first sample.
    As the content of that first Viking 2 sample so closely resembled that
    from the Viking 1, scientists wanted to try for a sample with different
    properties, especially some trace of carbon-based chemicals that would
    indicate life processes. The caliche sample would be taken 25 Sept. and
    the attempt to move a rock would be made 8 Oct., a 3-hr strategy
    meeting decided 20 Sept. Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said the
    x-ray instrument had never received its sample for analysis, so a sample
    for it would be dug 3 Oct. An editorial in the New York Times asked
    whether, in the absence of carbon compounds, the mission scientists
    should consider the possibility of Martian life based on some chemical
    other than carbon. (Mission Status Bulletin 42; NYT, 19 Sept 76, 29;
    20 Sept 76, 32; W Post, 19 Sept 76, A12; 20 Sept 76, A-5; W Star,
     19 Sept 76, A-2)
19 September: A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and
    mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape
    Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary
    advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly
    efficient organization” at JX, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up
    to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.),
    chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the
    House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would
    cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be
    recoverable. ( N U , 19 Sept 76, 24)
20 September: Aviation Keek & Space Technology magazine reported that
    the first hitch in operations of the Viking 2 lander-trouble with its
    digging arm-had been solved the problem turned out to be in a micro-
    switch. Ground control at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Calif. had
    commanded the lander’s computer to ignore signals from the malfunc-
    tioning switch in future digs. If the corrective commands freed the arm
    for duty, the experiments needing soil samples would begin receiving
    them and results would become available within a week or 10 days.
     Viking 2 ’s lander cameras had returned excellent pictures of the Utopia
    terrain around the landing site; the meteorological experiment was col-
    lecting and returning weather data regularly; and the seismometer
    (whose parallel on Viking 1 was never uncaged) was ready to monitor
    marsquakes, the magazine said. (Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25, 58-61)
  The council of Intersputnik-the International Organization for Cosmic
    Telecommunications-ended its fifth meeting in Berlin after 4 days of
    deliberations. Attending were delegations from Bulgaria, Hungary, the
    German Democratic Republic, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Czechoslovakia,
    and the USSR; also attending were observers from the Intl. Organization

                                   224
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     September

    for Radio and Television (OIRT), Intercosmos, and the Stwding Commis-
    sion for Post and Telecommunications @ E m ) . The meeting adopted
    documents on the use of technical installations for transmitting Tv, radio,
    telephone, telegraph, pictures, and data by satellite. (FBIS, ADN Intl.
    Service in German, 20 Sept 76)
  Evaluation of data and pictures from a dendrite-remelting experiment flown
    in Dec. 1975 on a space processing applications rocket (SPAR 1)
    confirmed the belief that space processing could produce better materials
    than was possible on earth, NASA announced. The experiment, one of nine
    sent to a 22S-km altitude for about 5 min of near weightlessness,
    included a camera to record solidification of aluminum chloride solution
    in a transparent vial in the absence of gravity. No fluid motion was
    detected in the liquid, which solidified uniformly without the formation
    of crystals (dendrites) that broke off and settled to the bottom of the
    solution in a control experiment on earth. This experiment was the first
    in which scientists had viewed the process of solidification under weight-
    less conditions, said the co-investigators, Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary
    Helen Johnston of Marshall Space Flight Center. Controlling the crystal-
    line structure of materials would enable scientists to make them uni-
    formly strong to meet specific needs. (NASA Release 76-159; MSFC
    Release 76- 167)
  Nine sites for the world's first solar electric-power plant had been proposed
    by utility companies and government units in the U.S. in response to a
    request in July 1976, the Energy Research and Development Adminis-
    tration announced. Sites suggested were in Arizona, California, Florida,
    Mississippi, Puerto Rico, Rhode Island, and Texas. The agency planned
    to complete an evaluation and negotiate a contract with the selected
    proposer early in 1977; the selected proposer would become a partner
    with ERDA in constructing and operating a plant to generate electric
    power from high-pressure steam produced by concentrated power from
    the sun. Power from this pilot plant would be distributed by the utility to
    its customers; the plant would produce 10 Mw (10 000 kw) under
    optimum full-sun conditions, enough to supply a community of 10 000
    population. Construction of the plant would begin in 1978 and reach
    completion in 1980, at an estimated cost of $100 million. (ERDA Release
    76-294)
20-25 September: The committee on planetary and lunar exploration of the
    Space Science Board began meeting 20 Sept. at the Calif. Inst. of
    Technology to consider proposals for future space exploration, including
    a radar mission to Mars to determine the thickness of the ice at the polar
    caps and investigate the terracing of the planet as a clue to past climate.
    Terrace edges in both polar regions had been found to lie along concen-
    tric circles centered close to, but not identically with, the poles. Scientists
    had suggested the terraces were formed when Mars was spinning around
    a slightly different axis under climate conditions other than those at
    present. A chahge in the Viking 1 orbiter's path to take over commu-
    nications relay for the Viking 2 lander would free the Viking 2 orbiter
    by 24 Sept. to proceed with a polar-observing mission.

                                      225
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

        The Viking 2 lander’s pyrolytic-release instrument, which had been
    directed to look for evidence of photosynthesis activity in a dry Mars soil
    sample in the dark to avoid ambiguity, had returned an ambiguous
    reading, said Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of the Calif. Inst. of Technology,
    who designed the instrument. The count of radioactive molecules re-
    leased during the analysis was 21 per minute, far less than the 96 per
    minute counted in the first similar assay by the Viking 1 lander, but
    more than the 1 5 counts per minute the instrument would show in the
    absence of photosynthesis. The puzzled scientists planned another sam-
    pling, this time with a moistened sample under a sun simulator, which had
    been omitted from the first run to prevent overheating the Viking 2
    instrument, working in a location warmer than the Chryse area tested by
     Viking 1 .
        Although neither of the Viking landers had turned up more than a
    suggestion of life, Viking 2 had confirmed the presence of water on
    Mars, and more than had been expected, project scientists announced at
    a JPL news conference 22 Sept. The permanent northern polar cap was
    found to be composed entirely of frozen water, not of frozen carbon
    dioxide as had been thought. A thin layer of dry ice covering the polar
    caps during most of the Martian year had suggested that both caps
    consisted of frozen carbon dioxide. Two Viking 2 orbiter measurements
    that led to the discovery were the unusually high water-vapor content in
    the atmosphere over the northern pole, and the average-surface-
    temperature readings on the icecap, which were too warm for frozen
    carbon dioxide to exist. Dr. Hugh Kieffer of UCLA predicted that a survey
    of the south polar cap would find it also made entirely of water ice. The
    new evidence suggested that, when first formed, Mars might have had
    twice as much water as the earth had at a similar period in its devel-
    opment; even now, scientists described Mars as “a planet-size iceberg.”
    Other Viking instruments had detected traces of krypton and xenon in
    the Mars atmosphere. This discovery was the first clue that the planet
    once had a considerably denser atmosphere that could have supported
    liquid water and even rainfall. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief Viking scientist,
    said that the krypton finding was a “major marker” that would permit
    deductions about the origin of the Mars atmosphere.
        On Saturday, 25 Sept., mission scientists at JPL were “relieved” to see
    photographs transmitted by Viking 2 showing that the lander had fol-
    lowed an order radioed from earth to dig a trench and dump the soil
    sample into the organic analyzer to screen it for 2 wk in a search for
    microorganisms. (Mission Status Bulletin 44; NYT, 21 Sept 76, 18; 26
    Sept 76, 5; W Post, 23 Sept 76, A-2; 24 Sept 76, A-2; 26 Sept 76,
     A-6; W S t a r , 23 Sept 76, A-3; 26 Sept 76, A-14)
21 September: NASA announced selection of Western Union Telegraph Go.
     and RCA Global Communications, Inc., for competitive negotiations lead-
    ing to award of a single contract to provide tracking and data-relay
    satellite services (TDRSS) to support earth-orbiting spacecraft for 10 yr
    beginning in 1980. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage procure-
    ment of two relay satellites in synchronous earth orbit, plus ground-

                                    226
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   September

     terminal facilities to be located at White Sands, N.M. The system would
     support all of NASA’s scientific, applications, and manned spacecraft
     missions in earth orbit up to 5000-km altitude, including Space Shuttle,
     Spacelab, and the automated spacecraft which the Shuttle would insert
     into orbit in the 1980s. T D B , when fully operational, would provide
     coverage over 85 to 100% of each orbit as compared to a present
     average of 15%, and permit closing down many government-owned
     ground stations and leased communications circuits now needed to sup-
     port earth-orbiting satellites in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Net-
     work (STDN); portions of the latter system would be retained only for
     synchronous satellites and those in higher altitude elliptical earth orbits.
      (NASA Release 76- 158)
*   Marshall Space Flight Center announced development of a solar
     concentrator-collector that would use a large plastic Fresnel lens to
     focus sunlight on a tube containing heat-transport fluid, for use in con-
     structing or converting cooling systems in large buildings or in manu-
     facturing processes requiring heat in the 200-370°C range. A Fresnel
      lens, consisting of a thin transparent material grooved on one surface,
      would serve the function of a heavier ordinary curved lens in focusing
      incoming light in the desired direction. MSFC’S lens, thought to be the
      largest tried in a solar-energy application, was assembled from multiple
     lens panels and measured 1.8 by 3.6 meters; it had been undergoing tests
      at Wyle Laboratories in Huntsville since July 1976. It would be moved
      to MSFC and integrated into a solar test bed for further analysis of
      performance. Primary advantage of the Fresnel lens would be its adapt-
      ability to mass-production techniques, permitting low cost; besides the
      light weight and space saving of the acrylic plastic, MSFC cited durability
      and mechanical strength, as well as ease of cleaning, of lenses exposed
      to weather. The test article, to minimize technology requirements and to
      interface with existing systems, used off-the-shelf materials and hard-
      ware as fully as possible. MSFC findings would be made available to
      industry after further testing and evaluation. (MSFC Release 76- 169)
*   MSFC announced selection of two NASA payload specialists and a backup for
     ASSESS 11, a Spacelab simulation project to be flown in May 1977 in a
     four-engine jet aircraft. ASSESS 11, a joint mission of NASA and the Euro-
     pean Space Agency (ESA), would use the two US. payload specialists and
     two selected by ESA [see 27 Aug.]. The two selected, both of the Jet
     Propulsion Laboratory, were Dr. Robert T. Menzies and David S. Biliu;
     Leon B. Weaver of MSFC was chosen as the backup. Dr. Menzies would
     be principal investigator (PI) for the laser absorption spectrometer experi-
     ment; Biliu was a member of JPL’S synthetic-aperture radar research
     team; Weaver, a veteran of the ASSESS Lear 4 mission of Oct. 1974 and
     presently assistant mission manager, would represent MSFC’S Spacelab
     Payload Projects Ofice, and was selected from a group already involved
     in ASSESS 11 whose experience would permit training at minimal cost. The
     ASSESS 11 payload would include both NASA and E A experiments in earth
     resources, monitoring of atmospheric pollution, and infrared astronomy.
     (MSFC Release 76-170; Marshall Star, 22 Sept 76, 4)


                                       227
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    A year-long cooperative experiment using Ats 6 in a mission called SUE--
0
     Satellite Instructional Television Experiment-to broadcast daily pro-
     grams on agriculture, health and hygiene, family planning, and national
     integration to an estimated 5 million persons in 2400 remote villages in
     India never before exposed to television had “met its primary goal,” said
     Prof. Yash Pal, director of the space applications center operated by the
     Indian Space Research Organization at Ahmadabad. Ats 6 had relayed
     the programs, broadcast from a ground station near Ahmadabad, to small
     ground terminals consisting of conventional m receivers augmented with
     small electronic components and inexpensive antennas of chickenwire
     mesh, all built in India; another 2600 terminals near conventional TV
     stations had rebroadcast the instructional material to cities and nearby
     villages.
          Before the programs began, teams of Indian social scientists and
     engineers had visited more than 6000 villages to select the ones to
     receive SITE transmissions; an individual in each village had to be
     identified as TV-set caretaker, and a public site-usually a school-
      selected as the viewing center, so that “weaker sections of village soci-
     ety” could be assured of equal access to the TV programs. As some
      appropriate villages lacked electricity, these had to be supplied with
      power, a valuable side effect of the experiment. Programs for SITE had
      been developed by India’s Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in
      collaboration with ISRO; program content and format had to be kept
      simple because of the high rate of adult illiteracy. More than 1200 hr of
      diversified content were broadcast during the experiment; attendance
      was particularly high for programs related to animal husbandry and
      agriculture. Children’s programs were received enthusiastically, with
      resulting improvement in school attendance, and many students brought
      younger members of the family to view the programs.
          One yr of experimental TV would not “change the face of our vil-
      lages,” said Prof. Pal, but it had created “a cadre of dedicated people
      and the methodology necessary to sustain an ongoing program.” As a
      follow-on, the Indian government would construct ground transmitters in
      six cluster areas of villages to include about 40% of those involved in
      SITE, to resume the educational programs by early 1977. (NASA Release
      76-157)
    The M)D did not really want the Space Shuttle, charged Sen. William
0
      Proxmire (D-Wis.), and NASA had “conned Congress into buying a pig
      in the poke” in its efforts to obtain funds for Shuttle development. DOD
      had shown that it did not want the Shuttle by its actions, said Proxmire,
      citing DOD’S statement that it would “under no circumstance#” pay for
      the fourth and fifth Shuttle orbiters, and the M)D decision to go forward
      with a new satellite communications system (DSCS-111) “which will not
      capitalize on the unique advantages of the Shuttle . . . [but] is to be
      compatible with both the Shuttle and the present Titan III-c.” Proxmire
      charged that the DSCS decision was based not on a 9-mo wait for the
      Shuttle, but on the fact that “WD has little confidence in a cost-effective
      operational Shuttle.” Proxmire also cited a General Accounting Office

                                      228
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   September

    report issued in April that W D would pay less to launch its satellites on
    expendable vehicles than on the Shuttle through 1990- 199I, assuming
    that DOD did not plan to recover and reuse any of its satellites. (SBD,
    24 Sept 76, 105)
* William Allan Patterson, pioneer of many firsts in the airline industry,
    would receive the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at an annual dinner
    in Dec. sponsored by the Natl. Aeronautic Assn., announced NAA
    President John P. Henebry. The 77-yr-old Patterson, who retired as
    board chairman of United Airlines in 1963, had joined Boeing Company
    in 1929 and in 1934 was elected president of United (created in 1931
    by Boeing’s merger with 3 other airlines to form a transcontinental
    system), a position he held for 29 yr. Patterson had declared himself most
    proud of establishing in 1930 the occupation of air stewardess; he had
    been instrumental in passage of the Federal Aviation Act in 1958,
    establishing a single federal agency with full authority for air traffic
    control, and in obtaining appropriation of federal funds for installation of
    landing and navigation aids at major airports across the US. The trophy,
    a miniature silver copy of the plane flown by the Wright Brothers at Kitty
    Hawk in 1903, had been awarded yearly by the NAA for significant public
    service of enduring value to aviation in the US. (NAA release, 2 1 Sept 76)
22 September: Scientists at the Naval Research Laboratory successfully used
    a computer system to orient sensors on high-altitude balloons orbiting the
    earth on observation flights of up to 100 days, NRL announced. The
    long-duration missions were required to monitor high-energy solar flares,
    cosmic gamma-ray bursts, and transient x-ray sources. The NRL system,
    designed for superpressure balloons flying at 40-km altitude, used a
    microcomputer programmable for as many as 32 observation tasks,
    which could be modified in flight by ground command. An L-band telem-
    etry link from the balloon permitted receipt and recording of data on
    position and sidereal time, used by the microcomputer to orient the
    detector. Data could be relayed through geosynchronous satellites, using
    the computer to orient a high-gain antenna toward the satellite. Real-
    time long-duration monitoring by balloons could offer a low-cost and
    frequently more sensitive alternative to satellite experiments, NRL stated.
    (NRL Release 44-7-76B)
26 September: Pilot training for the Space Shuttle would begin in October at
    White Sands Missile Range, the Washington Post reported, with
    instructors completing their training by mid-October. Two of the instruc-
    tors-David Griggs and Ted Mendenhall-were scheduled to make prac-
    tice approaches at the range 29 September; chief instructor Al Manson
    and copilot Ed Rainey made a similar test in August. Aircraft used in the
    Shuttle training are modified Grumman Gulfstream I1 jets fitted with
    Shuttle orbiter controls and instrumentation. ( W P o s t , 26 Sept 7 6 , A20)
* Both the United States and the US% were working on ways to shoot down
    enemy satellites in earth orbit, reported Henry S. Bradsher in the Vush-
     ington Star. Commenting on a Department of Defense disclosure of
     “aggressive basic technology research efforts” to protect U.S. satellites
    from a potential Soviet threat, Bradsher noted that the DOD previously

                                      229
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

    had refused to comment on U.S. work on so-called satellite killers [see
    27 July] and had tended to play down any Soviet danger. With the DOD
    announcement came word that the USSR had conducted 3 satellite-
    destruction tests this year; it had conducted 5 tests of such systems
    between 1968 and 1971, but had dropped them, leading Pentagon
    officials to think the program had been halted in accordance with 1972
    agreements that limited strategic defense armament (SALT I) and
    antiballistic-missile systems. The agreements had been based on each
    side’s ability to monitor the other’s compliance by means of recon-
    naissance satellites; however, recent reconnaissance photographs had
    been interpreted as showing Soviet launch pads carrying satellite-killer
    systems.
        Secretary of the Navy J. William Middendorf had stated 25 Sept. that
    the Soviet Union was presumed to be working on guidance systems that
    could destroy targets such as over-the-horizon naval warfare missiles,
    greatly heightening the threat to US. warships. Asked if the US. were
    developing satellite-killers, Middendorf replied, “We’re working in that
    direction.” The Pentagon at first refused to comment on a satellite-
    destruction program, but released a statement when pressed about Mid-
    dendorfs answer. ( W Star, 26 Sept 76, A-1)
27 September: NASA was preparing to issue requests for proposals in Jan.
    1977 for the Large Space Telescope, resulting in contractor selection
    during the next year if Congress approved the fiscal 1978 funding
    requested, said Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. NASA
    also hoped to issue an announcement of scientific opportunity to the
    scientific community in Feb., asking for scientific instruments to be
    carried on the first mission of the 2.4-meter telescope. (Av Wk, 27 Sept
    76, 9)
28 September: MSFC announced launchings of two giant helium-filled poly-
    ethylene balloons carrying cosmic-ray detectors, last week‘s flight for a
    French-Danish team investigating isotopic composition of primary cos-
    mic rays, the upcoming flight to evaluate instrumentation for a planned
    HEAO launch and for other Space Shuttle experiments. The HEAO flight
    scheduled for 1979 would survey and map gamma-ray and cosmic-ray
    flux. The balloon launch site near Sioux Falls, S.D., was chosen because
    earth magnetic-field lines there would deflect fewer cosmic rays, and the
    low population density and open terrain facilitated payload recovery. The
    balloons would reach an altitude of about 4 1 km, above 99.6% of earth’s
    atmosphere (which fragments cosmic rays), and remain aloft for 40 to
    60 hr sending data to the ground. Upon electronic command from the
    ground, the instrument payloads would separate from the balloons and
    return to earth by parachute; the balloons would be destroyed by ground
    command over unpopulated areas. Telemetry tapes and recovered in-
    struments would go to the investigators for analysis. (MSFC Release
    76-172)
29 September: NASA announced award of a cost-plus-bed-fee contract to
    evaluate a fuel-saving concept applicable to commercial subsonic trans-
    port aircraft. The three companies selected were Boeing Co., McDonnell

                                    230
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 September

     Douglas Corp., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; each company estimated
    its portion of the contract to be about $1.6 million. The 24-mo contract,
    to be managed by Langley Research Center, would be for a study of
    laminar flow control by use of an air-suction system built into aircraft
    skin surfaces to remove boundary-layer air before it could cause drag and
    air turbulence that would reduce aircraft speed. (NASA Release 76-161)
* Meetings in Ardashat, Armenia, between Soviet and American scientists on
    space biology and manned flight safety had concluded, announced the
    Yerevan domestic radio news service. The meeting heard reports on
    results of the Apollo-Soyuzjoint space mission, and proposed subjects for
    discussion at another meeting to be held in the US. in 1977. The
    government of the Armenian Republic gave a reception to honor the
    participants. (FBIS, Yerevan in Armenian, 29 Sept 76)
30 September Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of
    the u.s.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen.
    Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society
    announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the
    award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to
    the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most
    significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen.
                                                             .
    Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions . . by his partici-
    pation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in es-
    tablishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vitalfo the
    success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the
    basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in
    space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in
    space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force
    colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former
    astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space
    Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air
    Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the
    Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release,
    30 Sept 76)
During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an inter-
    view with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student,
    Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics
    course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the
    program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC,
    Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear
    jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both
    monetary compensation and college credit. The college program re-
    quired a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the
    Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical
    test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics.
    Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying
    since 197 1, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P
    license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)


                                    23 1
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
September

* The Marshall Space Flight Center announced 3 Sept. the start of hot-firing
      tests of the steering system for the Space Shuttle solid-fuelrocket booster
      (SRB). First series of tests, which would continue into Oct., would confirm
      design of the thrust-vector control steering system developed by MSFC
      engineers as part of the center's responsibility for SRB design and devel-
      opment. The system under test would provide power to move the nozzle
      of the SRB in any direction, steering the Shuttle in the first 120 sec of
      flight during SRB burn. Data from the first series of tests would be
      evaluated to refine the system design; after any needed modifications, a
      second series of tests would certify the system. Thrust-vector control
      units would be provided in 1978 to Thiokol Corp., MSFC contractor for
      the SRB solid-fuel rocket motor, for testing under actual firing conditions.
      (MSFC Release 76- 163)
          -MSFC announced it had delivered the first production case segment
      for the SRB motor to Thiokol's Wasatch Div. in Utah on 27 Sept., beating
      the schedule by 3 days. All case segments for the first motor were to
      arrive at Thiokol by the end of 1976. The delivered segment, almost
      4 m in diameter and 4.2 m long, weighed more than 5990 kg. EIeven
      segments would be used in each motor; joined, the segments and nozzle
      would measure more than 38 m long, over three fourths of the total SRB
      length. (MSFC Release 76-173)
          -MSFC announced 30 Sept. that personnel of the Rocketdyne Div.,
      Rockwell Intl. Corp., had fired a developmental test engine for the Space
      Shuttle for 650 sec, longest test to date. The same engine had been fired
      for 300 sec 2 days earlier. The tests, at the Natl. Space Technology
      Laboratory in Bay St. Louis, Miss., would produce component- and
      system-operation data from extended-duration firings at increasing
      power levels. (MSFC Release 76-1 74)
    Johnson Space Center announced on 2 1 Sept. modification of a cost-plus-
0
      award-fee contract with IBM, Gaithersburg, Md., to cover software for
      ground-based computing and data-processing systems at JSC. IBM would
      develop computer programs for Space Shuttle vehicle management and
      flight operations, and related scientific and medical operations. Value of
      the modified contract would be $19 463 000. ( J s c Release 76-59)
          -NASA contracted 22 Sept. with Aeronutronic Ford Corp. for support
      services for the Mission Control Center and other ground-based data
      systems at JSC, including data hardware and software systems en-
      gineering and maintenance, as well as logistics, reliability, and quality
      assurance. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would cost about
      $46 550 000 from July 1976 through 30 Sept. 1978. (JSCRelease
      76-60)
          -JSC announced 24 Sept. selection of Hamilton Standard Div. of
      United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a contract
      for development and production of a portable oxygen system for Space
      Shuttle crew and passengers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, costing
      about $1.9 million, would run from 13 Nov. 1976 to 13 July 1979. The
      system, designed to meet four special Shuttle needs (emergency oxygen
      in case of cabin-atmosphere contamination, prebreathing before space-
      walks, life support during rescue, and emergency oxygen after landing
                                       232
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   September

      in case of landing-area contamination), would be capable of operating
      independently or connected to the Shuttle oxygen.system. The contract
      would call for delivery of ten units and 50 recharge kits for NASA use in
      certification, training, and flight, plus ground-support equipment and
      manpower; it would contain options for 62 additional units and 310
      recharge kits. (JXRelease 76-61)
*   A giant Air Force antenna at Hamilton, Mass., that had shared in trans-
      atlantic communications with the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England
      by way of moon reflections would be dismantled and moved to Westford,
      Mass., for use by the Lincoln Laboratory of MIT in radar studies of earth’s
      upper atmosphere, the AFSC Newsreview announced. The big dish,
      nearly 46 m in diameter, had been used by the USAF Geophysics Labora-
      tory since 1962 for ionospheric and radioastronomy studies, as well as
      in auroral studies using satellite beacons. Continuing USAF research at
      Hamilton’s Sagamore Hill Observatory would use the facility’s 25.6-m
      antenna and smaller receivers. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 76, 10)




                                       233
                              October 1976

1 October: The boost given by the Viking Mars missions, now nearing an end,
    to those concerned with the space program might persuade Congress of the
    virtues of possible future projects, Science magazine reported. Describing
    15 Sept. testimony of Dr. John E. Naugle, acting associate administrator
    of NASA, before a House subcommittee, the magazine said “some of the
    juicier projects the agency has in mind for the 1980s” might include a
    roving-vehicle mission to Mars, shipped aboard a Solar Sailor, “the closest
    thiig the agency has ever proposed to a genuine space ship.” The Solar
    Sailor would be driven by solar pressure-light reflected from the sun,
    collected by huge lightweight sails-and was referred to as “a reusable
    interplanetary spacecraft.” Other future projects would be a Global Infor-
    mation Services satellite system to combine earth sensing, meteorological
    and pollution observation, data transmission, and navigation uses, all such
    information to be available to the public at receiving stations or home
    terminals; some sort of solar-energycollection system, either on the ground
    or in space; and moving “a segment of our industrial society into
    space . . . where there is abundant solar energy and an almost inex-
    haustible vacuum to act as a sink for thermal and chemical pollution.”
    Naugle and other agency spokesmen had noted that such plans were still
    in the design stage and the agency was not ready to discuss them in detail;
    however, Science commented, the Viking success might mean that for
    NASA “perhaps the sky will be the limit, after all.” (Science, 1 Oct 76, 39)
* NASA announced successful static test firing of one of two Space Shuttle main
    engies for 650 sec at main-stage operating level (50%rated thrust level)
    at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories, Bay St. Louis, Miss., under the
    direction of MSFC. The firing, on 30 Sept., was the longest test firing of an
    SSME to date. Previous firings had aimed at testing engine-throttling control,
    engine start and shutdown sequence, and engine power balance. The cur-
    rent series of tests, conducted by personnel of Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne
     Div., would obtain component- and system-operation data at increasing
    levels of power. The NSTL test program combined development and accept-
    ance testing; each Shuttle engine would be fired at NSTL before being
     certified for flight. (NASA Release 76-162)
* Three products developed by Lewis Research Center had appeared in a list
     of the 100 most significant products developed during the year, published
     by Industrial Research magazine, said the Lewis News. The magazine
     yearly considers about 1000 entries from industries throughout the US.,
     and presents the IR-100 award for the products selected by a panel of
     nationally known technical judges. The 1976 award brings to 16 the
     number won by h R C since it entered the competition 11 yr ago. Products
     cited were: a continuous-production cyclotron target, used in producing

                                      235
October                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    radioactive isotopes for diagnostic nuclear medicine; a thickness-measuring
    radar that could measure lake-ice thickness directly beneath an overflying
    aircraft, used by the Coast Guard to help extend the shipping season on the
    Great Lakes; and a ceramic thermal-barrier coating that would increase the
    life of metal parts by protecting them from very high-temperature erosive
    and corrosive gases, used to prolong the usefulness of turbine blades ten
    times beyond that of uncoated blades. (Lewis News, 1 Oct 76, 1)
1-21 October: No evidence of organic material in the soil of Mars appeared in
     Viking 2 lander’s first experiment results, John Noble Wdford reported in
    the New York Times. The experiment-heating a soil sample to vaporize
    any organic molecules-was          one of eight scheduled for the lander.
    Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, leader of the organic chemistry experiment,
    noted that the Viking 1 lander had found no trace of organic compounds
    either. Biology experiments on both landers had returned data indicating
    some unexplained activity in the soil samples. Gentry Lee, director of
    scientific analysis for the Viking project, said neither a biological nor a
    chemical hypothesis was consistent with all the data. (W, Oct 76, D13)
                                                                    1
        A letter to the NYTimes had emphasized that the absence not of carbon
    but of “the extremely complex molecules of carbon that are characteristic
    of earth life” was the puzzling factor in the Viking findings at Mars. (MT,
    2 Oct 76, 24)
         Project scientists had offered three possible explanations for the negative
    results of the attempts to identify organic compounds. First, any organic
    compounds left on Mars by the solar wind, by meteor fall, or by past life
    processes could have been destroyed by agents such as ultraviolet radiation,
    oxygen, or oxidants such as nitrates or metal oxides acting independently
    or synergistically;“certainly,” the project report published in the Oct. issue
    of Science said, “continuous exposure to short-wave ultraviolet light in the
    presence of oxygen will cause rapid chemical decomposition of most organic
    compounds.” Second, organic compounds might exist in Mars soil in
    amounts too dilute to be detected by the Viking instruments. Third, organic
    compounds might be forming on Mars and undergoing rapid destruction.
    The traces of organic molecules seen in a second Viking 2 lander chemistry
    test could well have resulted from contaminants known to have been in the
    test chamber before the spacecraft left earth, Dr. Biemann said. (W,
    2 Oct 76, 28)
         The Viking 2 lander pushed at a rock on the surface of Mars but was
    unable to move it, JPL scientists reported. The shove was preliminary to
    an attempt to sample soil shielded from solar radiation and more likely
    to contain organic material. Dr. Louis Kingsland, deputy mission direc-
    tor, announced the lander would be ordered to try again and to turn over
    a smaller rock if the first choice failed to move. Dr. Priestley Toulmin,
     director of the inorganic analysis experiments, said the iron-rich topsoil
     tested by the Viking 2 lander had a striking resemblance to that tested
     at the Viking 1 site; results of the assay were almost a duplicate of those
     sent to earth 2 mo ago. The similarity lead scientists to think the soil had
     been affected by ancient weather conditions that swept over large por-
     tions of the planet; however, the results could not show whether the

                                      236
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   October

    material below the surface was likewise uniform around the planet.
   { W Star, 6 Oct 76, A-5; NW, 8 Oct 76, A26)
        The third of three Viking 2 lander tests for dead organic matter in
    the soil of Mars had shown no sign of fossilized life, Dr. Biemann said at
    JPL. The last test would use soil exposed by turning over a rock on the
    Mars surface that scientists said might have been undisturbed for as long
    as a million yr. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Caltech, who supervised
    experiments on both Viking 1 and Viking 2 sites that looked for signs
    of biological activity, said that the results he had obtained ‘‘would be
    convincing for life on Mars if we had found the dead organic matter.”
    The sample from under the rock would be held for chemical analysis until
    scientists could examine photographs of the trench where it was dug to
    make sure the sample was taken from the proper protected place. An-
    other under-rock sample would be dug for biological analysis later, the
    second Viking 2 test for synthesis of organic matter to be conducted at
    the Utopia site. ( W Post, 12 Oct 76, A-8; NYT, 12 Oct 76, 18)
        Meanwhile, the seismology instrument on the Viking 2 lander had
    recorded no marsquake activity in the 2 wk it had been monitoring the
    planet’s surface, said Dr. Don L. Anderson, seismology team director.
    The detector, turned up to full sensitivity, could detect a quake as small
    as a 3 on the Richter scale (enough to cause only slight damage on earth)
    as far away as 200 km from the lander; Dr. Anderson said it was working
    well, recording breezes and even picking up vibrations from tape record-
    ers on board the lander. A similar instrument on the Viking 1 lander
    never was freed from its packaging. (W Star, 15 Oct 76, A-3)
        The scoop of soil taken from under a rock on the Mars surface also
    failed to yield a trace of organic molecules, Dr. Biemann announced.
    However, mission officials planned to go ahead with biological experi-
    ments using a sample from under another rock later in the week; the
    sample would be tested for signs of life processes-growth, metabolism,
    and respiration. ( C Trib, 21 Oct 76, 4-22)
3 October: Dr. William Nordberg, 46, director of applications at GSFC, died
    o cancer after a 2-yr illness. A native of Austria, he had come to the
     f
    U.S. in 1953 to work as an atmospheric geophysicist for the Army Signal
    Corps. As one of the scientists transferred from the Army to the newly
    formed NASA, he went to GSFC in 1959 as head of the physical meas-
    urement section in Satellite Applications Systems Div. and became Di-
    rector of Applications in 1974. In 1975 he had received both the
    William T. Pecora Award and NASA’s       Distinguished Service Medal for
    outstanding contributions to applications of remote sensing of earth by
    spacecraft, honoring his work with the Landsat project, in which he had
    coordinated the work of 300 scientists from 38 countries in demonstrat-
    ing satellite uses in disciplines such as agriculture, forestry, land use,
    marine resources and oceanography, mineral and oil exploitation, geol-
    ogy, and environmental impact. (Goddard News, Sept 76, 1; W Post,
    5 Oct 76, C-6)
4 October: The Intl. Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT)
    announced that the Assembly of Parties meeting in Nairobi, Kenya, had

                                    237
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

    confirmed the appointment of Santiago Astrain of Chile, since 1973 the
    secretary general of INTELSAT, as the first Director General of the inter-
    national organization. The board of governors had appointed Astrain in
    July to serve a 6-yr term as Director General, beginning 31 Dec. 1976.
    The Director General would be responsible for implementing permanent
    management arrangements and for tasks such as implementing a new
    high-capacity satellite system to be known as Intelsat V in the late 1970s
    and early 1980s. About 200 delegates, representing 69 of INTELSAT’S 95
    member countries, attended the Nairobi meeting. Elected were a chair-
    man, Isaac Omolo Okero of Kenya, and a deputy chairman, Fernando
    Gaviria of Colombia. Vice chairmen elected to represent the five world
    regions were Romulo Villar Furtado of Brazil (The Americas); Joachim
    Jaenicke of the Federal Republic of Germany (W. Europe); Zika Ra-
    dojlovic of Yugoslavia (E. Europe and N. Asia); and Sribhumi Sukhanetr
    of Thailand (Asia and Australasia). The meeting also recognized the
    People’s Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China,
    and welcomed the PRC to join INTELSAT. (INTELSAT Releases 76-28-1,
    76-29-1; Satellite Pathways, ComSat, vol. 1 no. 7, Sept-Oct 76)
5 October: About 3000 people attended a ceremony dedicating the Space
    Hall of Fame at Alamogordo, N.M., honoring men and women involved
    in space exploration. Original inductees, numbering 35, included US.
    astronaut Neil Armstrong and Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. Nine of
    the 35 were from the Soviet Union; eight each from the u.S. and West
    Germany; three from Austria, two from France, and one each from Great
    Britain, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Switzerland. Dr. Frederick Du-
    rant of the Smithsonian Institution announced the names of the pioneers,
    nominated by the Intl. Academy of Astronautics in Paris with final
    selection by a committee appointed by the governor of N.M. for the Hall
    of Fame. Lubas Perek, head of the UN’s outer space affairs division, told
    the audience that the choice of persons to be honored “will surely reflect
    the grand international character of outer space research.” ( W Star,
    6 Oct 76, 2; N U , 10 Oct 76, 26; Intl Space Hall of Fame, media
    release; Alamogordo Daily News, 3 Oct 76, dedication edition)
  Responses of Presidential candidates Ford and Carter to questionnaires
    submitted by U.S. physicists and engineers emphasized their “differing
    viewpoints,” wrote Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. One set of 16
    questions was from 24 professional engineering societies claiming a
    combined membership of one million; the other, dealing with three broad
    issues, was submitted by the American Physical Society’s president,
    Dr. William A. Fowler. To a question regarding overseas sales of nuclear
    fuel and equipment, President Ford replied that the US. must maintain
    the role of major supplier “for peaceful purposes-so that we can
    influence others to accept controls to minimize the threat of prolif-
    eration.” Candidate Carter replied that it was “absolutely essential” to
    halt such sales “even with safeguards” to prevent use of the materials
    in producing nuclear weapons. Physics Today, publishing the replies to
     Dr. Fowler’s questions in the Oct. issue, noted editorially that both
    candidates were committed to more support for basic research and ‘La

                                    238
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     October

     strong voice for science in the Administration’s decision-making.” (NIT,
     5 Oct 76, 33)
  One of the first in a group of 32 commercial solar heating and cooling
     systems in ERDA’S nationwide solar-energy demonstration program went
     into operation in Lynchburg, Va., NASA announced. Local and state
     government officials attended an open house at the office of Terrell E.
     Mosely, Inc., where the system is installed, to view the equipment
     together with businessmen, engineers, architects, and federal represen-
     tatives. The 32 pilot projects, selected from 308 proposals submitted to
     ERDA, include ten office buildings, four schools, three hotels or motels,
     two fire stations, two factories, one hospital, one laboratory, one library,
     and some miscellaneous buildings. NASA’s      Marshall Space Flight Center
     provided technical management for the installations in support of the
     ERDA program. (NASA Release 76-163; MSFC Release 76-177)
* The official Manila radio announced an agreement between Domestic Sat-
     ellite Philippines and the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan for acquisition,
     installation, and construction of 1 1 earth-satellite stations in a
     $26 million satellite communications system, to be operational by 1978.
     The system would provide long-distance service in the national commu-
     nications network. (FBIS, Manila FEBC in English, 5 Oct 76)
6 October: A rocketborne experiment to investigate the ionosphere failed
     when the second stage of the two-stage Nike-Cajun vehicle failed to
     ignite, Wallops Flight Center announced. Liftoff at WFC occurred at
     3:30 pm EIIT, and the Cajun with its payload fell into the Atlantic Ocean
     about 2 min 14 sec after liftoff. The experiment was to determine ion
     composition of the D and lower E regions of the ionosphere, with special
     emphasis on the transition region. Planned recovery of the experiment
     in midair would have spared the instrumentation from impact and expo-
     sure to salt water, allowing reflight at substantial cost savings. A commit-
     tee had been appointed to investigate the cause of the malfunction. (WFC
     Release 76- 14)
* ESA’s Science Program Committee announced that it had unanimously
     approved two new scientific projects at its sixth meeting held 4 and 5 Oct.
     in Paris. The committee approved participation in the Space Telescope,
     planned by NASA for launch in 1983, and agreed to finance a plan called
     GEOSARl (launching a Geos spacecraft into a different orbit on the second
     flight of the Ariane launcher, scheduled for Dec. 1979). The Space
     Telescope project depended on a favorable outcome of negotiations with
     NASA and approval of the project by U.S. authorities in 1977. The
     committee considered an additional ESA-NASA cooperative project, the
     Out-of-Ecliptic ( W E ) mission to fly two spacecraft around the sun at its
     north and south poles in a first exploration of the solar system’s third
     dimension; the committee agreed to continue negotiations with NASA and
     to join in an announcement of opportunities for the mission if necessary
     before the committee’s next meeting, in the spring of 1977. (ESA release
     6 Oct 76)
* IN’I‘ELSAT announced award to the British Aircraft Corp. of a 15-mo
     fixed-price contract for design, fabrication, test, and delivery of a model

                                      239
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

    onboard processor programmable to perform a variety of tasks, including
    monitoring and control of satellite electronic functions. A standardized
     system based on microprocessors, rather than hard-wired logic, for each
    individual function or system would reduce weight and power con-
     sumption and increase satellite reliability and efficiency. Value of the
     contract was 9b 121 600 in U.S. dollars. (INTELSAT Release 76-27-M)
0 The Brazilian Telecommunications Company received bids from inter-
    national firms to supply space tracking equipment to the Brazilian satel-
    lite communications system, according to a broadcast from the Brasilia
     Domestic Service. The announcement said the first stage of the domestic
     satellite system, to be concluded in 1979, would consist of 17 receiving
     and transmitting stations primarily in the Amazon region, and two space
     satellites; a third would be used for replacement. During a second phase
    ending in 1981, 19 more stations would be added. The system would
    consist of 44 stations in all, the last eight to be added later. (FBIS, Brasilia
     Domestic Service in Portuguese, 6 Oct 76)
7 October: Modifications of the test stand to be used at the Natl. Space
    Technology Laboratories for static firing of the combined Space Shuttle
    propulsion system had been finished 2 wk early, MSFC announced. The
    stand had been built for tests of the Saturn V first stage and converted
    for use in the Shuttle program by Industrial Contractors, Inc., of Idaho
    Falls, Ida. In the tests, scheduled to be conducted late in 1977 by
    workers in Rockwell Intl. Corp.’s Space Division under MFSC direction,
    the main engines of the Shuttle would be connected to a structure
    resembling the orbiter; this simulator, using both flight and nodighi
    hardware, would be attached to an external tank, the Shuttle element
    containing liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen for the three main engines.
    Firing of this combination (known as the Main Propulsion Test Article)
    would be the first time the three main engines were fired as a sysiem.
    Engineers would combine acoustic tests with the MPTA firings to obtain
    data for determining optimum vibration and sound levels; they would also
    use the data to check tanking procedures. Hardware for the tests would
    arrive at NSTL next summer. (MSFC Release 76-178)
0 The Energy Research and Development Administration announced plans to
    build a “power tower” in 1978 and put it in operation by 1981. Plans
    called for a large number of sun-tracking mirrors, called heliostats, to
    reflect sunlight on to a boiler located at the top of a tower; water i the
                                                                             n
    boiler, superheated by concentrated sunlight, would produce high-
    pressure steam to drive a turbine. ERDA was seeking a utility company to
    construct and operate the pilot plant: the utility would provide the site,
    install a conventional turbine and generator, and distribute the power to
    its customers over existing lines. ERDA would provide the solar portions
    (tower, boiler, heliostats, and storage) and charge the utility for the
    electricity. Sites proposed for the pilot plant were in Ariz., Calif., Fla.,
    Miss., P.R., R.I., and Tex. Three teams-headed by Honeywell Inc.,
    McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., and Martin Marietta Corp.-were
    working on designs for the pilot plant, and Boeing Engineering and
    Construction Corp. was developing a design for the heliostat only. WDA

                                        240
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    October

     would choose the best design and test it at a facility under construction
     at the Sandia Laboratories of ERDA in N.M. (ERDA Release NF-76-12)
        announced appointment of Michel Bignier, director-general of the
0 =A
                                                            from Jan. 1972 to
     French Centre National $Etudes Spatiales (CNES)
     June 1976, as director of the Spacelab program effective during Oct.
     ESA’S director general, Roy Gibson, had been managing the program with
     the assistance of the Technical Inspector, Prof. Massimo Trella, since
     the former Spacelab director resigned 3 mo ago. In addition to being
     responsible for directing the Spacelab program, Bignier as a member of
     ESA’S 9-man directorate would assist in collective consideration of major
     ESA management problems. (ESA release 7 Oct 76)
8 October: Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development
     at Johnson Space Center, had been chosen to receive awards from both
     the American Astronautical Society and the Instrument Society of Amer-
     ica, the JX Roundup reported. Dr. Faget, one of the original 35 mem-
     bers of the NASA Space Task Force Group, received from the AAS its
     Space Flight Award, given for the greatest contribution to the advance-
     ment of space flight and space exploration. Dr. Faget had received AAS’S
     Lovelace award in 1971. The ISA had selected him for the Albert F.
     Sperry Award, for “advancing spacecraft, laboratory and biomedical
     instrumentation through technical and engineering leadership of manned
     space flight programs.” Dr. Faget in 1969 received NASA’s medal for
     exceptional service and distinguished service medal-the agency’s high-
     est award-and had been inducted into the Natl. Space Hall of Fame.
     (JSC Roundup, 8 Oct 76, 1)
0 Test pilot William H. Dana had been chosen to receive the AIAA 1976 Haley
     Space Flight Award, the DFRC X-Press announced. Dana would receive
     the award at the IAF conference banquet 15 Oct. Named for Andrew G.
     Haley, one of the founders of the Am. Rocket Society, the award is for
     “outstanding contribution . . . to the advancement of the arts, sciences
     or technology of astronautics.” Dana would be honored for his service as
     test pilot on the HL-IO, M2-F3, and X-24B lifting bodies, and his 16
     flights as project pilot of the X-15 rocket-powered research aircraft.
     (DFRC X-Press, 8 Oct 76, 2; LA Herald-Examiner, 12 Oct 76, 3;
     Lancaster, Calif. Ledger-Gazette, 7 Oct 76, 10)
0 MSFC announced that the Alabama Society of Professional Engineers had
     chosen the Center to receive the first annual Wonder of Engineering
     award, for design engineering achievement in producing a study called
     Ecastar (a project during the summer of 1975, studying energy-
     conservation measures and their possible effect on society and the envi-
     ronment). Ecastar was one of the projects completed over the past
     decade in a design engineering program run at MSFC by Auburn Univ. A
     summer faculty fellowship program sponsored by NASA and the Am. SOC.
     of Engineering Education had awarded the fellowships to engineering,
     natural science, and social science faculty members in summer study
     programs directed by universities at NASA research centers, to enable the
     participants to design courses at their institutions and to further collab-
     oration between engineering and other disciplines. (MSFC Release
     76- 183)        *


                                     241
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

        announced award of a $1 441 116 contract extension to &nage-
    NOAA
0
    ment and Technical Services Co., Daytona Beach, Fla., for technical
    support in operating NOAA’S geostationary environmental satellite sys-
    tem. The extension would continue the company’s work in processing
    and distributing environmental data. Two GOES satellites at altitudes of
    35 800 km were transmitting imagery and other information t re-         o
    ceiving stations at Wallops, Va., and Suitland, Md., for communication
    to NOAA centers in Washington, D.C., Miami, Kansas City, and San
    Francisco. (NOAA Release 76-227)
10 October: US. balloonist Ed Yost, who had ditched his ballocrn in the
    Atlantic when loss of helium prevented him from completing the first
    transatlantic balloon crossing, was rescued by a West German tanker,
    the Elisabeth Bolton, after more than 3 hr of floating about 1200 km
    west of the Azores. The ship was reported headed for Gibraltar. Arescue
    plane sent to the scene earlier from the USAF Search and Rescue Center
    at Ramstein, West Germany, had circled over Yost’s position until he
    was picked up. Yost had stayed aloft just short of 107 hr (exceeding the
    1913 record of 87 hr) and had traveled about 4000 km, well beyond the
    1914 record of less than 3100 km. He had worked a year and a half on
    the 2-ton balloon-which had cost him about $100 000 of his own
    money-and began his journey from the US. coast at Milbridge, M . on   e,
    5 Oct. The 57-yr-old balloon manufacturer from Sioux Falls, S.D., said
    he was “in good spirits because I broke a lot of records . . . but I”m sorry
    I didn’t land on solid ground.” (C Trib, 11 Oct 76, 3; NIT, 12 Oct
    76, 5)
0 Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover ‘“the true
    nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern
    them” were the subject of last week‘s annual meeting of the Am. Physical
    Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl.
    Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Ernes.
    Scientists from the u.s., the Soviet Union, and other countries were
    considering the construction of a “world machine,.” a particle acceler-
    ator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in
    circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron voloi. Its
    cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence,
    would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major
    roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed a t several
    international conferences and would not be built until the end of the
    century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately
    and had asked the Intl. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the
    lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of
    several machines now projected or being built, that might show how
    problems should be most effectively handled.
        The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accel-
    erator Laboratory in Ill.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to
    500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now
    in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to 1000Gev
    by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s
    closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN-the European
                                     242
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    October
   Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland-also with a
   6.5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border,
   deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The
    Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR
   called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in under-
   ground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a
   ring nearly 1 8 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate
   protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev
    electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam.
    Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide
    answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said.
        The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km ma-
    chine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would
    take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for
    a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies
    achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators
    because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine
    of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called
    SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more
    than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost
    of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of
    positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic
    particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in
    an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into
    new particles.
        Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the
    namre of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons
    (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility
    by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist).
    Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal
    dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way
    to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7)
10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry
    space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Con-
    gress of the Intl. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was
    “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the
    opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as
    safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty.
    Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites,
    space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the con-
    ference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System
    Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator
    of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates
    arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and
    cheese reception before the sessions began.
        At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read
    a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Col-
    d u s as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator
    James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator

                                     243
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October
   for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses
   of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world . . . in
   less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights
   beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even eco-
   nomically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities.
   Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the
   member nations of SA      were suffering from an economic downturn and
   might have trouble maintaining ESA’S present funding level, estimated at
   $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were
   justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recom-
   mend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.”
       Dr. Leonard Jaffe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astro-
   nautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions.
   Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs
   Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and sum-
   marized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to sup-
   porting remote sensing and telecommunications-a span of interests, he
   said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.”
       A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details
   of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability
   for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session-
   wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets-illustrated col-
   lateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles
   section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon,
   officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and
   individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-
   events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the
   Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that
   led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977.
   Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of
   Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the
    1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent
   visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept. of
   Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing”
   and would be looking €or partners in the study of ocean management.
       On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Intl. Institute of Space Law held its 19th
   colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the
   remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of
   principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agree-
   ments on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and
   rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding atten-
   tion were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the
   monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on
   moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers
   presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State
   and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space
   should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and
   sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss. law
   school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies,

                                     244
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    October
   pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another
   paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development
   of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that
   lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the
   process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated
   that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space
   activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers.
       On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including
   a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and
   had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Intl. plant
   at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Intl.,
   described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge
   reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either
   by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting
   polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral depos-
   its in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four
   busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day
   program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhib-
   itions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations
   and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speak-
   ers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young,
   deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the
   Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project.
        On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first
   Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s
   (6
     getaway special”-a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the
   Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manag-
   er of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy
   the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time
   in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open
   his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but
   had not decided yet what use to make of the package. “It’s such a
   bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of
   money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of
   space transportation systems operations in NASA’s      Office of Space Flight,
   who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by
   Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C.
        Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the
   Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the
   Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and
   its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of
   cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour
   offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter,
   the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were in-
   volved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S.
   personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future
   vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the
   Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was
   told only that analytical studies were under way.

                                    245
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October
         The Washington Star and Av E’% reported that Soviet Intercosmos
    chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member
    of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of their
    motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov
    and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but
    finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although
    local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and
    the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which
     Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future
    joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-
    eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; v. c. Vachnadze and
     A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. z. Sagdeyev, director of the U S R
     Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate,
     Y. p. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V . Sokolov, and Q. P.
     Legostayev.
         As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said
     the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the
     benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to
     the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide
     sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th
     Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76;
     Av E’%, 1 8 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; WStar, 20 Oct 76, A-2;
      W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
11 October: Moon rocks-prime celebrities 5 yr ago-had become has-
    beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astro-
    nauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg oflunar
    material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space
    Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments re-
    turned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 5 1 U.S. governors;
    chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to
    nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is.
    had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and
    their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the
    composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said,
    although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for
    research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwin-
    dled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved.
    Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to
    obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public
    interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and
    2, Sterba wrote. (MT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
@ Inspection by U.S. Air Force and Japanese technicians of the MiG-25

    Foxbat Soviet interceptor plane landed in Japan by a defecting pilot early
    in September revealed a minimum of innovation and an approach that
    relied on “brute force,” reported Aviation Week and Space Technology
    magazine. Examination of the Foxbat revealed a standard ejection seat,
    although the pilot had told U.S. interrogators none was carried because
    of a desire to hold down the weight of the steel-frame aircraft (about
    1 4 000 kg with wings, tail surfaces, and afterburners removed). The
                                      246
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      October
    number of cockpit instruments was about half those usedin the F-4EJ
    built in Japan under license. None of the avionics in the MiG-25 used
    solid-state circuitry, relying instead on vacuum tubes; fatigue cracks in
    the airframe had been repaired by rough welding techniques. Despite the
    design deficiencies, however, the MiG-25 was “a formidable opponent,”
    Av Wk noted. (Av l% 11 Oct 76, 18)
                           $,
12 October: NASA announced that LeRC, the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Navy,
    and the Natl. Weather Service had successfully completed in Alaska a
    3-wk demonstration of an all-weather ice-information system developed
    in response to a Congressional request to see if the Great Lakes could be
    kept open for shipping all year. Cargoes reshipped because their barges
    had been iced in or turned back by weather had incurred additional
    transportation costs estimated at between $30 and $50 million in 1975
    alone. The demonstration-performed along the western and northern
    coasts of Alaska, a region having serious shipping problems caused by
    thick ice 60% of the time-used a Coast Guard plane equipped with
    NASA’s side-looking airborne radar to obtain daily microwave imagery
    similar to black-and-white photography, that revealed the type and
    distribution of ice in any kind of weather regardless of dense cloudcover.
    The data on coastal shipping were relayed through a Goes satellite by way
    of Wallops Island to LeRC; after processing, the images were sent back
    through Canada’s CTS satellite to Alaska for the Navy’s ice interpreters
    to use in making navigation charts for vessels moving in offshore ice. The
    system had been used in the Arctic to aid the Coast Guard icebreaker
     Glacier in operating through ice in zero-visibilityconditions. Use of the
    system had helped to keep the Great Lakes open for shipping for two full
    seasons for the first time in history, at an estimated saving of hundreds
     of millions of dollars each year; the 1976-77 shipping would be the third
    and final year of demonstration. (NASA     Release 76-165)
         announced appointment of Dr. James R. Lawson, currently serving as
0 NASA
     special assistant to the director of ERDA’S Office of University Affairs, as
     i?&%SA Director of University Affairs, effective 8 November.
     I3r. Lawson, president of Fisk Univ. from 1967 to 1975, received a
    bachelor’s degree in physics from Fisk and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from
     the Univ. of Mich. In 1957 he became professor and chairman of the
     physics department at Fisk, doing research on infrared spectroscopy. A
     member of Phi Beta Kappa and Sigma Xi, he had received the Rosenwald
      Fellowship and the Afro-American Natl. Fellowship Award. In his new
      position, Dr. Lawson would be principal adviser on NASA’s   relations with
      universities, including special university programs having agency-wide
     mope and interest. (NASA anno. 12 Oct 76)
13 October: NASA announced that a data-collection unit called Site Data
      Acquisition System (SDAS), first in a centralized nationwide network that
      would monitor the performance of solar heating and cooling systems, had
      b u n operating last wk, transmitting daily the data from a solar heating
      and cooling system installed at the George A. Towns Elementary School
      in Atlanta, Ga. The school, built in 1962, operated throughout the year,
      including the summer months; a large-scale system for heating and
      cooling, with sqlar collectors on the roof, had been added to the building

                                      247
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

      last year. The project was conducted jointly by Westinghouse Electric
      Corp. and the Ga. Inst. of Technology, und& a cost-sharing no-fee
      contract with ERDA. The data-gathering network to which the Towns
      school SDAS belonged would collect information on climate-tempera-
      ture, humidity, wind, and available sunlight-and collector inlet-outlet
      temperature, flow rate, and performance of the energy-storage system.
      Raw data would be received, processed, and printed out by an IBM facility
      in Huntsville, Ala., under contract to MSFC.
          Total number of units in the program might reach 2000 or more by
      the end of 1979, NASA estimated. Users of the information would include
      manufacturers of heating and cooling systems; building and construction
      firms; architects, municipalities, individuals, and others concerned with
      building design and construction. The national program was aimed at
      demonstrating the efficiency of solar energy systems for residential and
      commercial building, and to stimulate marketing and public acceptance.
      (NASA Release 76-166; MSFC Release 76-188; c Trib,19 Oct 76,l-18)
    NASA announced that Robert N. Lindley, director of project management
      at GSFC, would begin a temporary assignment in Paris 24 Oct. as Deputy
      Associate Administrator for Space Flight (European Operations), serving
      as senior NASA adviser to ESA for the Spacelab program. During this
      assignment, Dr. William C. Schneider, currently Deputy Associate Ad-
      ministrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, would act as director of project
      mangement at GSFC. Both officials would return to their original positions
      at the end of the ESA assignment. (NASA anno 1 3 Oct 76)
*   Rockwell Intl. announced award to the Aerostructures Div. of Avco Corp.
      of a contract valued at more than $50 million for long lead-time pro-
      duction work on outer wings of the B-1 bomber. Work would cover the
      first three operational B-1s produced for the U.S. Air Force. The Aero-
      structures Div. would design and fabricate tools and prepare for actual
      building of the outer wings. Rockwell Intl. had assembled outer wings for
      the first three B-1 prototypes, which had already accumulated more
      than 350 hr of flight tests at Edwards AFB, Calif. Outer wings on each side
      of the B-1 would constitute a shipset-one of the largest sections of the
      B- 1-weighing more than 1 3 000 kg, and measuring more than 1 8 m
      long and 4.5 m wide. Fuel would be stored inside the wing structure.
      (Rockwell Release LA-5)
    The European Space Agency announced choice of payloads tor Its Ariane
@


      launcher LO2 and LO3 qualification flights scheduled between June 1979
      and October 1980. Principal passenger on the LO2 flight would be the
      recently announced Geosari satellite, with a lateral passenger, Amsat, a
      70-kg radio-amateur space communications satellite proposed by a Ger-
      man organization affiliated with the Intl. Radio Amateur Satellite Organi-
      zation. Ariane LO3 would carry the India comsat Apple (Ariane pas-
      senger payload experiment), a three-axis-stabilized spacecraft weighing
      616 kg that would continue experiments in the 4- to 6-ghz frequency
      to be performed by India in the Satellite Telecommunications Experi-
      ments Project (STEP). Mounted in the lower central portion of the launch-
      er, Apple would bear the load of a principal-passenger satellite to be
      chosen*bythe end of the year from among a second Meteosat prototype;
                                      248
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    October

    a flight prototype of Symphonie, Franco-German comsat; an Italian Sirio
    microwave comsat with a payload different from the first model (see A
    & A75, 10 Mar); and a Canadian CTS spacecraft equipped with a
    European communications payload. Nominal orbit for the LO2 and LO3
    flights would be 35 800-km apogee, 200-km perigee, and 17.7’ incli-
    nation. ( E A release 13 Oct 76)
0 E A announced plans to award to Messerchmitt-Edkow-Blohmof West
    Germany, as prime contractor for COSMOS (a consortium of European aero-
    space companies), two contracts worth a total of about $55.38 million
    (u.S.) for definition of the Exosat satellite (phase B) and for subsequent
    design and development (phase C and D). Subcontractors from ten
    member states of E% would share in satellite development. Exosat,
    scheduled for launch in 1980-81 by a Delta or Ariane vehicle, would
    measure position, structure, spectral and temporal characteristics of
    cosmic x-rays between -0.1 kev and + 5 0 kev. Work on the 12-mo
    phase B contract would begin in Jan. 1977. ( E A release 13 Oct 76)
14 October: NASA launched Marisat 3, third and last in a series of Comsat
    General maritime communications satellites, from ETR at 6:44 pm EDT on
    a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. At seventh apogee 8: 11 pm EDT
    16 Oct., the apogee boost motor was fired to maneuver the satellite to
    a position at 36 000 km altitude above the equator at about 182OE;
    final move to operation location at 73OE above the Indian Ocean would
    take place in Nov.
        The spin-stabilizedactive-repeater spacecraft, weighing about 700 kg
    in orbit, was a cylinder with a diameter of about 2 m and an overall length
    of 3.65 m. Built by Hughes Aircraft Corp., the comsat would act as a
    relay station to transmit and receive information between ships and
    submarines at sea and shore stations. It would join Marisat 1, operating
    at 15OW over the Atlantic Ocean since Feb. 1976, and Marisat 2,
    operating at 176.5OE over the Pacific since June. (The Marisat 3
    mission was judged successful 3 Nov. 1976; the Marisat 2 mission [see
    9 June] had been judged successful 6 Oct. 1976.) (NASA Release
    76-1 56; MOR M-492-205-76-03 [prelaunch] 6 Oct 76, [postlaunch]
    5 Nov. 76; WStar, 15 Oct 76, A-5; MOR M-492-205-76-02’14                Oct
    76)
0 Marshall Space Fhght Center announced scheduling of further tests in
    October for prototype cloud-physics experiment hardware to be flown on
    the Space Shuttle to help researchers understand microphysical proc-
    esses occurring in the atmosphere. The experiments would develop
    techniques for accurate prediction and control of weather (increase of
    snowfall or rain, dissipation of fog, suppression of lightning) to improve
    man’s environment. The Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL)
    being developed by MSFC would use the low or zero gravity during
    Shuttle/Spacelab flights to perform experiments without contamination
    by supporting devices-wires, spider webs, blasts of air or electrical
    fields-used for test objects in earth laboratories. The prototype equip-
    ment was being tested in weightless periods provided by parabolic flights
    in the Johnson Space Center’s zero-gravity test aircraft. 0.H. Vaughn of
    the Aerospace Environment Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC, had
                                     249
October                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    been monitoring performance of the equipment during flights that began
    in September. (MSFC Release 76-186)
* Ruth Bates Harris, NASA’s    deputy assistant administrator for community
    and human relations, announced that she would leave the agency
    effective 15 Oct. Mrs. Harris said she would return to New York “to
    attend to pressing personal family needs,” but would “spend an number
    of months continuing to work as a consultant” to NASA, in order to
    complete some unfinished community and human relations projects. She
    had been a deputy assistant administrator since Aug. 1974, the first
    woman to reach that position in NASA, and had earlier been the first
    director of NASA’s Office of Equal Employment Opportunity. Before
    joining NASA, Mrs. Harris had been director of human relations for the
    public schools in Montgomery County, Md., and had been director of the
    Human Relations Commission in Washington, D C She had received
                                                       ..
    more than 50 awards and citations for her work in human relations. (NASA
    Release 76-1 70)
* The USSR launched a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 4, from an undis-
    closed site “in the medium latitudes” of European Russia to an
    altitude of 1512 km. Carrying “more than 10 complex and diverse
    scientific instruments” developed and built by specialists from Bulgaria,
    East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR, the rocket was designed to
    sample a vertical cross section of the neutral upper atmosphere and
    ionospheric plasma in a 15-min time period. In a Pravda interview,
    Academician B. N. Petrov noted that composition of the atmosphere and
    ionosphere changed with height, the lighter gases being at the top. None
    of the previous Vertikal rockets (launched in 1970, 1971, and 1975)
    had reached altitudes of more than about 500 km, the oxygen section of
    the ionosphere. Vertikal4 had reached the hydrogen region, or proton-
    osphere, and had measured properties of the plasma affecting radio-wave
    absorption and investigated effects of shortwave solar radiation on the
    earth’s atmosphere. Results of the investigation would extend knowledge
    of weather and climate, Petrov said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Oct 76;
    Pravda in Russian, 17 Oct 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian,
    29 Oct 76)
14-18 October: The USSR launched Soyuz 23 carrying two cosmonauts,
    Lt. Col. Vyacheslav Zudov as pilot and Lt. Col. Valery Rozhdestvensky
    as engineer, from the Baykonur cosmodrome near Tyuratam in Kazakh-
    stan at 8:40 pm Moscow time (1:40 pm EDT) 14 Oct. to link up with the
    orbiting space station Salyut 5 and continue research begun there in July
    by the crew of Soyuz 2 1 . The nighttime launch was replayed later on
    Soviet TV. Initial orbit parameters were 243-km perigee, 275-km
    apogee, 89.5-min period, and 51.6’ inclination.
        At what the NY Times described as “a restricted press conference
    before liftoff,” the rookie cosmonauts said their mission was to concen-
    trate on practical scientific uses of the Soviet space stations, especially
    extraterrestrial manufacture of metals, glass, and pharmaceuticals.
    Rozhdestvensky said that every ruble invested in space exploration had
    “already been returned tenfold to the national budget in one way or
    another.’:

                                     250
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   October

        Tass announced at noon Moscow time on 16 Oct. (5 am EDT) that the
    docking of Soyuz 23 with Salyut 5 had been cancelled “because of the
    off-design regime of [the] approach control. system,” and the crew had
    been ordered to return to earth. The NYTimes noted that this was “the
    first occasion on which the Russians have made public their problems
    before the completion of a space flight.” Usually no announcement had
    been forthcoming until the crew had returned to earth. At 8:46 pm
    Moscow time (1:46 pm EDT)-almost exactly 4 8 hr after liftoff-the
    descent module landed 195 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan
    “on the surface of Lake Tengiz” in a heavy snowfall. The search and
    rescue teams, working under difficult nighttime conditions, recovered
    the descent module and the cosmonauts from the first splashdown in the
    15-yr history of Soviet manned space flight. Announcement of the
    adverse conditions of the landing was not made until 12 hr afterwards,
    a delay suggesting some difficulty in locating the capsule. Lt. Gen.
    Vladimir Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, said that helicopter
    and amphibious craft had aided the recovery. Residents of the nearby
    town of Arkalyk welcomed the returned cosmonauts at the airport and
    made them honorary citizens. The crew returned to the Baykonur cos-
    modrome by plane on the morning of 17 Oct.
        The splashdown of Soyuz 23 resulted from chance rather than plan-
    ning, said the newspaper Izvestia on 18 Oct., describing fears at
    recovery-team headquarters that the landing craft might have gone into
    swamps near the lake, after a report that the craft had tilted on impact,
    putting the porthole below the water’s surface. The pilot of a plane had
    reported the capsule’s position and a helicopter had towed the capsule to
    shore amid fog, snow, and broken ice. The official comments were
    regarded as “an effort to avoid blaming the astronauts for the mission’s
    failure,” said the NY Times.
        The Soyuz 23 difficulty marked the fourth failure of a Soyuz mission
    to rendezvous; radar trouble had forced the crews of Soyuz 3, Soyuz 8,
    and Soyuz 15 to return to earth without docking. The Wash. Post noted
    that about one in three Soyuz flights had failed to carry out its mission:
    Soyuz 1 and Soyuz 11 resulted in the deaths of one and three cos-
    monauts respectively, and two cosmonauts on an unnumbered mission in
    April 1975 had been forced to abort their flight before reaching earth
    orbit. (NYT, 15 Oct 76, A 13; 16 Oct 76,6; 17 Oct 76, 29; 18 Oct 76,
    32; 19 Oct 76, 17; W P O S ~ , Oct 76, A-21; 17 Oct 76, A-17;
                                      15
    1 8 Oct 76, A-16; C Trib, 15 Oct 76, 1-5; 17 Oct 76, 1-3; 18 Oct 76,
    1-8; W S t a r , 17 Oct 76, A-14; FBIS, Tass in English, 14-17 Oct 76)
15 October: To criticisms of “basic” research, “whose practical applications
    no one can foresee,” the New York Times in an editorial said the two
    Nobel Prizes in medicine for 1976 might have been designed to provide
    an answer and a rebuke. While Dr. Baruch S. Blumberg in the early
    1960s was studying genetic variation in the susceptibility to disease of
    different people (a “seemingly abstruse topic,” the Times noted), he
    found in the blood of an Australian aborigine a strange protein described
    as Australia Antigen, now usually called Hepatitis B surface antigen.
    Blood given for transfusions nowadays is regularly tested for this protein
                                    25 1
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

    to prevent Hepatitis B infection, thus preventing thousands of blood
    recipients each year from being infected. The other Nobel prizewinner,
    Dr. D. Carleton Gajdusek, while in New Guinea during the 1950s became
   interested in the so-called laughing disease, “kuru,” that was destroying
    the Fore, an obscure Stone Age people. His work on that disease revealed
   a new type of slow-acting virus that could produce brain degeneration,
    and that might be “involved in multiple sclerosis and other major neu-
    rological diseases.” The message for financiers and directors of research,
    said the Times, is that “in the long run nothing is more practical than
    basic studies” and that “basic research yields the richest dividends.”
    (NIT, 15 Oct 76)
  Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSat) reported net income for
    the third quarter of 1976 of $7 607 000, down from last yr’s third-
    quarter net of $11 837 000. The decrease was the result of amounts
    placed in escrow under an FCC accounting and refund order of 16 June
    1976; if the order had not been in effect, the quarter’s net would have
   been $14 603 000. Although operating income dropped as a result of
   the escrow requirement, the wholly owned Cornsat General Corp. for the
   first time had realized revenues for the entire period from both Marisat
   and Comstar programs; in the third quarter a yr ago, the subsidiary had
   reduced ComSat’s net operating income by a penny per share. Operating
   expenses, including taxes, were $30 223 000 for the quarter, up from
    $24 997 000 for the third quarter of 1975; the increase was due to
   costs of the launches of Intelsat IV-A, Marisat, and Comstar sateuites.
   Cornsat’s gross operating revenues for the third quarter of 1976 totaled
    $36 260 000, an increase over last yr’s third quarter total of
    $35 116 000; the escrow requirement had prevented the gross revenues
    from increasing more than $ 15 million over last yr’s third quarter with
    the beginning of Marisat and Comstar services and continued growth in
    the number of circuits leased to customers of the Intelsat global commu-
    nications system. Half circuits leased at the end of Sept. 1976 numbered
    4129, a 16% increase over the 3547 leased at the end of Sept. 1975.
    Money put in escrow under the FCC order represented the difference
    between customer payments to ComSat under present rates, and the
    amounts based on lower rates that would be required under an FCC rate
    decision of 4 Dec. 1975. The rate decision was still under judicial review.
    (ComSat Release 76-16)
  An enormous explosion in central Siberia that shook the world 68 yr ago
    might have been caused by the crash of a nuclear-powered spaceship
    from an alien planet, according to the Soviet news agency Tass, reported
    in the Washington Star. Tass quoted scientist Aleksey Zolotov, who had
    just returned from a survey of a remote river valley at Tunguska. On
    30 June 1908, a blast estimated as up to 2000 times more powerful than
    the first atomic bomb had shaken measuring devices all over the world
    and had been heard nearly 1200 km away from Tunguska. Trees had
    been uprooted as far as 50 km from the site, and ground tremors had
    thrown to the ground horses that were pulling plows as far away as
    380 km. Most scientists had attributed the explosion to the impact of a
    meteorite or comet with a mass of 10 million tons and measuring mort
                                    252
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      October

    than 90 meters across. Zolotov told Tass that his survey team had found
    higher than normal radioactivity in remnants of trees near the site; also
                                                                    .
    taken were samples of permafrost soil. “Our investigation . . seems to
    confirm our assumption that what took place in the Tungus taiga was a
    nuclear explosion,” Zolotov said. “It is from this point of view that we
    are exploring the possibility of the artificial origin of the Tungus cosmic
    body.” Tass did not give figures for the radiation study, nor did it identify
                                                                    .
    Zolotov beyond saying he was a “noted Soviet scientist . . who has
    been studying the Tungus mystery for years.” ( W S t a r , 15 Oct 76, A-4)
17 October: Two recently published books on “the worst disaster in aviation
    history-the crash of a Turkish Airlines x-10 outside Paris that killed
    at least 346 people in March, 1974--” alleged that the disaster was not
    only preventable but was predicted in detail years before it happened, the
     Washington Post reported. Destination Disaster, by an investigating
    team from the London Sunday Times, aimed at inspiring another con-
    gressional investigation into “corporate and governmental interworkings
    that contributed to the disaster,’’ the Post said; The Lust Nine Minutes,
    by Moira Johnston, was a more subjective and personal account of the
    same crash.
        Senate and House hearings in the summer of 1974 had revealed that
    a technically similar accident in June 1972 had exposed an error in the
    design of the DC- 10: a faulty locking system for the door of the large
    cargo compartment. The 1972 mishap had resulted in a “gentlemen’s
    agreement” between the administrator of the Federal Aviation Adminis-
    tration and the president of the Douglas Division, McDonnell Douglas,
    that the lock would be fixed but that FAA would not issue a public and
    legally binding “airworthiness directive” mandating the repair. After the
    agreement was reached, the director of product engineering for the
    Convair Division of General Dynamics, subcontractor to McDonnell
    Douglas for the fuselage (including the door), wrote a long memorandum
    expressing concern about the door. Neither this memo nor another
    Convair memo on the question of liability for the cost of modifications
    ever reached McDonnell Douglas, the authors said, although evidence
    existed that McDonnell Douglas was fully aware of the problem
    nevertheless.
        Turkish Airlines, which was responsible for maintenance after the
    E- was delivered, was sharing in liability settlements with McDonnell
         10
    Douglas, General Dynamics, and the FAA, according to attorneys, who
    said total liability from the crash would probably set a single-accident
    record. The Post noted that FAA had issued 147 airworthiness directives
    in 1973; in 1974, year of the crash, the number was 299; in 1915, the
    number rose to 445.
        Private consultant Charles 0. Miller, former chief of the Natl. Trans-
    portation Safety Board‘s bureau of aviation safety, who had gone to Paris
    to assist in investigation of the Turkish Airlines crash, said in a recent
    interview that the Convair memoranda and other documentation that
    provided background to the technical decisions had been turned up by
    the liability lawyers rather than by the crash investigators or by congress-
    ional investigators. ( W Post, 17 Oct 76, A-1, A-12)
                                     253
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

18 October: President Ford awarded the National Medal of Science, the
   highest US. award for distinguished scientific achievement, to 15 sci-
   entists, one of them now dead:
   --John W. Backus, IBM Research Laboratory, San Jose, Calif., for contri-
   butions to computer programming
   -Manson Benedict, professor emeritus, MIT, for his role in creating the
   discipline of nuclear engineering and his leadership in developing techniques
   for uranium-isotope separation
   -Hans A. Bethe, professor emeritus of physics, Cornell Univ., for contri-
   butions to understanding of the atomic nucleus, the origins of solar heat,
   and atomic energy
   -Shhg-Shen Chern, professor of mathematics, Univ. of Calif. at Berke-
   ley, for work leading to discoveries in geometry and topology
   -George B. Dantzig, professor of operations research and computer sci-
   ences, Stanford Univ., for invention of linear programming and methods of
   using mathematical theory in computers
    -Hallowell Davis, professor emeritus of physiology, research professor of
   otolaryngology, Washington Univ., for research leading to advancement in
    fields ranging from neurology to acoustics and pediatrics
    -Paul Gyorgy, late professor emeritus of pediatrics, Univ. of Pa. School
    of Medicine, for discovery of three vitamins and related research in human
   nutrition
    -Sterling Brown-Hendricks, former chief chemist, U.S. Dept. of Agricul-
   ture plant industry station, Beltsville, Md., for research in physical and
   chemical properties of soils
    -Joseph 0. Hirschfelder, professor of theoretical chemistry, Univ. of
    Wisc., for contributions to atomic and molecular quantum mechanics
    -William H. Pickering, director emeritus, Jet Propulsion Lab., for leader-
   ship in exploration of planets and the solar system
    -Lewis H. Sarett, senior v.p. for science and technology, Merck & Co.,
    for contributions to chemical synthesis of cortisone and other chemo-
    therapeutic agents
    -Frederick E. Terman, v.p. and provost emeritus, Stanford Univ., for his
    role in creating modern electronics
    -Orville A. Vogel, US. Dept. of Agriculture, professor emeritus of agron-
    omy and soils, State Univ. of Wash., for agronomic research including
    development of semidwarf wheats
    -E. Bright Wilson, Jr., professor of chemistry, Harvard Univ., for theo-
    retical and experimental contributions to the understanding of molecular
    structure
    -Chien-Hsiung Wu, professor of physics, Columbia Univ., for experi-
    ments leading to the understanding of the decay of the radioactive nucleus
    (MT, 19 Oct 76, 20)
8 Sweden’s Royal Academy of Sciences announced that three more Amer-
    icans had won Nobel prizes: Prof. William N. Lipscomb, Harvard
    Univ., for chemistry, and Prof. Burton Richter of Stanford Univ. and
    Prof. Samuel C. c. Ting of MIT for physics. Prof. Lipscomb won for his
    studies of the structures and properties of boranes, and Profs. Richter
    and Tingshared the physics prize for their independent discoveries of a
                                      254
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    October

    new type of elementary particle known as psi or J. Americans had won
    all four of the prizes awarded so far this year; Prof. Milton Friedman of
    the Univ. of Chicago had won the prize for economics, and the prize for
    medicine had gone to Dr. Baruch S. Blumberg of the Univ. of Pa. Medical
    School and Dr. D. Carleton Gajdusek of the Natl. Institute for Neuro-
    logical Diseases. All the prizes carry an award of $160 000, derived
    from the estate of Sweden’s Alfred Nobel, inventor of dynamite, who
    established the prizes in 1901. (NIT, 19 Oct 76, 1, 34; 24 Oct 76,
    E- 14)
0 In separate accounts, Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine
    emphasized problems arising in USSR attempts to reoccupy the Salyut 5
    “military space station.” The magazine reported that the Soyuz 21
    cosmonauts were forced to return to earth under emergency circum-
    stances 24 Aug. because of “an acrid odor flowing from the Salyut-5
    space station environmental control system.” Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov
    and Col. Boris Volynov “tolerated the odor for some time but were unable
    to find the cause of the problem before the odor became unbearable,” the
    magazine said, noting that the mission was the sixth failure in the last
    nine USSR attempts to complete manned orbital-station missions. In an-
    other story in the same issue, the magazine said that “the Soviets believe
    they have solved the [Salyut 51 environmental control system’s odor
    problem that forced the early return of the Soyuz-21 crew” as demon-
    strated by the 14 Oct. launch of Soyuz 23 carrying Lt. Col. Vyacheslav
    Zudov and Lt. Col. Valery Rozhdestvensky. (Av Wk, 18 Oct 76,13,25)
0 The Energy Research and Development Administration announced that a
    nuclear explosion reported by the Peoples Republic of China 17 Oct. had
    been detected by the US. Atomic Energy Commission’s detection system.
    The explosion, which occurred underground at 1 a.m. EDT at the Lop Nor
    test area i western China, was in the low-yield range, ERDA said. (ERDA
                n
    Release 76-320)
19 October: Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on
    female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for
    establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s women astronauts. Women
                                               first
    employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill
    and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women
    responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise
     and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures
     on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the
    subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt
    of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from
     the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers
    monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in
    pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts
     (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 1976, with
     a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by Decem-
     ber 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
                                 James M. Doolittle and Neil A. Armstrong-
0 Two “pilots of note”-Gen.
    had announced plans to establish a Charles A. Lindbergh Memorial Fund

                                     255
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

   to support the work of young scientists, explorers, and conservationists,
   the New York Times reported. Gen. Doolittle, leader of the first World
   War 11 air raid on Tokyo, and astronaut Armstrong, first man to walk on
   the moon, would head a drive to raise $5 million for the fund by 20 May
    1977, the fiftieth anniversary of Lindbergh’s takeoff on the first solo
   nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean. Income from the endowment,
   expected to be about $400 000 a yr, would be distributed to Lindbergh
   Fellows who “combine qualities that made [Lindbergh] a unique human
   being,” said Doolittle at a press conference. He told reporters Lindbergh
    66
     would have been happier with a living memorial than one out of bronze
   and stone.” Lindbergh, who died in 1974 at the age of 72, had continued
   in aviation as a test pilot and airline executive but had branched out into
   medical technology research and wildlife conservation in his later years,
   the NYT said. The fund’s sponsoring committee included representatives
   of the Explorers Club and the World Wildlife Fund, as well as other areas
   of interest to Lindbergh: aerospace, ecology, exploration, and science
   and engineering. Announcement of selections for fellowships would be
   made yearly on 2 1 May, anniversary of Lindbergh’s arrival in Paris after
   his 33-hr flight in Spirit o f S t . Louis. ( N I T , 20 Oct 76, 22)
21 October: Correlations between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion
   sickness on the ground and his susceptibility in space were the subject of
   studies by JSC scientists, based on data from U.S. and Soviet manned
   space flights and on data from tests aboard a zero-gravity training
   aircraft. Motion sickness had been difficult to study because of the
   variety of separate sensory inputs to the brain. The three major compo-
   nents of human balance and posture were generally accepted to be visual
   input, defining the local vertical component; vestibular input from the
   semicircular canals and otoliths in the inner ear, sensing angular and lin-
   ear acceleration and the presence or absence of gravity; and muscle sens-
   ors, monitoring posture. These interrelated inputs normally function to
   keep the body balanced; in an earth-normal gravity, balance would be re-
   flexive, and persons would not be conscious of the body-movement
   patterns that kept them upright. In a moving vehicle, the inputs to the
   brain might produce contradictory information resulting in a feeling of
   discomfort; “motion sickness” is not an adaptive response and does not
   improve the situation, as coughing would do to relieve a throat blockage.
        Persons without sight can experience motion sickness, but persons
   without their vestibular functions intact apparently do not. Although
   little was known about the interactions among the three sensory systems,
   motion sickness seemed to be more related to vestibular input. During
    Skylab missions, in the relatively large areas of living space, much
   vestibular relearning apparently occurred in the first 2 wk of spaceflight,
   after which all crewmen became very resistant to motion sickness. No
   correlation was apparent between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion
   sickness on the ground and his susceptibiity in space. The studies postu-
   lated that the otolith (chalky concretion in the inner ear) was the receptor
   affording the most direct information on gravity, and therefore was the
   source of many of the inputs causing disequilibrium or motion sickness.
   (JSC Retease 76-67)

                                     256
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   October

  The B-1 bomber was vital to U.S. security, said Gen. William J. Evans,
0
    commander of the Air Force Systems Command, in a speech to the
    Rockwell Management Club at Los Angeles, Calif. As part of a strategic
    triad-SLBMs, ICBMs, and bombers-constituting three distinct types of
    retaliatory weapons, the B-1 would help complicate defense efforts of
    potential enemies. Although the U.S. now had “a rough equivalence” of
    strategic strength, Gen. Evans noted that the Soviet Union was engaged
    in an effort to upset “the present equilibrium’’ and gain military advan-
    tage. Along with deterrent value, the B-1 should be considered a flexible,
    reusable, appropriate weapon in a conventional tactical role as well as in
    a nuclear strategic role. A future conflict might start not through “a
    surprise storm of nuclear missiles,” but through “daring but limited acts
    of provocation” to which the U.S. should be able to respond with at least
    a show of force or be “perceived as a paper tiger.” Gen. Evans congrat-
    ulated Rockwell and other contributors to the development of the B-1
    and urged continuation of the program. (OIP Release 231.76)
* FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced award to Wilcox Electric
    Co., Kansas City, Mo., of a $3 720 699 contract for nine Category 111
    instrument-landing systems that would complete a program to provide
    all-weather landing capability at key airports across the US. One Cate-
    gory 111 system would be installed at the FAA academy at Oklahoma City
    for training; the other eight would go to Kennedy Airport, NYC; O’Hare,
    Chicago; Houston Intl., Kansas City Intl., Seattle-Tacoma Intl., Los
    Angeles Intl., Portland Intl., and Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne County
    Airport. The new equipment had already been installed at Dulles Intl.
    near Washington, D.C., Atlanta Intl., San Francisco Intl., and Stapleton
    Airport at Denver, as well as at the FAA center at Atlantic City, N.J.,
    where it had been used for test and evaluation. Category III equipment
    would permit landings without visual reference to the ground, under
    weather conditions with ceiling zero and runway visibility no less than
    about 200 m. Existing Category II equipment at the sites to be replaced
    would be moved to other airports, to be named later. (FAA Release 76-97)
22 October: A recently completed manipulator-development facility at John-
    son Space Center’s Bldg. 9a laboratory would assist NASA engineers and
    technicians in studying Shuttle payload deployment and retrieval in
    space, Jsc announced. The manipulating system, with a reach of 15.2
    meters, was the largest known remotely controlled manipulator system.
    Sizes of payloads to be carried in the Space Shuttle would range from
    very small to a maximum length of 18.2 m and diameter of 4.5 m;
    objective of the facility would be to improve techniques of moving bulky
    payloads in and out of the orbiter’s bay in a weightless environment. The
    manipulator arm would be operated from inside the orbiter cabin by an
    astronaut using a pair of hand controllers and viewing the process
    through a window, aided by a closed-circuit TV system. The laboratory
    building also housed working models of orbiter components including a
    full-scale forward cabin section with cargo bay, manipulator station, and
    a large air-bearing table approximately 25 by 30m on which simulated
    payloads could be steered on a cushion of air by the remote arm. The

                                    257
                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

      air-bearing table would also test the ability of astronauts to move over the
      smooth interior of the orbiter, using suction-cup shoes instead of cleats
      locking into grids. An engineer wearing suction-cup shoes and strapped
      into a cage-like apparatus on the air-bearing table could be familiarized
      with “walking like a fly” in the day-to-day work environment of the
      Shuttle. (JSC Release 76-66)
    A new research aircraft combining the precision hover and low downwash
@

      of a helicopter with the long range and high speed of a fixed-wing aircraft
      made its debut at rollout ceremonies in Arlington, Tex., marking ‘ba
      major milestone in the joint NASA-Army tat rotor program,” according to
      a NASA announcement. The Bell Helicopter Textron’s xv-15 would
      undergo a 2-yr flight-testing program scheduled by Ames Research
      Center and the Army’s Air Mobility Research and Development Labora-
      tory. The XV-15 was a 12.8-m-long 9.7-m wing-span aircraft with
      wingtip-mounted engines, transmissions, and 7.6-m propeller rotors that
      could tilt from the helicopter position for vertical takeoffs and landings
      and for hovering, to a horizontal position for forward flight at speeds up
      to more than 482 kph. The tilt rotor would operate with less noise than
      conventional helicopters or turboprop aircraft of comparable size. The
      first XV-15 would undergo ground and hover tests, then go to ARC for
      testing in that center’s wind tunnel; the second xv-15 would undergo
      initial envelope-expansion flight tests at Bell’s Arlington, Tex., facility
      beginning late in 1977. (NASA Release 76-169; WStar, 2 4 Oct 76, A-2)
    M F C announced completion of a huge self-propelled vehicle called the
@

      Straddle Carrier Transporter, fabricated by McDonnell Douglas Astro-
      nautics co. at St. Louis, Mo., and shipped to MSFC for assembly, to be
      used in moving sections of the Space Shuttle external tank at the Mi-




The XV-15-a tilt-rotor research aircraft combining features of helicopters and con-
ventional airplanes-rolls out at the Arlington, Tex.facility of Bell Helicopter Textron 22
Oct. 1976. (NASA 76-H-804)

                                         258
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      October

   choud Assembly Facility in New Orleans. Assembled, the external tank
   would measure 47.2 m in length and 8.5 m in dia.; empty, it would weigh
    33 300 kg, and would carry about 708 440 kg of propellants for launch.
   The transporter, completely self-supporting, would use electricity from
   a propane-powered generator for its hydraulic propulsion system, steer-
    ing, lights, and hoists; it would lift, stabilize, and carry major external
    tank assemblies over concrete floors and improved roadways. Its five
    cable hoists included two 10-ton units on a monorail on the aft frame;
    two 5-ton units on a monorail on the forward frame; and a 2-ton hoist
    on a centerline rail. The 5- and 10-ton hoists in combination would
    handle the liquid-hydrogen tank with a volume of 1573 cu m; the smaller
    hoists would handle the liquid-oxygen tank, with a volume of 552 cu m.
    (MSFC Release 76- 193)
0 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of Johnson Space Center, had
    received the highest honor given by the government of France to a citizen
    of another country: the insignia of the Knight of the Legion of Honor,
    the Jsc Roundup reported. The award was given for Kraft’s “tireless
    efforts toward better understanding and cooperation between the people
    of the United States and France.” He had also received the Natl. Civil
    Service League’s career-service award for 1976, as one of ten chosen for
     “excellence in the public service.’’
         Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, former director of JSC, was one of 35 space
     pioneers inducted into the Space Hall of Fame 5 Oct. during the dedica-
     tion of the new facility at Alamogordo, N.M.
         At a J s c ceremony 18 Oct., astronaut Donald K. Slayton received the
     American Heart Assn.’s 1976 Heart of the Year award for inspiring
     millions of Americans by “overcoming a heart problem that had
     grounded him for 10 years, enabling him to resume his distinguished
     participation in America’s space program.” (JSC Roundup, 22 Oct
     76, 1)
24 October : RockwelLlntl. Corp. inspectors testing their inventory of trans-
     istors after a government warning to watch for counterfeit semiconduc-
     tors had found 1 1 of 11 transistors of one type to be fakes, the New York
     Times reported. Rockwell had concluded that bogus parts had been
     “unwittingly built into [NASA’s] major current project, the Space Shuttle,
     for which Rockwell is the prime contractor.” The NET said that ‘La       rash
     of discoveries of bogus devices” had plagued the electronics industry for
     the last year and a half.
         The Defense Electronics supply Center (DESC), a DOD agency that
     procured almost all electronic devices for defense, found 20 of 60
     components taken randomly from stock to be “suspect” and had re-
     turned them to the makers for tests to determine authenticity. “Counter-
     feit” components-devices altered physically to misrepresent their true
     type or quality, by relabeling, renumbering, or adding false reliability
     information or dating- would not necessarily be nonfunctional; howev-
     er, as the purpose of the alteration would be to indicate falsely that a part
     had passed certain quality tests, and would therefore be much more
     valuable, the part might fail under strenuous application. Failure of a

                                       259
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

    single component could have consequences far outweighing its 25-cent
    cost. The transistors tested at Rockwell had been marked to indicate
    suitability for use in the most rigorous applications; upon disassembly,
    the parts showed no indication of having undergone any of the extra
    testing signified by the external markings, which had increased the cost
    fivefold.
        Although one trade organization (Electronics Industries Assn.) set up
    a task group to combat the problem of counterfeiting, “all sectors of the
    electronics industry are working against . . . major procedures to allevi-
    ate counterfeiting,” said the NYT report. At issue was the use of distrib-
    utors, intermediary between producers and end users, who had a “heavy
    financial interest in maintaining the current system,” the report said.
    Most semiconductor producers sold rejects to junk or surplus dealers for
    their metal content; the items not disfigured were a very inexpensive
    source for remarking, and could be introduced into the market as high-
    quality low-cost items. Virtually all counterfeit components could be
    traced to the big defense contractors, said the NYT. Industry sources
    contended that ’the DOD had loose procurement practices, with a
    purchasing-policy rule that component contracts must go to the lowest
    bidder. As a DESC spokesman pointed out, “We are simply not allowed
    to pay a premium price on any contract,” even if the low bid is sus-
    piciously below the going rate-“a strong indication that something may
    be wrong,” the NYT noted. Accepted methods of the industry made it
    impossible to guarantee the authenticity of any part that did not come
    directly from the manufacturer, the report added. Although vendors had
    predicted that a 1974 DESC edict calling for a strict and immediate
    upgrading of tests on military-grade components would disrupt the sup-
    ply, few problhms had arisen after the regulations had taken effect.
    (NYT, 24 Oct 76, 3F; Newsweek, 25 Oct 76)
25 October: The failure of Soyuz 23 to rendezvous with Salyut 5 indicated
    that the USSR was still encountering the technical and procedural prob-
    lems that had beset its manned space program for the past 15 yr, said
    Aviation Wk & Space Technology magazine. The failure was the sev-
    enth in 11 attempts to complete various space-station missions and the
    second in a row for Salyut; the unplanned water landing that concluded
    the failed mission was the first in Soviet space history, but was attributed
                                                     .
    to “nothing more than bad luck,” said Av Wk The rendezvous-system
    failure was the fourth Soyuz mission plagued by procedural errors or
    hardware malfunctions associated with docking: Soyuz 3 failed to dock
    with Soyuz 2 in 1968, Soyuz 8 failed to dock with Soyuz 7 in 1969,
    and Soyuz 15 had been unable to rendezvous and dock with Salyut 3
    in 1974. Because the failure of a system on the Soyuz 23 ended its
    mission rather than any problem with Salyut 5, Western observers
    wondered how soon the Soviets would attempt to reman the space station,
    which Av W7c referred to as “military.” (Av Wk, 25 Oct 76, 23)
e Viking 2’s lander dug a soil sample from beneath a rock on Mars and de-
     livered it to the biological instrument package. All three experiments
     received a part of the sample; initial data from two of them-the labeled-
     release and the pyrolytic-release experiments-were sent to mission
                                     260
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                     October

    control at JPL. The third (gas-exchange) experiment was in a long incuba-
    tion period that would continue through solar conjunction-a movement
    of the bodies which would put the sun between Mars and the earth-
    preventing communication with the Viking landers and orbiters. Con-
    junction would begin about 10 Nov. and continue through early Dec.; if
    the landers were revived successfully after the communications gap,
    more samples would be collected in mid-Jan. Leonard Clark, surface-
    sampler engineer, foresaw no problem in reactivating the arm mechan-
    isms, adding that they had worked very well, “just the way they did
    during ground testing on earth before they left the manufacturer.” (Av
     Wk,1 Nov 76, 15)
26 October: The 2000th major missile launch from Cape Canaveral took
    place at 4:30 pm EDT when an Army Pershing missile was launched by
    troops of Battery C, 3d Battalion, 84th Field Artillery, of the U.S. 7th
    Army from Europe. First launch from “the Cape” had occurred 26 yr
    previously on 24 July 1950, when Bumper 8, a captured German V-2
    rocket capped by a WAC Corporal second stage, lifted off the then
    sparsely settled area. (KSC Spaceport News, 12 Nov 76, 1)
27 October: Ames Research Center announced that 18 scientists represent-
    ing eight institutions would fly on NASA’s    Galileo I1 airborne research
    laboratory on a 3-wk study of atmospheric pollution that would take
    them nearly pole to pole across the central Pacific Ocean, north to south.
    Between 28 Oct. and 19 Nov., the scientists in eight teams would
    measure changes in the upper atmosphere caused by jet aircraft exhaust
    and would investigate the effect on the upper atmosphere of fluoro-
    carbons and halocarbons from aerosol sprays and other sources. The
    experiments at many latitudes from far north to far south would gather
    data in both northern and southern hemispheres to note changes in
    upper-atmosphere composition and pollutants between altitudes of
    10.6 km and 12.1 km. Measuring would begin in Alaska, then proceed
    at Hawaii, Samoa, Australia, New Zealand, and Antarctica. Observations
    near Hawaii would be coordinated with similar measurements at about
     18-km altitude by NASA’s     earth-resources survey aircraft, also based at
    Ames.
        The jet-pollutant study was part of a 4-yr cooperative effort between
    ARC and the Lewis Research Center, which had included experiment
    packages carried on jets operated by Pan American, United, and Qantas
    airlines; the Galileo I1 flights would measure pollution over remote areas
    not covered by commercial aircraft. The aerosol pollution measurements
    were part of a broader program by NASA and other agencies to ascertain
    the constituents of the upper atmosphere in a nonpolluted condition, in
    order to define changes with time in proportions of ozone, fluorocarbons,
    water vapor, carbon monoxide, and other compounds, and to determine
    whether such changes were manmade. Galileo I1 data from both types of
    measurements would be coordinated with data collected by NOAA stations
    in Alaska, Hawaii, and Samoa, as well as by stations of the meteorological
    services of Australia and New Zealand and the Commonwealth Scientific
    and Industrial Research Organization. (ARC Release 76-79)

                                     26 1
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

  The Soviet Union’s earth satellites had added a new profession-that of
@

    printer-to those of meteorologist, cartographer, and communicator,
    the Tass news agency announced. A Molniya comsat tested in Kha-
    barovsk had transmitted newspapers from Moscow to the Far East more
    economically and more rapidly than had been possible using the trans-
    continental cable. The high-resolution capability of the equipment had
    produced excellent images, the announcement said, adding that “papers
    received by Far Eastern subscribers will now be absolutely identical to
    those taken out of their letter boxes by the Moscovites.” (FBIS, Tass Intl
    Service in Russian, 27 Oct 76)
29 October: MSFC announced that it had modified its Saturn facilities to
    accommodate Space Shuttle work, having completed remodeling of a
    giant test stand used in the 1960s for static test firing of the Saturn V
    first stages. The stand would be used in structural tests of the liquid-
    hydrogen tank portion of the Shuttle external tank; the hydrogen tank
    measured 29.3 m long and 8.5 m in diameter. Stand modifications
    included work platforms, changes in the stand structure including pres-
    surization, and an instrumentation and control system. Holddown arms
    were removed and a flame deflector that channeled rocket exhaust away
    from the area was taken from under the stand. Liquid-oxygen storage
    facilities used for Saturn had been converted for liquid-hydrogen storage
    needed for Shuttle testing, instead of building new storage. The contract
    with Algernon Blair of Montgomery, Ala., by the Huntsville Div., Corps
    of Engineers, was for approximately $4 million. (MSFC Release 76-195)
* MSFC announced selection of the Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., for nego-
    tiations leading to award of a $7 007 210 cost-plus-award-fee contract
    for installing, activating, disassembling, and removal of special equip-
    ment at MSFC for Space Shuttle structural and dynamic ground tests. The
    contract would run from 15 Nov. 1976 through Dec. 1979. MSFC re-
    sponsibilities in developing the Space Shuttle covered three areas: the
    main engine powering the orbiter, which uses three of these engines; the
    external tank holding propellants for the main engines during launch and
    ascent; and the solid-fuel rocket boosters to be jettisoned after burnout
    and recovered by parachute for future use. MSFC would make structural
    tests of the external tank and boosters, development tests to prove design
    concepts of the main engine and external tank, and dynamic tests simu-
    lating flight conditions to be encountered by the Shuttle during launch.
            Release 76- 196)
    (MSFC
@ Two Landsats, launched in 1972 and 1975 to monitor earth resources, had

    been tested for the job of census taker by NASA and the Bureau of the
    Census, NASA announced. Public Law 521, signed by President Ford
     1 8 Oct. 76, required a complete U.S. census every 5 yr instead of once
    every 10 yr; the satellites, if their performance in 1980 in regional
    readouts and verifications should prove satisfactory, would permit
    significant savings in manpower, the Bureau said. Landsat images, al-
    though not detailed enough to count people or houses, could serve to
    identify geological, agricultural, and societal features, especially residen-
    tial patterns of growth. Satellite images of areas of Md. and Tex. had
    been processed in 1975 to identify land cover typical of transition from
                                     262
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    October

    rural to urban use; conventional census boundaries overlaid on the
    images enabled a computer to identify urban fringe zones in the test
    areas, verified by actual census statistics, the Bureau said. (NASA Release
    76- 176)
* NASA’s  aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) received nearly 1500 reports
    in its first 3-mo operating period, which ended in midJuly, NASA an-
    nounced. As a result of information in the reports, NASA forwarded 130
     alert bulletins to the Federal Aviation Administration. Pilots and aircrew
     members submitted 62% of the reports, and air traffic control personnel
     34%, indicating broad support for the program within the aviation
     community. About 99% of the reports included reporter identification
     that would permit NASAto follow up on the data if necessary; follow-up
     was used in more than 150 cases. Twelve of the reports concerned
    aircraft accidents and were forwarded to the Natl. Transportation Safety
     Board and the FAA as required; none of the reports contained information
     relating to a criminal offense. All other reports had the reporters’ names
     removed, as specified in the agreement between NASA and the FAA, before
     the information was forwarded. Review of the information so far had
     revealed some “less obvious problems” with the national aviation system,
     NASA said, and analysis would proceed shortly: problems included equip-
    ment malfunction, communications breakdown, flight operations, and
    personnel workloads. (NASA Release 76- 177)
* A mysterious radio signal apparently emanating from the Soviet Union had
    been so powerful that it had disrupted maritime, aeronautical, telecom-
    munications, and amateur radio operations throughout the world for
    months, the New York Times reported. The US. Federal Communi-
    cations Commission had forwarded four complaints to the USSR Ministry
    of Post and Telecommunications since 25 Aug., but had not received an
    answer. Colin Thomas of Leeds, England, worldwide coordinator of inter-
    ference reports for the Intl. Amateur Radio Union, said that amateurs in
    Sweden, Norway, West Germany, the U.S., and Australia had complained
    of the interference; protests by the British Home Office to the USSR had
    not received a reply, he said. The Intl. Telecommunications Union in
    Geneva, Switzerland, to which the matter was referred, said it had no
    power to enforce treaties against interference but tried to mediate such
    situations. An FCC spokesman said complaints had been received almost
    daily since early July; direction-finding equipment had confirmed the
    source of the signals as the eastern side of the Baltic Sea. An extremely
    wideband signal pulsing 10 times per second was causing the inter-
    ference, which had generated complaints from every type of shortwave
    user. What generated the signals, what type of intelligence they might
    be carrying, and what the purpose was, remained unanswered questions,
    the Nflsaid. (IVY”, 30 Oct 76, 5)
During October: Numbers of ham radio operators had received pictures
    transmitted by the Viking lander from the surface of Mars more than
    370 million km away, the Associated Press reported in a story reprinted
    by the New York Times. Retired printing foreman Bob Walton of Des
    Moines, Ia., said that a third of the 260 000 hams in the U.S. might be
    capable of receiving the pictures if they spent about $700 on equipment.
                                     263
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
October

    Last July the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena broadcast on its
    20m band that off-duty personnel would relay Mars pictures through
   their amateur radio station; Walton found a junked TV set, replaced some
   parts, and began receiving the Mars pictures. The JPL signals, tape-
    recorded and put through a converter, turned the sound into pictures
    when played back. Vocal explanations of the pictures could also be taped
    for playback. Storms in Iowa had prevented Walton from receiving some
    of the Mars pictures, but ham operators in Tex. and Fla. sent him the
    ones he had missed, he reported. (Nm,7 Oct 76, 10 C)
        Video transmissions of Viking lander pictures from the JPL ham radio
    station N6V (NASA 1976 Viking) at Pasadena had bypassed ham radio
    operators in San Diego County nearby, wrote Cliff Smith, science writer
    for the Sun Diego Union. The shortwave radio signals, good for long-
    distance communications, had been received by “about 13 000 hams
    around the world equipped to receive the pictures,” but not by the score
    of ham operators around San Diego. The locals pointed out that special
    converter devices N6V used for picture transmission and reception had
    been made by a company in San Diego, and that the local ham organiza-
    tion had donated to N6V the converter used by the station for its Viking
    transmissions. After a representative of the San Diego Reporter Assn.
    called the situation to the attention of the N6V broadcasters-all hams
    employed as technicians at JPL, the Viking control center-N6V cor-
    rected the omission by beaming its broadcasts to a repeater station on
    Otay Mt. that most area hams could receive. Pictures received since the
    change had included shots of the Viking 2 mechanical arm trying to turn
    over a rock; closeups of the Martian moons, Deimos and Phobos; and a
    weird-looking alien whose image the JPL station transmitted as a joke.
    (Sun Diego Union, 8 Oct 76)
  MSFC announced development of a new system of vehicle mobility that could
    greatly extend unmanned explorations on the surface of Mars and other
    planets. The concept grew out of work on the successful lunar roving
    vehicle that carried astronauts and equipment on extended exploration
    of the moon, far from the lunar module’s landing site. Scientists had
    regretted the lack of mobility of the Viking landers on the surface of
    Mars, because the data on atmosphere and terrain had been limited to
    the landing site. The new idea, called Elastic Loop Mobility System
    (ELMS), would use a continuous elastic-loop track in place of the landing
    pads; the track would distribute lander weight uniformly over a relatively
    large area, with suspension and drive systems on the spacecraft com-
    bined into a single lightweight package. The geometry of the loop would
    serve to provide “excellent mobility” on soft soils and smooth rides over
    hard and rough terrain. Tests on models revealed slope-climbing capabil-
    ity, high maneuverability, and power to surmount obstacles and cross
    crevasses. Combining the ELMS with existing Viking hardware would
    produce a mobile laboratory that could conduct scientific missions on the
    Mars surface for 6 mo along traverses up to 150 km.
        Recent reviews of a possible mobile-Viking mission to Mars, using the
    ELMS concept, considered extending the mission to 2 yr along traverses


                                   264
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                       October

      up to 500 km. The low ground clearance of the Viking spacecraft,
      together with the low ground-pressure tolerances on soft Martian soil,
      ruled out the use of wheels for mobility, as well as the use of conventional
      tracks because of high energy consumption and low operational reli-
      ability. Besides use of the MSFC-developed ELMS for planetary ex-
      ploration, the U.S. Marine Corps had considered the system for a new
      generation of amphibious landing vehicles for the 1980s, a MSFC spokes-
      man said. (MSFC   Release 76-191)
    “Under the guise of lack of funds... paucity of imagination’’ had lost the
                                          a
      u.S. “a preeminent place in the world of space science and engineering,”
      said a letter in Aviation Wk & Space Technology magazine. In the
      meantime, the USSR “has not turned down any opportunity to use its
      space science and engineering to advance their well-being for the present
      or for the future.” The letter cited the Grand Tour exploration of the
      outer planets, during a planetary configuration that “will not occur again
      until 179 years have passed,” and the Large Space Telescope program
      as lost opportunities for the U.S. to retain technological superiority. (Av
      Wk,11 Oct 76, 74)
    Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta
0
      Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct
      a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990.
      The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of
      equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, as-
      suming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and
      maintenance costs of such equipment. (JscRelease 76-62)
          -JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading
      to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction
      support services at the Center, including minor construction and other
      site work-alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads,
      sewers, walks, etc.-required by space programs and normally for
      projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1
      December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the
      government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC
      Release 76-63)




                                      265
                           November 1976

1 November: NASA would appeal a decision of the U.S. District Court ordering
    the agency to rehire all Marshall Space Flight Center civil service
    employees laid off since 1967 as the result of awarding support-services
    contracts to private business, Aviation Veek & Space Technology
    magazine reported. The court had ruled that all such contracts awarded
    at MSFC since 1967 were illegal. NASA spokesmen estimated that up to
    1500 contractor employees now at MSFC could be fired as a result of the
    ruling, and that 17 000 contractor employees throughout the agency
    might be affected by the decision, which ordered NASA to rehire the civil
    service personnel with back pay in amounts depending on the period of
    unemployment. Had all the employees affected been unemployed for the
    full 10 yr (the “worst-case situation”), necessary back pay might go as
    high as $150 million, NASA said, although the actual funds required would
    be less. An appeals court had already granted NASA a stay until 1 Feb.
    1977 before the district court’s ruling became effective, so that the
    agency could ask Congress for supplemental funds to cover the back-pay
    requirements. (Av ;Iwt, 1 Nov 77, 22)
  NASA announced plans to use a new technique for rapid detection of fecal
    coliform bacteria in water systems, under an agreement with EPA’s region
    2, to define water quality in coastal areas of the New York Bight along
    the Atlantic coast. NASA would supply remote data-collecting buoys and
    a monitor designed to detect coliforms, the accepted indicator of bacte-
    rial contamination. Developed at LaRC as a byproduct of early Skylab
    environmental-control systems technology, the electronic monitoring
    device could detect human and nonhuman fecal coliforms in a few hours
    rather than days, permitting health authorities to act promptly upon
    discovery of large quantities of disease-producing bacteria. Shellfish beds
    could become infested with pathogenic organisms resulting from ocean
    dumping of sewage; the sensor could also monitor coliform levels in lakes,
    public water supplies, and sewage-plant effluent. (NASA Release 76-1 78)
@ The U.S. Air Force Systems Command announced that its space and missile

    systems organization (SAMSO) had completed tests at MSFC to define effects
    of sound waves and shock waves on the Space Shuttle during launch,
    using a 6.4% scale model of the launch pad proposed for Vandenberg
    AFB. The model launch pad, measuring roughly 13 m long by 6.5 m wide
    by 2 m high and weighing more than 27 000 kg, underwent engine-
    induced overpressure and noise environments simulated by Tomahawk
    solid-fuel rocket motors and high-pressure gaseous hydrogen-oxygen
    engines. Shock waves from rocket-engine ignition interacted with ex-
    hausts on the launch pad to direct overpressure back to the launch
    vehicle; the flow rate also created an acoustic field causing turbulence in

                                     267
November                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    the surrounding .atmosphere. The altered environments were modified
    during testing by altering the configuration to produce the most accept-
    able design of launch vehicle and payload. (AFSC Release OIP 170.76)
  U.S. nuclear export policy should be conditioned on an international under-
    standing that certain activities are “inherently dangerous,” said Victor
    Gilinsky, commissioner of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission in a
    speech at Mass. Institute of Technology. Although the dangers of Pluto-
    nium-“both a nuclear explosive and the key to a virtually inexhaustible
    source of energy”-had been regarded as located far in the future, “the
    future is here,” said Gilinsky, citing the accumulation of plutonium-rich
    spent fuel from civilian power reactors in storage sites around the world,
    with more and more nations interested in commercial-scale reprocessing.
    Although the desire for plutonium had been stimulated by the assumption
    “almost universally held” that its use was a natural, desirable, and
    indispensable result of using nuclear materials to generate electricity, the
    assumption had made even more difficult any attempt to restrict the
    availability of plutonium. Likewise, safeguards based on confusion or
    misapprehension about the possibilities of misusing plutonium had been
    nullified by the spread of technological knowhow as a national policy of
    the U.S. More than 90% of the enriched uranium imported in 1975 into
    the European Economic Community to produce energy-and eventually
    plutonium- had been supplied by the u.S., Gilinsky pointed out. Nuclear
    commerce should be conditioned on a new policy that “unrestricted
    national development of nuclear power programs is inherently incompat-
    ible with a secure world,” he concluded, and no distinction should be
    recognized between military and “so-called ‘peaceful’ ” nuclear ex-
    plosives. (NRC Release S- 14-75)
2 November: Two NASA laboratories had spearheaded “the most ambitious
    effort so far to detect radio emissions from distant civilizations,” Walter
    Sullivan reported in the New York Times. The project, known as SET1
    (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), would use a specially con-
    structed device called a multichannel spectral analyzer with various radio
    telescopes to scan simultaneously a million different frequency bands
    within a range known to scientists as the “waterhole.” This part of the
    spectrum lies between the frequencies emitted by hydrogen atoms adrift
    in space (1420 mhz) and those from hydroxyl, composed of one hydrogen
    and one oxygen atom (1662 mhz), which combines with hydrogen to form
    water; the frequency range had been chosen as “a logical rendezvous for
    intelligent creatures trying to make contact for the first time.” Ames
     Research Center would have primary responsibility for program manage-
     ment and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use its worldwide network
    of antennas besides providing instruments for the multichannel system,
    including a data processor capable of handling 6 million channels. NASA
    officials noted that the search would not depend on deliberate efforts at
     communication by other civilizations, citing the detectable radio energy
     emitted by the earth in normal space operations, television transmissions,
     and so forth. (NI”, Nov 76, 16)
                           2
  Landsat data analyzed by computer had distinguished accurately between
     stands of. hardwood and pine, offering an improvement in routine forest
                                     268
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                November

    management, NASA announced. Forestry specialist Darrel Williams at
    GSFC had achieved an overall accuracy in classifying forest categories of
    90%, in comparison with airplane photographs of the same tract, a
    commercial forest in N.C. owned by the Weyerhaeuser Corp., chosen so
    that the data could be checked against a known base available con-
    tinuously. Aerial photos used in forest inventory might be updated only
    every 3 to 5 yr, because of the expense of airplane flights, whereas
    Landsat could provide repetitive coverage much more frequently. Use of
    the Landsat data, besides replacing conventional photographic coverage,
    could permit continuous land evaluation for insurance and tax purposes
    and provide evidence of unauthorized cutting, among other benefits.
    (NASA Release 76-179)
0 Britain and France announced their decision to build no more Concorde
     supersonic jetliners beyond the 16 now under construction or in the air.
     After a meeting in London with France’s transport minister Marcel
     Cavaillb, British industry minister Gerald Kaufman told a news confer-
    ence that future projects would concentrate on less exotic subsonic
     aircraft that would stand a better chance of making money. The Con-
     corde, a project begun by treaty in 1962, had already cost about $1.92
     billion for research, design, and development; each plane, with support
     facilities, would cost about $49.6 million. Nine had been built and
     sold-five to British Airways, four to Air France-and, of those remain-
     ing, three would go to British Airways and two to Air France, while
     preliminary purchase agreements had been signed with Iran for two
     others. British Airways had begun supersonic commercial flights in Jan.
     1976 with its Concordes between London and Bahrein; Air France had
     begun similar service at about the same time between Paris and Rio de
     Janeiro. On 24 May 1976, a trial service began from London and Paris
     to Dulles Intl. Airport at Washington, D.C. Banned by the New York
     Port Authority from landing at JFK Intl. Airport, pending results of en-
     vironmental testing at Dulles, the Concorde was losing money for both
     its state-owned sponsors; Air France reported losses of from $30 to
     $32 million in the first 9 mo of Concorde operation. Potential customers
     for the Concorde had made it clear that they would be interested only in
     the Europe-to-New York City route, most lucrative of the interna-
     tional flights. Kaufman added that the two countries had not become
     disenchanted with supersonic transport even though their future plans
     were to build smaller planes; “the fact that you’re going for bread and
     butter now,” he said, “doesn’t mean that you’d be disenchanted with
     caviar later.” (NYT, 3 Nov 76, 61; W Post, 4 Nov 76, A-3; W Star,
     3 NOV 76, A-5)
0 Michel Bignier, Director General of the French cNES from Jan. 1972 to
     June 1976, assumed his new duties as director of ESA’S Spacelab pro-
     gram. (ESA newsletter, Nov 76, 2)
3 November: A Stanford Research Institute study requested by Ames Re-
    search Center of ways to detect possible intelligence signals from outer
    space reported that the most effective and economical technique would
    be use of a hemispheric antenna more than 3 km in diameter, orbiting

                                    269
November                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
    the earth opposite the moon but shielded from earth‘s radio emissions.
    The orbiting antenna would occupy one of the points in the moon’s orbit
    where the gravity field of earth and moon would balance one another.
    Two other strategies assessed in the study were an “orchard” of para-
    bolic antennas (similar to that suggested in 1971 for Project Cyclops, a
    joint ARC-Stanford proposal to use massed loom antennas for signal-
    seeking and for radio astronomy), and a group of antennas in craters on
    the far side of the moon shielded from earth interference to sweep the
    entire range of the heavens during each month. Choice of the best
    strategy would depend on estimates of how far the system would need to
    look to find another technological civilization; Walter Sullivan noted in
    the NY Times “a strong suspicion that the nearest possible civilization
    may be 500 light years or more away.” (NYZ’, 3 Nov 76, 70)
0 Dr. Mary Helen Johnston, metallurgist at MsFc, was principal guest speaker
    at the Federal Women’s Day program at Wallops Flight Center.
    Dr. Johnston, who said she wanted to be one of the first American women
    chosen for space flight, participated in 1974 as part of an all-women crew
    of experimenters in a 5-day tryout of the general-purpose laboratory at
    MSFC, a cylindrical mockup of the Spacelab being built in Europe for
    Space Shuttle flights. Using the neutral-buoyancy simulator, a working
    area for handling experiment packages in a zero-gravity environment,
    the crew developed techniques for use on Spacelab. As principal in-
    vestigator for three scientific experiments and co-investigator on an-
    other, Dr. Johnston had planned the work in hopes of going on orbital
    missions in the 1980s. Also on the program was Audrey Rowe Colom,
    director of women’s activities for the Corporation for Public Broad-
    casting and current president of the Natl. Women’s Political Caucus.
    Besides the speakers, the program included skits by WFC employees and
    a costumed narration of “TWO       Centuries of American Women on Pa-
    rade.” (WFC Release 76- 15)
* Dr. Harrison H. (Jack) Schmitt, astronaut on ApoZZo 17, was the victorious
    Republican candidate for the US. Senate from New Mexico, defeating
    Democrat Joseph M. Montoya, who was seeking a third term. Now a
    consulting geologist, the 41-yr-old Schmitt had a 3-to-2 lead in the
    returns. CBS commentator Walter Cronkite noted in a news broadcast at
     10:25 p.m. EST on 2 Nov. that astronauts constituted only 2 ten-
    millionths of the U.S. population, yet there would now be two U.S. senators
    who were astronauts-Schmitt and John Glenn (D-Ohio)-which was
      representation out of all proportion.” ( W Post, 3 Nov 76, A-17;
     bb


    broadcast, 2 Nov 76)
4 November: JXannounced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Go. for nego-
    tiations leading to award of a contract, valued at about $970 000,
    funded by NASA and ERDA for the study of space-based solar-power
    systems. The 12-mo two-phase study would provide specific data on the
    most effective way to convert solar to electrical energy using satellites,
    and would determine where in space the various phases of a solar-power
    satellite should be constructed and assembled; the second phase would
    define weights and costs of a satellite system. The project would aim at

                                    270
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 November

    providing uninterrupted energy beamed to earth from large satellites in
    fixed orbits at altitudes above 35 000 km. (JSC Release 76-69)
* ERDA conducted a demonstration at Ft. Belvoir, Va., for military decision-
    makers on the use of solar cells by the armed forces. Arranged in
    cooperation with the US. Army’s Mobility Equipment Research and
    Development Command, the exhibit would show the advantages of solar
    cells over conventional sources of electricity in applications such as
    communications and surveillance. Increased purchase by the military
    could improve availability of solar cells to the general population, ERDA
    said, by stimulating mass production and thereby lowering costs. (ERDA
    release 1 Nov 76)
5 November: NASA Hq announced that Robert S. Kraemer, Director of Lunar
    and Planetary Programs, would become special assistant to Dr. Robert
    S. Cooper, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, working on the
    applications missions of the center. Kraemer had been at NASA Hq for 9
    yr, 6 of them in his current position. (NASA Hq. special anno., 5 Nov 76)
* LaRC announced that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project,
    would resign in December to become vice president for advanced pro-
    grams at Martin Marietta Aerospace. Martin, who came to LaRC in 1964,
    had managed the Viking project since 1968, directing work at JPL, at
    Martin Marietta’s facility in Denver, and at universities and subcon-
    tractor plants throughout the US. Martin Marietta had been prime
    contractor for the Viking project. h R c said that 6. Calvin Broome,
    Viking mission director, would become Viking project manager 15 Nov.,
    directing the 18-1~10  extended mission from the control center at JPL in
    Pasadena, Calif. (NASA special anno., 5 Nov 76; LaRC Release 76-37;
    NYT, 6 Nov 76, 9)
  KSC announced award to Norflor Construction Co., Orlando, Fla., of a
    $284 000 construction contract for an airlock to provide a clean-room
    environment in the spin-test facility of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station,
    to be used in preparing Delta-launched spacecraft and later for Space
    Shuttle payload processing. Construction would be completed within 160
    days after contractor’s notification to proceed. The airlock installation
    would include a 5-ton crane, air conditioning, personnel airlock, and
    lines for electricity, vacuum, compressed air, and gaseous nitrogen.
    Present clean-room facilities were occupied by elements of the Mariner
    Jupiter-Saturn spacecraft scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977.
    Delta payloads scheduled for launch in the spring and summer of 1977
    included Geos (ESA), April; Goes, May; 0”s (ESA), June; Japan’s G!VB
    metesat, July; Sirio, an Italian comsat, August; and Meteosat (ESA), Sept.
    (KSC Release 490-76)
e NASA Hq and LaRC announced that A. Thomas Young, former mission
    director for the Viking project, had been appointed Director for Lunar
    and Planetary Programs at NASA Hq and would begin his new duties
    6 Dee. in the Office of Space Science. Young, who had worked with the
    Viking project since 1968 and helped develop Mars mission objectives,
    was most recently the mission operations manager and director of the
    750-person Viking flight team at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. In his new job

                                     271
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
November

   he would manage NASA’s         unmanned planetary programs, including
   Viking, Pioneer, Mariner, and Helios, as well as studies in planetary
   astronomy, atmospheres, and geology; advanced scientific planning, pro-
   gramming, and technology; extraterrestrial materials research; and
   flight-program support. (LaRC Release 76-40; NASA Hq special anno.,
    5 Nov 76)
  After a series of technical checks, the Ekran satellite launched in the USSR
    2 6 Oct. had been activated, Tass annouced. Ekran, in synchronous
   orbit, had transmitted experimental television programs over “a vast
    territory in Siberia between the Surgut and Yakutsk meridians,” Tass
    said, describing the new service as a “gigantic telebridge.” USSR first
    deputy communications minister V. Shamshin said the new generation of
    comsats would provide a reliable and economical system of television
    communications throughout the Soviet Union. Ekran, whose trans-
    mitters were apparently more powerful than those of the Molniya series,
    would dispense with the need for 12-meter ground antennas used by the
    previous Orbita system, Tass said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 5 Nov
    76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 6 Nov 76)
6 November: Scientists at Johnson Space Center had used helium-filled
    balloons as the preferred means of carrying payloads to study the atmos-
    phere above the ozone layer. Although sounding rockets and airplanes
    could operate in the medium between 30 and 50 km over the earth’s
    surface, neither could remain stationary for very long, the rocket’s time
    in the stratosphere being measurable in minutes; also, payload weight for
    an airplane must decrease with the altitude it can maintain, whereas a
    balloon would be capable of taking an 1800-kg payload as high as 50 km.
    JSC’s Environmental Effects Office had used balloons to study effects on
    the ozone layer of fluorocarbons and other chemical interactions in the
    upper atmosphere; recent Natl. Research Council recommendations on
    reduction of use of freons had been partially based on JsC balloon-flight
    data. The JscSpace Physics Branch had used balloons to carry cosmic-
    ray instrumentation for the study of high-energy particles, and had
    worked with the Utrecht Space Sciences lab in carrying an ultraviolet
    telescope by balloon for use in a range of light that was opaque to
    observation from earth. Balloons and payloads prepared by J% were
    launched from Palestine, Tex., by the Natl. Center for Atmospheric
    Research, with parachutes for recoverable experiments. (JSC Release
    76-70; JSC Roundup, 19 Nov 76, 1)
7 November: Instruments left on the moon’s surface during the Apollo
    program were continuing to transmit information from 1 3 experiments,
    Jsc announced. The Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 1969) accounted for 2 of
    the experiments; Apollo 15 (July-Aug. 1971), for 3; Apollo 16 (April
     1972), for 3; and Apollo 17 (Dec. 1972), for 5. Findings included the
    discovery that the moon did in fact possess an atmosphere, only about
    a millimeter thick and composed of ions of light minerals, and that the
    first two layers below the moon’s surface consisted largely of basaltic
    rock and silicon. Data transmitted by 5 of the nuclear transmitters still
    operating were sent to stations at JPL, Pasadena, Calif., and GSFC, Green-

                                    272
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTZCS, 1976                                  November

    belt, Md., where they were analyzed by 10 scientists. (NYT, 7 Nov
    76, 45)
* Atomic reactor waste buried in the Ural Mountains had exploded in 1958,
    killing hundreds and affecting thousands with radiation sickness, accord-
    ing to an exiled Soviet scientist whose article in the British New Scientist
    was reported by Associated Press. Zhores Medvedev, a biochemist and
    geneticist who had been a wellknown dissident in the Soviet Union, had
    been allowed to go to Britain in Jan. 1973 but became an exile when
    Soviet authorities refused to allow him to return. His article said that
    reactor waste buried for many years in a deserted area had overheated
    and erupted “like a violent volcano,” and that strong winds had blown
    the resulting radioactive clouds for a long distance; however, no one had
    been evacuated from the area until after symptoms of radiation sickness
    appeared. Many Ural towns with medium to high levels of radiation had
    never been evacuated, he said, adding that the area was among several
    that were off limits to Western correspondents. Medvedev said several
    biology research stations had been built in what was “the largest area of
    gamma radiation in the world” to study the damage to plant and animal
    life. In 1974, a Soviet official denied reports of explosions at the the
    Shavchenko nuclear power station on the Caspian Sea, at the same time
    that Pravda, the Communist Party newspaper, was assuring the public
    that radioactive wastes had been stored safely.
        Another Soviet disaster had occurred in Oct. 1960, Medvedev said,
    when then-Premier Nikita Krushchev ordered the launch of a moon
    rocket to be timed with his arrival in New York City for a session of the
    UN General Assembly. When the ignition button was pushed, nothing
    happened; under normal procedures, Medvedev said, workers would
    drain the fuel from the rocket before inspecting to find the cause of the
    failure. However, Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, then head of Soviet rocket
    forces, felt himself “under an obligation to fulfill the ambitious order”
    issued by Krushchev and decided to investigate immediately. While
    dozens of engineers and other experts were examining the rocket and its
    support systems, the ignition suddenly started to work, but the rocket
    could not take off because of “the forest of inspection ladders.” The
    rocket toppled over and turned the Soviet cosmodrome into a holocaust,
    killing many persons in the area, including “some of the best represen-
    tatives of Soviet space technology,” Medvedev said. AP noted that the
    Soviet media routinely ignore all disasters, whether natural or manmade.
    (W Post, 7 Nov 76, A-1; W S t a r , 7 Nov 76, B-8; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76,
    20)
8 November: The U.S. Air Force announced it would begin flight tests of a new
    system called latar (laser-augmented target acquisition/recognition),de-
    veloped by Northrop Corp. to give pilots of single-seat aircraft enhanced
    air-to-surface and air-to-air attack capability. The latar pod, mounted in
    the gun bay of the USAF F-4E, would contain long-range high-resolution
    electro-optical equipment for target imaging, laser designation, and ac-
    quisition and tracking; its field-of-view would be limited only by the
    fuselage and the externally carried munitions on the aircraft. The system

                                     273
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
November

    would allow a pilot to acquire a target visually, using either a helmet-
    mounted sight system or a telescopic radar, with the optical turret
    following his line of sight; the view seen by the latar would appear on a
    helmet-mounted display built by Minneapolis Honeywell. The system
    would be suitable for use in all types of aircraft, including helicopters.
    (OIP Release 203.76)
@ FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced that the agency would

    sponsor a conference in Washington, D.C., 16 Nov. to foster the use of
    metrics in aviation, in accordance with national policy set forth in the
    Metric Conversion Act of 1975. The conference would hear presenta-
    tions by FAA, other federal agencies, aviation users, and the public, and
    would run into a second day if necessary. Subjects to be discussed would
    include air-traffic control, operations, and aeronautical charts and navi-
    gation aids, as well as design of aviation products and the impact on the
    aviation community of a transition to the metric system. McLucas noted
    that FAA had already begun to use metric measurements i areas such as
                                                                 n
    standards for airport design and construction. (FAA Release 76-106)
  Federal agencies allocated $4.5 billion to institutions of higher learning in
    FY 1975, the Natl. Science Foundation reported, a level of support about
    the same as the previous year’s but representing an 8% decline when
    converted to constant (1 972) dollars. HEW allocated the largest amount,
    $3.2 billion, or 70% of the total; the NSF supplied the second largest,
    $491 million or 11%. Other sponsoring agencies were the Dept. of
    Agriculture, DOD, ERDA, and NASA. Of the $2.2 billion earmarked for
    research and development (about half of all allocations to academic
    institutions), researchers in life sciences received $1.2 billion, more than
    half of all federal R&D funds; research in physical sciences received $307
    million, about 14%, and engineering and environmental sciences each
    received about 9%. All other fields together received only about 13%.
    (NSF Release ~ ~ 7 6 - 9 1 )
9 November: The $100 million spent by the US. on a search for life on Mars
    had produced only disagreement over the findings, Viking project sci-
    entists said at a JPL press conference. Four of six Viking scientists said
    they did not know whether life existed on Mars; one denied that Viking
    had found life; the sixth said he felt Viking had found “primitive mi-
    crobes” in the Mars soil samples. All six agreed that Viking had found
    nothing at either the Chryse or the Utopia landing site representing
    fossils that would have confirmed a previous existence of life on Mars,
     Wushington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported.
        Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, who designed the instrument to look for
    dead organic matter, noted that nothing had been detected, and ex-
    plained readouts from other instruments as the result of an exotic chem-
    istry catalyzed by some superoxidant in the surface of Mars and activated
    by solar ultraviolet rays that penetrated the Mars atmosphere all the way
    to the surface. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. disagreed, saying that the
    failure to find dead organisms did not outweigh the activity detected by
    the biology instruments, which produced readings at a lower temperature
    and lost them when the sample was heated. This result “smells more like

                                     274
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  November

    biology than any chemistry I can think of,” Sagan added. Vance Oyama
    of ARC favored a chemical explanation; Dr. Gilbert V. Levin of Biosphe-
    rics said he leaned toward a biological explanation. Dr. Norman H.
    Horowitz of Calif. Inst. of Technology, who designed the photosynthesis
    experiment, favored the biology explanation but regretted the absence of
    fossils. Dr. Harold P. Klein of ARC said the Viking results “do not
    rigorously prove there is life on Mars, nor do they rigorously disprove it.”
        New York Times reporter John Noble Wilford described the failure
    to detect on Mars the organic compounds essential to life processes on
    earth as “a major surprise,” causing most of the confusion over inter-
    pretations of the data; a NY7’ editorial noted that the Mars findings had
    forced a new look at theories about the origins of life on earth, which
    “seems neither so certain nor so inevitable as it did before the Viking
                .
    landings . .” (W Post, 10 Nov 76, A-9; NIT, 10 Nov 76, A-16;
     1 8 Nov 76, 42)
e The National Aeronautic Assn., at its annual meeting in Washington, D.C.,
    announced its selections for Elder Statesmen of Aviation for 1976. The
    award, established in 1954, honored outstanding Americans over the age
    of 60 who had made significant contributions to aeronautics. The three
    persons chosen were: J. Leland Atwood, 72, leader in aviation for more
    than 50 yr, who headed North American Rockwell (now Rockwell Intl.)
    until his retirement in 1970 and originated the design concept for the
    P-5 1 Mustang; Clifford W. Henderson, 81, originator of the Bendix and
    Thompson trophy races and the Power Puff Derby, and manager of the
    National Air Races 1928-1939; and Blanche Wilcox Noyes, 76, who
    learned to fly in 1928 and won the national closed-course race in 1929,
    the Miami All-American air race in 1931, and the Bendix trophy for a
    cross-country flight in 1936. (NAA release 9 Nov 76)
e INTELSAT announced plans to conduct a 1977 program of research and
    development costing more than $5.4 million, to advance technology for
    its global comsat system. The R&D yearly budget, approved by the recent
    meeting of the board of governors, would consist of $1.3 million for
    research to identify technology that appeared promising for the future
    INTELSAT projects; $2.2 million for contract authority for projects with
    near-term applications; and $1.9 million for in-house support of such
    projects. Areas of exploratory research would include spacecraft and
    microwave technology, communications processing, analysis of propaga-
    tion and transmission, and studies of materials and devices. Near-term
    projects would include development of antennas, transponders, and other
    components; investigation of cross polarization; development of NiH bat-
    teries, voice-channel decoders, high-power transistors, and improvement
    of techniques. (INTELSAT   Release 76-33-M)
  S A announced acceptance of the first solid-propellant apogee boost motor
    produced in Europe-designed and made by SNIA-Viscosa of Italy in
    collaboration with SEP of France-for use in its Geos (geostationary
    scientific satellite). The motor, measuring 1.1 m long with maximum
    diameter of 0.7 m, weighed 305 kg, more than the remainder of the
    spacecraft, and would serve to inject the satellite into geostationary orbit

                                     275
November                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    from the elliptical transfer orbit provided by a Thor-Delta launch vehicle.
    The satellite was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral in April
    1977. (ESA release 9 Nov 76)
10 November: The Marshall Star reported that a former student research
    assistant at MSFC, now a member of the faculty at Alabama A&M Univ.,
    would be principal investigator in a study to develop remote-sensing
    applications for resources study and management, under a $35 000
    grant from NASA and MSFC. The research effort would catalog the trans-
    portation network of Ala., including highways, railroads, water systems,
    and airports, and would devise a system for storing information in quickly
    retrievable form that could readily be updated. Dr. Oscar Montgomery,
    who had worked on the study at the outset, had graduated from A&M and
    had received a Ph. D. from Purdue Univ., returning to A&M in the
    department of natural resources and environmental studies. He and
    other researchers at A&M would identify and assist users of remotely
    sensed data in Ala., develop university facilities and skills to handle,
    process, and interpret such data, and support “ground truth” and related
    activities of the Earth Resources Office at MSFC. The grant, part of the
    Minority Institutions Research Program, would provide remotely sensed
    data obtained by aircraft or spacecraft to the Ala. Development Office
    and other state agencies. (Marshall Star, 10 Nov 76, 4)
0 The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of 3 yr of test and
    evaluation on a production-engineered version of a laser-guided bomb kit
    designed for easy mounting on standard unguided bombs. AFSC noted
    that, during the Southeast Asia conflict, laser-guided bombs were 200
    times as likely to reach the target as manually released unguided bombs,
    and had outscored computer-aimed bombs by 50 to 1. The USAF de-
    scribed the U;B as “one of the most effective technological advances” in
    weaponry, one LGB costing less than 12 standard unguided bombs and
    offering additional savings in fewer missions flown, fewer crew losses,
    increased storage life, and greater reliability. (OIP Release 241.76)
10-1 November: The mysterious high-power radio signal that had inter-
     1
    rupted international communications for months disappeared suddenly
    on 2 Nov., officials at the Federal Communications Commission reported,
    but resumed as unexpectedly 10 Nov., the foreign minister of Norway
    told his parliament. Personnel at the Rogaland radio station on Norway’s
    west coast began receiving the signals again from a shortwave trans-
    mitter they thought was located near Kiev in the Soviet Ukraine. The FCC
    said in Oct. that hundreds of complaints had been received about the
    interference, heard through a wide range of high frequencies from about
    6 to 28 mhz, like a rapid ticking 10 times per sec. The signal had
    disrupted ship-to-shore, aeronautical, telephone, and amateur and inter-
    national broadcast services around the world, particularly in Europe and
    across the North Atlantic. The USSR had never acknowledged that the
    transmissions originated there; a spokesman at the Soviet embassy in
    Washington, D.c., said he did not know what was causing the inter-
    ference. (WStar, 9 Nov 76, 1; WPost, 11 Nov 76, A32; NYT, 11 Nov
    76, 5)

                                     276
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  November

1 1 November: Ames Research Center announced that a NOAA scientist,
    Dr. Peter M. Kuhn, had discovered a way to give airplane pilots up to
     12 min. warning of air turbulence ahead, during his investigation of
    infrared radiation emitted from atmospheric water vapor using ARC’S
    Convair aircraft. While measuring background infrared radiation in the
    atmosphere to define sources of astronomical infrared, Dr. Kuhn had
    seen sudden drastic changes in water-vapor content followed closely by
    turbulence. A radiometer in the aircraft wheel well of the Galileo II flying
    laboratory could detect atmospheric infrared from water vapor, and
    predict accompanying turbulence with an 81% reliability. Experiments
    with varying infrared wavelengths had permitted detection of turbulence
    more than 100 km ahead of the plane. The water-vapor anomalies
    resulted from wave motions in the atmosphere caused by lee waves over
    high terrain or by sudden shifts in wind speed or direction with resulting
    friction between adjacent streams of air. Although water-vapor content
    would usually be fairly constant, the wave motions would thin the vapor
    in one place and concentrate it in another, making the turbulence de-
    tectable. (ARC Release 76-80; Av R%, 15 Nov 76, 25; NOAA Release
     76-251)
0 NASA announced appointment of Glynn s. Lunney, manager of the Shuttle
     payload integration and development program ofice at JSC, as Deputy
     Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, replacing
     Dr. William C. Schneider. Dr. Schneider had been assigned as director
     of project management at CSFC. Lunney’s NASA career began at LeRC in
      1958; he transferred to the Space Task Group at LaRC in 1959, and
     moved with that group to JsC. He was manager of the Apollo spacecraft
     program in 1972, and served as technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz
     Test Project. (NASA Release 76-183; JSC Release 76-71; JSC Roundup,
      19 Nov 76, 1)
0 Despite lower profits in its work on the Space Shuttle and increased losses
     in business aircraft, Rockwell Intl. reported higher sales and earnings for
     both the last quarter and the full fiscal year ending 30 Sept. 1976.
     Earnings were $121.1 million, up 29% in fiscal 1976, and sales in-
     creased 8%to a record $5.2 billion. The figures did not include discon-
     tinued operations in Rockwell’s industrial components area, sold in Dec.
     1975. Four of the company’s five operating areas reflected better man-
     agement and lower interest costs: automotive operations, electronics
     operations, consumer operations, and utility and industrial operations.
    The aerospace operations figures reflected fewer award-fee opportu-
     nities, Rockwell said. (Rockwell Release R-40)
12 November: The first Soviet jumbo jet, the 1~-86,     would begin test flights
    in Dec., according to a Moscow broadcast. The plane would be able to
    carry 350 passengers at about 373 kph over distances up to 1460 km,
    according to claims, which would mean it could make nonstop flights
     from Moscow to Lisbon. The noise level inside the plane would be lower
    than that in Boeing jumbo jets, the broadcast added. (FBIS,      Moscow to
     North America in English, 12 Nov 76)


                                     277
November                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

14 November: The USSR would be able by 1980 to produce a thermonuclear
    reaction by using a powerful laser, according to scientists at the Lebedev
    Physics Institute quoted in the USSR’s ‘Academy of Sciences journal
    Priroda. Institute Director Nikolai Basov (sharer of the 1964 Nobel
    prize in physics, for work in laser amplification) emphasized that Soviet
    science had been first to begin work on this problem, which would be the
    basis of power engineering in the future. Scientists were using two
    approaches: building powerful installations called Tokamaks, in which a
    reaction would proceed continuously; or using a laser beam to compress
    a small quantity of material such as deuterium to “a hundred trillion
    atmospheres, thousands of times as great as inside the sun,” with accom-
    panying rise in temperatures until a microexplosionoccurred, to produce
    current for future power and heat stations. Unlike the Tokamak, this line
    of research could lead to production of transportable nuclear-power
    stations for delivery to remote areas, the article said. (FBIS, Moscow
    Domestic Service in Russian, 14 Nov 76; A&A 64, 367)
16 November: MSFC announced it had completed a critical design review for
    part of a heavy-nuclei experiment scheduled to go into space aboard the
    third High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO-C) in 1979. The ex-
    periment, called 6-3, would characterize cosmic-ray flux from detailed
    measurements of charge and energy spectra, study propagation of cos-
    mic rays, and search for superheavy elements. Principal investigators
    were Dr. Martin Israel, Washington Univ.; Dr. Edward Stone, Calif.
    Inst. of Technology; and Dr. Cecil Waddington, Univ. of Minn. The
    HEAO-C, whose objective would be to map the sky for gamma-ray and
    cosmic-ray flux, would carry two other experiments besides the C-3. A
    design review for the experiment hardware would be held in Feb. 1977.
    (MSFC Release 76- 199)
  Three NASA employees were among 16 career federal employees selected
    as winners of the Natl. Civil Service League’s 1976 career service
    awards. In ceremonies at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.,
    those honored included former astronaut Michael Collins, third U.S. man
    to walk in space, selected for his work with the Smithsonian’s Air and
    Space Museum, of which he had been director since April 197 1; Chris-
    topher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC; and Charles F. Hall, Pioneer project
    manager at ARC, where he had worked since 1942 beginning with NACA.
    ( W S t a r , 23 Oct 76, C-8; W Post, 19 Oct 76, C2)
17 November: MSFC announced it had issued requests for bids on a contract
     to design, construct, and test on earth a space-based manufacturing
     facility to make structural members for assembling large structures in
     space. Proposals would be received until 30 Nov. The machine to be
     produced under this contract would demonstrate automatic beam fabri-
     cation, a necessary step in developing a facility to support requirements
     for large structures in space, such as space platforms, electrical power-
     generating plants, or large antennas for communications and astronomy.
     (MSFC Release 76-200)
18 November: MSFC announced near-completion of an experimental chamber
     being built for the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) sched-

                                     278
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 November

    uled to fly on Spacelab for use in developing techniques to predict, alter,
    and control weather. The chamber would be a ground-test engineering
    model simulating the expansion of a parcel of air as it rises in the
    atmosphere, using carefully controlled temperature and pressure to mon-
    itor moist air as it would undergo changes like those causing the for-
    mation of cumulus clouds. Droplets formed in the simulated clouds would
    be photographed by cameras outside the chamber; the lack of gravity in
    space would allow the droplets to remain suspended for longer periods of
    time, permitting scientists to study them at length. The completed cham-
    ber, liquid thermal-control system, and temperature sensors would be
    tested to obtain uniform cooling of the chamber walls. Data from the
    experiments would serve to improve computer models of clouds, and to
    aid in developing methods to increase snowfall or rain, dissipate fogs, or
    suppress lightning. (MSFC Release 76-201; Marshall Star, 24 Nov
    76, 1)
21 November: NASA-funded studies conducted in Fla. and Tex. using infrared
    images from NOAA’S    Natl. Environmental Satellite Service had provided
    fruit and vegetable growers with timely information on ground tem-
    peratures during periods of crop-killing freezes, NOAA announced. The
    images, provided every half hour by Goes 1 from its equatorial station
    over South America at 35 800-km altitude, were transmitted from
    heat-radiation sensors to ground stations for conversion to visual imag-
    ery. The Fla. study used a computer to display the temperature vari-
    ations in shades of gray, verified by ground readings taken in the area
    by Univ. of Fla. personnel. The Texas study converted the satellite data
    to typewriter characters that produced a remarkably similar printout,
    transmissible over teletypewriter machines, more widely available than
    photofax equipment. Both studies aimed at helping growers decide
    whether to undertake expensive steps to keep crops from being damaged
    by frost; heating orchards in Florida might cost up to $5 million per
    night. (NOAA Release 76-257)
22 November: MSFC announced it had shipped to GFSC the experiment payload
    for SPAR 111, third in a series of about 15 space-processing applications
    rockets being flown over a 15-yr period to obtain space-processing data
    in near-zero gravity until Space Shuttle flights become available in the
     1980s. The scientific payload built by MSFC would be integrated with GFSC
     components-igniter, separator, control and recovery systems-and
     shipped to the U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range, N.M., for a sched-
     uled mid-December launch. SPAR payloads recovered by parachute would
    be forwarded to investigators for analysis. The SPAR flight would provide
    about 5 min of near-zero gravity in which to perform materials proc-
     essing. (MSFC Release 76-204)
* MSFC announced that officials from NASA Hq and three of its field centers
     were participating in a Spacelab preliminary design review being held by
     ESA at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 19-26 Nov. Besides representatives
     of MSFC, lead center for Spacelab design in the U.S., employees of KSC and
     JXwere attending the review to see that basic design requirements had
     been met before construction of the engineering model of Spacelab

                                     279
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
November

    began. A NASA in-house review had been held at MSFC 15-17 Nov. (MSFC
    Release 76-203)
23 November: NASA was negligent in the 1972 death of Kirby Dupree,
    supervisor of a support unit for astronauts, a federal judge ruled in
    awarding $575 000 to the widow and a 4-yr-old daughter. When a
    battery box exploded in an astronaut training facility at JSC, Dupree and
    James E. Scott were assisting with water experiments used to simulate
    space flights. Scott won $100 000 for injuries suffered in the accident.
    Both Dupree and Scott were employees of a contractor at the facility.
    (NYT, 25 Nov 76, 20)
0 A program conducted jointly by NASA’s     Dryden Flight Research Center and
    Langley Research Center had been trying literally to work the bugs out
    of aircraft, by studying materials and methods to keep insects from
    sticking to the leading edge of aircraft wings. The study was part of
    NASA’s  aircraft energy-efficiency program, aimed at developing an ad-
    vanced long-range aircraft with possible savings of 20 to 40% in fuel
    consumption. The laminar flow-control technology on which the ad-
    vanced craft would depend for savings required smooth airflow over the
    wings; impacted insects sticking to the leading edge of the wing could
    interrupt the airflow and cause turbulence. The test planes used at LaRC
    and DFRC had variously coated panels installed on the leading edges, with
    instrumented probes above them to register airflow changes resulting
    from adherence of insects and monitor differences attributable to the
    panel coatings. After a low flight over areas where insects would impact
    the wing surfaces, the aircraft would land for preliminary measurements
    and then fly at high altitudes and speeds to measure the effects on airflow.
    (DFRC Release 20-76; LaRC Release 76-41; NASA Release 76-190)
@ ERDA announced selection of Clayton, N.M.,      as the first municipal utility to
    field-test its 200-kw wind-turbine generator. The Clayton utility would
    operate the modern windmill for 2 yr beginning late in 1977, and would
    assemble test data on the performance and economics of wind-energy
    systems connected with conventional power plants and providing power
    through existing utility lines. Clayton, a 3000-inhabitant town located
    in an area of the Great Plaiw with high average wind speeds, would be
    the first U.S. locality in more than 30 yrs to generate electric power for
    public consumption through the use of wind. Its conventional utility
    system used both gas and oil generators. Integration of the wind-power
    system would be supervised by technicians from NASA’sR C at Cleveland,
                                                                L
    O., who would train the municipal utility employees in operating the wind
    turbine. (ERDA Release 76-348)
23-26 November: Reports in two national magazines-“both denied,” the
     NY Times noted-charged that the Soviet Union had used laser beams
    to put U.S. early-warning satellites out of commission, and each predicted
    that the US. had been working on its own hunter-killer satellites. The
     current issue of Newsweek had reviewed the incident of 1975 when a
     U.S. early warning satellite and a companion relay satellite had been
     disabled over the Indian Ocean, citing “strong evidence, despite official
     U.S. denials, that last year’s incident over Siberia was the work of a laser
     beam 10 000 times as strong as any natural blaze.” u.S. Secy. of
                                      280
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    November

     Defense Donald Rumsfeld had stated that the US. satellites had been
     damaged by the glare of natural gas fires along a pipeline in Western
     Russia, but did not deny that lasers might have caused the damage.
     Newsweek said the U.S. had already developed chemical lasers requiring
     no electrical power, and described a possible fleet of US. “dark satellites”
     with radar-absorbing exteriors that would be invisible to Soviet detection.
     It also predicted that a full-scale war in space-a science-fiction type of
     clash of hunter-killer satellites, manned orbital shuttles, and laser death
     rays-could “leap off the drawing boards” in the 1980s.
         Reporter Tad Szulc said in the current Penthouse magazine that the
     U.S. government had not publicized the attack on its satellites used to
     police the 1972 arms pact with the USSR for fear of endangering nego-
     tiations with Moscow on a new strategic arms pact. He said Washington
     was perplexed by the Soviet effort to interfere with satellites that were
     verifying compliance with the 1972 treaty.
         The NY Times noted that spokesmen for both the State Dept. and the
     Dept. of Defense had denied the magazine reports of interference with
     U.S. satellites, although DOD had verified that the USSR had been at-
     tempting to intercept its own satellites already in orbit, not always suc-
     cessfully. Pentagon sources told the NYT that the Soviet hunter satellites
     used conventional explosives, although shockwaves from an explosion
     would not proliferate in the vacuum of space and a hunter would have
     to be accurate enough to close in and destroy a target with debris. A N I T
     editorial 26 Nov. said the “vast sums” needed for space weapons would
     be more wisely spent on peace and good relations on earth. (C Trib,
     2 3 NOV 76, 4-15; NYT, 2 3 NOV 76, 15; 24 NOV 76, 12; 26 NOV 76,
     A-22)
24 November: A lunar scientist in Johnson Space Center’s Division of Lunar
    and Planetary Sciences had suggested that low-viscosity lava rather than
    water could have caused the large channels seen on Mars, JSC announced.
    Ernest Schonfeld, in a paper to be presented at the annual meeting of the
    Am. Geophysical Union, said that the abundant large channels-one of
    the most puzzling landforms on Mars-were more easily explained by
    lava than by water; scientists had not been able to identify thick deposits
    of sediment that should have resulted from channel formation by water.
    Viking 1 had landed near the mouth of a large channel where thick
    sediments should have been deposited, but rocks at that site appeared to
    be volcanic. Schonfeld proposed that thin basaltic liquid melted below the
    Mars surface had flowed freely to erode the surface, and said that the
    coincidence of the age of volcanic activity on Mars and the erosion of the
    channels supported his idea. (JSC Release 76-72)
30 November: NASAannounced establishment of a joint working group with
    the Agency for Intl. Development (AID) to explore further cooperative
    programs upon successful completion of the AIDSAT project. Final demon-
    stration of AIDSAT came 30 Oct. i Haiti. NASA’s Ats 6 satellite showed
                                       n
    people in 27 developing nations how space could improve their way of
    life, using small portable transmitter-receiver units to broadcast high-
    quality color TV directly to low-cost receivers in remote areas. Programs
    consisted of both filmed and live portions: on film, viewers saw a message
                                      281
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
November

   from President Ford, followed by one of three films produced by NASA on
   communications technology, remote-sensing satellites (like Landsat), and
   prediction and relief in natural disasters. The live segment contained two
   half-hour programs; the first, originating in the host country, showed
   officials describing technological challenges and current efforts to meet
   them, and the second was a two-way question-and-answer session be-
   tween senior officials in the host country and experts in Washington, D.C.,
   discussing education, health, agriculture, and similar national concerns.
   Millions of viewers had seen what in many instances were the first color
   TV broadcasts in the host country. (NASA Release 76-189)
0 Wallops Flight Center announced appointment of Dorinda S. Bailey, an
   equal opportunity specialist in the office of the Center Director, as
    full-time Equal Opportunity Officer for the center. Before coming to
    Wallops in 1974, Mrs. Bailey had been an examiner in the Civil Service
   Commission’s Bureau of Personnel Investigations. As EO officer, she
    would be responsible for developing and managing programs to assure
    equal opportunity in center employment. (WFC Release 76-16)
0 The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifi-
    cations to McDonnell Douglas Dc-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden
    depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator
    John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a
    1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Trans-
    portation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lock-
    heed L-101 1s and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near
    Paris of a DC- 10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death
    of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control
    cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a
    1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976-without McLucas’s
    knowledge-but all U.S. airlines flying Dc-10s had agreed to comply with
    the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 3 1
    March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. ( WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9)
During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. newsletter reported that,
    during the 69th annual general conference of the Fbdbration Aero-
    nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FA1 gold space medal
    was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo
    crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Le-
    onov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald
    K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for
    establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for dura-
    tion, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov
    Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the
    previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx
    medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each
    received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of
    the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful
    purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the
    Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and exe-
    cution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space.
    (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)

                                     282
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  November

    Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Stafford, currently commander of the USAF Flight
      Test Center at Edwards AFB, Calif., received the National Geographic
      Society’s Gen. Thomas D. White space trophy for 1975, in recognition
      of “outstanding contributionsy’ in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.
      (AF Magazine, Nov 76, 21)
    Former astronaut Frank Borman, who commanded both the Gemini 7 and
@

      Apollo 8 missions and who currently was president and chief executive
      officer of Eastern Air Lines, was efected chairman of the board for EAL
      replacing Floyd D. Hall, who had resigned to become permanent chair-
      man of the executive committee of the International Air Transport
      Association (IATA). (Av Wk, 2 9 Nov 76, 20)
    The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of vibration and
@

      performance tests at Arnold Engineering Development Center on a small
      solid-propellant rocket motor scheduled to boost the Intl. Ultraviolet
      Explorer spacecraft into orbit in 1977. The motor, Thiokol Corp.’s
      TE-M-604-4, would be fired about 24 hr after launch to move the IUE
      into a near-synchronous orbit at altitudes of from 24 000 to 48 000 km.
      WE, a cooperative research program shared by NASA, ESA, and the U.K.
      Science Research Council, would carry a 45-mm-diameter ultraviolet
      telescope to investigate characteristics of stars and planets. (AFSC
      Newsreview, Nov 76, 4)
    The Natl. Science Foundation’s Nov. bulletin contained information on new
@

      NSF policy on grant renewals, submission of final reports, and other ac-
      tivities. As of 1 Oct., standard NSF awards could be renewed only once,
      by amendment of the original grant or contract, provided that the cumu-
      lative duration of the grant would not exceed 5 yr. Further support for
      the same or a different project would be awarded through new grants,
      based on new proposals. Also effective 1 Oct., the final fiscal and tech-
      nical report on a grant and a summary of the completed project must be
      submitted within 90 days after expiration of the grant. NSF also an-
      nounced a program called Research Initiation in Minority Institutions, to
      encourage research among enrollments predominantly of black, native
      American, Spanish-speaking, or other ethnic minorities; a program
      called National Needs Science Faculty Professional Development, to
      support training for science teachers at both 2- and 4-yr coneges and
      universities; and a Law and Social Sciences program to fund empirical
      research by law-review students in collaboration with legal scholars and
      social scientists. (NSF Bulletin, Nov 76, 1)
    “Washington sources” not further identified had revealed that the first
0
      underwater test launch of a Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile, the
      SS-NX-18, had occurred “early in November” between a submarine in
      the White Sea and an impact area near Plesetsk. The “new missile” had
      been test-launched previously from a land-based facility at Plesetsk.
      SpaceJEight, published by the British Interplanetary Society, quoted its
      sources as saying that the Ss-Nx-18-which        used storable liquid pro-
      pellants, and carried multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles
      (MIRVs)-had traveled about 5150 km, about 70% of its design range,
      and would replace SS-N-8 in the Delta 1 and Delta 2 class of USSR nuclear
      submarines. (Spacejight, vol 19 no 2, 41)
                                      283
                            December 1976

1 December: Officials of US. airlines told Secretary of Transportation William
    T. Coleman, Jr., in an all-day hearing that lack of government help in
    financing the costs of government-imposedrules for quieting planes could
    lead to severe setbacks in service, such as wholesale groundings, diminished
    competition, fuel waste, less relief from noise, and possible loss of the
    national lead in aircraft technology. The airlines had suggested a plan last
    spring to set aside a fourth of the 8% ticket tax for replacement or refitting
    of planes that exceeded the new noise limits. Opposed to this plan was James
    C. Miller 3d, assistant director of the administration’s council on wage and
    price stability, who said that he would favor a “pollution tax,” imposed on
    planes inversely to the amount of noise suppression achieved, rather than “a
    subsidy from the public purse.” Secy. Coleman said he would make a
    recommendation to the outgoing Ford administration by the end of Dec.
    New noise rules promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration, DOT,
    were to take effect on 1 Jan., setting up a 4- to 8-yr timetable for replacing
    or refitting aircraft that did not comply with stringent limits on noise. (W,
    2 Dec 76, 21)
0 NASA announced appointment of Dr. James J. Kramer as acting Associate
    Administrator in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST),
    replacing Robert E. Smylie, who would become Deputy Director at GSFC.
    Dr. Kramer, who came to NASA Hq from L R C in 1971, had been manager
    of the refan program office. In a related action, Paul F. Holloway, director
    for space at hRc, would begin a temporary appointment as acting deputy
    Associate Administrator of OAST on 3 Jan. 1977. (NASA anno. 1 Dec 76)
0 Launch complex 14 at K S C - U S ~ ~ for John Glenn’s orbital flight in Feb. 1962
    and other manned launches until 1966-was blown up with plastic ex-
    plosives by an Army demolition team after the Air Force decided the rusty
    and obsolete towers constituted a hazardous area and should be demolished.
    The scrap metal would be sold to the highest bidder. News reports noted that
    a stainless steel memorial would remain to mark the place where the seven
    original astronauts took their first steps into space. ( WStar, 2 Dec 76, A-3;
    CBS News transcript, Cronkite-Dean, 1 Dec 76; NBC Nightly News, Brinkley,
     1 Dec 76)
0 A Pentagon group charged with making decisions on weapons programs-the
    Defense Systems Acquisition Committee-held its first meeting to consider
    production of the controversial B- 1 bomber and scheduled another meeting
    for 6 Jan. 1977 to decide on consolidation of cruise missile programs backed
    separately by the Air Force and the Navy. Defense Secretary Donald H.
    Rumsfeld had stated-apparently with approval from the transition team of
    the incoming Carter administration-that he was responsible until 20 Jan.
    for making weapons decisions that came up for scheduled consideration;

                                      285
                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

      however, he had also told subordinates that W D should exercise restraint in
      passing on programs that the incoming administration might review or
      change. President-elect Carter had questioned the necessity for a B-1
      bomber program. The controversy over cruise missiles arose from Air Force
      advocacy of an air-launched missile that could be used only with a B-1 or
      B-52 bomber; t i restraint offered the verificaton possibility, acceptable to
                        hs
      the USSR, of controlling the number of cruise missiles by counting the
      bombers carrying them. However, the Navy had advocated its Tomahawk
      missile which could be launched from a submarine torpedo tube as well as
      from a surface ship or a bombing plane. The Navy’s preference would
      thwart verification of future arms-limitation agreements, since all attack
      submarines as well as surface ships and bombers could be potential platforms
      for launching the Navy missile. The Carter transition team was concerned,
      said the New York Ernes, that the Navy might be trying to lock in the new
      administration with a pre-inauguration decision that would complicate fu-
      ture negotiations with the USSR. Both the Navy and the Air Force programs
      were started after a 1972 agreement with the USSR that placed a 5-yr
      limitation on strategic ballistic missiles; the $15 million design studies had
      grown into $300 million development programs, and had reached the point
      where a decision was needed on proceeding into costly engineering devel-
      opment. Observers pointed to the Army’s plan to award contracts in the next
      week or so on its $7 million programs for troop-carrier and attack helicop-
      ters as a decision that would make it difficult for the incoming administration
                                               (m,
      to re-examine its predecessor’s policy.            2 Dec 76, 23)
    A report in lzvestia on Soviet passenger planes to be in service by 1980 failed
@

      to mention the Tupolev- 144 supersonic transport, the Wushington Post
      reported. An official of the USSR Aviation Ministry said the trouble-plagued
      Tu-144 would not go into passenger service in 1976 as promised last Dec.,
      when the highly publicized “first scheduled supersonic service” began be-
      tween Moscow and Alma Ata in Soviet Kazakhstan. That service, initially
      twice a week, carried only mail and cargo, and was viewed by Western
      observers as an extended test-flightprogram. The mail service had been cut
      back to once a week in June 1976, with reports of problems in the passenger
      cabin such as noise, vibrations, and pressure. The Tu-144, which on
      31 Dec. 1968 had been the first supersonic civilian plane to fly, was
      designed to carry up to 140 passengers up to 5600 km, but had never been
      known to meet either specification; observers said its fuel consumption was
      greater than expected. Its service on Aeroflot lines, set to begin in 1974 or
       1975, had been set back by a crash in Paris in 1973. Although ignoring the
      Tu-144 in the lzvestia story, Aviation Minister Boris Bugayev said the
      state-operated Aeroflot fleet would include the 350-passenger Ilyushin-86
      airbus, not yet flown, and the medium-range 120-passenger Yak-42 air-
      plane, which he said would be “put into service in the current Five-Year
      Plan period.” (W Post, 1 Dec 76, A-12)
*   ESA announced award to European industry of two study contracts, one to
      define a large (about 900 kg) technological and experimental satellite in
       geostationary orbit, the other to define the communicationspayload for such
       a satellite. The 4-mo contracts, each valued at about $450 000 u.s., went
       to groups headed by Engins Matra and SNIAS of France for the spacecraft,
                                        286
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  December

   and to a group headed by Germany’s AEG-Telefunken for the payload. The
   new satellite would be designed for launch by ESA’S Ariane, possibly on the
   fourth development flight scheduled for Oct. 1980; it would flight-test
   equipment and techniques as forerunner of a large platform carrying vari-
   ous communicationspayloads for direct and semidirect television and sound
   broadcasting and for propagation experiments in the 20- to 30-ghz range.
   The new system would differ from ESA’S in offering new services re-
                                                oTS
   quired by countries without elaborate ground communications and broad-
   casting installations;it would carry four or more high-power TV channels for
   direct home reception, besides providmg low-cost facilities for national
   telecommunications through small “thin route” terminals. (ESArelease
    1 Dec 76)
2 December: Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld announced that the
    Ford administration had decided to authorize construction of the contro-
    versial B-l bomber, under a contract arrangement that would allow the
    incoming Carter administration 5 mo to review the $22.8-bdlion pro-
    gram. Rumsfeld’s announcement said that B- 1 testing was complete and
    that it was “in the national interest” to proceed with production. During
    the campaign, candidate Carter had said he was opposed to immediate
    production but held out the possibility of further research on the bomber,
    which the Pentagon now declared completed. The unusual contract
    arrangement of month-by-month funding until the end of June was an
    extension of the 1 Feb. deadline set by Congress for commitment of funds
    for the program; the Air Force awarded contracts totaling $704.9 million
    to Rockwell Intl., General Electric, and the Boeing Company for the first
    three production models of the bomber, plus procurement to make eight
    more. The contracts, however, limited government liability to a monthly
    total of $87 million through June. Air Force Secretary Thomas C. Reed
    said at a news conference that keeping the B-1 in the research state was
    unnecessary and wasteful, and that “it would be irresponsible not to
    initiate B-1 production at this time” in view of the expansion of Soviet
    strategic forces. A manned bomber, he said, was the third part of a
    triad-including land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles and mis-
    sile-bearing submarines-that would present “an insoluble problem” to
    the USSR and make it a losing proposition to attack the U.S. because of
    retaliation that would follow. The swing-wing B-1 , although only two-
    thirds the size of the B-52, could carry twice the payload, was faster in
    takeoff and flight, and carried electronic systems more difficult to jam
    than those of the B-52. Opponents claimed that $100 million apiece was
    too high a price to pay €or a bomber in the age of antiaircraft missiles,
    and suggested alternatives such as loading a commercial Boeing 747 with
    cruise missiles that could be fired while the plane was a safe distance from
    enemy defenses. (NYT, Dec 76, A18; W P o s t , 3 Dec 76, A-1)
                               3
  The Natl. Science Foundation announced that employment of academic
    scientists and engineers had increased 3% in 1976; the increase had cut
    across all major fields of study, from 1% in life sciences and engineering
    to nearly 7% in social and environmental sciences. The number of
    full-time scientists and engineers at academic institutions went from
     224 800 to 230 500, or 3%, and the number of those employed part
                                     287
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

    time went from 55 900 to 58 700 (5%).Over the period 1965 to 1976,
    there was a significant shift to teaching. Scientists and engineers em-
    ployed primarily as teachers increased 223 200 from 1975 to 1976
    (3%); those working primarily in research and development increased
    5 1 000 (2%). The number of women employed full time as scientists and
    engineers increased 5% from 1975 to 1976, a rate more than double
    that for men. (NSF Highlights, 2 Dec. 76, 1)
* A solar-powered microwave station, first of its type in commercial use, had
    been installed on the Navajo settlement of Medicine Hat, Utah, the
     Chicago Tribune announced. The microwave relay tower, working in
    the hot climate without the need for airconditioning controls, would bring
    dial telephone service to the Indian community. (C Trib, 2 Dec 76,4-9)
3 December: NASA announced that it would simulate the drop of the main
    probe of its planned 1978 Pioneer Venus mission into the Venusian
    atmosphere, by dropping the probe from an Air Force balloon at 32 km
    altitude over the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. The drop, scheduled
    for a date between 13 and 16 Dec., would be the first of two tests, a
    second being scheduled for early 1977. Flight events to be simulated just
    before the probe’s descent into the dense hot lower atmosphere of
    Venus-deployment of the probe parachute, separation of the heat-
    shield, and (after a 17-min parachute descent) separation of the
    parachute-would occur at an altitude of 16 km, where the temperature
    and density of earth’s atmosphere and the velocity of the probe would be
    much the same as those on Venus. The instrumented vessel would
    contain special equipment to monitor system performance, and movie
    cameras on the balloon platform as well as telescopic still and movie
     cameras on the ground would record the test. (NASA Release 76-192; ARC
     Release 76-84)
* NASA announced two appointments effective 19 Dec. in the Office of Gen-
    eral Counsel: Allie B. Latimer as assistant general counsel for general
    law, and Richard J. Wieland as assistant general counsel for litigation.
    Ms. Latimer, who since 1972 had been assistant general counsel for
    automated data and telecommunications for the General Services Admin-
    istration, was the first national president of Federally Employed Women
    (FEW). Wieland, who had been at JSC since 1963, was currently assistant
    Chief Counsel for general legal matters at that center. (NASA anno. 3 Dec
     76)
4 December: According to a story in the Chicago Tribune, the USSR on an
    undisclosed date had fired a submarine-launched missile farther than
    ever before. An SSN-8 missile had landed in mid-Pacific slightly more
    than 9000 km from its launching point, presumably a submarine in the
    Barents Sea. (The longest-range U.S. submarine-launched missile could
    reach just under 4700 km.) U.S. intelligence sources were reported
    unsure whether the additional range of the SSN-8 resulted from extra
     rocket power or a lighter warhead; SSN-8 had previously been identified
    as a single-warhead weapon used in the USSR’s 17 new Delta-class missile
    submarines. Commenting on the report, the New York Times said the
    Soviets’ test shot was “good news paradoxically” for the U.S. and the

                                    288
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                      December

    whole world: in contrast to large land-based intercontinental ballistic
    missiles, the submarine-based missiles were neither large enough nor
    accurate enough for effective first-strike counter-silo use, and their
    concealment and mobility would make them ideal second-strike weapons
    useful only as deterrents. As long as the USSR had no submarine-launched
    missile, there was little possibility of lowering the ceilings set in a previous
    agreement to a level that would head off a Soviet first-strike capability.
    The ceilings had allowed each side to have 2400 strategic bombers and
    missiles, of which 1320 could carry multiple warheads; if the USSR should
    agree to deploy half its multiple-warhead missiles at sea as the U.S. did,
    such an agreement could eliminate the possibility of either side’s con-
    structing a high-confidence first-strike force and would help ensure sta-
    bility of the nuclear balance for a long time. The NYT favored such an
    agreement, which would call a halt to ongoing missile programs. (C Trib,
    4 Dec 76, 2-5; NYT, 6 Dec 76, 32)
5 December: The fundamental cause of the succession of Ice Ages undergone
    by the earth had been the slight but regular changes in the shape of
    earth’s orbit around the sun, according to a team of u.S. and British
    scientists headed by Dr. James D. Hays of Columbia Univ. Analysis of
    layers of fossil microorganisms from cores of sediment taken from the
    floor of the Indian Ocean produced measurements of the earth’s climate
    over the past 450 000 yr; changes in climate appeared in alternating
    layers of warm- or cold-preferring microfossils, known as radiolaria. The
    discovery should permit prediction of the onset of the next Ice Age,
    although the cooling trend now in process should continue for about
    20 000 yr. The last great glaciation 18 000 yr ago brought ice down over
    most of Canada, northern Europe and Asia, and the northern u.s.; it was
    one of eight major Ice Ages over the past 700 000 yr. The ice retreated
    about 11 000 yr ago to its present boundaries, and the earth is now in
    a warmer period. The investigation, to be reported formally in the
     10 Dec. issue of Science magazine, was supported by a consortium of
    universities and the Natl. Science Foundation. (Nm,5 Dec 76, 4-14;
    C Trib, 5 Dec 76, 1-9)
6 December: NASA announced “an unusual agreement” with McDonnell
    Douglas Corp., under which the firm would build a solid-fuel upper-stage
    rocket as a commercial venture, to be available for use in future Space
    Shuttle missions. The firm would build and market the product using its
    own funding and initiative, at no direct cost to NASA or the U S . govern-
    ment, except when the government might be a purchaser; NASA agreed
    that it would not knowingly fund or formally solicit development of
    competitive or alternate upper-stage systems. McDonnell Douglas would
    market the stage hardware and services either directly to users, or
    through NASA; NASA would not be committed to buy any hardware or
    services from McDonnell Douglas. The Delta rocket, workhorse of NASA’s
    expendable launch-vehicle program, which had carried most of the com-
    sats and metesats now in geosynchronous orbit, .would be phased out
    along with other expendable vehicles after the Space Shuttle became
    operational. After the Shuttle had carried payloads into low earth orbit,

                                        289
December                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    the upper stage would put the payloads (weighing up to 1110 kg) into a
    transfer orbit, where a kick motor would insert them into geosynchron-
    ous orbit. (NASA Release 76-198)
@ MSFC announced that two of its employees had manufactured a precision

    quartz ball that would be used by the National Bureau of Standards as
    a density measure. John Rasquin and Jack Reed of the Materials and
    Processes Laboratory in MSFC’S Science and Engineering Directorate
    made the precision sphere, which is 90 mm in diameter and weighs
    290 g. NBS had selected quartz as the homogeneous material for its
    standard because it could be made with a high order of purity, had great
    temperature stability, and was ideal for use in an interferometer because
    of its precisely known optical properties. MSFC originally made two clear
    quartz spheres for NBS that were unsatisfactory because of their high
    transparency, as the interferometer required a highly reflective surface;
    NBS exposed the spheres to gamma radiation for 4 mo to make them
    opaque by changing their molecular structure, but the radiation induced
    minute internal stresses that altered the contour. The spheres, returned
    to MSFC, were reworked by Rasquin and Reed to NBS specifications of
     1x         deviation in radius. One of the spheres had been completed and
    the other was about 50% complete. (MSFC        Release 76-209)
7 December: The mission of the launch of Comstar B on 22 July 1976 from
    the Eastern Test Range on an Atlas-Centaur AC-40 was declared suc-
    cessful by John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator for Space Flight,
    NASA announced in a postlaunch mission operations report. The space-
    craft’s apogee motor was successfully fired 24 July 1976, injecting the
    Comstar into the desired synchronous orbit. (NASA MOR M-491 -201 -
    76-02, 1 3 Dec 76)
0 The Peoples Republic of China launched an unidentified satellite from the
    Shuang-Cheng-Tzu site into an orbit with 483-km apogee, 170-km
    perigee, 59.5’ inclination, and 91.l-min period. Aviation Wk and
    Space Technology magazine reported that mission characteristics indi-
    cated the vehicle was in the 2700- to 4500-kg class and that the launch
    vehicle was a CSS-X-3 booster. Hsinhua News Agency, whose launch
    announcement the Tass agency picked up, reported 10 Dec. that the
    satellite had returned to earth “with precision according to plan,” with
    no further details. This was PRC’S seventh satellite launch. (FBIS, Tass in
    English, 7 Dec 76; GSFC SSR, 9 Dec 76; FBIS, Peking NCNA, 10 Dec 76;
    Av Wk,13 Dec 76, 29; SBD, 1 4 Dec 76, 234)
                        Pioneer 1 1 into unexplored space above the plane of
  The flight of NASA’s
    earth’s orbit had confirmed the structure of the sun’s magnetic field for
    the first time, NASAannounced. Dr. Edward J. Smith of the Jet Propulsion
    Laboratory-magnetometer experimenter for Pioneer 1 1 -reported to
    the meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union that observations conducted
    from Feb. to Nov. 1976, while the spacecraft was four times farther from
    the sun than the earth, showed that the solar magnetic envelope had a
    simple north pole-south pole structure split into northern and southern
    portions at the magnetic equator by a “warped” sheet of electric current.
    This warped sheet had appeared to move as the sun rotated, up and down
    relative to the earth’s orbital plane. As the solar magnetic field extended
                                     290
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  December

    several billion miles over the north and south solar poles, well beyond the
    orbit of Saturn, earth spacecraft traveling in earth‘s orbital plane had
    passed through the warped electric current and detected contradictory
    motions, the field in the northern solar hemisphere being carried outward
    by the solar wind and the field in the southern hemisphere reversing back
    toward the sun. Earlier spacecraft therefore reported reversals in the
    direction of the solar magnetic field each time the current sheet was
    encountered, reports that led to a variety of interpretations. When
    Pioneer 11 had passed close to Jupiter in Dec. 1974, the gravitational
    effect had thrown the spacecraft 6 2 million km above earth’s orbital
    plane, allowing it to measure solar phenomena at a point 16’ above the
    solar equator-9 O higher than previously possible-where it discovered
    a uniform solar field, pointing away from the sun. The present solar
    model would exhibit the warped current sheet about 15 each side of the
    solar equator, accompanied by small-scale random magnetic fields of
    varying intensity and direction; the north polar region would generate a
    well-ordered magnetic field in a single direction, and the south pole a
    similar field in the opposite direction. The sola; wind would carry the
    magnetic field out until it met the interstellar gas, perhaps near the orbit
    of Pluto, where the outgoing north-polar field would link with incoming
    south-polar field to “close the magnetic loop,’’ Dr. Smith suggested.
    (NASA Release 76-199; ARC Release 76-85; NIT, 7 Dec 76, 1)
8 December: NASA announced that the proceedings of its Nov. 1976 workshop
    on space battery technology were available from GSFC, where the sessions
    had been held annually since 1968. Batteries had proved to be the major
    limiting factor in long-life space systems used for research in commu-
    nications, weather, and earth-resources detection and monitoring; cur-
    rent life expectancy for batteries was 3 to 7 yr, depending on orbital
    altitude. (Spacecraft in synchronous orbit at 35 000 km altitude derived
    power from electrochemical batteries charged by solar cells on the
    spacecraft surface; batteries on these craft, continuously in the sun
    except for two eclipse periods per year, would escape the charge-
    discharge cycling that wore out similar batteries carried on spacecraft
    circling the earth every 90 min at lower altitudes, discharging their
    power in the resultant periods of darkness.) NASA had begun the work-
    shops to exchange information between manufacturers and users for
    increasing efficiency and lifetime of the batteries, resulting in improve-
    ments by industry in batteries used for heart pacemakers, aircraft, and
    consumer goods such as portable tape recorders, radios, and flashlights.
        Gerald Halpert, CSFC chairman of the battery workshop, said the Nov.
    session had reviewed a new technique of fabricating battery plates elec-
    trochemically at temperatures of 100°C, which would reduce the num-
    ber of steps in the process and provide a more uniform product. Also
    discussed was a rechargeable nickel-hydrogen battery, a new product
    that could provide more energy per kg for larger systems, with storage
    capacities ranging from 2 5 to 100 ampere-hr. The nickel-hydrogen unit
    would be used for the first time on the Navigational Technology
    Satellite-2, part of the joint services research program for a global
    satellite system. Another topic was the special procedures developed at
                                     29 1
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

    GSFC for battery improvement that had been implemented in industry for
    quality control and evaluation of the product. (NASA     Release 76-200)
0 ESA concluded its preliminary design review of the manned orbital Spacelab
    at the premises of the prime Spacelab contractor, VFW-Fokker/ERNO in
              w.
    Bremen,         Germany. Senior representatives of ESA, NASA, and ERN0
    said the review was successful and the result exceeded expectations. The
    review cleared the way for a detailed design phase to begin development
    of the engineering model of Spacelab, due for delivery by the end of
     1978. The flight model would be delivered by the end of 1979 for a first
    ESA-NASA mission in 1980. (ESA release 9 Dec 76)
9 December: America’s Bicentennial year might be called the “Year of the
    Communications Satellites,” NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher
    told participants at the Conference on Satellite Communication and
    Public Service meeting at GSFC. Recalling that Alexander Graham Bell
    had unveiled the telephone at the Philadelphia Centennial exactly a
    century ago, Dr. Fletcher quoted an observer’s statement that, of all the
    gifts young America had received on its 100th birthday, the telephone
    proved to be the most valuable; in 1976, of NASA’s 19 launches, 13 had
    been communications satellites, which might prove the most valuable gift
    received by the US. on its 200th birthday. Comsats were in use by 107
    countries or territories on 6 continents, Dr. Fletcher said, and more than
    a billion people-one of every 4 on earth-could witness an international
    event as it happened “live by satellite.” Not only had comsats been able
    to do current jobs better and cheaper, they had also opened new possi-
    bilities for public service. Development of small inexpensive simple earth
    stations would permit sending needed information to millions of people
    without present access to it, Fletcher said; very large antennas and high
    transmitter power in space would make it possible to use receivers on
    earth “not 30 feet in diameter, or even 10 feet, but the size of your watch
    crystal,” he added. To get the larger, heavier spacecraft into orbit,
    Fletcher predicted use of the Space Shuttle, making “runs to space on
    a regular schedule, carrying people and cargo for communications,
    scientific research, earth resources inventory, materials processing, and
    other tasks.” Use of the Shuttle would reduce the cost of putting a
    satellite in orbit from more than half to less than a quarter of the total
    cost of design, construction, and launch. Fletcher called on members of
    the conference to help NASA define the public purposes to be served by
     “
       an imaginative space program” that would involve users in its develop-
    ment from the outset. (Text; NASA Release 76-202)
* The US. Navy, in the last days of the Ford Administration, had awarded
     a $159.9 million contract to Rohr Marine, Inc., for design of a new type
    of warship that would ride on an air bubble at three times the speed of
     conventional ships. The 3000-ton prototype of the “surface effect”
     ships would ride on an air bubble trapped by sidewalls and bow and stern
     seals; the high speed would result from not having to push through water
     as conventional vessels do. The Navy had experimented with a 100-ton
     test vehicle that reached speeds of more than 165 km per hr, a new Navy
     surface-speed record, in tests last June near Panama City, Fla. Although
     critics had questioned the need for a ship that speedy, the Navy had said
                                     292
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  December

    its primary roles would be antisubmarine warfare and sea-to-shore haul-
    ing of people and cargo. The Navy had also successfully fired an antiship
    missile from an experimental air-cushion vessel traveling at about
     111 kph. ( WPost, 10 Dec 76, A-2; WStar, 10 Dec 76, B-12; B Sun,
     10 Dec 76, 6)
10 December: GSFC Director Dr. Robert S. Cooper presented a Group
    Achievement Award to the AIDSAT team for “the highly successful inter-
    national demonstrations in which leaders of over twenty-five under-
    developed countries were shown the potential benefits to be derived from
    the application of satellite communications and remote earth sensing.”
    The demonstrations had taken place over a 90-day relocation period
    during which the Ats 6 was moving from its position over India to a new
    geosynchronous position over the western Pacific. The team-led by
    former CSFC engineer Paul McCeney, NASA Hq Office of Applications, as
    AIDSAT program manager;         m d e n of GSFC, as project manager; and
    John Wilhelm of the Agency for Intl. Development, as program
    coordinator-undertook to produce 27 programs for broadcast to as
    many nations over the 3-mo period. Three technical teams carried
    portable terminal equipment to three clusters of nations: A, consisting of
    Thailand, Oman, Jordan, Sudan, Mali, Cameroon, Uruguay, Ecuador,
    and Jamaica; B, consisting of Bangladesh, United Arab Emirates,
    Yemen, Libya, Upper Volta, Central African Republic, Bolivia, Surinam,
    and Costa Rica; and C, consisting of Pakistan, Kenya, Morocco, Ivory
    Coast, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Argentina, Peru, and Haiti. Goddard en-
    gineers Dave Nace, John Chitwood, and Al Whalen were managers of the
    A, B, and C clusters respectively. The high-level government officials and
    businessmen in the participating countries who took part in the programs
    included eight presidents, three prime ministers, a king, and a sultan.
    Each country received virtually the same 2.5-hr program format, which
    began with a personal taped message from US. President Ford and
    presented films on remote sensing and on earth-orbiting communications
    and meteorological satellites, ending with an hour of two-way direct video
    communications between panelists in the US. and the host country.
    Millions of viewers in the host countries watched the programs by direct
    or delayed broadcast over national TV networks, some seeing the first
    colorcasts ever received in their country. The historic experiment in
    telecommunications technology transfer fulfilled a promise to make U.S.
    technology available to developing nations, given by Secretary of State
    Henry Kissinger in May 1976 at the U.S. Conference on Trade and
    Development in Nairobi, Kenya. (Goddard News, Dec 76, 3-4)
11 December: Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty
    over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their terri-
    tory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia
    listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda,
    Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4)
12-20 December: “One of the most important ore-bearing structures in the
    world” might prove to be located in an Antarctica site known as the
    Enchanted Valley, the New York Times reported, when a US. Geological
    Survey party *ofsix-including two women-had completed their study
                                     293
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

    of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound
    station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explor-
    ers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered struc-
    ture produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar”
    to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld
    complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the
    Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the
    northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the uSCS
    group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of
    UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base,
    had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lam-
    bert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently.
        Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling
    a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation
    of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the
    Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s
    oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into
    the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries
    participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (REP) were
    Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet
    Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editori-
    ally that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems
    still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns
    from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular
    reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus.
    The REP-an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooper-
    ation” in Antarctic research-was “one of the great success stories of
    the post-1 945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be
    overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added.
    ( N M : 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
13 December: Forecasts of NASA activity in 1977 included plans to launch 19
    missions, with a possible four backup spacecraft in case of trouble with
    current missions. The 19 included eight comsats (NATO-3B; Palapa-B;
    OTS, an operational test satellite developed by ESA; Intelsat IVA-C; %io,
    an Italian experimental spacecraft; Intelsat IVA-D; FLTSATCOM, part of a
    Navy-Air Force operational near-global system for command and control
    of all DOD forces; and Japan’s CS, a comsat to be placed in synchronous
    orbit); six scientific satellites (HEAO-A, a high-energy astronomical obser-
    vatory; CEOS, an ESA mission to study geomagnetic phenomena from
    synchronous orbit; MJS-A and -B, two Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly
    by Jupiter and Saturn,*and possibly Uranus; ISEE, a two-spacecraft
    international sun-earth explorer mission developed by NASA and ESA; and
    IUE-A, the international ultraviolet explorer spacecraft also developed
    jointly by NASA and ESA); three metesats (GOES 2, to be launched for NOAA
    into synchronous orbit; GMS, a Japanese geosynchronous meteorological
    satellite; and Meteosat, ESA’S synchronous-orbit weather spacecraft,
    scheduled for 0 longitude); one navigational satellite, the Navy’s Tran-
    sit 19, with R s D modifications not common to other Transits; and one
    applications satellite, Landsat-C, third in its series of earth resources
                                     294
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    December

      technology spacecraft. The backup launches to be scheduled only if
      replacements were needed were comsats RCA-C and a spare Om, navsat
      Transit 20; and metesat ITOS E-2, on standby in case of trouble with
      Noaa 4 or Noaa 5, already in orbit. Of the 19 scheduled launches, all
      but two would be from Cape Canaveral, using 12 Delta rockets, 3
      Atlas-Centaurs, and 2 Titan 111-E-Centaurs.The other two launches, both
      from Vandenberg AFB, would use one Delta and one Scout rocket.
      MSFC forecast for 1977 that facilities for assembling and testing the
      Space Shuttle orbiter would be completed, as well as test firings of the
      Shuttle’s solid-fuel motors and main engines. (Av P~C, Dec 76, 26;
                                                                13
      KSC Release 492-76; MSFC Release 76-218)
*          permanent-personnel status as of the end of November 1976 showed
    NASA’s
      the agency as having 153 employees over its end-of-year ceiling,
      23 8 16. Center with most employees over allowed number was MSFC, with
       143; also over strength were Headquarters with 34, LaRC with 14, ARC
      with 8, and JSC with 5. However, GSFC had 20 fewer employees than
      allowable, KSC had 15 fewer, LeRC and Wallops were each 6 below ceiling,
      and NSTL and DFRC were short three and one employees respectively. The
      General Management Review Report containing these figures noted that
      efforts would be made to achieve the FY 1977 ceiling through attrition.
      (GMRR 13 Dec 76, 13)
    Radio links with the Viking landers on Mars were reestablished, ending a
      month of silent hibernation during which communications had been
      blocked by the passage of the sun between Mars and earth. Scientists at
      the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena sent a “wake-up call” to the
      robot laboratories on Mars that had been collecting a month‘s supply of
      data during the blackout period; these data, to be played back beginning
      20 Dec., would include images of the area around the two landers,
      inorganic chemical analysis, additional biology data, and any records to
      support the (thus far unsuccessful) search for marsquakes, using the
      seismometer on the Viking 2 lander.
          Resumption of activity would begin Viking’s 18-mo “extended mis-
      sion,” which would provide more images of the Mars surface and polar
      regions, as well as measurements of water vapor and temperature, some
      at twice the resolution of previous observations; process more samples of
      the surface for life-detection tests and inorganic chemical analysis; pho-
      tograph Deimos and Phobos, the moons of Mars; and monitor daily and
      seasonal weather changes, origins of planetwide dust storms, and any
      seismic activity that might occur. As Mars entered its closest approach
      to the sun in the spring of 1977, scientists would be watching for signs
      of the dust storms thought to be triggered by perihelion; when Mariner
       9 arrived at Mars in 197 1, the entire planet was engulfed in the greatest
      dust storms in the history of Mars observations and surveys from orbit
      were limited for several months. Such storms could endanger the Vikings
       on the surface of Mars, besides impeding the view from orbit. ( W Post,
       15 Dec 76, 2; NASA Release 76-208; W Star, 16 Dec 76, A-7; NYT,
       21 Dec 76, 21)
*   NASA announced that a series of aircraft flights from Alaska to Argentina
      between January and May of 1974 had provided information on the
                                       295
December                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    transport and distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere from the
    tropic seas to the higher latitudes, as well as vertically to the stratos-
    phere, important to an understanding of earth’s ozone layer and possibly
    of earth climate. Previous studies of water in the stratosphere, made
    from aircraft and balloon flights, had not provided data on latitudinal
    transport. Ernest Hilsenrath of GSFC, who reported this first mapping of
    water-vapor distribution in both northern and southern latitudes in a
    paper at the American Geophysical Union meeting 8 Dec., noted that the
    1974 flights had confirmed an increase in the amount of atmospheric
    water vapor since 1964. The experiments, flown on an Air Force RB-57,
    were managed by GSFC under contract to DOT as part of its Climatic
    Impact Assessment Program. (NASA Release 76-20 1)
* Simultaneous measurements by two polar-orbiting satellites of powerful
    electric currents causing magnetic disturbances on earth had produced
    composite diagrams of horizontal current-flow in the ionosphere, vertical
    currents along magnetic-field lines, and the resulting magnetic per-
    turbations, NOAA announced. A team of scientists representing NOAA and
    five universities had presented their findings at the annual meeting of the
    American Geophysical Union in San Francisco. Dr. Yohsuke Kamide of
    the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (spon-
    sored by NOAA and the Univ. of Colorado) said that, before the advent of
    satellites, auroras had been studied from the ground with cameras and
    magnetometers, which could detect the presence of powerful currents
    but not their location or direction. The Triad satellite launched in 1972
    by the U.S. Navy had carried a Johns Hopkins Univ. three-component
    magnetometer to measure the strength of vertical currents supplying the
    “
      auroral electrojets”; using it, together with a satellite launched by the
    USAF Defense Meteorological Satellite Program and ground-based meas-
    urements from stations in Alaska, Canada, and the USSR, the team had
    produced its composite for 30 instances of perturbation. Other members
    of the team were Herbert W. Kroehl of NOAA’S Environmental Data
    Service; Dr. Gordon Rostoker, Univ. of Alberta; Dr. Syun-ichi Akasofu,
    Univ. of Alaska; Dr. Thomas A. Potemra, Johns Hopkins Univ.; and
    Dr. Ching Meng, Univ. of Calif. at Berkeley. (NOAA Release 76-274)
14 December: NASA announced selection of three contractors to negotiate for
    provision of various subsystems for the Solar Maximum Mission space-
    craft. The SMM, scheduled for launch in the third quarter of 1979, would
    carry instruments to investigate solar flares; the spacecraft would be built
    on the modular concept, so that its instrumentation could be readily
    changed or replaced.
        Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., would negotiate to provide
    the communications and data-handling subsystem at a proposed value of
    $2.5 million, for one protoflight model with options for up to six addi-
    tional. The CsDH subsystem would provide ground and onboard control
    of all spacecraft and sensor functions, and of retrieval of housekeeping
    and experiment data.
        McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., East St. Louis, Mo., would
    negotiate to provide the power module subsystem for the SMM at a

                                      296
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                    December

      proposed value of $ 2 . 3 million, with options for up to six additional. The
      power module, an unregulated system operating from a deployable solar
      array, would provide 1280 w at the beginning of its operating life.
          General Electric Space Div., Valley Forge, Pa., would negotiate
      to provide the attitude-control subsystem at a proposed value of
      $3.5 million, with options for up to six additional subsystems. The ACS
      would include reaction-control devices as well as a high-performance
      gyro inertial-reference unit, a pair of fixed electronic-scanning star
      trackers, a three-axis magnetometer set, and sun sensors.
          The SMM spacecraft, a 381-cm-long cylinder weighing about
      1740 kg, would be powered with solar panels and fit atop a modular
      spacecraft base; it would be capable of launch on a Delta and retrieval
      by the Space Shuttle. (NASA Releases 76-203, 76-204, 76-205)
*   MSFC announced the successful launch on a Black Brant VC research rocket
      at White Sands Missile Range, N.M., of the first containerless experi-
      ments in materials processing ever attempted on a spacecraft. NASA’s
      third space-processing applications rocket, SPAR 111, carried a five-
      experiment payload, two of these using acoustic and electromagnetic
      suspension devices, or levitators. Materials suspended in a levitator could
      be melted and resolidified without touching a container, resulting in a
      degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature processing,
      as the melt in a conventional container would be contaminated to some
      extent by the container itself. The rocket flight provided about 5 min of
      near-weightlessness for performance of the experiments, which were
      recovered by parachute for ex erimenter analysis. Experimenters were
      Charles Schafer, MSFK; Jeny $ouch, GE; D . John Papazian, G~umman
                                                     r
      Aerospace Corp.; Dr. David Lind, Rockwell Intl. Science Center; and
      Dr. Donald R. Uhlmann, MIT. Conclusions as to the success of container-
      less processing would await analysis of telemetry, inflight film, and ex-
      periment results. (MSFC Releases 76-207, 76-2 12)
    The IJSSR Ministry of Higher and Specialized Secondary Education had
      announced plans to build an Institute of Nuclear Energetics at Obninsk,
      in central Russia, site of the “world’s first industrial atomic power
      station,” the Tass news agency reported. First Soviet educational institu-
      tion of this type, the new center would train engineers in design and use
      of nuclear power stations. In accordance with a new program of con-
      structing nuclear power stations, Tass said the present 6-million-kw
      capacity would be supplemented by an additional 13 to 15 million kw;
      new stations were being built at Kursk, Smolensk, Kalinin in central
      Russia, and in the southern Ukraine. The Obninsk center would be the
      860th higher education institution in the USSR, Tass noted. (FBIS, Tass in
      English, 14 Dec 76)
    Dr. Donald H. Menzel, one of the world’s leading authorities on the sun and
0
      its corona, died at Mass. General Hospital after a long illness. During his
      lifetime, he had viewed 15 total solar eclipses, leading expeditions to
      distant places like the Sahara (1973) and Siberia (1936), where the
      Soviets provided a parlor car of the Trans Siberian Railroad for his
      equipment and camping gear. Dr. Menzel had taught for nearly 40 yr at

                                       297
December                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

    Harvard; Dr. Fred L. Whipple of Harvard, a colleague and former
    student of Dr. Menzel, noted that many of the best-known astronomers
    in the U.S. had also been taught by Dr. Menzel. The Minor Planet Center
    of the Intl. Astronomical Union recently named an asteroid Menzel in
    recognition of his contribution to astrophysics. In 1938, Dr. Menzel
    developed the first coronagraph in the U.S. to permit study of the sun’s
    corona without an eclipse; in 1933, he had collaborated with J C Boyce
                                                                     ..
    in establishing the presence of oxygen in the solar corona, and in 1941
    he had worked with Winfield W. Salisbury on the initial calculations that
    enabled the first radio contact with the moon in 1946. He had received
    a Ph.D. in astrophysics at Princeton in 1924, writing science-fiction
    stories to help pay his expenses, and had taught at the Univ. of Iowa and
    Ohio State Univ. before becoming professor of astrophysics at Harvard
     in 1939. He was director of the Harvard College Observatory from 1954
     to 1966, when he was named research scientist at the Smithsonian
     Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge. He had retired from the univer-
     sity in 1971, but had continued to do research there. ( N U , 16 Dec 76,
     50)
15 December: The “hotline” between Washington, D.C. and Moscow had
     changed into a Direct Communications Link using two independent sets
    of orbiting satellites, and eliminating any actual wire between the two
     capitals, the Christian Science Monitor reported. A spokesman for the
     Army Communications Command at Ft. Huachuca, Ariz., where the U.S.
     portion of system was designed and built, said it could be put into use
     whenever diplomats from both countries made the final arrangements.
     The $15-million system would be located at Ft. Detrick, Md., near
     Washington, the spokesman said. (CSM, 15 Dec 76)
0 Ithaco Inc. of Ithaca, N.Y., a space-industry subcontractor specializing in
     low-orbital unmanned-satellite electronics, had discovered a lucrative
     and largely untapped agricultural market by turning its expertise on
     animal electronics: specifically, a new device first marketed 19 mo ago
     to help farmers determine whether their pigs were pregnant and to
     preview the quality of porkchops the hogs would produce. The device
     would let farmers determine pig-pregnancy status 50 to 60 days earlier
     than previously possible, meaning substantial savings for breeders, com-
     pany officials said, adding that the market would not be attractive to a
     large company. Overseas farmers accounted for up to 40% of “Scan-
     oprobe” sales, which totaled $3.8 million for the 1976 fiscal year, best
     in the firm’s 14-yr history. Ithaco would not abandon its space contracts,
     the company said, but employees who worked on intricate satellite parts
     could be switched over to the “animal electronics” contracts. (NW,
      1 5 Dec 76, A 16)
16 December: NASA announced that it would modify equipment and facilities
     used in the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz programs for use in future
     space programs, and that it would dispose of remaining Saturn-Apollo
     hardware that had no future application. Disposal would eliminate stor-
     age costs, free storage space, and make facilities available for ongoing
     programs, the agency said. The action marked the transition of U.S.

                                     298
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                 December

   manned space activity from use of expendable vehicles to use of the
   reusable Space Shuttle, scheduled to undertake its first mission within
    3 yr. Although NASA, at the request of Congress, had kept its remaining
   Saturn-Apollo flight hardware since April 1975 in minimum-cost storage,
    to be able to restore it to flight condition if needed, the backup Skylab
   workshop and Apollo-Soyuz backup docking module had been trans-
    ferred to the National Air and Space Museum; twenty-two H-1 rocket
    engines from Saturn stages had been transferred for use in Thor-Delta
   vehicles. Much of the remaining Saturn-Apollo hardware would probably
   be turned over to the Smithsonian Institution, and other equipment would
   be screened for use in the Shuttle or other programs. (NASA Release
    76-206)
 NASA announced award to Owen Enterprises, Inc., of wilmington, Calif., of
    an exclusive patent license for production of a solar-energy concentrator
    invented by JPL’S Dr. Katsunori Shimada that focuses the sun’s rays from
    almost any angle without the need for a tracking mechanism. The
    concentrator-a special arrangement of multifaceted Fresnel lenses-
    magnifies solar energy tenfold, heating a fluid in channels beneath the
    lenses, which is released through a thermostat when the proper tempera-
    ture is attained. A series of the devices could be set up, depending on the
    specific energy requirements of a structure. Suitable for residential,
    commercial, or industrial applications, the concentrator had proved
    much more efficient than other solar-collector units on the market. Owen
    Enterprises, Inc., the licensee, is an American Indian-owned firm that
    planned to assemble the device at facilities on the Rincon Indian Reser-
    vation near Escondido, Calif. The firm would invest $200 000 to develop
    the concentrator for the market, and pay 1% royalty to the US. Treasury
    on its gross sales. (NASA Release 76-209)
  At the request of the Soviet Union, U.S. satellites took pictures of the
    predicted bumper crop of grain in the USSR and turned the pictures over
    to that country to confirm the predictions, said presidential science
    adviser Dr. H. Guyford Stever at a White House briefing. The Russians
    had announced 5 Nov. that more than 220 million metric tons of grain
    had been harvested; US. Dept. of Agriculture officials said the
    final figures would probably exceed 1973’s record Soviet harvest of
     222.5 million tons. (NYT, 17 Dec 76, A-4)
16-22 December: The USSR announced its intention of launching carrier
     rockets into two areas of the northern Pacific between 20 and 30 Dec.,
    and requested the governments of other countries using sea and air
    routes in the vicinity not to permit their ships and planes to enter those
    areas during the launching period. At the same time the Soviets declared
    other areas free for navigation because the launchings in those areas had
    been completed. The Tass broadcast gave the locations of the dan er
    spots as having center coordinates of 46’N, 164’E, and 32’27 F           N,
     170’10’E. The nature of the launches was not specified. On 22 Dec.
    Tass announced it had been authorized to state the locations were “free
     for sea and air navigation from December 22, 1976.” (FBIS, Tass in
     English, 16 Dec 76, 22 Dec 76)

                                    299
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

17 December: Dr. Michael Duke, curator of lunar samples at NASA’s Johnson
    Space Center, returned from Moscow with two half-gram samples of
    moon soil brought to earth in Aug. 1976 by the USSR’s Luna 24 space-
    craft. The samples were part of a 2-meter-long core of lunar material
    obtained by a hollow drill from the surface of Mare Crisium, a region of
    the moon from which the U.S. had not had any samples. This was the third
    time US. scientists had obtained a Soviet sample in exchange for material
    collected by Apollo astronauts from other places on the moon. Other
    members of the U.S. scientific delegation to Moscow this week were
    Dr. Charles Simonds, Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., and
    Prof. Gerald J. Wasserburg of the Calif. Institute of Technology. The
    small size of the sample would not detract from its usefulness, according
    to Dr. Bevan French, chief of NASA’s     program of research on extrater-
    restrial materials; methods routinely used for extracting information
    from samples of meteorite or deep-sea basalt could produce hundreds of
    chemical analyses from a single tiny crystal or determine the age of a
    fragment smaller than an aspirin tablet. (JSC Release 76-75)
0 NASA announced selection of United Space Boosters, Inc., Sunnyvale,
    Calif., as assembly contractor for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster
    rocket. USBI, a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technologies Corp.,
    received a cost-plus-award fee contract for $122 million, to cover six
    design, development, and test and evaluation flights up to March 1980,
    with options for 21 operational flights extending into 1982. The contract
    would cover all booster assembly activities at MSFC and KSC; MSFC would
    supervise assembly, checkout, and refurbishment of the boosters, and
    KSC would supervise final assembly, checkout, launch operations, and
    postlaunch disassembly of the boosters. First of six orbital test flights had
    been scheduled for the second quarter of 1979, with operational flights
    to begin in 1980. At launch, the three main engines and two boosters of
    the Space Shuttle would operate together; upon burnout at about 4 3 km
    altitude, the boosters would separate and descend by parachute to the
    ocean for retrieval and refurbishment. The boosters were designed for
    use 20 times. (NASA Release 76-212; MSFC Release 76-215; WsJ,
    21 Dec 76, 11)
0 The Concorde supersonic airliner, making regularly scheduled flights be-
    tween London, Paris, and the Dulles airport outside Washington, D.C.
    since 24 May, had been lending its distinctive sonic waves to atmospheric
    research by Columbia Univ. monitors, the New York Times reported.
    Dr. William L. Donn, senior research associate at Columbia’s Lamont-
    Doherty Geological Observatory, and his colleagues Nambath Balachan-
    dran and David Rind had derived surprising data on daily variations in
    the supposed prevailing winds in the upper atmosphere, and were antic-
    ipating new data on dispersal of atmospheric pollutants and the content
    of the rarefied reaches of earth’s atmosphere. The sound waves, inau-
    dible to the human ear but detectable by sensitive microphones register-
    ing changes in air pressure;contained atmospheric information up to as
    far as 120-km altitude, through reflection from the thermosphere. Pre-
    cise knowledge of the Concorde’s elevation and location along its flight

                                      300
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   December

    path had aided in interpreting data on atmospheric temperatures and
    wind conditions depending on the exact strength and path of the sound
    waves, Dr. Donn said. (NU, 17 Dec 76, A-18)
  A British Aircraft Corp. team had successfully launched the second of a
    series of Skylark 12 high-altitude research rockets from the Andoya
    Range in arctic Norway to investigate auroral activity for the U.K.
    Science Research Council and other groups investigating the intense
    phenomena above the Arctic Circle, the London Press Assn. reported in
    a broadcast. The rocket reached an altitude of more than 680 km,
    sending scientific data to ground receivers for 1 4 min of the flight. First
    launch of the new three-stage Skylark, capable of carrying payloads to
    three times the altitude of earlier versions, took place 21 Nov. (FBIS,
    London Press Assn., 17 Dec 76)
18 December: Astronaut-pilots in training for the Space Shuttle program had
    used a simulated shuttle-a Grumman Gulfstream 2 twin-engine jet-
    in approach-and-landing maneuvers over the southern New Mexico
    desert at White Sands Missile Range, the New York Times reported.
    Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, JSC director, who recently watched the training
    at White Sands, said that the latter installation might eventually become
    a space port for launch and recovery of the shuttle. The pilots were to
    test an actual space shuttle-the Enterprise, unveiled this fall by Rock-
    well Int1.-some time next year; the first vertical launch of the shuttle
    had been scheduled for 1977 from KSC at Cape Canaveral, Fla. ( N U ,
     19 Dec 76, 41)
19 December: Three satellites making simultaneous investigations of earth’s
    magnetic field had confirmed that long low-frequency waves spreading
    the disruptive effects of magnetic storms on earth had been generated far
    out i space by energetic particles from the sun, NOAA announced.
          n
    Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in
    San Francisco, Calif., earlier in Dec., Dr. Joseph N. Barfield of NOAA, R.L.
    McPherron of UCLA, and W.J. Hughes of London’s Imperial College
    reported the waves might have practical uses in exploring for oil and
    minerals, and in aiding undersea communication with submarines, which
    now had to surface to make contact. Environmental satellites Sms 1 and
    Sms 2, with research satellite Ats 6, in geosynchronous orbit on a line
    along the earth’s equator, had carried magnetometers used to detect the
    low-frequency waves passing each satellite in a predicted order, the first
    use of multiple spacecraft to make such measurements simultaneously.
    Confirmation of the theory also identified the point of origin as the
    magnetosphere and the existence of a “resonance region” that amplified
    the wave frequency. The region was described as about 1200 km thick.
    (NOAA Release 76-281)
20 December: MSFC announced opening of a new solar heating and cooling
    test facility, part of a nationwide demonstration program conducted by
    ERDA, to evaluate solar-powered systems and components and determine
    their efficiency and suitability for residential and commercial applica-
    tions. Systems tested would mainly be those built by commercial manu-
    facturers, but would include experimental systems provided by ERDA and

                                     30 1
December                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976

     NASA. The facility occupied an area formerly used for testing in the
    Saturn program, and data-acquisition equipment used in that program
    would be used in the new facility to collect and store information on the
    effectiveness of the units under test. The site could accommodate 5 11 m2
    of solar collectors at one time. The facility could test air and liquid
    units for airconditioning (up to 10 tons) or heating (systems up to
    500 000 Btu); it included a test bed for evaluating efficiency of tanks to
    store heat collected by the systems for use when there was no sunlight.
    Systems meeting the criteria for operation, maintenance, and perform-
    ance would be installed in buildings throughout the country for trial use.
    (NASA Release 76-21 1 )
21 December: The Dept. of Defense had reported McDonnell Douglas as the
    largest U.S. defense contractor for the year ended 30 June, replacing
    Lockheed Aircraft Co., the Wull Street Journal announced. The leader,
    which had been fourth on the list in FY 1975, had obtained contracts
    valued at $2.46 billion (5.9% of all defense contracts of more than
    $10 000 awarded during FY 1976). Lockheed, which had been the
    leader for 6 of the previous 7 yr, received contracts in FY 1976 valued
    at $1.51 billion (3.6% of the total). Third was Northrop Corp. with
    $1.48 billion (3.5%); fourth was General Electric Co., $1.35 billion
    (3.2%). Others of the ten largest were United Technologies Corp.,
    $1.23 billion (2.9%); Boeing Co., $1.18 billion (2.8%); General Dynam-
    ics Corp., $1.07 billion (2.6%); Grumman Corp., $982 million (2.3%);
    Litton Industries, Inc., $978 million (2.3%); and Rockwell Intl. Corp.,
    $966 million (2.3%). (E' ], 21 Dec 76, 11; W D Release 585-76)
                               S
* The Natl. Science Foundation announced that U.S. and Canadian astrono-
    mers had succeeded in using telescopes more than 800 km apart, linked
     by satellite, to simulate a telescope nearly as large as the earth. A radio
    telescope at the Natl. Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank,
    W. Va., had been linked through a joint U.S.-Canadian satellite to a radio
    telescope at the Algonquin Radio Observatory in Ontario, allowing the
     observers to review the results while the observations were in process.
     The technique would permit astronomers to measure the size and shape
     of a distant galaxy or quasar with a precision better than 1/ 1000 arcsec,
     equivalent to measuring the size and shape of a penny more than
     4000 km distant. The sateIlite would transmit information at a rate
     equivalent to 10 000 simultaneous telephone calls; the large data rate
     would increase the sensitivity of measurements, allowing the study of
     very faint objects in space. Besides the principal investigator, Dr. George
     W. Swenson, Jr. of the Univ. of Ill., the team included S.H. Knowles and
     W.B. walton of NRL; N.W. Broten and D.N. Fort of Canada's Natl. Re-
     search Council; K.I. Kellermann and Benno Rayhrer of NWO; and
     J.L. Yen of the Univ. of Toronto. (NSF Release PR76-106)
* E% announced that its council meeting in Paris 16 and 17 Dec. had
    approved a new program, Earthnet, in which ESA would centralize and
    coordinate European activities in reception, processing, distribution, and
    archiving of earth-resources satellite data. Earthnet would give Euro-
    pean users access to data from NASA programs such as Landsat, Seasat,

                                     302
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                   December

    Nimbus-G, and the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission, to provide a basis
    for defining European requirements for future remote-sensing satellite
    programs. Earthnet would be integrated into existing data-reception and
    processing facilities at Fucino, Italy, and would use ESA’S computerized
    data center at Frascati, Italy, with an information-retrieval network
    RECON to disseminate information on the data available. ( E A release
    21 Dec 76)
22 December: Rockwell International-prime contractor for NASA’sSpace
    Shuttle-announced that it had purchased more than $18 million of
    goods and services from minority businesses throughout the U.S. in 1976,
    a 58% increase over 1975. Rockwell had been cited by the Black
    Businessmen’s Assn. of Los Angeles for its participation in “Black Eco-
    nomic Development,’’ and by the Natl. Assn. of Black Manufacturers for
    its contributions to industry development. Kenneth B. Gay, Rockwell
    vice president for purchasing, said that “qualified minority businesses in
    t1ie more technical areas” had been hard to find in the past, but there
    were “many highly skilled, competent small companies competing ag-
    gressively for our business” at present. The more than 500 minority
    firms supplying Rockwell received about $5 million for machining and
    specialty fabrication; more than $2 million for metal structures; another
    $2 million each for raw materials and supplies and for technical services;
    and more than $1 million each for electrical equipment and for mainte-
    nance and repair services. (Rockwell Release R-46)
* An unmanned Soviet spacecraft that returned to the earth 17 Dec. in Soviet
    Asia after 18 days in orbit might have been the test vehicle of a new
    Soyuz designed to carry three cosmonauts into space, instead of the two
    that have flown on the 13 Soyuz missions during the past 5 yr. Thomas
    O’Toole, reporting in the Washington Post, pointed out that the Cosmos
    869 had flown the same pattern followed by all Soviet manned space
    flights, and noted that the USSR had long followed the practice of dis-
    guising unmanned test flights of Soyuz spacecraft by using the gener-
    alized Cosmos designation. At least four unmanned Soyuz vehicles had
    flown under the name of Cosmos during the past 4 yr, the article said.
    The USSR had not attempted a three-man flight since 1971, when the
    three crewmen of Soyuz 11 suffocated on their return to earth; the crew
    could have survived had they worn space suits, but the vehicle being used
    had no room for three men in space suits. Officials said then that the
    spacecraft would be modified to accommodate three-member crews in
    space suits, and Western observers predicted that the Inter-Soyuz flights
    scheduled to begin in 1978 with Russians and non-Russians together
    would use three cosmonauts again. ( W Post, 22 Dec 76, A-2)
23 December: Aircraft overflights by Wallops Flight Center, coordinated by
    L R C at the request of NOAA, were helping the U.S. Coast Guard track an
    oil slick from a tanker grounded off Nantucket Island, NASA announced.
    Flights on 19 and 22 Dee. had obtained data from the ocean around the
    tanker to use in calculating the slick’s trajectory; another flight had been
    scheduled for 24 Dec. Imagery from Landsat 2 was providing synoptic
    views of the spill area. NOAA would use the information to set up analytical

                                      303
                          ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

    models for determining potential environmental damage associated with
    offshore oil and gas production on the continental shelf. Brookhaven
    Natl. Laboratory, ERDA, had also requested the data for use in environ-
    mental studies. (WFC Release 76- 17)
0 The U.S. Army awarded a contract to Sikorsky Aircraft, Stratford, Conn.,
    for a new generation of combat assault helicopters-single-rotor craft
    driven by jet turbine engines, capable of carrying a three-man crew plus
    1 1 heavily armed soldiers-in a decision that would bring a total of
    $3.4 billion including development and other costs to the depressed area
    economy over the next 10 yr, the New York Times reported. State
    officials said the contract could produce up to 17 000 new jobs and called
    it “the perfect Christmas present.” Sikorsky officials said the contract
    would bring it $2 billion directly and $1.4 billion more to subcontractors
    in 35 states. Also competing for the contract was the Vertol division of
    Boeing Corp., in Morton, Pa. ( N U , 24 Dec 76, A-1)
24 December: The first group of future cosmonauts from socialist countries
    had been welcomed at the USSR training center named for Yuri Gagarin,
    Maj. Gen. Georgy Beregovoy, director of the center, told a correspond-
    ent for the Tass news agency. The joint flights with Soviet cosmonauts
    would include representatives from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and the
    German Democratic Republic (the first three groups to arrive), Bulgaria,
    Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania, and the joint flights were
    scheduled for 1978 to 1983. Beregovoy said the socialist countries had
    been cooperating for the past decade on the Intercosmos program,
    launching satellites and meteorological rockets and more than 20 experi-
    ments in various branches of science. He also mentioned the Apollo-
    Soyuz flight as a successful example of international cooperation in
    space. (FBIS, Tass in English, 24 Dec 76)
30 December: The Dept. of Transportation announced that the Federal
    Aviation Administration had awarded a $125 363 contract to York
    Univ., Ontario, Canada, for a program to measure ozone and the oxides
    of nitrogen present in all aircraft-engine emissions in the stratosphere.
    The program, to begin in the spring of 1977 in cooperation with NOAA’S
    Aeronomy Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., would use detection instruments
    lifted by balloons to an altitude of more than 35 km for the first simulta-
    neous measurement of three types of nitrogen oxides and ozone; deter-
    mining the high-altitude level of nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and
    dinitrogen pentoxide would be an important step in finding the role of
    these oxides in maintaining the ozone balance. The contract would sup-
    port the High Altitude Pollution Program, started in 1975 as part of
    DOT’S Climatic Impact Assessment Program; York Univ., which par-
    ticipated in CIAP, had in 1972 provided the first data on the stratospheric
    density of nitric oxide under the direction of Prof. Harold Schiff, a
    pioneer in the field. (DOT Release 76-122)
31 December: Clocks around the world would be set back one second this New
    Year’s Eve, because the earth‘s spin was that much longer in 1976 than
    it was last year. The backward move would be the sixth in the last 5 yr
    because of a slowing in the earth’s spin, the Washington Post explained;

                                     304
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976                                  December

    the changes were made twice in 1972 and once in each of the last 4 yr,
    each time on New‘ Year’s Eve. The standard U.S. timepiece (at the Natl.
    Bureau of Standards Laboratory at Boulder, Colo.) would be reset at
    midnight GMT (7 pm in Washington, D.C.), and similar atomic clocks
    would be reset at the same moment in more than 80 countries including
    the Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China. The earth‘s spin had
    been slowing for at least 250 yr, when it was first noticed, except for a
    10-yr period before 1900 when the rotation speeded up by 25 sec. In
    1878, Simon Newcomb, then chief astronomer at the Naval Obser-
    vatory, first systematically observed a fluctuation in the rate of rotation,
    which still is verified by 80 observatories around the world who send their
    findings to the Intl. Time Bureau in Paris, established in 1972 (the year
    the clocks lost 2 sec). Scientists attributed the slowdown to the moon’s
    pull on the tides, braking the motion of the earth‘s mantle. (W Post,
    31 Dec 76, A2)
During December: The Air Force Systems Command announced that former
    astronaut Maj. Gen. Michael Collins had been appointed mobilization
    assistant to the AFSC commander. The position was the top Air Force
    Reserve post in A F X . Collins, who was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as
    a reserve major general 10 Mar. 1976, would continue to serve as
    director of the National Air and Space Museum. (AFSC Newsreview,
    Dec 7 6 , 10)
0 Images from Landsat had reinforced the theory that mankind had created
    his own deserts through overgrazing of livestock, according to Joseph
    Otterman, a Landsat data user at Tel Aviv University. Satellite and other
    data had shown that overgrazed land on one side of the fence along the
    Israel- Egypt armistice line consistently measured several degrees cooler
    than the other side; the denuded land, reflecting more sunshine, retained
    less heat than vegetated land. The warmer land heated the overlying air,
    causing it to rise, form clouds, and rain; lack of this “heat mountain”
    effect over the denuded land encouraged formation of deserts. (CSM,
     15 Dee 76)
  Further press comment on Soviet “hunter-killer” satellites appeared in the
     Chicago Tribune, Washington Post, and New York Times, prompted
    by reports of the piggyback launch of Cosmos 881 and 882 on 15 Dec.
    Columnist Nicholas von Hoffman noted Pentagon denials that the USSR
    had used laser beams to destroy an American satellite and claims that the
    Soviets had been practicing knockouts only on their own targets; but the
    physical safety of the u.S. was “more in jeopardy now than ever,” he
    concluded, adding that “of course, we’ll put our money into aggressive
    basic research efforts to stop the Russian hunter-killer satellites.”
    Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post described the launch and
    recovery of two Soviet satellites said by intelligence experts to be larger,
    newer versions of the hunter-killer craft, flown into orbit and back to base
    after circling the earth once, a move the experts said was to prevent
    China’s tracking the craft by radar. O’Toole said the Soviets were
    believed to have carried out 16 experiments in the past 9 yr in which
    unmanned spacecraft followed target satellites into space and blew them-

                                     305
                           ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
December

      selves up to remove the targets from orbit; these tests stopped in 197 1,
      but resumed in Feb. 1976 after the launches of China 5 and China 6.
      The two Soviet spacecraft followed an unusual flight path, similar to
      those taken by manned Soyuz satellites, and were also unusual in re-
      turning to earth after so brief a flight. The New York Times reported the
      launch on 27 Dec. of Cosmos 886, which “apparently attempted to
      intercept” Cosmos 880, launched 9 Dec. “The hunter satellite never
      came closer than one mile to its target . . . and finally disintegrated on
      its third orbit,” the NYTnoted, adding that Cosmos 880 was still in orbit.
      The NYT story went on to describe the Cosmos 881 and 882 launch, “at
      first thought to have been such a test,” as actually connected with the
      manned space program. No effort had been made to interfere with US.
      space vehicles, and the 27 Dec. launch-the USSR’s fourth test of a
      satellite interceptor this year-had been classified as a failure by intel-
      ligence sources, the NYTsaid. (C Trib, 4 Dec 76, 1-7; W P o s t , 18 Dec
      76, A-1; NYT, 31 Dec 76, A6)
*   “One of the environmental disasters of the century” was the appearance
      of water hyacinth in the Sudan’s Nile river basin, reported an inter-
      national conference of scientists representing the u.s., the Democratic
      Republic of the Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Ger-
      many, Indonesia, and Mozambique, after a meeting sponsored by the
      Natl. Academy of Science’s Board on Science and Technology for Inter-
      national Development, and by the Sudan Agricultural Research Council.
      Besides choking watercourses and interfering with fishing and naviga-
      tion, water hyacinth flourishing in warm river waters around the world
      had proved to harbor carriers of bilharzia and malaria. Measures sug-
      gested for control included herbicides, biological intervention, exchange
      of information and trade restrictions, and stimulation of economic incen-
      tive to harvest the plants. The report cited a NASA discovery that water
      hyacinth was a possible source of biogas production, and recommended
      harvesting to exploit this resource as well as using the plant for water-
      buffalo fodder. (NAS News Report, Dec 76, 2)




                                      306
                         Appendix A


     SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND
       MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1976
   World space activity increased only slightly in 1976; total launches,
128, increased from 125 in 1975. Of this total, the U.S. had 26 plus one
space probe, described in the introduction to Appendix B. The USSR had
99 launches with 121 payloads, 79 of these in the Cosmos series; the 101
Cosmos payloads included such specialized spacecraft as 8 navigation
satellites (Cosmos 789, 800, 823, 842, 846, 864, 883, and 887), and
the ocean-reconnaissance satellites Cosmos 860 and 861 working as a
team. The Soviets also launched 7 spacecraft in the Molniya comsat
series, 3 in the Meteor series, 2 Intercosmos spacecraft carrying experi-
ments from other countries, a moon probe (Luna 2 4 ) that returned a
surface sample to earth, the magnetospheric investigator Prognoz 5, 2
additional geostationary domestic color-TV satellites (Statsionar 1B and
1C), and 3 manned Soyuz spacecraft, as well as another orbiting space
station (Salyut 5).
   The number and variety of launches by other countries decreased
sharply to a total of 3 . In Feb., Japan launched Ume, an ionosphere-
sounding satellite, using its N rocket for the second time. The Peoples
Republic of China in Aug. launched its sixth satellite, still in orbit; in
Dec., it launched China 7, which reentered in Jan. 77.
   Sources of these data include the United Nations Public Registry of
Space Flights; the Satellite Situation Report compiled by Goddard
Space Flight Center’s Operations Control Center; and press releases of
NASA, Department of Defense, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration, and other government agencies, as well as the Commu-
nications Satellite Corporation. Soviet data derive from statements in the
Soviet press, translations from the Tass news agency, international news-
service reports, and announcements and briefings by Soviet officials.
Data on satellites of other nations also come from the announcements of
their respective governments and international news services.




                                   307
                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                      i
                      0
                      N




             >
             f

                      L?
                      o\
                      m


                      0
                      N
                      4




             n        W                  N
                                         0
                                         N
                      m
                      m
             n


                           W
                 .B        e
                           3
                 W
                 0
                 a
                 .-
                           %.
                           +
                           W
                 %.
                           B
                 W
                 B         c
                 c
                               Appendix A
A




          4    9
     0:
     10
     N         t(
               -
               d
          r-



               09
          2
     d:
     m         d
          m
     m
     10        3
               A




          m               r-
               3
     10                   e
               0
     10
     d    m
          0
               2          2



                          -
          m               N
               m
               co
     r-
     m                    9
     N    m
          d    d
               3

     2




d
c1

R

                    309
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                                        9
             2          9
                                        r-
                        r-              -
                                        ?
                        d
             r-




             ?
             m




                                  co
             m
             \o                   r-
                                  dl
             3



                                  -
                                  4

                                  m
                                  I
                                  n




                             W
                  W
                  m          I
                             B
                  B
                             L.
                  L.
                             1
                  1
                             a
                  0
                  c          c.




                       310
                                           Appendix A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




x       s
m       N
        2

N
        2
0
N       N
        m
        ln




                       W               m
                                  W
m                                 r-
m                      4          N
        m
0                                      m
        0
                       2
        m
        v,




        -d
        m
        0




                           31 1
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                             -
                   f         E.:
                   0
                   N         rD




                   -         x
                   d
                   m         m
                   2

                             d
                   m         t-
                   0
                   t-
                             4

                   ro
                   m



                             m
                   r-        m
                             W
                   \o
                   00

                   ro
                   m




                    312
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976     Appendix A


        J
       3               g
                       .-
                       *I
                       :
                       :
                       8
                       I
2
m
N




                                       x
                       1          1
                4
        cq      m      m          ro
                       N          N    N
        e
        10
         4




        :
x                      4
                                       4
                4

                0;     v3
                       m
                0                      N
        m
W                                      m
                       2
                1
        r-                             I-



                       m
                m                      m
                                  W
r-
                                       2
                k2     -r         r-
                       P-         10
r-
e
                       m          m    2
                       m          m



                       N
                0
        E                         10
                F-
m
-r                                W
                                  0
                       m
                2
m       0
                       m          I
                                  n
                       m          m
        dl
        0




                            313
Appendix A                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                                l
                                .

                                2
                                0
                                m
                                0
                                e
                                c
                                I
                                P

         ":
                                2
                      c?
                      d
         N
         I
         n            m         u3




                      z                     :
         2                                       2
                                2                m
                                m
                      01
         2                                  u3
                                            QI
         t-



                                                 m
                      I
         N                      N
                                            2
                                            -+   2
                                0
         \o                     N
         kn           0
                      u3

         -
         I
         n
         4




         *
         0            N
                                r-          m    N
         01                                      I
                                                 n
                      m                     m
                                01
                                N
                                                 m
                      u3
         2                                  m
                                            m
         I




              -                      .6
                           .-
                            i
                            :
              ¶   .




                                z
                      l
                      .                     l
                                            .    l.     l
                                                        .
                                l
                                .

                                                        3
                      2                          3
                                            2    cy
                                            2
                                2
                      2                                 u3
                                                        cy
                                                 cy




                                      314
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976         Appendix A




                           c
                           $          F
                                      t
                                      i
                           -
                           .-
                            C         c

                                      P
                           .-
                                      cc
                           SI


                                 -             2
                                      1
                           c?    1
           2          9
1
                      *
0                          4
                                      \o
                      r-              v)
           r-                                 0
                           W     W




                                      x
                           x     2
                      N
2          a
           !
                      m
                      In              m
           W
           QI
m                          2     W
2

           zr
*                                m
                      r-
           s
N                     0
                                 N
                                 0
\o                         W
                           -
                           3
                      m
m
10



           v)
N
           m
W
m
m

                 t:
                .-
                e,
                rp
                0

                P




     <
     @4
     QI




L.                                    L.       L.

2                                     d"       I
                                      -
                      L          L.

                                 d"
                      2               m        N
                                               N
N
10                               -3
                      10



                           315
Appendix A   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                    316
                                          Appendix A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                               ..
                               3
                                0
                               .-
                                E
                    5;
                    3
                    2

                               c
                               t:
                               h


                                              9
                                     3

                                     0        4
                                              a




                                              x
                    2          9     D?
                               .3
                                I    W
                    a                         2
                                     N
                                     e
                               r-    4




                                              dl
                    N                OI
                    r-                        e
                                     I
                                     N
                                     D        W
                    4


                                     W
                                     M




m       e           N                0        W
                                     N
                               4
                                              m
W                   W
                    N          t-
                               W
        m                            a
4
        I
        n
4
                                     I
                                     n
                               52    W




                                x     h
        x
                                5    3
                     h


                                -
                    3
        2                            m
                                N
        e           m                M




                         317
Appendix A              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                                                            cd
         G
         c                                                  r-

                                                            d
                   8
         d                                                  4
                   CI
                                                            m
         r-
         -0

         5
         I
         d

                            -
                            4                p:
         4
         d
                                             5
                                             0
                            m
         r-



                                                  ?
         4

         cj                                       m
         5




                                                  m
         0                                                  0,
                                                            r-
         r-
         N                                        0
                                                  N         N




                            4                     c1
                                                   \
                                                            OI
         5
                                                            r-
         r-                                                 0
                                                  d
         d(                 01
                            Cr)                   m




                                   6
                                  .-
              .5                                       .%
              W                   0                    W
                                                       0
                                  m
              5
                                                       e
              P                   P
              L.                  L                    .I
                                                       0
              c                   c
                                                        z
                                  B
              0
                                  c                    *-




                   x                         x               x
          h                  h                    h

                   5        2                2
         3                                        2"        2
         OD                 H
                                             N
                   0
                   N                                        El
                                                            OD
                            N
         d




                                       318
 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976         Appendix A




        3
        c




.-
 C




        z
x                      Lo
                       0
                       01
        m
\o




               -?
               03
               Q\




                                              cu
N                                     v)
                       03                     m
                       r-
4
                       00             m
                                      Q\
m
                                               2
                                      ..
                                      -I
                       m
                       v)




                                      m        ro
                                      r-       d
                                               v)
                                      f




                       -
               -       t              8
               P                      L-.

                       %
               W



                            319
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                                    s
                          s
             3   9
                 d
                 t-                 t-
                          t-
             l
             -




                                    2
                          4

                          uj
                                    4
                          4




             m                      m
                          4
                 m                  \o
                          In
             d
                                    dl
                          -e
                 2
             2                      4
                          4




                                               -
                                    m          r-
                                    m
                          4
                 m
             m   0
             0            m                    0
                                               m
                                    2
                          2
             2   2

                                                    .6
                                         .6
                               .6
                                                    W
                                         W
                               V
                               W
                                                    5
                                         5
                                                    P
                                         P
                               P
                               .-                   5
                                         k
                               k
                                         4.4

                                                    B
                               B         0




                         320
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976        Appendix A




       f
       c)

       m
       N




4                                    f
                                             2
                                     ,I
                                     -
                                     m
E-                                           N




       ".
                                     2       2
       01                      m
                               0;
       m                             m       m
                                             \o




                        m      m
m      c-
N      E-                      M
                        oa
                        d
2                              N
       d




                               +
       Ln
M                                    4
                                             +
                                             0
                                     m
       1
m                              dl
                               N
N                                            00
       m                             N
                                             m
                                             m
                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A



                  L

                  f
                  .5

                  .-
                  =:
                  I

                  .-
                  I
                  1
                  E
                  8
                  3
                  W



                  e
                  a

                  4

                  4
                  r-




                                       x    2
                  9
                  0                         W
                                       OI
                  2

                                            m
                                       *
                                       QI
                  o\                        d
                                            N
                                       cy
                  W
                  t-




                  r-                        d
                                       N
                                            r-
                                            N
                                       d
                  4
                  W




                       .%
                       W
                       m
                       P
                       Li
                       c
                       0




                             -         -
             W
                                        x
                             x

                             -
             a
             c.              a
                                       c)
             N
             OI                        N




                                 322
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976              Appendix A




                              2
                 8            e




                              ;      '9
                 A

                 d                   W
                                     OI
                 m
                 f            M




                              m
                 d
                 e            W
                              01
                 t
                 -
                 v)
                 m


                                     N
                 QI           W      m
                              01
                                     m
                              0
                              N
                 m
                 10



                                          .-
                                           t:
                                          0
                                          0
                                          -
                                          I.


                                          E
                                          w




                        323
Appendix A   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                         m         LD
                                   r-
                                   dl
                         m
                         m
                         m



                                   r-
                         r-        e
                         r-
                         dl        OI
                                   m
                         m
                         N




                   324
                                                Appendix A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                                           x
                           R         2
             4

             A             a               0
                                     \o
             0
             4




                                      ab   ab
                                     4     4
                                           ro
                                     d



                         325
                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendill '




                                                 M
                                           ab
                   ab                 ab
                             M
              m
                            4         4    4     4
                   3
              4                       ro
                   N
                            2                    m
                                           r-    N
                                           c3
              m.                      c3
                   &




                                326
                                          Appendix A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




.-
 C




                         c?          1
                                ?
                cq
                                m
         2               e
                8                    M
                         m           0
         \o                     Q,




         m      4
         m
         hl     m
                zp




r-       r-     r-              zp
                                \o
                         0           0
                                     Q,
         m      m        r-
2               r-       N
         -
         3
                                     m
                                m
c\1
                                     In
                                     m




 ab      c

         K
4
3        &




                        327
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                                  -
                        c
                        8         8
                        m         m
                                  a
                        -0
                        5         e
                        c
                                  5
                        I
                        d         d

                                                s
                                           c9
                                           \o
                                           N    P-




                                           x
             x                                  -
                                                c9
                        2         2             0
                                           co
                        W         W
             W




                                  m
    I,                                          0
             W                                  a
                                                P-
    .p E     dl
             N                    0
                                  N
    E"


                                                -
                                                m
                                  a        \o
             a
                                  R        m
             N
             rJ
                                                W




                                                      i
                                                     .-
                                      .4
                                                     W
                                      0
                                                     4
                                      4
                                                     P
                                      E:
                                                     z.
                                      LI
                                      2              c
                                                     B
                                      B




                         -                       2
             2                    c
                                  a              D
                         0
              0                   f2            rn
                        rn
             rn
                                  N
             -.
             v)                                 N
                                                0.
                        N         N




                            328
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976       Appendix A




                                 m
                                 ,   m
N       dl                0
                 10       QI
                                     %i
                 N
                 10
        N
4                                N
                          m
m
                 rn
                 rD




                        329
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                          d
                          m
                          Q,




      330
                                        Appendix A
        AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




         d
         -
         r-
          x
         CI
                             .-
         m
                             g
         V

         g                         .-
                             .-     E
                              E
                             .-
         E
         0                   E :
         2                   5,




                  J
          6                   x
i   i
    2            z
         t
z                            n
                 01
         N
m        \o
    m
N   N            N           N




                      33 1
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                                        4
                              9
                              r-
                              d         r-




                                        2
                                        A




                                        \o
                                        d
                                        3

                                        r-
                                        4
                                        ro
                                        4




                                             .-
                                    6         6
                                   .-
                                   8         8
                                   m         m
                                   P         P
                                   .-        I.
                                   I.
                                   0

                                   a         I

                                             0
                                   c
             .
             u                           .co
                               .o
             .o




                   332
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976        Appendix A




                  s
                  P-




                                     m
                  I
                  n
                                     0
                                     hl
                  f


         0
         -r
         I
         n




                                     d
                                     B
                                     01



                        333
                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix A




                                                 &
                                 t:             .-
                                       .-
                                        d
                          A     .-
                         .-
                                           m    m
                                0
                         0
                                                V
                         e                 4
                                 6
                                           B    0
                         P      P
                                                I.
                                           I.
                                 I
                                 .
                         2                      m
                                m
                                c               L

                         a      B               8
                                           8




                                      ri
             ri
                                      d
             d                        t-
             In                       d
             d




                         334
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976   Appendix A




       d
d              d
H             B
      E;
z      t-     c
              a
              N
       N




                        335
                                Appendix B

              MAJOR NASA LAUNCHES, 1976

      The following table of major NASA launches includes payloads carried by
all rocket vehicles larger than sounding rockets launched in 1976 by NASA or
under NASA direction.
      During 1976, the U.S. had 27 launches (with 35 payloads) including a
suborbital gravity probe, all of which were successful. Of these, 1 1 (with 19
payloads) were launches by DOD. The remaining 16 were NASA launches, only
two for its own programs: Lageos, the laser geodynamics “golfball” satellite
launched in May as a permanent reference point for earth-dynamics studies,
and the gravity probe launched in June carrying a red-shift experiment that
apparently confirmed the “equivalence principle” of Einstein’s theory of
relativity. (In 1975, NASA had launched 10 all-Us. scientific payloads.) The
 14 launches for others in 1976 included 2 spacecraft for DO& 7 comsats-
Intelsat IV-A F-2 in Jan.; Marisats 1, 2, and 3 in Feb., June, and Oct.;
RCA’S Satcom 2 in Mar.; and Comstars 1 and 2 in May and July-;                1 for
N O L , the Noaa 5 in Jdy; and 4 international s a t e n i t e d e l w s 2 for FRG
in Jan.; Cts 1 for the Canadian Dept. of Communications in Jan.; Nato M A
for NATO in Mar.; and Palapa 1 in July, a domestic comsat for Indonesia.
      These tables usually categorize vehicle and payload performance as S for
successful, P for partially successful, or U for unsuccessful. A fourth category
(Unk) would indicate payloads that did not operate because of vehicle failure.
These categories, which are unofficial, do not take into account that U
missions might produce valuable information, or that payloads with a long-life
design might later fail to meet the design requirements and might then become
officially unsuccessful. Further information on these launches appears in
Appendix A and in the indexed entries in the text.




                                       337
Appendix B   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                   338
                                     Appendix B
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




cn     cn                               v)




cn     cn                               rn




                        339
                    S, 1976
A




    a    rn



    rn   rn




              340
                                Appendix C
             MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1976

       Manned flight activity worldwide in 1976 consisted of only 3 launches,
all in the USSR Soyuz series. The new Soviet space station, Salyut 5, was not
launched until June; in July, the crew of Soyuz 21 docked suctessfully with
it and remained 7 weeks. Neither the crew of Soyuz 22 nor that of Soyuz 23
was able to dock successfully, although each returned to earth safely.
       At the end of 1976, the US. had made 31 manned space flights: 2
suborbital, 20 in earth orbit, 3 in lunar orbit, and 6 lunar landings, with a total
of 43 different crewmen. The USSR had made 30 manned flights, all in earth
orbit, with 38 cosmonauts. The u.S. total of manned-spacecraft hours in flight
was 7681 hrs 10 min; the USSR total, 6685 hr 27 min. Total cumulative
man-hours in space for the U.S. were 22 503 hr 39 min; for the USSR,
13 575 hr 36 min.




                                       341
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix C




                    342
                              Appendix D

  NASA SOUNDING ROCKET LAUNCHES, 1976

      The following table lists the 63 sounding rockets of the Arcas class and
above launched by NASA in 1976. The launches took place in Norway,
Sweden, Greenland (for Denmark), and Canada, as well as in the United States
(including Alaska and Hawaii). The rockets carried payloads for the Naval
Research Laboratory, the Energy Research and Development Administration,
and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, as well as for 5 NASA centers,
13 universities, 3 foreign governments, and 2 U.S. corporations. Types of
onboard experiments included 28 in plasma physics; 8 in solar physics; 4 in
astrophysics; 3 each in aeronomy, cometary physics, and meteorology, and
2 in galactic astronomy, as well as 5 vehicle systems tests, 2 flight systems
tests, 1 engineering test, and 3 space processing tests, plus 1 unidentified
payload from Norway.
      Information for the table came from Goddard Space Flight Center’s
Quick Look Sounding Rocket data sheets, issued after launches, with addi-
tional information from some of the experimenters concerned. Launch dates
are in local time, with the date in Greenwich Mean Time added if different.




                                    343
Appendix D   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                   344
                                     Appendix D
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                                             L



                                             E
                                             .-
                                             a
                                             -
                                             0
                                             B
                                             I
                                             .
                                             4
                                             L


                                             c
                                             YI
                                             E
8                                            E
 :
 :                                           M
2.
                                             B
4-

 I
.-                                           0
E                                            Y

                                             x
                                             g
a
B                                            e
-
G                                            m

e                                            .-
                                              0


                                             -
                                             u
4)
L

E"                                           M
                                             4

                                             p
                                             -
P
U




m




                        345
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix D

                      M
                ail
                +     +
                E      E
                +     c
                s      C
                a      I
                       .

                      P
                U
                E
                      m
                bi
                a     a
                -
                0      0
                v
                       E
                 E
                .a    .B
                      -
                      .z
                5     c
                .-
                e

                      d
                4



                      5
                 i
                .a    a
                ;     s:
                \     \
                      E
                 E
                .a
                -     .E
                      5
                5     .-
                .-
                \      \

                .-     .-
                 5     5
                5     5
                61    61
                       a
                a
                       8
                 8
                -      -
                I      I
                       -.&
                -      e
                 I,



                        B
                B
                       .g
                 E
                .-
                 :     a
                 a
                       W
                 0
                 m     m
                .-     .-
                 A     A
                c      c
                a      a
                 2     2
                       -
                -      9
                I
                a      a
                 p
                 -     E
                       p




                      346
                                     Appendix D
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




        L

        3
        M
        m


                        347
                            ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix D




                                 -I
                                  E
                                 .-
                                 a
                                 -8
                                 C
                                 .-
                       a
                       .

                                 E
                       e,
                                 P
                        E
                       .-
                       E         0
                       a         e,
                       0
                                 9
                       F         2
                       3
                       -         3.
                       i


                       -         s
                       8         10
                                 .-
                       8         g
                                 c
                                  a
                                 -
                       e          m
                                  h

                       m          0
                                  v)

                                 u
                       p
                       -

                                                         x
                                 x           R
                       N
                                                 $   0   @4
                       N
                                             2
                       N
                                                 N   L
                                 N                       N




                                       d
                             6
                  ai
              d                        M
                             M
                  M
             a    9          d         d
              i   m




                                       348
                                     Appendix D
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                       349
Appendix D   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976




                   350
                               Appendix E
               ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES

  Listed here are the abbreviationsused for citing sources in the text. Not all the
sources are listed, only those that are abbreviated.


AAAS Bull                       American Association for the Advancement of Science’s
                                  AAAS Bulletin
A&A                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’
                                 magazine, Astronautics & Aeronautics
                                     Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1976: A Chron-
A&A 1976                        NASA’s
                                  ology (this publication)
                                American Broadcasting Company
ABC
                                Atomic Energy Commission News Release
AEC Release
                                Aerospace Daily newsletter
Aero Daily
Aero Med                        Aerospace Medicine magazine
                                Air Force Association’s Air Force Magazine
AF Mag
AFHF Newsletter                 Air Force Historical Foundation Newsletter
                                Armed Forces Journal magazine
AFJ
                                Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview
AFSC Newsreview
                                Air Force Systems Command News Release
AFSC Release
                                Aerospace Industries Association of America News
AIA Release
                                  Release
       Facts                    American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’
AIAA
                                  Facts
AIAA Release                    American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                  News Release
                                American Institute of Physics Newsletter
      Newsletter
AIP
AP                              Associated Press news service
                                NASA Ames Research Center’s Astrogram
ARC Astrogram
                                American Astronomical Society’s Astrophysical
Astro Journ
                                  Journal
                                Atlanta Journal Constitution newspaper
Atlanta JC
Av Wk                           Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine
B News                          Birmingham News newspaper
                                Baltimore Sun newspaper
B Sun
                                Education Foundation for Nuclear Science’s Bulletin of
Bull Atom Sci
                                  the Atomic Scientists
                                Business Week magazine
Bus Wk
                                Chicago Daily News newspaper
C Daily News
                                Chicago Tribune newspaper
C Trib
                                Canadian Press news service
Can Press
                                Columbia Broadcasting System
CBS
                                Chemical & Engineering News magazine
C&E News
                                Cleveland Plain Dealer newspaper
61 PD
                                Cleveland Press newspaper
C1 Press
Columbia J Rev                  Columbia Journalism Review magazine

                                      351
                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
Appendix E
                       Communications Satellite Corporation News Release
ComSatCorp Release
                       Congressional Quarterly
CQ
                       Congressional Record
CR
                       Christian Science Monitor newspaper
CSM
                       Chicago Tribune News Service
CTNS
                       Detroit News newspaper
D News
                       Denver Post newspaper
D Post
                       Defense Atomic Support Agency News Release
DASA Release
                       See FRC.
DFRC
                       Dow Jones news service
DJ
Dc P I 0
 o                     Department of Commerce Public Information Office
                       Department of Defense News Release
DOD Release
                       Department of Transportation News Release
DOT Release
                       Executive Office of the President News Release
EOP Release
                       Federal Aviation Administration News Release
FAA release
FBIS-SOV               Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet number
                       Facts on File
FonF
                       Flight Research Center News Release (after 8 Jan. 1976,
FRC Release
                         became Dryden Flight Research Center News Release)
                       NASA Flight Research Center’s X-Press
   x-Press
FRC
GE Forum               General Electric Forum magazine
Goddard News           NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News
                       NASA Goddard Space Flight Center News Release
GSFC Release
                       NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situation
CSFC SSR
                          Report
                       General Telephone & Electronics News Release
GT&E Release
                       Houston Chronicle newspaper
H Chron
                       Houston Post newspaper
H Post
                       Journal of Aircraft magazine
JA
                       Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory
IPL Lab-Oratory
                       Jet Propulsion Laboratory News Release
JPL Release
                       Department of Commerce Joint Publications Research
JPRS
                         Service
                       NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (Manned Space-
JSC Release
                         craft Center until 1 7 Feb. 1973) News Release
                       NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center’s Space News
JSC Roundup
                          Roundup
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’
JSR
                          Journal o Spacecraft and Rockets magazine
                                   f
                        Kansas City Star newspaper
KC Star
KC Times                Kansas City Times newspaper
                        NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center News Release
KSC Release
                        Los Angeles Herald-Examiner newspaper
LA Her-Exam
                        Los Angeles Times newspaper
LA Times
                        NASA Langley Research Center’s Langley Researcher
Langley Researcher
                        NASA Langley Research Center News Release
LARC Release
                        Los Angeles Times News Service
LATNS
                        NASA Lewis Research Center News Release
LERC Release
                        NASA Lewis Research Center’s Lewis News
Lewis News
                        Miami Herald newspaper
M HER
                        Miami News newspaper
M News
                        Minneapolis Tribune newspaper
M Trib
                        NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center’s Marshall
Marshall Star
                         Star
                        Milwaukee Journal newspaper
MJ
                        NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center News
MSFC Release
                          Release
                        New Haven Register newspaper
N Hav Reg
                        Newark News newspaper
N News

                               352
                                                                       Appendix E
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
N Vu Sun                     Northern Virginia Sun newspaper
NAA News                     National Aeronautic Association News
                             National Aeronautic Association’s World and U.S.A.
NAA Record Book
                               National World Aviation-Space Records
                             National Aviation Club News Release
NAG Release
                             National Academy of Engineering News Release
NAE Release
                             North American Newspaper Alliance
NANA
                             National Academy of Sciences News Release
N& Release
NAS-NRC Release              National Academy of Sciences-National Research Coun-
                               cil News Release
                             National Academy of Sciences-National
                  News Rpt                                              Research
NAS-NRC-NAE
                                                  Academy of Engineering News
                              Council-National
                               Report
NASA anno.                   NASA announcement
                             NASA Headquarters      “General Management Review
NASA GMR
                               Report”
                             NASA Historical Report No. 39
       HHR-39
NASA
       Hist Of
             f               NASA History Office
NASA
                             NASA Headquarters Weekly Bulletin
       Hq WB
NASA
                             NASA Ofc of International Affairs
                                   fie
       Int Aff
NASA
                             NASA Legislative Activities Report, Vol. XIII, No. 8
       LAR, XIII/8
NASA
             Of
             f               NASA office of Legislative Affairs
       Leg
NASA
                             NASA Headquarters Mission Operations Report, pre-
NASA   MOR
                               liminary prelaunch and postlaunch report series; infor-
                               mation may be revised and refined before publication
                             NASA program office (for the program reported)
       prog O f f
NASA
                             NASA project office (for the project reported)
       proj o f
             f
NASA
                             NASA Headquarters News Release
       Release
NASA
                             NASA report of sounding rocket launching
       Rpt SRL
NASA
       SP-40 19              NASA Special Publication No. 4019
NASA
Nut1 0 6 s                   National Observer magazine
                             Nature Physical Science magazine
Nature
                             National Broadcasting Company
NEX
                             National Geographic Society News Release
NGS Release
                             NASA Management Instruction
NMI
                             NASA Notice
NN
                             National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration News
NOAA Release
                               Release
                             Naval Research Laboratory Release
NRL Release
                             National Space Club News Release
NSC Release
                             National Space Club News
NSC News
                             National Space Club Letter
NSC Letter
                             National Science Foundation’s Science Resources Stud-
NSF Highlights
                               ies Highlights
NSF Release                  National Science Foundation News Release
                             NASA National Space Technology Laboratories News
NSTL Release
                               Release
NY News                      New York Daily News newspaper
NYT                          New York Times newspaper
                             New York Times News Service
NYTNS
0 Sen Star                   Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper
Oakland Trib                 Oakland Tribune newspaper
Omaha W-H                    Omaha World-Herald newspaper
                             Navy’s Office of Naval Research Reviews
ONR Rev
P Bull                       Philadelphia Evening and Sunday Bulletin newspaper
P lnq                        Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper
                             Public Affairs Office
PA0
                             National Archives and Records Service’s Weekly Com-
PD
                               pilation of Presidential Documents

                                     353
Appendix E              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1976
                          Public Information O 5 c e
PI0
                          USN Pacific Missile Range’s Missile
PMR Missile
PMR Release               USN Pacific Missile Range News Release
Pres Rpt 74               Aeronautics and Space Report o the President: 1974
                                                          f
                            Activities
                          Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory News Release
SAO Release
                          DefenselSpace Business Daily newspaper
SBD
Sci Amer                  Scientijc American magazine
                          Science & Government Report, independent bulletin of
Sci & Gout Rpt
                            science policy
SciServ                   Science Service News service
SD                        Space Digest magazine
SD Union                  Sun Diego Union newspaper
                          Scientific Manpower Commission’s Scientijc, Engineer-
SET Manpower Comments
                            ing, Technical Manpower Comments
                          British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight magazine
Sf
SF Chron                  Sun Francisco Chronicle newspaper
SF Exam                   Sun Francis0 Examiner newspaper
                          Soviet Aerospace newsletter
Sou Aero
                          Center for Foreign Technology’s Soviet Report
Sou Rpt
                            (translations)
                          Space Propulsion newsletter
SP
                          NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News
Spaceport News
                          IUWDS World Data Center A for Rockets and Satellites’
Spacewarn
                            Spacewarn Bulletin
                          NASA compendium of sounding rocket launches
SR list
SSN                       Soviet Sciences in the News, publication of Electro-
                            Optical Systems, Inc.
                          St. Louis Globe-Democrat newspaper
St Louis G-D
                          St. Louis Post-Dispatch newspaper
St Louis P-D
                          New Orleans Times-Picayune newspaper
T-Picayune
Tech Rev                  Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Technology
                            Review
                          Congressional testimony, prepared statement
Testimony
                          Prepared report or speech text
Text
                          Official transcript of news conference or congressional
Transcript
                            hearing
                          United Nations Public Registry of Space Flight
UN Reg
                          United Press International news service
UP1
                          U.S. Geological Survey News Release
USGS Release
                          U.S. Postal Service News Release
USPS Release
w Post                    Washington Post newspaper
W Star-News               Washington Star-News newspaper
                          NASA Wallops Flight Center News Release
WFC Release
                          White House News Release
WH Release
                          World Journal Tribune newspaper
WIT
                          Wall Street Journal newspaper
lVSJ




                                 354
        INDEX AND LIST OF ABBRJEVIATIONS
                             AND ACRONYlMS
A300. See Airbus.                               h c a , 18, 73, 79, 84, 106, 136, 146, 176,
AAAS. See American Association for the              210
                                                AFSATCOM. See Air Force Satellite Commu-
   Advancement of Science.
Abilene, Texas, 116                                 nications System.
ablation, 37                                    Agency for International Development (AID),
aborigine, 251                                      105-106, 175,281,293
abort system, 89, 244, 251                      aging, 55, 111, 113,255
abrasion, 60                                    agriculture, 4 , 47, 73, 81, 137, 141, 178,
                                                               0
absorption, 46, 141,227,250,281                     198, 221, 228, 237, 245, 262, 279, 282,
AC-4 ( A W e n t a u r launch vehicle), 290         298,299,305
Academy of Sciences, USSR. See Soviet Aca-      Agnculture, U.S. Dept. of (USDA), 141, 150,
   demy of Sciences.                                198,201,254,274,299
acceleration, 25                                agronomy, 254
                                                Ahlborn, Dr. H., 96
acceptance testing, 97, 259
accident, 15, 16, 44, 53, 59, 94, 135, 153,     Ahmadabad, India, 228
   209, 214, 244, 251, 253, 263, 273, 280,      AIAA. See American Institute of Aeronautics
   282, 303                                         and Astmnautics.
accretion, 56                                   AID. See Agency for International Develop-
accuracy, 126, 142, 151, 209, 281                   ment.
acoustical holography, 106                      AIDSAT. See AID space-age technology.
acoustics, 27, 33, 168, 170, 24Q, 254, 267,     AID space-age technology (AIDSAT) program,
   297                                              175,281,293
                                                aileron, 118
ACPL. See atmospheric cloud physics labora-
                                                air-breathing engine, 47
   "y.
                                                Air Commerce Act of 1926,85
acrylic, 227
Advance II (research ship), 119                 air-cushion system, 84, 292
advanced manned strategic aircraft, 158         air-drag balance measurement, 20
                                                Air Force, U.S. (USAF)
AE-C (AtmosphereExplorer C), 27
AE-D (AtmosphereExplorer D), 27                 -contracts, 99, 108, 149, 186,248,271,287
A G E (AtmosphereExplorer D), 27                --cooperative pmgrams, 27, 49, 90, 125, 233,
AEGTelefunken, 136, 287                             242
aerial photography, 105, 115, 133, 151,269      -flight testing, 14, 44, 47, 53, 84, 95, 123,
                                                    273,276,283,288
Aeritalia, 165, 187,209
aerodynamics, 23, 24,33, 194                    -people, 19, 29, 44, 69, 70, 80, 99, 129,
                                                    14S,2178, 231
aerodyne (wingless aircraft), 29
aeroelasticity, 18                              --Dlanes. 58. 81.92. 184. 246.285.287
                                                G l i c y , 158, 193, 199,257,285, 287
Aemflot, 286
                                                --satellites, 50, 79, 102, 133, 141, 195, 214,
aeromechanics, 117
aeronautical research                               294
   -military, 84, 113                           -technological utilization, 17, 24, 61, 130,
                                                    134, 162, 172
   -NASA, centers, 5, 48, 54, 95, 117, 118,
      241                                       Air Force Academy Foundation, 145
   -NASA-industry, 81,97, 230                   Air Force Association, 125, 161
   -overseas, 187,246                           Air Force Flight Test Center, 14
                                                Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, 233
aeronautics, 17,39, 79, 85,87, 115, 124, 193
                                                Air Force Materials Laboratory, 162
aemnoxny, 343
                                                Air Force Satellite Communications System
A&nomy Laboratory, NOAA, 17,304.
Aeronutronic Ford Corp., 186,232                    (AFSATCOM), 118
Aerosat, 14, 130,211,214                        Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organi-
                                                    zation. See Space and Missile Systems
Aerosat Space Segment Board, 14,211
aerosols, 17, 77, 216, 261                          Organization (SAMSO).
                                                Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), 129,
Aerospace Corp. See Grumman.
Aerospace Industries Association, 3, 17, 81         130, 159, 170,257,267,276,283,305
aerospace industry, 18, 61, 72, 81, 82, 87,     Air France, 3, 103,269
                                                air-launched missile, 286
   135,165,166,180,187,192,211,249,277
                                                Air Line Pilots Association, 16
Aerospace Medical Division, USAF, 172
                                                 Air Mail Act of 1925,67
aerospace sciences, 18,63, 256
                                                 Air Mobility Research and Development La-
aerospace technology, 13, 18, 80, 126, 256
                                                    boratory (US.Amy), 258
Aerospatiale (French contractor), 97,130,180,
                                                 Air National Guard, 109
    187, 188. 195
Aetna Insurance, 78                              air pollution, 3, 17, 19, 34, 39, 64,76, 88,
AF. See Air Force, U.S.                              102, 105, 117, 160, 189, 216, 221, 227,
AFML. See Air Force Materiel Laboratory.            261


                                            355
air safety, 17, 66, 84, 89, 94, 97, 114, 134,      Algonquin Radio Observatory, Ontario, 302
    135, 149, 167, 209, 214, 229, 257, 263,        alien, 252,264
    277.282                                        All-American air race, 275
air stewardess, 229                                Allegheny mountains, 109
air-tr&ic control, 16,33,66,68,84,94, 167,         Allen, H. Julian, award, 48
    181, 198,214,229,263,274                       Allende meteorite, 5 6
Air Transport Association, 124, 134, 166           alloys, 95-96
Airborne Observatory. See Kuiper obsema-           alluvial deposits, see geology.
    tory, Galileo II.                              Alma Ata, USSR, 8,286
Airbus (European passenger transport), 134,        Alpha Building Corp., 265
    188                                            ALSEP. See Apollo lunar scientific experiment
airconditioning, 19,47,78,108,271,288,302             package.
aircraft                                           ALT: approach and landing tests
-communications, 4, 212, 263, 276                  Altai territory, USSR, 177
-design, 8, 33, 71,84,87,90,95, 113, 123,          altimeter, 46
    144, 181, 229, 231, 246, 248, 253, 258,        altitude
    273,274,280,282                                -aircraft, 47, 76, 123, 164, 165, 170, 280,
-flight control, 61, 68, 95, 113, 167, 170,           300
                                                   -balloon, 216,229,230, 272,304
    194,214
-fuel conservation, 89, 230, 280                   -missile, 53
-improvement, 33, 66,84,87, 95, 113, 125,          --over (earth, moon, planet) surface, 46, 64,
    134, 149, 160, 164,273, 280,282, 285                 82, 119, 122, 131, 138,291
Tmanufacturing, 17, 81, 89, 125, 135, 149,         -rocket, 126,250
    161, 180, 190,211                              --spacecraft, 66,79,166,218,227,271,279,
-technology, 8, 14, 33, 285                           282
-testing, 84,95, 164, 229                          aluminum, 17,61,67,%, 134,146,157,160,
-use for research:                                    170, 197,222,225
    AF, 14, 28                                     amateur radio, 195, 248, 263, 276
    Army, 4Q, 258                                  Amazon river, 24Q
    Coast Guard, 2,236                             ambassador, 79
    FAA, 67                                        American Association for the Advancement of
                                                      Science (AAAS), 1, 32,33,35
    NASA, 33, 44, 46, 76, 95, 132, 144, 145-
       146, 194,249,256,261,272, 280,295-          American Astronautical Society (AAS), 241
                                                   American Broadcasting Co. (ABC), 152
    296
   NOAA, 17,204,277                                American Chemical Society, 216
   university, 300                                 American Federation of Government Employ-
   USSR, 6, 8, 73                                     ees, 191
AiResearch Manufacturing Co. of Calif.. 142        American Geophysical Union, 77, 281, 290,
airfoil, 5, 29, 81                                    296,301
airlines, 15, 16, 26, 85, 124, 125, 134, 149,      American Heart Association, 259
   166, 180, 181, 182, 198, 212, 256, 269,         American Indians, 69,288,299
   277,285, 286                                    American Institute for Chemical Engineering,
airlock, 271                                          186
airmail, 67                                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
Airplane Research Institute, Vienna, 28               nautics (AIAA), 3,65, 106
Akasofu. Dr. Svun-ichi. 2%                         American Institute of Industrial Engineers, 99
airport, 4, 33, '56,68, '84, 89, 118, 124, 134,    American National Standards Institute, 78
   167, 181, 198,229,257,274,276                   American Physical Society, 25, 238, 242
airships, 6,41,97                                  American Radio Relay League, 1    %
airs&am, 33, 130, 132                              American Revolution Bicentennial Assn., %
Aksenov, Vladimir, 220-221, 342                    American Rocket Society, 241
Alabama, 106,241,276                               American Society for Mechanical Engineering,
Alamogordo, N.M., 27,238,259                          186
alarm system, 102                                  American Society of Engineering Education,
Alaska, 29, 37, 62, 63, 69, 93, 94, 247, 261,         241
   295,296,343                                     American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&"),
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971,          18,94, 157, 186
   69                                              Ames Research Center (ARC)
Alaska, Univ. of, 69, 2%                           --contracts, 94,97
Alberta, Univ. of, 2%                              meetings, 103
Alcator (fusion machine), 36                       -missions, 49,58
Aldrin, Edwin E., Jr., 178                         -people, 48, 144, 156, 175, 177, 218, 231,
Aleksandmv, Anatoly P., 76, 221                       275, 277, 278, 295
Aleuts, 69                                         -programs, 33,38,45,61,77,117,127,168,
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, 166                       194, 231, 258, 261, 269-270
Algernon Blair Co., 262                            amphibious craft, 90, 251, 265


                                             356
amplifier, 6                                         approach and landing (Shuttle tests), 53, 62,
A 1 (DOD advanced meteorological satellite),
  m                                                     66, 98, 204, 210, 220, 222,229,250-251,
   214, 327                                             301
                                                     AFT:automatic picture transmission
AMSA advanced manned strategic aircraft
Amsat (amateur radio comsat, W. Germany),            Aquila (constellation), 150
   248                                               Arab states, 69, 210
An Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Func-          ARC. See Ames Research Center.
   twn,F s a Years 1967-1977, 192                    ARCO. See Atlantic Richfield Co.
           icl
anaerobic, 40                                        Arctic research, 6,73,209, 247,301
Anders, William A., 48,79                            Arcturus (star), 155
Anderson, Arthur T., 151                             Ardashat, Armenia, 231
Anderson, Dr. Don L,237                              Arecibo, P.R., 33,77,84, 148,213
                                                     Argentina, 149,293,295
Anderson, Jack, 78
Anderson, Dr. James G., 216                          argon, 83, 139, 146, 155, 181
                                                     Argyre (region of M r ) 162
                                                                          as,
Andes, 45
Andover, Me., 200                                    Ariane (ESA launch vehicle), 80, 88, 97, 192,
Andoya range, Norway, 301                               239,248,249,287
Andrews Air Force Base, 129                          Aries (rocket), 49
animals, 38,64, 113, 172, 298, 305                   Arizona, 7, 71, 121, 139,209, 225,240
                                                     Arizona, Univ. of, 82, 132
anomaly, 15, 17, 71,78, 183,250-251, 277
                                                     Arkalyk, USSR, 251
anorthosite, 55
 Antarctic, 17, 79, 175, 200, 209, 261, 293          Arlington, Tex., 258
 Antares (star). 115                                 Armament Development and Test Center,
 antenna,'31,'62, 79, 84, 123, 141, 150, 165,           USAF, 170
                                                     Armenia, 231
    181, 197, 205, 207, 213, 228, 229, 233,
   268,269,272,275, 278,292                          arms limitation agreement, 230,286
antiaircraft missile, 287                            arms race, 1,30,32, 47, 238, 281, 286,289
antiballistic missile, 151, 230                      Annstrong, Neil A., 18,63, 147, 238, 255
                                                     Army, U.S., 25, 28, 40, 72, 113, 193, 237,
 antigen, 251
 Antilles, 83                                           261,262, 271, 279,285,286, 304
 antisatellite spacecraft. See interceptor satel-    Army Communications Command, 298
   lite,                                             Army Missile Command, 25
                                                     Army Signal Corps, 40
antisubmarine warfare, 292
 Apollo (program)                                    Arnold Engineering Development Center,
-history, 10, 29, 51, 66, 76, 80, 9 , 112,
                                         0              U*S,     24, 130,283
    119, 126, 129, 147, 148, 231, 285, 298-          Arnold, Dr. James R., 131
   299                                               ARO, Inc., 131
-people, 18, 19, 27, 37, 39, 48, 50, 53, 54,         arrays. See solar conversion devices.
   57, 70, 79, 91, 96, 137, 178, 231, 238,           arsenic, 157
   259, 270, 277,278,282-283.305                     art, 137
-results, 11, 20, 36, 37, 57, 60,63, 66, 74,         artificial gravity, 38
   78,97, 111, 116, 158, 179,246,256,264,            artificial limbs, organs, 37, 63
   272,300                                           Artsimovich, Dr. Lev, 36
A p l b 8, 48, 79,283                                AS-W17 (sailplane), 109
ApoUo9, 19                                           asepsis, 23
A p l b 10, 51                                       Asia, 74, 106, 177,215,238,276,289, 303
Apolb 11, 18, 35, 54, 112, 137, 148, 150,            Asimov, Isaac, 176
                                                     Askins, Barbara S., 158
   178,246, 305
A p b 12, 11,37, 272                                 Aspin, Rep. Les (D-Wis), 7, 58, 160
A p l b 13, 37                                       assembly, 97, 112, 169, 198, 222, 245, 258,
A p o l b 14, 11, 19, 36, 74, 150                       270,278,295,300
A p l b 15, 11,66,272                                ASSESS (airborne science Spacelab-experi-
A p l b 16, 11,272                                      ment systems simulation), ESA program,
A p l b 17, 11, 50, 131, 246,270,272                    194,227
Apollo 204 fire, 54                                  ASSESS 1 , 194,227
                                                                 1
Apollo lunar scientific experiment package           Associated Universities, Inc., 32
   (ALSEP), 11,36, 74,272                            Association of Universities for Research in
Apollo-Soyuz.Test Project (ASTP), 20, 27, 29,           Astronomy (AURA), 7
                                                     asteroid, 25, 35, 105, 168
   51, 53,54,73,76,80, 119, 126, 129, 163,
                                                     ASP. See Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.
   190,193,221,231,244,277,282-283,298,
   304                                               Astrain, Santiago, 21,238
Apollo telescope mount (ATM), 179                    astrogeology, 77
Apple (Ariane passenger payload experiment),         astronaut (see also names of individuals)
   India comsat, 248                                 --administration, 19,46,57,95,224,270
Applications Technology Satellite (AB) pro-          -history, 4-5, 10, 25, 27, 51, 66, 119, 137,
   gram (see also Ats 6), 47,228                        147,222, 231, 238,255,282-283,285


                                               357
-research, 11,14-15,20-21,26,36,52,59-         Auriga (constellation), 108
   60,63,66,74,80,90,111, 127, 145, 159,       aurora, 37,49,63,68,233,2%, 301
                                               Australia, 35, 93, 150, 151, 172, 251, 261,
  232-233,255,256,264,272,300
-training, 118,142,162,194,220,227,229,           263,294
   257,301                                     Austria, 143,237,238
Astronautics Engineer Award, 49                automatic beam fabrication, 278
astronomers, 7,23,27,46,74                     automatic picture transmission (APT), 133
astronomy, 7, 32, 33, 35, 77, 93, 108, 158,    automated systems, 60,76,79,144,148,160,
    170, 179, 198, 220, 227, 244, 272, 277,       168, 177, 182, 197,227,288,295,342
   283,294,298, 302, 305                       automobile, 29,39, 135, 146
astrophysics, 148, 193, 198,298,343            autoradiographicfilm intensification, 158
asylum, political, 210                         AV8 "Harrier" (STOLaircraft), 164
ATA. See Air Transport Association.            Avco Corporation, 248
Atkinson, Dr. Richard T., 185                  Avco Everett Research Laboratory (AVCO
Atlanta, Ga., 35,247                              Electronics), 35, 39, 80
Atlanta International Airport, 257             Aviation Historical Foundation, 67, 97
Atlantic City, N.J., 257                       Aviation Ministry, USSR, 286
Atlantic ocean, 14, 18, 31, 47, 60, 66, 83,    aviation policy, 125,212,274
   89, 103, 115, 118, 129, 143, 145, 169,      aviation safety. See air safety.
   181, 186, 195, 200, 212, 223, 239, 242,     avionics, 28, 81, 117, 247
   249,256,267, 276                            Aviation Space Writers Association, 96
Atlantic Richfeld Co., 37                      awards, 18, 40,48, 49, 65, 79, 90,99, 133,
Atlantic Science Corpomtion, 132                  143, 165, 186, 196, 2 4 229, 231, 235,
                                                                           @,
Atlas (launch vehicle), 99                        237, 241, 247, 254, 256, 259, 275, 280,
Atlas-Centaur, 18, 49, 94, 157, 211, 218,         282,283,293
                                               Azores Is., 83, 242
   290,295
Atlas MA-5, 149                                AflK (joint U.S.-FRG satellite), 7
ATM. See Apollo telescope mount project.
                                                 El (bombed. 51.81.92. 108,123,158,161,
atmosphere (see also individual planets)
--ionosphere, 20, 32, 142,233,239,250               185, 2&, '257,'285, 287
-magnetosphere, 11,49,68, 142, 301               B-52 (bomber), 47, 58,97, 286,Z87
-planetary (see individual planets)              B-747. See Bming 747.
-protonosphere, 250                              background radiation, 15, 217, 277
-research, 15, 27, 32, 53, 76, 77, 119, 142,     Backus, John W., 254
    148, 187, 189, 249, 272, 277, 279, 288,      bacteria, 44,45,60,    149,216, 267
   295,300,304                                   Bahamas, 19,57
--stratosphere, 17,32, 53, 64,76, 216,272,       Bahrein, 3, 269
                                                 Bailey, Dorinda S., 282
   295,304
--thermosphere, 19, 27, 300                      Baker, Dr. William O., 9
-upper atmosphere, 27, 46,53, 64,73, 148,        Balachandran, Nambath, 300
   163,187,221,230,233,250,261,272,300           Baldwin, Jack, 124
Atmosphere Explorer (AE) project, 19,27          ballistic missiles, 286-287
Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory, 249,       balloon, 6, 11, 17,29,68,88, 115, 117, 136,
   278                                              138, 145, 160, 171, 190, 212, 216, 229,
atmospheric pollution, 3, 17, 64, 105, 189,        230,242,272,288, 304
   232,235, 261,300                              balloon-borne telecommunications and broad-
atmospheric pressure, 8, 19, 104, 146              cast system, 136
Atomic Energy Commission. See ERDB;              bdoon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer
   NRC.                                            (BUSS), 115
atomic physics, 254, 273                         Baltic Sea, 263
atomic power, 36, 74, 127, 146, 149, 252,        Baltimore, Md., 36, 37, 73, 80,99
   254,297                                       Banana River, 169
atomic research, 7                               Bandanaraike International Airport (Colombo,
ATS. See Applications Technology Satellite.         Sri Lanka), %
Ats3, 10                                         Bangladesh, 176, 293
Ats 6,49, 93, 105, 111, 175, 228, 281, 293,      banks, 142, 191
   301                                           Barents Sea, 288
AT&T. See American Telephone and Tele-           Barfield, Dr. Joseph N., 301
   graph Co.                                     barium, 49,63
attitude control, 20,59,218,297                  Barron, James, 127
Atwood, J. Leland, 275                           Barstow, Calif., 197
Auburn, Mass., 51                                basalt, 55,122,148,215,272,281,300
Auburn Univ., Ala., 241                          basic research, 238,251
AURA. See Association of Universities for        Basov, Nikolai, 278
   Research in Astronomy.                        Battelle Memorial Institute, 94


                                           358
Battelle-NorthwestResearch Institute, 95     birds, 134, 172
battery, 15,144, 181,213,219,275,280,291     Black Brant (sounding rocket), 95,297
Baykonur cosmodrome, USSR, 140, 204, 220,    Black Businessmen’s Assn. of Los Angeles,
   221,250,273                                  303
beacons, 66,233                              black holes, 26, 32
beam separation, 18                          Black Sea, 195
Beckman, Dr. John, 194                       Bledsoe, Maj. Adolphus (Pat), 164
Bedford, Mass., 190’                         Bliiov, Nikolay, 6
Beech Aircraft Corp., 145                    Block 5D (USAF metesat program), 214
                                                                        .-
Beer, Dr. Reinhold, 46                       block grants, 13
behavior, 148, 159, 199                      blood, 20,23,47,63, 171,251,255
Belenko, Lt. Victor I., 210                  Blumberg. Dr. Baruch S., 251.255
Belgium, 4,130                               Board on Science and Technology for Inter-
Bell, Alexander Graham, 139,292                 national Development, NAS, 306
Bell Laboratories, 9                         boats, 50, 117
Bell X-1 (supersonic aircraft), 137          Boeing 7x7 (proposed jet aircraft), 187
Bell Helicopter Textron, 258                 Boeing 707, 124, 180, 191,209
Bendix Corporation, 36, 262                  Boeing 727, 124, 188
Bendix trophy, 275                           Boeing 131, 180, 188
Benedict, Manson, 254                        Boeing 747, 37, 62, 66, 134, 137, 170, 180,
Benefidd, Doug, 124                             191,210,282,287
Benjumin Franklin (research sub), 159        Boeing Aerospace Corp. (see also Boeing Com-
Bennett (comet), 45                             mercial Airplane Co., Boeing Co.), 47, 53,
                                                60,75,186, 187, 193,270
Beregovoy, Maj. Gen. Georgy, 304
Bering Strait, 143                           Boeing Commercial Airplane Co., 33
Bering, Vitus, 143                           Boeing Company, 60,75, 180, 186, 187, 188,
Berkeley, Calif., 56                            198,229,230,240,277,287, 302,304
Berlin, Germany, 224                         Boldt, Dr. Elihu, 101
Bermuda, 46,83,181,212                       Bolivia, 191, 293
Bern, Univ. of, 187                          bomb. See weapons systems.
beryllium, 25                                Bombay, India, 48, 128
Bethe, Hans W., 254                          bomber aircraft, 47, 58, 158, 161, 191,257
Bethpage, N.Y., 118                          Bmnet, Dr. Roger, 178
                                             booster. See launch vehicle.
Bicentennial, U.S., 66, 135,243,292
-NAA, 85,97,98                               Bootes (constellation), 115
-NASA and centers, 25, 29, 70, 107, 123,     boranes, 254
   132, 139, 144, 145, 150,210, 270          Borman, Frank, 283
-NASM, 137                                   boron-epoxy composite, 222
                                             Boston, M s . 33, 36, 51, 96,98, 102, 143
-USAF, 80                                               as,
Biemann, Dr. Klaus, 157, 236, 274            Boston Univ. School of Medicine, 176
“big bang” theory, 32                        Boulder, Colo., 179, 304
                                             boundary layer, 5, 231
“Big Bird” (reconnaissance satellite), 141
Bignier, Michel, 241, 269                    Boyce, J.C., 298
Bijvoet, Jan A., 48                          Bradsher, Henry S., 229
                                             Bradt, Dr. Hale, 101
bilharzia, 306
Biliu, David S., 227                         Braginsky, Prof. Vladimir B., 45
Bimini, 57                                   brain, 252
                                             braking, 121
Binder, Alan S., 155
                                             Brand, Vance, 27,282
biochemistry, 1, 40,273
                                             Brazil, 5, 117,238,240. 293
bioengineering, 15,20, 23,37,63,65, 172
biogas, 40, 306                              breakthrough, 36,80
                                             Bredt, James H., 65
biohazard, 11
                                             breeder reactor, 1 1
biology
                                              Brekhovskikh, Leonid, 15
-international research, 148, 212, 306
                                              Bremen, W. Germany, 113, 292
-Mars, 17,100,139,154-157,177,199-2~,
                                             Brigham City, Utah, 1 8 8
  203-204,208,215,217,236-237,260,274,
  295                                         Britain. See United Kingdom.
-NASA research, 35, 126, 169                  British Aircraft Corp., 165,239,301
-USSR research, 38, 119, 159, 193,231         British Airways, 3, 103, 180, 190, 212, 214,
biomedicine, 71, 148, 188, 190                  269
biosat, 38                                    British Interplanetary Society. 108,283
biosensor, 60                                 bromine. compounds, 64
 Biospherics, Inc., 156, 175, 275             Brookhaven National Laboratory, 66, 242, 304
                                              Brooks, Rep. Jack (D-Tex.), 218
biotechnology, 172, 199
 Bir, James E., 98                            Broome, G. Calvin, 271



                                         359
                                                  Canadian Department of National Defence,
Broten, N.W., 302
                                                     114
Brown University, 166
                                                  canals of Mars (see also Mars), 100, 154
Broyles, Howard, 172-173
                                                  Canaveral. See Cape Canaveral.
Buchwald, Art, 154
                                                  cancer, 11,35,99, 137,216
Buck Rogers, 154
                                                  Cannon AFB, N.M., 184
budget (federal), 1, 12, 14, 16, 43, 58, 134,
                                                  Cannon, Sen. Howard (D-Nev.), 67
  138, 151, 160-161, 193, 201, 274
                                                  Canoga Park, Calif., 63,219
-NASA. See NASA, funding.
                                                  capacity, 118, 120, 162,291
Budget Reform Act of 1974, 12
                                                  Cape Canaveral, Fla., 1, 31, 107, 131, 133,
Buffalo (transport aircraft), 33
                                                     157, 193, 223, 224, 261, 271, 276, 295,
Buffalo, N.Y., 36
                                                    301
Bugayev, Boris, 286
                                                  Cape Fear Technical Institute, 119
Bulgaria, 128, 163,219,224,250,304
                                                  Cape Kennedy. See Cape Canaveral.
Bumper 8 (captured V-2 rocket), 261
                                                  Capella (star), 108
buoys, 29, 119, 145,267
                                                  Capri Chasm (Mars), 139
Burch, Dr. James L., 142
Burger, Jan J., 91                                capsule, 251
                                                  “capture cell,” 167
Burroughs, Edgar Rice, 100
                                                  carbon, 37, 56,60,61,64, 224
Bushveld area, S. Africa, 294
                                                  carbon-14, 199
BUSS balloon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectro-
                                                  carbon-based life forms, 215,224, 236
  meter
                                                  carbon dioxide, 83, 139, 146, 155, 156, 199-
Bykovsky, Col. Valery, 220-221,342
                                                     200,215,226
C-3 experiment (HEAO), 278                        carbon monoxide, 46,64,146, 189, 199-200,
C-5A galaxy, 134                                     215,261
C-8 “Buffalo” (transport plane), 33               carcinogenic materials, 9,60, 80
                                                  cardiovascular research, 255
C 4 7 ‘‘Gooney Bird” (transport plane), 66,
                                                  career, 72, 164
  11s
C-G-(research aircraft), 119, 133                 Carey, Governor Hugh (N.Y.), 3
C-band telemetry, 115                             Cargill Investor Services, 141
CAB. See Civil Aeronautics Board.                 cargo, 59,97, 166, 257,292
cadmium, 41                                       Caribbean Sea, 66, 76, 176, 182
Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services, 82              Carr. Gerald P., 129
calcium, 157, 187,224                             Cam, Dr. Michael, 218
calendar, 12                                      carrier rocket, 299
calibration, 62                                   cartel, 182
caliche, 224                                      Carter, President Jimmy, 91, 161, 185, 238,
California, 24, 38, 115, 121, 124, 150, 173,         285,287
                                         /
                                                  cartography, 73,262
   198,218,224,225, 240,243            /
                                                  Casani, John R., 4 ,71,245
California Institute of Technology (Gdtech),                          3
   23,25,45,64,69, 72, 101, 119, 132, 133,        Case, Sen. Clifford P. (D-N.J.), 128
    151,225,237,275, 278,300                      Case Institute of Technology, 62
California, Univ. of                              Caspian Sea, 41, 177, 273
                                                  Castor (rocket booster), 65
-Berkeley, 254, 2%
                                                  catalyst, 200,216,274
-Livermore Laboratory, 216
                                                  catastrophe, 154
--Lax Angeles, 132, 226, 301
                                                  Cavailk, Marcel, 187, 269
-San Diego, 1, 101, 131
-San Francisco, 45                                CDC. See Canadian Dept. of Communications.
Calio, Dr. Anthony, 100                           celestial mechanics, 8
Calspan Corp., 67                                 cells, 64
Caltech. See California Institute of Technol-     CEMA (international socialist standing commit-
                                                     tee for post and telecommunications), 225
   ogy-
Cambridge Light Co., 125                          censor, 29
Cambridge Research Laboratory, USAF, 69           census, 262
camera, 43, 101, 119, 121, 130, 133,              Centaur (rocket), 49, 128
   152,154,220-221,224,225,288,2%,                Centennial exposition, U.S., 138, 292
   342                                            Central African Republic, 293
Cameroon, 181,293                                 Central America, 76, 106,176
Canada, 1, 9, 14, 48,76, 84, 114, 117, 141,       Central Asian power grid, 29
   149, 179, 200, 212, 214, 247, 249, 289,        Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 141
                                                  Centre National de la RBcherche Scientifique
   296, 302, 304, 337, 338, 343
Canadian Department of Communications                (CRNS), Paris, 178
   (CDC), 10,337, 338                             Centre National d’ktudes Spatiales (CNES),
Canadian Department o Mines and Resources,           Paris, 88, 212,241,269
                       f
   244                                            centrifuge, 38



                                              360
                                                   civil service. See federal employees; person-
ceramic, 53, 126, 130, 166, 236
                                                      nel, U.S. govt.
CERN. See European Center for Nuclear Re-
                                                   Civil Service Commission (CSC), 167, 191,
   search.
Ceman, Eugene A., 50, 51, 57                          192, 198,267,282
                                                   Civil Transport Development Corporation
Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, 7
certification, 114, 134,233,235                       (Japan), 187
                                                   civilian space program, 21, 37, 66,71, 185
cervit, 7, 53
                                                   Clark, Dr. Benton, 157
cesium ion thruster, 181
                                                   Clark, Dr. John F., 51, 77, 133
Cessna 402 (aircraft), 231
                                                   Clark, Leonard, 261
CF6 (GE engine), 134
                                                   Clarke, Arthur C., 21, 159
CFM 56 (GE-Snecma engine), 188
                                                   Clayton, N.Mex., 280
challenge, 22
channels, on M r . See Mars.
                 as                                clean room, 271
Chappell, Dr. Charles R., 142                      cleaning, 112, 227
                                                   Clemson Univ., 93
charged particle, 36, 58, 278
                                                   Cleveland, O., 36, 67, 143, 145, 280
Charleston, S.C., 143
                                                   Cleveland Pneumatic Co., 81
charter flights, 182,213
                                                   climate. See meteomlog.
Charyk, Joseph V., 92
Chattanooga, Tenn., 77                             Climatic Impact Assessment Program, 2%,
                                                      304
chemical analysis, 300
                                                   clocks, 45, 126, 304
chemistry
                                                   cloud, 132, 143, 148, 150, 177, 249, 278,
-awards, 254
                                                      279,305
-Mars,      146, 147, 154, 178, 199-200, 203,
                                                   cloudcover, 10,14,39, 46, 165,192,213,247
   205,215-216,224,236237,274,295
                                                   Clovis, N.Mex., 16
-moon, 54,183-184,300
                                                   CNES. See Centre National $Etudes Spatiales.
-pollution, 35,60-61,80,88, 117, 160,235,
                                                   coal, 11, 35, 58, 125, 151, 176
   272
                                                   Coast Guard, U.S., 4, 130, 236, 247,303
-technology utilization, 37, 81, 131, 143,
                                                   Coleman, William T., Jr., 3, 102, 124, 212,
    158, 167, 193, 280
                                                      285
chemotherapy, 254
                                                   Collet, Jacques, 91
Chern, Shiing-Shen, 254
Chetveryakov, S. D.,246                            Collier trophy, 40
                                                   collimator, 101
 Chicago, Ill., 35, 67, 68, 85, 141, 167, 257
                                                   Collins, Michael J., 137, 231, 278, 305
Chicago, Univ. of, 105, 255
                                                   Collins Radio, 29
“chicken soup,” 156
                                                   collision, 25, 26, 214
 Chile, 7, 45, 191, 238
                                                   Colom, Audrey Rowe, 270
China. See Peoples Republic of China; Repub-
                                                   Colombia, 10, 238, 293
    lic of China (Taiwan).
 China 4 , 5                                       colonization of space, 80,107, 127, 139, 159,
                                                      176, 244
 China 5 , 306
 China 6, 196, 306, 307, 327                       color, 10, 106, 133, 141, 143, 153, 155, 186,
 China 7, 290,307,332                                 204,209, 215,221,279, 281,293
 Chitwood, John S., 293                            Colorado, 66, 150, 179, 2%
chlorine compounds, 17.61, 64,216                  Colorado, UNv. of, 31, 296
                                                   Colson, Jack, 1%
 chloroform, 60
                                                   Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 152,
 chlorophyll, 45
                                                      270
 chrome, 141
                                                   Columbia Univ., 25, 254, 289, 300
 chromosphere, 88
 Chryse (region of Mars), 77, 121, 138-140,        combat aircraft. See military aircraft.
                                                   combustion, 58, l , a 216
    146, 148, 153, 155, 203, 205, 208, 215-
    216,217,226,274                                comet (see also individual comets), 8, 31, 45,
 CIA. See Central Intelligence Agency.                 168,252,343
 Cicerone, R.J., 216                               command and data acquisition, 8
 Cincinnati, O., 36                                commemoratives, 67
 Cincinnati, Univ. of, 63                          Commerce, US. Dept. of, 26, 85, 107, 177,
 circuits, satellitelairplane, 18, 30, 153, 247       201
 citizen groups, 124                               commercial aviation, 15, 26, 67, 81, 85, 89,
 Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA), 66            102, 124, 134,230,261,269
 Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB), 26, 182            commercial broadcasting, 18,37, 152
                                                   commercial spacecraft, 58, 31, 75, 117, 1%
 civil aviation, 15, 26, 33, 61, 67, 81, 84,
    85, 113,134-135, 167, 180-181,181-182,         commercialization, 29, 188, 203, 211, 223,
     187, 195, 198, 209, 212, 214, 229, 230-          227,239,248,268,269,288,289,299,301
                                                   Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
    231, 242, 253, 257, 263, 269, 274, 275,
    277,282,283,285,286,300,304                        128



                                             361
Committee on Space Research (COSPAR),                 165, 185, 192, 193, 228, 235, 246, 247,
    171,222                                           253,287,299
 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Re-        -House of Representatives, 58,75, 111,149,
    search organization, 261                          160, 161, 185,222
communications                                     -House Committee on:
--commercial, 9, 30, 35-36, 77,82,92, 125,            Government Operations, 218-219
    252,288                                           Science and Technology, 19,222, 224, 235
-galactic, 268,269-270                             -Joint Committee on Defense Production, 57
-Intelsat, 18, 20, 21, 73, 119, 186                -Senate, 58,67,91,128,129,151,161,184,
-international, 9, 10,69,105-106,114,135,             185, 195,222,270,305
    136,141,175-176,181,200-201,209-210,           -Senate Committee on:
    211-212,213,228,239,240,24%,       275,281-       Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 13, 62,
    282, 286-287,293                                     112, 126
-relay,     4, 146, 205, 215, 223, 225, 226,
    233,249,264,280,288 (see also data relay;         Armed Services, 158
    satellite relay)                                  Commerce, 3
-satellites, 1, 2, 6, 18, 29, 31, 37, 57, 60,         Foreign Relations, 128
    61, 79, 89, 93, 94, 115, 132, 157, 195,        Congressional Research Division. See Library
    197,223,226-227,233,249,263-264,292,              of Congress.
    294-295                                        Connecticut, 113, 115, 150, 304
 (See also individual comsats: Aerosat, AIDSAT,    Conn. Dept. of Commerce, 188
    Ats, Comstar, Copernicus, Cts, Ekran,          Conn. Product Development Corp., 188
    Goes, Intelsat, Marisat, Nato IIIA, Oscar,     Conn., Univ. of, 188
    Palupa, Raduga, Satcom, Seasat, Sympho-        conservation, 11,30, 41, 137, 230, 256
    nie, TDRSS, Westar)                            consortium, 21, 101, 187,209,214,249, 289
 -USSR,       59, 117-118, 214-215, 224-225,       Constellation (transport aircraft), 72
    263,272,276,298                                Constitution (suggested name for Space Shut-
 Communications Research Center, Canada,              tle orbiter), 211
    114                                            construction, 58, 59, 62, 77, 248, 270
 Communications Satellite Act. of 1952. 21         construction of facilities, 72, 225, 265, 271,
 Communications Satellite Corporation (Com-           278
    SatCorp), 6, 9, 21, 30, 76, 77, 92, 115,       consumables, 142
    149, 181, 196, 201,245,252, 307                consumers, 94, 182,216
                                                   contained reaction, 36
 Communications Technology Satellite (Cts I),
                                                   containerless processing, 297
    Canadian comsat, 1, 9, 247, 249, 308, 337,
                                                   contamination, 23, 57, 105, 216, 232, 236,
    338
 compatibility, 113                                   249,267,297,304
 competition, 182, 188, 204, 265, 275, 285,        Contemporary Arts Museum, 127
    303                                            contractors
 components, 259                                   -airmail, 67
 composite materials, 61, 62, 67, 89, %, 135,      --ComSatCorp, 91
  , 222                                            -DOD, 81,92,99, 108, 141, 158, 161, 162,
 computer, 8, 43, 61, 78,80,81, 89, 112, 114,          164, 184, 186, 248, 266, 287, 292, 302,
    131, 141, 154, 155, 159, 16$, 172, 177,           304
    189, 193, 204, 224, 229, 232, 254, 263,        -ERDA, 52, 94, 116, 124, 142, 167, 181,
    268, 279, 303                                     225,270
Computer Sciences Corp., $1, 114                   -European, 6, 113, 130, 190, 195,209,212,
COMSAT; ComSatCorp. See Communica-                    214,249,286,292
   tions Satellite Corporation.                    -FAA, 257,304
Comsat General Corp., 2, 14, 31, 37, 60,82,        -FCC, 125
   89,94, 157,212,223,249,252                      -Intelsat, 15, 20, 179, 181, 186, 239
comsats. See communications satellites.            -NASA, 1, 47, 57, 65, 78, 81, 94, 97, 101,
Comstar D - I (1 A-1), AT&T satellite, 2, 94,          107, 111, 112, 113, 114, 130, 149, 168,
   252,317,337,339                                     170, 179, 190, 191, 198, 211, 226, 230,
Comstar D-2, 157,290,324,337, 339                     232,259-260,265,267,278,280,296,298,
Concorde (SST aircraft), 3, 102, 125, 149,           299
                                                   -NOAA, 242
   188,189, 195,269,300
condensation, 56, 121, 139                         -NSF, 7
Conference on Applied Science and Technol-         -Shuttle,   19, 25, 73, 74, 77, 78, 82, 98,
   ogy in the Arab World, 176                         145, 150, 161, 162, 168, 188, 192, 198,
Conference on Trade and Development, 293             203,218,262,271,277, 289,300,303
confirmation, 129                                  Control Data Corp., 112
Congo, 293                                         control systems, 168, 188, 193-194, 199-200,
Congress, U.S., 12, 16, 39, 50, 58, 124, 138,         225,240,251,257,262,279,282



                                             362
 Convair (division of General Dynamics), 211,      Cosmos 811, 315
   253                                             Cosmos 812, 315
 Convair 990 (“Galileo II,” NASA research          Cosmos 813, 315
   aircraft), 194,277                              Cosmos 814, 315
 convection, 186                                   Cosmos 815, 316
 conventional weapons, 113, 257, 281               Cosmos 816, 316
 converter, 264,270                                Cosmos 817, 317
 cooling systems. See airconditioning; heat        Cosmos 818, 318
   transfer; solar heating and cooling.            Cosmos 819, 318
Cooper, Dr. Robert S., 77, 133,271, 293            Cosmos 820, 318
 Cooperative Institute for Research in Environ-    Cosmos 821, 318
   mental Sciences, 2%                             Cosmos 822,318
coordination, 4 ,53, 59, 91, 142, 293
                4                                  Cosmos 823, 307, 319
Copemieus. See Orbiting Astronomical Obser-        Cosmos 824, 319
   vatory.                                         Cosmos 825, 319
copper, 41                                         Cosmos 826, 319
core sampling, 32, 289, 300                        Cosmos 827, 320
ComeUUniv., 32,33,82, 166,208,254,274              Cosmos 828, 320
corona. See solar corona.                          Cosmos 829,320
coronagraph, 298                                   Cosmos 830, 320
Corporation for Public Broadcasting, 18, 125,      Cosmos 831, 320
   270                                             Cosmos 832, 321
Corps of Engineen. See Army, U S .                 Cosmos 833, 321
correlation, 67                                   Cosmos 834, 321
corrosion, 17, 81, 169, 236                       Cosmos 835, 322
cortisone, 254                                    Cosmos 836, 322
Cortright, Edgar M., 18                           Cosmos 837, 322
cosmic dust, 8, 15, 105                           Cosmos 838, 322
cosmic event, 45, 253                             cosmos 839 (target spacecraft), 163, 323
“cosmic galmall,’’ 23, 87, 337                    Cosmos 840, 323
cosmic radiation, 8, 11,33,88, 190,212,221,       Cosmos 84I, 323
   229,230, 249, 272, 278                         Cosmos 842, 307,324
Cosmic Research Institute, USSR, 212              Cosmos 843, 324
“cosmic soccerball” (rescue system), 59           Cosmos 844, 324
cosmonaut, 5,73,76,129,140,176,190,193,           Cosmos 845, 325
   197,204,219,221,245,250-251,260,282.           Cosmos 846, 325
   303,304, 341                                   Cosmos 847, 325
COSMOS (consortium of European aerospace          Cosmos 848,326
   companies), 130, 214, 249                      Cosmos 849, 326
Cosmos (series of USSR satellites), 73, 307       Cosmos 850, 326
Cosmos 782, 38, 119, 212                          Cosmos 851, 326
Cosmos 787, 308                                   Cosmos 852,326
Cosmos 788, 308                                   Cosmos 853, 327
Cosmos 789, 307, 309                              Cosmos 854,214,327
cosmos 790,309                                    Cosmos 855, 328
Cosmos 791, 309                                   Cosmos 856, 328
Cosmos 792, 309                                   Cosmos 857,328
cosmos 793, 309                                   Cosmos 858, 32%
Cosmos 794, 310                                   Cosmos 859, 329
Cosmos 795, 310                                   Cosmos 860,307,329
Cosmos 796,310                                    Cosmos 861,307,329
Cosmos 797, 310                                   Cosmos 862,330
Cosmos 798, 310                                   Cosmos 863,330
Cosmos 799, 3 11                                  Cosmos 864,307,330
Cosmos 800,307,311                                Cosmos 865, 330
Cosmos 801, 311                                   Cosmos 866, 330
Cosmos 802, 3 11                                  Cosmos 867,331
Cosmos 803, 34,311                                Cosmos 868, 331
Cosmos 8U4,34,312                                 Cosmos 869, 303, 331
Cosmos 805, 312                                   Cosmos 870, 331
Cosmos 806, 313                                   Cosmos 871, 332
Cosmos 807,313                                    Cosrms 872,332
Cosmos 808,314                                    Cosmos 873, 332
Cosmos 809,314                                    Cosmos 874, 332
Cosmos 810,314                                    Cosmos 875, 333


                                              363
Cosmos 876, 333                                     damage, 16,33,127,135,151,168,171,183,
Cosmos 877, 336                                       208,215,279,281,304
Cosmos 878, 333                                     Dana, William H., 241
Cosmos 879, 333                                     danger, 128, 216, 230, 251, 268, 277, 299,
Cosmos 880,306,334                                    305
                                                    Dantzig, George B., 254
Cosmos 881, 305,334
Cosmos 882,305,334                                  Dartmouth College, 28
Cosmos 883, 307,334                                 Dassault-Breguet (French contractor), 187-188
Cosmos 884,334                                      data
Cosmos 885, 334                                     -acquisition, 5, 6, 72, 80, 168, 229, 248,
Cosmos 886, 306,335                                     2%, 302,303
Cosmos 887, 307,335                                 -analysis, %, 131, 133, 142, 144, 160,221,
COSPAR. See Committee on Space Research.                230,232,268,272,274,275,279,295,297
                                                    -ollection,    20,82, 101,113, 115, 160, 171,
cost control, 1, 53, 58, 161, 193, 228, 260,
                                                        247,267,270,280,300, 302
   265, 270,279
                                                    -distribution, 6, 128, 179, 198, 225, 235,
cost reduction, 6, 7, 66, 67, 70, 102, 111,
                                                        242,276,302
   114, 124, 125, 131, 135, 141, 160, 166,
                                                    -management, 44,82,296,303
   167, 169, 183, 187, 194, 213, 219, 229,
                                                    -processing, 43, 60, 79, 81, 112, 114, 127,
   239,247,268-269,271,276, 292
                                                        133,153,158,162,171,232,239-2443,242,
Costa Rica, 293
                                                        248,254, 263,268, 275,276, 302,303
coty, ugo, 102
                                                    -relay, 4, 5, 10, 37, 93, 120, 146, 151, 154,
Council on Wage and Price Stability, 285
                                                        205,207, 229
counterfeiting, 259
                                                    -transmission, 36, 62, 82, 101, 147, 148,
court cases, 191,209,253,267, 280
                                                        155, 165,205, 223,225,235
coverage, 152, 165, 269
                                                    -utilization, 4, 22, 24, 119, 171, 279, 304,
CPB. See Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
                                                        305
Crabbe, Buster, 154
                                                    Davies, Merton E., 119, 132
Craig, Jimmie, 88, 160
                                                    Davis, Hallowell, 254
crash, 120, 253, 282,286
                                                    daylight, 36, 45, 74, 165, 215, 245
crater, 25, 35, 122, 162, 218, 270
                                                    DC-3 (G-47; Gooney Bird), 66
crew safety, 5, 59, 89, 92, 172
                                                    DC-8,124
crew training. See training; Space Shuttle train-
                                                    DC-9, 124,214,222
   ing.
                                                    DC-10, 134, 180, 253,282
Crimean Astrophysical Observatory, 151
                                                    death, 5, 15, 16, 28, 29, 39, 4 , 51, 71, 135,
                                                                                    4
Croatia, 143
                                                        237,251,253,273,280, 281,282, 303
Cronkite, Walter, 270
                                                     Death Valley, Calif., 121
crop survey, 35, 141, 171, 198,279,299
                                                     debris, 25, 187, 214, 281
cross polarization, 94, 275
                                                    decision-making, 39
cruise missile, 47, 53, 158, 285, 287
                                                     Declaration of Independence, 98, 132
crustal activity, 23, 146, 155, 305
                                                    decontamination, 147
Cruzen, Paul J., 32
                                                     Deep Space Network (DSN), 24, 71, 151, 205
cryogenics, 50, 63,77, 145
                                                    defector, 210
crystals, 126,140,225,300
                                                     Defense, Department of (DOD)
 CS (Japanese comsat), 290
                                                    -budget, 13, 185, 192-193,201,257,274
 CSS-X-3 (PRC booster), 290
                                                    ---contracts, 19, 53, 57, 81, 92, 99, 107, 108,
CSC. See Civil Service Commission.
                                                        149,184,186,248,259,260,292,302,304
CTS. See Communications Technology Satel-
                                                    -history, 25, 199, 231, 233, 242, 246, 261,
   lite.
                                                        295
 Cuba, 219,224, 304
                                                    -people, 19,37,44,50,70,83,%, 99,129,
 culturing, 20
 current-machine chamber (Tokemak), 36                  145,163,164,178,193,255-256,283,305
                                                    -policy, 30,32,57, 129, 135,158, 161, 165,
 Currie, Dr. Malcolm R., 57, 129, 164, 193 \
                                                        172, 185, 192, 228, 257, 259, 271, 285,
 Cutler Hammer Corp., 98
                                                        287
 cyclone, 74, 83                                      ~




 Cyclops (joint ARC-Stanford project), 270          -programs, 46, 47, 58, 60, 79, 80, 89, 90,
 cyclotron, 235                                         95, 99, 102, 115, 117, 123-124, 133, 158,
 Cydonia (region of M r ) 77, 153, 155
                      as,                               160, 161, 164, 184, 203. 214, 219. 223.
                                                        229-230,276,280-281,283,294-295,298;
 Cygnus (constellation), 115
 cytology, 193                                          305
                                                     -research. 14. 24. 27. 4Q. 50. 61. 84. 87.
 Czechoslovakia, 128, 163, 219, 224, 250, 304                                               --, - ,
                                                                                       -?


 Da Vinci I (balloon), 88,160                           106, 113, 130, 135,’156, 142, 170, 172,
 Da Vinci N , 88, 117, 160                              229,247,258,265,267,273, 279,2%
 Da Vinci III, 160                                   Defense Electronics Supply Center, DOD, 259
                                                     Defense Meteorological Satellite Program.
 Dallas, Tex., 35, 73
                                                        USAF, 2 69
 DAM. See detection and mapping system.


                                                364
Defense Supply Agency, DOD, 163                    display, 133,245,274,279
Defense Systems Acquisition Review Commit-         distance, 151, 160, 162, 196,220, 252, 264,
   tee, DOD, 172, 285                                 268,270,277,282,288,291,302
deficit, 12                                        Distinguished SeDIice Medal (NASA), 39, 99,
dehydration, 19                                       241
Deimos (moon of Mars), 220,264,295                 dis& signal, 114, 171,205
Deissler, Robert G., 186                           docking, 38,53,129,140,162,163,220-221,
deJager, Cees, 116                                    251,260,282.299
De La Vaulx medal, 282                             documents, 127, 150, 163,253
De Loach, Dr. Anthony C., 194                      DOD. See Defense, (U.S.) Department of.
Deloffre, Bernard, 91, 133, 134                    -satellite (launched 19 Feb.), 312
Delpech, J.-L., 7                                  -satellite (launched 22 Mar.), 314
Delta (launch vehicle), 9, 28, 61, 63, 65, 73,     -satellite (launched 2 June), 319
   79, 87, 99, 115, 131, 133, 141, 165, 223,       -satellite (launched 26 June), 321
   249,271,289,295,297                             -satellite (launched 8 July), 322
Delta 1, Delta 2 (Soviet nuclear-submarine         -satellite (launched 15 Sept.), 328
   classes), 283, 288                              --satellite (launched 19 Dec.), 335
Deming, Wash., 38                                  DOI. See Interior, Department of.
demolition, 285                                    domestic communications, 119, 157, 287
dendrite, 95, 225                                  Domestic Council, White House, 92
Deneb (star), 115                                  domestic satellites, 1, 10, 35, 61, 65, 73, 239,
Denmark, 4,45,130,230,294,343                         240
density, 36, 288, 290                              Donn, Dr. William L., 300
Denver, Colo., % 98, 116, 257, 265
                   ,                               Doolittle, Gen. James M., 255
Denver, Univ. of, 68                               Doppler shift, 114
deployment, 136, 257                               Dora (solar-power generator), 136
depreciation, 78                                   d’Omano, Michel, 88
Des Moines, Iowa, 263                              DOT. See Transportation, Department o .  f
desalination, 45                                   Douglas Division, McDonnell Douglas Corp.,
DESC. See Defense Electronics Supply Center.          253
desert, 120, 153, 154, 155, 157,305                Doyon, Inc., 69
design, 133, 134, 162, 168, 169, 172, 218,         draft, 13
   220, 241, 242, 247, 24.8, 249, 251, 253,        drag reduction, 81, 231
   262, 265, 268, 269, 275, 278, 279, 283,         Drake, Dr. Frank, 32, 33
   286,292                                         Draper Sboratories, 28
destruction, 34, 118, 163, 176,215, 229-230,       drogue parachute, 24
   236.277.280.285.289. 305                        drone, 47
detection, 41, 47, 57; 61,’88, 93, 118, 130,       drought, 141
   132, 139, 154, 156, 171, 215, 225, 230,         drugs, 39,250
   255,267,268,269-270,274,277,281,300,            Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC)
   304                                             -missions, 5,37
detection and mapping system (DAMS), 4             -people, 66, 70,99,241,295
detente, 119                                       -programs, 95, % 97, 98, 144, 164, 193,
                                                                        ,
deterrent, 7                                          204,210,280
Detroit, Mich., 23, 36, 67,85, 257                 Dryden, Dr. Hugh L., 5, 62
Detroit, Univ. of., 193                            drying, 127
deuterium, 149,278                                 DSCS: defense satellite communications sys-
developing nations, 106, 112, 119, 281, 293           tem
de Waard, Johannes, 194                            DSCS-2 (military comsat), 117
DFRC. See Dryden Flight Research Center.           DSCS-3 (military comsat), 118, 228
DGA International, 195                             DSN. See Deep Space Network.
diagnostic aid, 236                                dual-satellite mission, 143
diet, 11, 40                                       Duewer, William H., 217
dinitrogen pentoxide, 304                          Duke, Dr. Michael G., 246, 300
direct-broadcast satellites, 18, 243-244           Dulles International Airport, Va., 3, 16, 102,
Direct Communications Link (hotline), 298             257,269,300
dirigible, 6,41,97                                 DuPont, 24
dirt, 208                                          Dupree, Kirby, 280
disarmament, 16, 30, 47, 149                       Durant, Dr. Frederick, 238
disaster, 10, 22, 38, 142, 171, 175, 214, 252,     duration, 96, 129, 133, 140, 171, 190, 221,
   253,273,282, 306                                   229,272,282,306,341
Discoverer 36 (USAF project), 195                  Dusey, Michael, 102
discrimination, 111                                dust, 76,105, 14.8, 171, 295
disease, 251, 267, 306                             dust storms, 101, 295
Disher, John H., 106                               Dutch. See The Netherlands.


                                                 365
Duxbury, Dr. Thomas C., 162                          elderly, 11, 111
dynamics, 15,24, 166, 169-170,262                    ELDO European Launcher Development Or-
dynamite, 255                                           ganization.
Dyson, Dr. Freeman, 35                               elections, U S , 12, 91, 161, 185, 211, 238,
                                                        270,285,287
Early Bird (helsat I), 21, 92                        electric car, 213
early-warning satellites, 133, 2 0
                                 8                   electricity, 34, 36, 45, 63, 75, 102, 112, 125,
earth, 71, 114, 139, 151, 156, 218, 226-227,            131, 143, 144, 167, 173, 197, 219, 225,
   275,289,304,337                                      240, 249, 259, 268, 271, 278, 280, 281,
earth resources, 69, 77, 106, 170, 203, 227,            290,296,303
   262,276,291,294,302                               electrochemistry, 291
Earth Resources Laboratory, La., 179, 204            Electrodynamics Explorer satellite, 142
earth sensing, 10, 76, 229, 235, 293                 electromagnetism, 75, 172, 297
earth station (see also individual listings)         electron, 25, 63, 105, 242
-international, 21,31,69,76, 119-120, 128,           electron-beam fusion, 9
   163,179,181,200,205-207,213,224,235,              electronics, 1, 11, 46, 58, 60,61, 132, 153,
   239,240, 252,272,281,286, 302-303                    171, 184, 208, 215, 228, 230, 240, 244,
-monitoring, 38,46-47, 79, 114, 165-166,                254,259, 267,287, 297,298
   171,213-214,229,242,247,264,267,272,              Electronics Industries Assn., 260
   279, 2%                                           electrophoresis, 20, 126
-remote, 5, 10, 29, 105-106, 111-112, 117-           elementary particle, 25, 56
                                                     Ehabeth Bolton (W. Ger. tanker), 242
   118,214-215, 223,228,244,276, 293
-unmanned, 6,82,98-99                                Ellington AFB, Tex., 118, 170, 220
-use in research, 23, 35-36, 38, 45, 87, 93,         Elliott, Maj. Lany A., 164
                                                     Elmira Heights, N.Y., 109
   115,120,197,211-212,22&227,233,249,
   261, 288,292,302                                  ELT: emergency locator-transmitter.
Earthnet (ESA program), 302                          emergency, 20,59,66,93, 102,114, 171,194,
earthquake, 1,23,38,140                                 195,232, 255
East Coast, 38, 111, 143                             emissions, automobile, 189, 216
East Germany. See German Democratic Repub-           employment (see also personnel, U.S. govt.;
   lic.                                                 NASA management), 72, 79, 81, 82, 161,
Eastern Airlines, 15, 198, 283                          172,262,287,304
Eastern Test Range (ETR), 9, 60, 61, 79, 94,         Enchanted Valley, Antarctica, 293
   115, 141, 249,290                                 Encke (comet), 8
Ecastar (project), 241                               endangered species, 32
Echo 1, 28, 149                                      endurance, 129
echo canceler, 181                                   energetic particles, 49, 105, 301
eclipse, 52, 80, 291, 297                            energy
ecology, 33, 67, 176, 204, 256                       -conservation, 11, 58, 68, 71, 97, 115, 144,
Economic Development Administration, 93                 241,265. 280
economics, 12,18,75,84,107,139,141, 149,             -research, 11, 13, 22, 27, 30, 49, 58, 71,
   166, 167, 176, 181, 182, 221, 244, 250,              99,101,102, 116, 133-134,213,247-248,
   255, 269,272,277,280, 304, 306                       278
ECS (European communications satellite), 209         -Energy Research and Development Admini-
Ecuador, 293                                            stration (ERDA):
Edison Company, 143                                     contracts, 94, 102, 116, 124, 142, 270
Edison Light Co., 125                                   history, 11, 219, 247, 255
education, 10, 13, 22, 39, 72, 106, 111, 175,           participation with NASA, 13, 27, 29, 67,
   195,228,241,274,282,283,288,297                         72, 112, 116, 124, 141, 144, 167, 181,
Edwards AFB, Calif., 5, 14,44,98, 106, 123,                239, 280,301-302
                                                        policy, 11, 13-14, 48, 133-134, 201,271,
   164,248,283
EEC. See European Economic Community.                      274
EEO. See equal employment oppoztunity.                  pollution, 88, 117, 160, 304
efficiency, 50, 83, 159, 169, 181, 197, 212,            solar power, 13, 27, 29, 52, 72, 75, 94,
   213, 24Q, 248, 262, 280, 291, 299, 301,                 111-112, 116-117, 124, 141, 142, 14.4,
   302                                                     219,225,239,240, 247-248,270,301
Eglin AFB, Fla., 170                                    wind power, 67, 102, 124-125, 167, 181,
Egypt, 20,69, 122, 149, 305,306                            280
Ehricke, Dr. Krafft, 107,245                         --source, 36, 101, 102, 137, 176, 181, 225,
Einstein theory, 52, 126, 337                           268,271,301
                                                      Engelmann, Dr. Rudolf J., 88, 160
Eisenhower, President Dwight D., 21,92, 185
ejection, 44,80,214, 246                              engineering, 30, 35, 64, 65, 72, 81, 97, 113,
Ekran (Statsionar l C , Soviet comsat), 272, 330        118, 133, 156, 172, 204, 241, 256, 274,
elastic-loop mobility system, 264                       278,279,287
                                                      Engineers, Corps of. See Army, US.
Elder Statesman of Aviation, 275


                                                   366
engines (see also Space Shuttle main engine),         Evans, Ronald E., 5   7
  58,160,167                                          Evans, R. Adm. Stuart J., 83
Engins Matra (France), 2 68                           Evans, Gen. W i l l i i J., 158,257
England. See United Kingdom.                          evaporation, 45,50,224
Engle, Joe H., 2 2
                 2                                    Everest, Mt., 218
Enterprise (Ti’ space ship), 159,211                  evolution, 54,56,82
Enterprise (Space Shuttle orbiter prototype           Exceptional Service Award, 186,241
  O - 0 ) 210,211,222,301
   V11,                                               exercise, 92,140
environment, €6, 24,4 , 4 ,53,6 ,
                     0 45, 8
               22,             0                      exhaust gases, 216,261, 6   27
  7 ,71,80,82,84,87,104, 3 1 7 140,
   0                            1 , 2,
                                 1                    exhibit, 2 ,1 7 1 3 215,246,270
                                                                5 3, 6,
  1 5 168, 1 9 1 2 1 5 2 8 222,2 1
    6,         6, 9, 9, 0,              4,            exobiology, 100,146,203,208,215-216,217-
  255,267,271,274,276,287,304                           218,236-238
Environmental Data Services, NOAA,2   %           Exosat (ESA cosmic-ray satellite project), 2 9
                                                                                              4
Environmental Effects Oflice, JSC, 2 2
                                    7             expedition, 143
environmental impact, 3,18,80,84,237,269,         expendable equipment, 90, 218, 229, 289,
  306                                               299
                                                  experiment
environmental monitoring, 5 8 , 2 7 2 2
                             , 2 6, 7,
                                                             26,177,199,236,260,272,279,296,
  31
   0                                              ---data,
                                                       27
                                                        9
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 3,
                                                                       101, 114,126,132,
                                                  -design, 36,44,52,66,
  6 , 0 ,1 7 1 4 1 3 160,189,201,267
   115 1,2, 3,
                                                    139,140, 148, 154, 1 5 166, 1 8 197,
                                                                            5,    7,
enzyme, 20
                                                    224,225,226, 239,275,278,280,297,
EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency.
                                                    305
epoxy, 62
                                                  experimental aircraft, 164,258
Epsilon (star in Gemini), 83
                                                  exploration, 22,1 9 1 7 149,205,225,254,
                                                                    3, 4,
Epstein, William, 30
equal employment opportunity (EEO), 250,            256,264,301
                                                  Explorer I , 25,65
  22
   8
                                                  Explorer 51, 1 9
equator, 5, 1 ,1 ,
             0 9 38,59,62,79,94,121,
                                                  Explorers Club, 256
  1 8 1 9 1 1 1 3 157,279,293,301
   2, 3, 4,5,
                                                  explosion, 56, 1 4 1 9 163,252,255,273,
equivalence, 52,1 62                                               3, 4,
ERDA. See Energy Research and Development           280,281,305
                                                  explosive, 268,2 5
                                                                   8
   Administration.
ERN0 (Raumfahrttechnik GmbH), VFW-                exports, 81,268
                                                  exposure, 172,216
   Fokker subsidiary, 1 3 2 9 2 2
                       1,0, 9
error, 1 3 1 4 156,218                            extinction, 3
        5-5,                                                    3
ESA. See European Space Agency.                   extrapolation, 56
Escondido, Calif., 2 9                            extraterrestrial life
                    9
Eskimo, 6                                         -indications. 2 .2 . 5 . 1 4 199. 252
                                                                    2 4 6 0 . ,---
          9                                                                      I   ~




                                                  -Mars, 1 ,1 ,4 , ’100,121,1 9 146,
                                                             5 7 9 77,               3,
ET: external tank (see Space ShuttIe).
                                                     149,152-154,177,200,203-204,205,207-
ETR. See Eastern Test Range.
                                                     208,215,217-218,224,225-226.236-237,
Ethiopia, 3 6
           0
                                                       274275,295
Europa (ESA launch vehicle), 80
                                                  -radio detection, 33,268,2 9 2 0
                                                                                 6-7
Europe, 18,238,270,289
European aerospace industry, 87,1 6               extraterrestrial materials, 250,272,300
                                  8
European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN),      extravehicular activity, 7 ,7 ,232,278
                                                                             36
  22
   4
                                                  F3 (Orion CPl40, Canadian aircraft), 1 9 7
European Common Market, 1 28
                                                  F-4 (fighter aircraft). See Phantom.
European Economic Community, 268
European Launcher Development Corporation         F-4c (tighter aircraft), 44
                                                  F-4e (fighter aircraft), 2 3
                                                                            7
  (ELDO), 6
European Southern Observatory, 3                  F-4E.J (Japanese interceptor plane), 247
                                1
                                                  F-5e (fighter jet aircraft), 1 ,1 5
                                                                                46
European Space Agency (ESA)
                                                  F 1 (Tomcat, fighter aircraft), 160, 184
                                  130,1 4
-cooperative propms, 14,68,95,         9,          -4
                                                  F-14a (fighter jet aircraft), 1 4
                                                                                 8
  211-212,227,239,248,271,275,283,286-
                                                  F-18 (fighter aircraft), 184
  287,294
                                                  F-104 (Starfighter, fighter aircraft), 1 5
                                                                                          6
                                                  F-111 (fighter jet aircraft), 184
--people, 48, 1 3 1 4 241,248, 6
               3, 3,           29
--policy, 4,80,209,214,244,249,279, 2 2           FAA. See Federal Aviation Administration.
                                     9
                                                  fabrication, 7 ,1 5 188,248,278,291,0
                                                                3 3,                         33
-Spacelab, 4 , 53, 78,91, 1 3 1 3 1 2
                            1, 2, 9,
              4
                                                  fabrics, 23,24,26,    59-60,93
  1718
   9-9
                                                           s modification, 78,98, 928
European Space Conference 1975,88
European Space Research and Technology Cen-       facsimile, 62,7 ,1 5 2 6
                                                                   9 1,0
                                                  Faget, Dr. Maxime A., 2 1  4
  ter (ESTEC), 1 4 9
                                                  FA1 Fkdkration Aeronautique Intemationale
eutectic (alloys), 95
                                                     (Intl. Aeronautical Federation, Paris)
EVA. See extravehicular activity.


                                                367
failure, 15, 39, 49, 59, 156, 163, 183, 200,     fission, 36
                                                 Fitzmoms, Gov. James (La.), 150
   203, 207, 214, 217, 239, 251, 255, 259,
   260,275,306,337                               flag, American, 70
Fairchild Industries, Inc., 99,211,2%            Flash Gordon, 154
                                                 _ . . Satellite
                                                 Fleet.                 Communications Svstem
fallout, 172                                         .
                                                                                              ’
                                                     (FLTSATCOM), 31,118,211,249
family planning, 105, 228
                                                 Fletcher, Dr. James C., 21, 28, 62, 117, 129,
fan, 134, 184
                                                     138. 143, 147, 148, 163, 171, 211. 222,
Far East, 262
fare systems, 124, 166, 182,213                      243,292
Farley, Clare F., 163                            flexibility, 72
                                                 flight control. See aircraft; missile control.
Farmer, Dr. Barney, 122
Farnborough Intl. Aerospace Exhibition, 192      Flight Inspection Natl. Field Office, FAA, 66
                                                 flight operations, 15, 17, 53, 121, 140, 146,
fatality, 15, 16, 44,209, 214, 216
                                                     160,232,263,272
fatigue, 15, 17, 247
                                                 flight readiness, 123, 218
fault, geological, 84
                                                 Flight Research Center. See Dryden Flight
fauna, 38
                                                     Research Center.
FCC. See Federal Communications Commis-
   sion.                                         flight safety. See air safety.
                                                 qght simulator (at JSC), 91
Federal Aviation Act o 1958, 229
                        f
                                                 flight test, 37, 44,47, 96, 97, 118, 123, 144,
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 14,
   16, 4 , 66, 89, 94, 103, 124, 125, 134,
          8                                          248,258,273,277,287, 343
   149, 167, 212, 231, 253, 257, 262, 274,       Flight Test Center, USAF, 283
   282,285,304                                   floating platforms, 6
                                                 flooding, 38, 121, 139, 177
Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
                                                 flora, 38
   18,30,35,78,92, 125, 157,252,263,276
Federal Coordinating Council for Science,         Florida, 40, 108, 132, 151, 169, 171, 224,
   Engineering, and Technology, 185                  225, 240,242,264,271,279
                                                  Florida State Univ., 159,209
federal employees, 13,57,191, 193,267,278,
                                                  Florida, Univ. of, 132, 279
   282
Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany),       FLTSATCOM. See fleet satellite communica-
                                                     tions system, DOD.
   1, 4, 7, 29,43, 49, 50,69, 113, 117, 123,
    130, 135, 165, 186, 187, 190, 194, 209,       Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton Univ.,
   210, 213, 238, 242, 249, 263, 287, 292,            189
   294,306, 308, 337, 338                         fluid-transfer system, 23, 64
federal spending, 1, 7, 12, 58, 75, 134, 185,     fluids, 126, 186, 225, 227, 299
   191, 192, 201, 222, 224, 225, 228, 229,        fluorocarbons, 17, 64, 216,261,272
   238,265,274,281,285                            fluorosensing, 61, 105, 155, 216
Federal Women’s Program, 164,270                  fly-by-wire (aircraft control system), 193
Federally Employed Women (FEW),      164, 288     flying lunar-excursion experimental platform
federally sponsored research. See government-         (training device), 66
   sponsored research.                            Flying Yacht (aircraft), 40
 Fkdhration Aeronautique Internationale (FAI),    foam insulation, 170
    109,164,282                                   fog, 139, 205, 249,251, 279
                                                  foil sampler, 77
female physiology, 255
Feoktistov, Konstantin, 5, 92                     Fokker-VFW, 209
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, 25,        food, 9, 11, 16, 22, 34, 105, 111, 123, 141,
   242                                                156, 176, 204,279,294, 306
fertilizer, 40, 64, 216                           footprint, 150
 FEW. See Federally Employed Women.               Ford (automobile), 29
                                                  Ford, D . Arthur B., 294
                                                            r
 Fiat, 165
                                                  Ford, President Gerald M., 12, 16, 48, 50, 57,
fiber research, 93
fighter aircraft (see also individual aircrd),        70, 91, 107, 126, 129, 137, 143, 147, 14%,
    14,95, 160, 165, 172, 179, 184, 191,210           151, 176, 185, 211, 212, 238, 243, 254,
film, 45,158, 281                                     262,282,285,287,292,293
filter, 146, 153-154, 156                         Ford, Henry, 85
                                                  Ford, Sen. Wendell H ,13.
Finland, 59, 179
                                                  Ford Motor Co., 92
fire, 38, 57, 59, 93, 127, 177, 184, 199, 273,
   280                                            Fore (tribe of New Guinea), 252
                                                  “A Forecast of Space Technology 1980-2000”
firefighting equipment, 26, 102, 130
firefly, 1                                            (NASA report), 21
                                                  forecasting. See meteorology.
fiscal year, 12,75
                                                  Foreign Apicultural Service, 198
fish, 24, 34, 45, 67, 74, 119, 140, 204, 267,
                                                  forest monitoring (see also timber), 38, 73,
   306
                                                      177,221,237,268-269
 Fisher, Adrian, 149
Fisk Univ., 247                                    Fort, D.N., 302


                                             368
Fort Belvoir, Va. 271                             Ganick, LE., 18
Fort Detrick, Md., 298                            Ganiott, Owen K , 176
                                                                   .
Fort Huachuca, Ariz., 298                         Gartrell, Harold E., 91
Fort Worth, Tex., 116                             gas chromatograph, 49, 61, 146, 155, 156,
fossils, 11, 44, 58, 121, 138, 167, 237, 274,       157,200,217
   289                                            gas-exchange experiment, 15, 17, 156, 175,
“Foundations of Space Biology and Medicine”         200,215,217,261
   (report), 159                                  gases, 82,104,108,123,126,135,155,167,
Fourth of July, 120, 138                             169, 170, 177, 181, 193, 199, 215, 236,
Fowler. Dr. William A.. 238                         250,267,280,304
Foxbat (aircraft). See MiG25.                     Gaviria, Fernando, 238
France, 3, 4, 6, 7, 50, 69, 80, 87, 88, 117,      Gay, Kenneth B., 303
   128, 130, 135, 178, 180, 186, 187, 188,        geiger counter, 177
   195, 209,212, 230, 238, 241, 249, 259,         Gelles, Dr. S.H., 95
   269, 275                                       Gemini (constellation), 83
Frank, Dr. Neil, 177                              Gemini program, 39, 50, 70,90
Frascati, Italy, 211, 303                         Gemini 6, 90
free flight, 37, 66                               G m i 7, 283
                                                    ei  n
freeze, 19, 70, 279                               Gemini 9, 50
freight, 135                                      General Accounting m i c e (GAO), 7, 57, 184,
French, Dr. Bevan, 300                              228
freon, 77,216,272                                 General Dynamics Corp., 53, 70, 184, 186,
Fresnel lens, 227,299                               211, 253,302
Friedman, Dr. Herbert, 101                        General Electric Co., 19, 91, 92, 93, 134,
Friedman, Prof. Milton, 255                         167, 181, 188,212,214, 287,297,302
Friedhip 7, 223                                   General Electric Space Division, 142, 297
“frog suit,” 23                                   General Services Administration (GSA), 28,
frontier, 80, 137                                   218,288
frost, 139,205, 279                               General Telephone & Electronics Corporation
Frutkin, Arnold W., 91, 95                          (GTE), 94, 186
FSCS. See Fleet Satellite Communications          generation (of power; of signals), 67, 81, 136,
   System.                                          172-173,263, 268, 270-271, 278,280
Fucino, Italy, 303                                genetics, 11, 193,251
fuel, 26, 30, 36, 61, 68, 89, 99, 103, 120,       Geneva, Switzerland, 31,45,243,263
   123, 134, 144, 145, 149, 170, 172, 187,        Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry Insti-
   216,230,248,267,268,280,285,286                  tute (Sov. Acad. of Sci.), 183
Fuller, Maj. John, 164                            geodynamic experimental ocean satellite
Fullerton, Lt. Col. Charles G., 37,222              (GEOS), 5-6,87, 271,294
Fulton, Fitzhugh L. Jr., 66                       geography, 44
funding, federal, 1, 58, 59, 129, 134, 135,       Geological Survey, US., 77, 82, 121, 208,
   151,158,160,185,192-193,201,222,246,             218, 293-294
   265                                            geology, 20,35, 55,69, 73, 79,84, 121, 155,
Fuqua, Rep. Don (D-Fla.), 224                        177, 208, 218, 221, 224, 237, 262, 270,
fusion (nuclear), 9, 11, 26, 36, 58, 99             272,300
future, 12, 18, 21, 22, 35, 75, 80, 99, 107,      geomagnetism. See magnetic phenomena.
   137, 144, 148, 160, 168, 171, 176, 203,        geometry, 254
   211, 225, 229, 235, 245, 265, 268, 269,        geophysicalresearch, 23,27,68,69, 170, 171,
   275, 292,296295,298                               193,208,250
                                                  George A. Towns elementary school, 247
Gagarin, Yuri, 73, 76,238,282,304.                George Washington University (D.C.), 65, 75,
Gaja Mada, 141                                       190
Gajdusek, D . D. Carlton, 252, 255
            r                                     Georgia, 161,247
Galaxy (aircraft). See G 5 A .                    Georgia Institute of Technology, 2.28
                                                  Georgia Tech. See Georgia Inst. of Technology.
galaxies, 23, 24, 32, 33, 74, 82, 150, 302,
                                                  Geos (proposed ESA satellite), 68, 213, 271,
  343
                                                     275
Galilean satellites (of Jupiter), 104
                                                  GEOS geodynamic experimental ocean satel-
Galileo Galilei, 52, 100
                                                     lite.
Mile0 IZ (NASA research aircraft; see Convair
                                                  Geos 3, 5, 46, 119
  990). 194,261,277
Gamma Boiites (star), 132                         Geosari (proposed ESA program), 239, 248
                                                  geostationary operational environmental satel-
gamma rays, 8, 101, 131, 190,212,229, 230,
                                                     lite (GOES), 1, 4, 5, 10, 29, 38, 93, 242,
  273,278,290
GAO. See General Accounting office.                  247,271,275,286,289
Gardner, Mass., 190                               geostationaryorbit, 14, 35, 50, 68, 135, 192,
                                                     212, 213, 275,286
Garmire, Dr. Gordon, 101


                                                369
geosynchronous orbit, 62, 79, 265, 289,293,        government-sponsored research, U.S., 7, 93,
   301                                                111, 113, 117, 162
                                                   GPA. See gravity probe.
geothermal energy, 58, 137, 176
German Democratic Republic (East Germany),         Grace, Donald, 102
   79, 128, 163,219,221,224,250,304                grain, 141,299
German Institute for Space Research, 136           Grand Canyon, 121, 122, 139
German Space Operations Center, 8                  Grand Tour (explorationof outer planets), 265
Germany, East. See German Democratic Re-           Grant, Carl E., 193
   public.                                         grants, 184
Germany, West. See Federal Republic of Ger-        gratuities, 57
   many.                                           gravitational waves, 45
germination, 150                                   gravity, 20, 38, 43, 52, 82, 104, 105, 126,
getaway special (Space Shuttle payload), 245          131, 132, 162, 166, 225, 249, 256, 270,
Gibraltar, 242                                       291
Gibson, Edward G., 129                             Gravity Probe-A (GPA) red-shift experiment,
Gibson, Roy, 88, 91, 134,213,241,244                  126,321,337, 339
Gilinsky, Victor, 268                              Gray, Laurence F., 6
                                                   Great Britain. See United Kingdom.
Gillam, Isaac, IV, 99
Gilruth, Dr. Robert R., 259                        Great Galactic Ghoul, 15
                                                   Great Lakes, 4, 236, 247
glacier, 79,289
Glacier (U.S. Coast Guard icebreaker), 247         Great Plains, 151, 280
                                                   Great Race of 1908, 145
glass, 55, 123, 167, 171, 250
                                                   GFeat Red Spot (on Jupiter), 104, 189
Glenn, Sen. John (D-Ohio), 223,270,285
                                                   Greece, 49
Glennan, Dr. T. Keith, 62
                                                   Green Bank, W. Va., 302
global climate, 34
                                                   Greenland, 55, 343
Global Communications, Inc. (RCA), 62, 226
                                                   Grew, Dr. Edward S., 294
global comsat system, 21, 252, 275
                                                   Griffin, Gerald D., 70
Global Information Services Satellite System
                                                   Griggs, David, 229
   (future project), 235
                                                   Griner, Carolyn, 95,225
global satellite system, 171,200,291,294
Globcom. See Global Communications, Inc.           G m , E.S. (Todd), 63
GMS (Japanese meteorological satellite), 271,      gross national product, 50
   294                                             groundcontrol, 17,43,98,144,190,224,229,
Goddard, Dr. Robert, 49,51, 138                       230,264,2%
                                                   ground station. See earth station.
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC)
                                                   ground support, 15, 78, 189, 223, 226-227,
-contratts, 73, 226, 2%
-meetings, 291,292                                    233,242, 279, 300
-missions, 27                                      ground tracking, 29, 143,240
-people, 77, 133, 171, 178, 190, 1%, 237,          grounding, 184
   248,269,271,277,285,291,293,295,2%              “group flight,” 282
-programs, 23, 28, 29, 46,51, 60,63, 101,          Grumman Aerospace Corp., 4.6, 47, 96, 118,
   132, 133, 143, 145, 151, 187, 204, 226,            125,184,211,218,220,229,297,301,302
   272,279,307,343                                 GSFC. See Goddard Space Flight Center.
                                                   GSR-A. See h r .
Godtrey, Arthur, 98
                                                   GTE. See General Telephone & Electronics.
GOES. See geostationary operational environ-
   mental satellite.                               Guest, Dr. John, 218
Goes 1, 4, 5, 10, 38, 279                          Guiana Space Centre, 88
Goes 2 ~Goes-B),1,294                              guidance system, 47, 53, 99, 120, 230, 232,
&s 3.93                                               276
 ?
gold, 41                                           Guidry, Louis E., 66
Goldstone tracking station, 84, 120, 197           Gulf Coast, 10,60
Goldwater, Sen. Barry M. (R-Ariz.). 222            Gulf of Suez, 123
Goodell, Charles E., 195                           Gulf Stream, 118
Goodlette, John D., 120                            Gulfstream (Grumman twin-engine jet), 118,
Goodyear Aerospace Corp., 97                          220, 229,301
“Gooney Bird” ( C 4 7 ; DC-3), 67                  Gursky, Dr. Herbert, 101
Gordon, Robert V., 142                             Gyorgy, Paul, 254.
Gorove, Dr. Stephen, 244                           gyroscope, 34, 297
government-furnishedmaterials, 77
                                                   H-1 (Hughes-designed aircraft), 71
government-industry cooperation. See industry-
   government.                                     H-1 (rocket engine), 299
Government Printing Wice (GPO), 159                Haack, Robert W., 179, 191
Government Radio Administration (Republic          Hady, Ahmed Abdel, 122
   of China), 20                                   Hagood, Carlos C., 194
                                                   Hague (The), Netherlands, 119
government regulation, 9


                                                 370
Haise, Fred W., Jr., 37, 222                      helmet, 172,274
Haiti, 281,293                                    Helt, Capt. Robert C., 164
Haley, Andrew e.,a w d , 241                      hemoglobin, 63,171
                                                  Henderson, Clifford W., 275
Hall, Charles F., 278
Hall, Floyd D., 283                               Hendricks, Sterling Brown, 254
                                                  Henebry, John P., 229
Halley's comet, 168
                                                  Henry, Joseph, 138
halocarbons, 77,261
Halpert, Gerald, 291                              hepatitis, 251
ham radio. See amateur radio.                     herbicide, 306
                                                  Heronemus, William, 102
Hamburg, Univ. of, %
                                                  Herrington, Preston B., 160
Hamilton, Mass., 233
Hamilton-Standard Division, United Techn.         Hess, Dr. Seymour L., 209
                                                  HEW. See Health, Education, and Welfare,
  Corp., 108, 145, 167,181,232
                                                     U.S. Dept. of.
handicapped, 66
                                                  Heyman, Joseph S., 47
Hanscom AFB, Mass, 190
                                                  High, Richard W., 167
hardware, 25, 58, 72, 78, 81, 83, %, 101,
                                                  High Altitude Observatory, Colo., 179
   112, 131, 172
Hargrave, Dr. Robert B., 156                      High-Altitude Pollution Program, 304
                                                  high-altitude research, 142, 170, 229, 301
Harrier (STOL aircraft). See AV8.
Harrington, Rep. Michael J. (D-Mass.), 111        High-Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO),
Harris, Ruth Bates, 250                              62,101, 149,211, 230,278,294
Harvard College Observatory, 298                  High Flight Foundation, 66
                                                  high frequency, 37, 106, 143,276
Harvard Univ., 39, 83, 90,254, 298
harvest, 141, 299                                 higher education, 274
Haskins, Dr. Larry, 54                            highly maneuverable aircraft technology
Hauzeur, Max, 44                                     (HIMAT) program, 95
Hawaii, 5,62,94,%, 132, 196,261,343               Hilsenrath, Ernest, 2%
                                                  HIMAT. See highly maneuverable aircraft tech-
Hawaii, Univ. of, 71, 102, 105, 125, 179
Hawaiian Electric Co., 125                           nology (program).
                                                  Hidenburg (airship), 41
Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., 164, 209
                                                  Hinners, Dr. Noel W., 53, 100, 142
Hayman, Dr. Deter, 54
Hays, Dr. James D., 289                           Hirsch, Robert, 52
                                                  Hirschfelder, Joseph O., 254
hazard, 26, 59, 64,121, 128, 132, 134, 153,
   158, 172, 193,208,285                          Hispanics, 18, 72
                                                  historical exhibit. See exhibit.
haze, 121
                                                  history, 28, 35, 54, 79, 222
health, 13, 22, 34, 92, 105, 175, 221, 228,
                                                  HL-10 (lifting body), 241
   267.282
Health, Education, and Welfare, U.S. Dept.        Hlasa, Jerry, 190
   of (HEW), 201,274                              HMSBounty, 173
HEAO. See High-Energy Astronomy Observa-          Hokkaido, Japan, 210
                                                  hold, 170
   tory.
HEAO-A, 294                                       Holland. See The Netherlands.
                                                  Holloway, Paul F., 285
heart, 137
Hearth. Donald P.. 22                             holography, 106
heat, 23, 26, 37, k, 56, 61, 70, 71, 74,
                        54,                       Holzer, Dr. Thomas E., 32
   104, 107, 130, 131, 146, 147, 156, 170,        home terminals, 235,287
   193, 203, 208, 215, 220, 226, 227, 235,        Honduras, 177
   236,274,278,288,297,299, 305                   Honeywell, Inc., 116, 142, 240, 274
Heat Capacity Mapping Mission, 303                Hong Kong, 5, 182
heat mapping, 24,67, 115, 122, 303                Honolulu, Hawaii, 96
heat sensine. 67. 105. 115.279                     Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics,
heat transf;,  70, 72,'94, 1@4,124, 130, 141,         282
   186,189, 198,227,278                           honors, 18,238,251,259,282
                                                   Hoover, Richard, 93
Heathrow airport, London, 89, 103
                                                  Horowitz, Dr. Norman, 156,226,237,275
heavy lifter, 97
                                                   Horton, Victor W.,66
heavy metals, 41
heavy particles, 278                               hotline, 59,298
helicopter, 51, 97, 113, 117, 130, 251, 258,       Hotz, Robert B., 87
                                                   House Committee on. See Congress; general
   274,286,304
Helios program, 272                                   subject.
Helws 1, 8, 49                                     housekeeping, 15
Helios2, 1, 7,49,272,308,337,338                   Housing and Urban Development (HUD), U.S.
heliostat, 240                                        Dept. of, 30
helium, 9,26, 78,88,97, 171,230,242,272            Houston, Texas, 35, 71, 127-128
Hellas (region of Mars), 76                        Houston Baptist Univ., 116


                                                371
                                                   improvements. See new products; new tech-
Houston Intl. Airport, 257
Houston, Univ. of, 128                                 niques.
Howard, Paul W., 33                                inadvertent modification of the stratosphere
Hq: Natl. Aeronautics and Space Administra-            (IMOS), 64
  tion, Headquarters                               incubation, 156, 199-200,215,217,261
HSD. See Hawker Siddeley Dynamics.                 India, 47, 78, 106, 128, 149, 175, 228, 248,
HUD. See Housing and Urban Development.                293
                                                   Indian Ocean, 79, 181, 186, 200, 223, 249,
Hughes, Howard R., 71
Huehes. W. J.. 301                                     280,289
Hu&es’Aircraft Co., 15, 71, 92, 94, 141,           Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO),
                                                       111,228
  183,186,249
human factors, 22, 172                             Indiana, 117
human relations, 250                               Indians. See American Indians.
humanitarian, 48                                   Indonesia, 1, 2, 96, 141, 293, 306, 337, 339
Humboldt State Univ., 24                           Industrial Contractors, Inc., 240
humidity, 38, 179, 248                             industrial Research (magazine), 47,235
Humphrey, Marshall, 61                             industrial waste, 41
Hungary, 128, 163, 219, 224, 238,304               industry-government cooperation, 29, 61, 65,
hunter satellite. See interceptor.                     75, 81, 93, 117, 125, 135, 141, 148, 149,
hunting, 19                                            159, 162, 188, 204, 212, 225, 227, 247,
humcane, 10, 74, 177                                   253, 269,285, 289, 291
hydraulic systems, 169, 170, 259                   inertia, 52, 297
hydrazine, 80, 99, 172                             inert gases, 181
hydrocarbons, 189,216                              Inex Adria Airways, 214
hydrochloric acid, 172                              infection, 252
hydroelectric, 123                                  inflation, 18, 50, 58, 124, 171
hydrofluoric acid, 56                               inflation, economic, 141, 201
hydrogen, 26,36, 50,97, 104, 145, 170, 171,         influence, 161
  240, 250, 259, 262,268                            informationretrieval, 63,68,303
hydrogen bomb, 12,36                                informationtransfer laboratory, GSFC, 151
hydrogeology, 20                                    infrared, 5, 7, 24, 46, 69, 119, 166, 189,
hydrology, 5, 6, 67, 73, 82                             192, 227,247, 277, 279
                                                   -cameras, 5, 7, 10, 130, 132-133, 220
IAF: International Astronautical Federation         -mapping, 67, 69
IBM. See International Business Machines.           -radiometry, 67, 277
ICAO. See International Civil Aviation Organi-      -spectrometer, 43
   zation.                                          -telescope facility, Hawaii, 53, 54
ICAS Interdepartmental Committee for Atmos-         injury, 26, 280
    pheric Sciences                                 inland waterways, 4
ICBM. See intercontinental ballistic missiles.      INMARSAT: International Maritime Satellite
ice, 4, 6, 35, 46, 70, 73, 74, 138, 145, 225,           Organization
    236,247, 251, 294                               innovations. See new products; new techniques.
Ice Age, 289                                        Innsbruck, Austria, 23
Iceland, 122                                        inorganic matter, 155, 157,213,216, 236, 295
Icewarn (project), 4                                insects, 113, 280,306
Idaho, 214, 240                                     inspection, 106, 118, 188
ignition, 267, 273                                  Institute for Solar Research, 52
IL86 (Soviet jumbo jet), 277, 286                   Institute of Nuclear Energetics, USSR, 297
Illinois, 23, 145                                    instrument landing, 66,98,257
Illinois, Univ. of, 187, 302                         Instrument Society of America, 241
illiteracv. 228                                      instrumentation, 35, 4 , 58, 62, 74, 77, 88,
                                                                             4
imaging, 131, 133, 151, 153-155, 158, 165,              93,115,117,123,131,132,145,146,150,
    171, 177, 207, 242, 247, 262, 263, 273,             153, 156, 165, 175, 178, 203, 208, 213,
    279,295,299,303,305                                 217, 221, 222, 223, 224, 229, 230, 239,
Imboden, Otis, 88                                       241, 247, 250, 252, 257, 262, 267, 272,
IMCO. See Intergovernmental Maritime Con-               273,274,275,279,288,294,296,302
    sultative Organization.                          insulation, 50,61, 115, 170,220,236
immigrant, 143                                       integrated subsystem test bed, 25, 64
IMOS. See inadvertent modification of the            integration, 44, 53, 97, 117, 148, 159, 166,
    stratosphere.                                       169
impact, 55,84,134, 140, 148, 162, 167,214,           intelligence, 24, 34, 163, 263, 268, 269, 288,
    239,251,252                                         305-306
Imperial College, London, 301                        INTEISAT. See International Telecommunica-
implants, 37                                            tions Satellite Corporation.



                                                 372
                                                      International Council of Scientific Unions, 68,
Intelsat (comsat) program, 49, 59, 118, 186,
                                                          171
   200,252
                                                      International Geophysical Year, 68
InteZsat 1,92
                                                      International Institute of Space Law, 244
Intelsat IV program, 186
InteZsat N-A, 21,92, 181, 186,252                     International Magnetospheric Study, 49, 68
                                                      International Maritime Satellite Organization
Intelsat IVA-C, 294
                                                          (INMARSAT), 205
InteZsat NA F-1, 18, 78
           -
                                                      International Organizationfor Radio and Tele-
InteZsat N-A F-2, 18, 78, 311, 337, 338
Intelsat V program, 21, 73, 186, 211, 238                 vision. See OIRT.
                                                      International Radio Amateur Satellite Organiza-
interceptor (aircraft; satellites), 34, 163, 164,
                                                          tion, 248
   229,246,280-281,305
                                                      International Solar System Decade, 65
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM), 1,
                                                      International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE), 68,
   32,49, 106, 149,257,283,287,289
                                                          294
Intercosmos program (USSR), 212, 219, 220,
                                                      International Telecommunications Satellite
   225,244,245,304,307
                                                          Organization (INTELSAT), 15, 18, 20, 21,
Intercosmos 15, 128, 321
                                                          73, 119,179,181, 186,200,206,237,239,
Intercosmos 16, 163,325
                                                          275
Interdepartmental Committee for Atmospheric
   Sciences (ICAS), 64                                International Telecommunications Union, 21,
interference, 29, 31, 146, 213,263, 270, 276,             73,263
                                                      International Xme Bureau, Paris, 305
    281, 306
                                                      international trade, 141, 268
interferometry, 78, 213, 290
intergalactic space, 75                               International Ultraviolet Explorer (WE) pro-
                                                          ject, 283, 294
Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative
                                                      International Union of Pure and Applied
    Organization (IMCO), 205
                                                          Physics, 242
Intergovernmental Science, Engineering, and
   Technology Panel, 185                              interplanetary medium, 24
interim test stand, 25                                interplanetary spacecraft, 24,80, 197
                                                      Inter-Soyuz (USSR program), 303
interim upper stage (IUS) for Space Shuttle,
    90, 186, 193                                      Intersputnik (International Organization for
Interior, Dept. of, 116, 144, 201                         Cosmic Telecommunications), 224
International Academy of Astronautics, Paris,         interstellar medium, 32,82,291
    238                                               invention, 39, 50, 90, 102
International Aeronautical Federation. See            Inventions and Contributions Board, NASA,
    Fkd6ration Aeronautique Internationale.               87
 International Air Transport Association              inversion, atmospheric, 105
    (UTA), 283                                        Io (moon of Jupiter), 105
International Amateur Radio Union, 263                ion, 36,45, 142, 272
International Astronautical Federation (IAF),         ion-beam fusion. 9
    65,241,243                                        ionosphere research (see also atmosphere), 20,
International Astronomical Union, 298                     44,233,239,250,2%
 International Business Machines (IBM), 78,            Iowa, 264
    112, 232,248, 254                                  Iowa, Univ. of, 105, 298
International Civil Aviation Organization              IR-100 (award), 235
    (ICAO), 14,212                                     Iran, 44, 76, % 117, 149,269,282
                                                                        ,
 international communications, 21,47, 92, 176,         Ireland, Republic of, 4
                                                       iridium, 162
   276
international cooperation                              iron, 157, 175, 183, 187,209,236,294
-general, 1, 10, 21, 27, 28, 44, 48, 49, 68,           Itwin, Col. James B., 66
   69, 73, 77, 79, 119, 128, 168, 175, 176,            Isabelle (proton collider), 243
    205-207,237,242,243,246,281,306                    Isaksen, Dr. I.S.A., 32
-European, 4, 6, 44, 54, 78, 87, 128, 130,             SEE. See International Sun-Earth Explorer.
    165,249,292                                        Isle Royale National Park, 116
-USSR, 78,80,95,119, 191,212,219,299,                  isotopes, 158, 230, 235, 254
    303,304                                            Israel, 122, 210, 305
-US.-Africa, 20, 41, 122                               Israel, Dr. M r i , 278
                                                                    atn
-U.S.-Asia, 1, 47, 111, 187                            ISRO. See Indian Space Research Organiza-
                   1,9, 10, 14, 302
-U.S.-Canada,                                              tion.
-US.-South America, 7                                  Istanbul, Turkey, 145
-U.S.-USSR, 15,38,39,45,59,73,83,159,                  Italy, 4,20,46,130,165, 187,190,209,210,
    163, 195,231,294,298,304                               211,238,249,271,275,294
-U.S.-W. EWW, 1, 7, 19, 23, 31, 45, 48,                Ithaco, Inc., 298
    49, 53, 93, 95, 113, 116, 125, 135, 149,           Itos program, 133, 165
    164, 165, 198,239,302                              ITOS E-2,295



                                                    373
ITOSH. See Nom 5.                                   Jones, Gen. David C., 231
IUE-A. See International Ultraviolet Explorer.      Jones, Dr. Robert T., 144
IUS (interim upper stage for Space Shuttle).        Jordan, 176,293
   See Space Shuttle, upper stage.                  JPL. See Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
Ivey’s Plumbing and Electrical Co., 72              JSC. See Johnson Space Center.
Ivory Coast, 293                                    judicial ruling, 191
                                                    jumbo jet. See jet aircraft.
J particle, 255                                     Jupiter (planet), 13, 24, 35, 43, 46, 58, 69,
 Jaenicke, Joachim, 238                               71, 103, 168, 189,245,271, 291,294
 J d e , Dr. Leonard, 244                           Jupiter (rocket), 25
 Jakarta, Indonesia, %                              Justice, U.S. Dept. of, 195
 Jakob, Max, memorial award, 186
 Jakobowski, Walter, 100                            Kalinin, USSR, 297
Jamaica, 293                                        Kamchatka, 143
 James, Jack N , 22
                .                                   Kamide, Dr. Yohsuke, 296
jamming, 50, 118, 153,287                           Kamunay, Mt., Philippine Is., 209
 Japan, 44, 50, 68, 179, 186, 187, 210, 239,        Kansas, 55
    244,246447,271,294,307,312                      Kansas City, Mo., 242
 Javelin (sounding rocket), 143                     Kansas City International Airport, 257
JBF Scientific Corp., 125                           Kantrowitz, Dr. Arthur, 35, 39
Jeppesen Sanderson, IN., 209                        kapton, 24
jet, 47, 53, 67, 81, 85, 118, 124, 165, 170,        Karl Marx collective farm, USSR, 193
    180, 187, 189, 190, 191, 194, 220, 227,         Karl Zeiss Jena, 220
    261,269,277,282,304                             Kaufman, Gerald, 269
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)                     Kazakhstcin, USSR, 8, 38, 193,221,250,286
--contracts, 63, 219                                Keefe, Dr. J. Richard, 152
-meetings, 226, 274                                 Kellermann, K.I., 302
-missions, 16, 43, 49, 100, 120, 131, 138-          Kemayoran airport (Indonesia), 96
    140, 146, 148, 152, 155, 160, 168, 175,         Kennedy International Airport, N.Y., 3, 15,
    177,203, 205, 207-209,223, 224                     89, 102, 134, 257,269
-patents, 23, 299                                   Kennedy Space Center (KSC)
-people, 64, 69, 70, 71, 133, 139, 162,227,         -contracts, 78, 113, 145, 271, 300
    254,271, 290,299                                -meetings, 107, 279
-programs, 22, 46, 47, 61, 63, 71, 75, 84,          -missions, 98
    132, 144, 166, 172, 217, 237, 245, 264,         -people, 159, 164, 295
    268, 272,295                                    -programs, 50,70,78,90,%, 113,123,132,
JFK airport. See Kennedy International Airport.        148,164,168-169,199,210,211,261,285,
Jodrell Bank Observatory, U.K., 233                    300,301
Joenz, Capt. Elden, 164                             Kentucky, 151
John F. Kennedy Airport. See Kennedy Inter-         Kentucky State Univ., 113
    national Airport.                               Kenya, 106, 176, 237,293
Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory,           kerosene, 51,80, 111
   1%                                               Kerr, Joseph H., 144
Johns Hopkins Hospital, 99                          Kerwin, Joseph P., 111
Johns Hopkins Univ., 31, 95, 2%                     Ketchum, Rep. William M. (R-Calif.), 222
Johnson, Dr. Bruce B., 161                          kevlar, 24, 25, 59
Johnson, Clarence ‘‘Kelly,” 18                      Khabarovsk, USSR, 262
Johnson, David S., 38                               Khrushchev, Nikita, 273
Johnson Gage, 78                                    kidnev. 20
                                                    KieffLri 6.
Johnson, President Lyndon B., 39                                  Hugh H., 122, 226
Johnson, Dr. T.V., 132                              Kiev, USSR, 276
Johnson Space Center (JSC)                          killer (satellite) system. See interceptor.
--contracts, 27, 47, 91, 112, 145, 161, 162,        Killian, Dr. James R., 185
   170,179,199,220,232-233,265,270,280              Kingsland, Dr. Louis, 153, 156,236
-meetings, 35, 54,65, 72                            Kissinger, Henry, 34, 106, 128, 293
-missions, 11, 36, 53, 74, 112, 142                 Kistiakowsky, Dr. George B., 185
-patents, 167                                       kites, 138
-people, 18, 37, 39, 54, 66, 70, 116, 241,          Kt Peak National Observatory, Ariz., 46,53,
                                                     it
   246,259,277,278,281,288,295,300,301                 71,82
-programs, 4, 11, 14, 54, 59, 60, 90, 93,           Kitty Hawk Flyer, 137,229
   115, 118, 127, 132, 161, 188, 220, 224,          Klate Holt Co., 170
   249,255,256,257,272,279,281                      Klein, Dr. Harold P., 139, 175, 177, 217, 275
Johnston, Bradford, 90                              Klimuk, Pyotr. 92, 129, 171,222
Johnston, Dr. Mary Helen, 95,225, 270               Knowles, S. H., 302
Johnston, Moira, 253                                Kohoutek (comet), 31


                                              374
                                                      Large Space Telescope (future project), 230,
Komarov, V.M., 282
Kondo, Yoji, 116                                          265
                                                      LaRock, Ralph I., 75
Korean W r 145, 158, 178
         a,
                                                      laser (light amplification by stimulated emis-
Kourou, New Guinea, 6,88
                                                          sion of radiation), 9, 14, 17, 23, 35, 52, 83,
Kraemer, Robert S., 100,271
                                                          87,105,144,162,172,197,227,273,276,
Kraft, Dr. Christopher C., Jr., 259,278,301
Kramer, Dr. James J., 285                                 278,280,305
                                                      laser-augmented target acquisition and recogni-
Kratzer, Myron, 149
Krier, Gary, 95, 194                                      tion (latar), 14,273
Krvehl, Herbert W., 2%                                latar. See laser-augmented target acquisition
                                                          and recognition.
Krstic, Dr. D., 245
                                                      Latimer, Allie D., 288
krypton, 226
KSC. See Kennedy Space Center.                        Latin America, 106
Kuhn, Dr. Peter M., 277                               latitude, 17, 261,2%
                                                      Latter, Robert, 157
Kuiper airborne observatory, 82
                                                       launch. See individual mission; appendixes.
Kurchatov Institute, 36
                                                       launch-abort system (for Space Shuttle), 89,
Kursk, USSR, 297
                                                           169
kuru (laughing disease), 252
                                                       launch complex 14, KSC, 285
G l O l l flriStar, Lockheed jet transport), 179,      launch complex 41, KSC, 148
   180,190,191,282                                     launch facility, 1, 6, 7, 9, 18, 19, 27, 29,
Lband telemetry, 115, 229                                  32, 88, 97, 168, 230, 267, 283
labeled-release experiment (Viking), 156, 175,        launch registration, 128
   177, 199,216,260                                   launch vehicle (see also Ariane; Delta; Saturn;
labor unions, 120, 198,206                                Titan), 7, 9, 18, 25, 28, 31, 44, 49, 50,
LACIE. See large-area crop inventory experi-              51, 64,65, 73, 79, 80,82, 87,88, 90, 94,
   ment.                                                  95, 97, 99, 102, 149, 150, 198, 211, 218,
Ladish Co., 82                                            235, 239, 240, 243, 249, 250, 261, 262,
Lageos (laser geodynamic satellite), 1, 23, 87,           268, 275, 276, 279, 283, 289, 290, 295,
   317,337, 339                                           297,299,300,301
LaGuardia airport, N.Y., 198                           launches, DOD.
Laird, Melvin, 158                                    -AMSl, 214,327
Lake Cowichan, B.C., 201                                           -9, 50,313
Lake Superior, 117                                    -NOS 1, 316
Lambda-Airtron Div., 162                              -P-76-5, 102,318,339
Lambert glacier, Antarctica, 294                      S D S - 2 , 325
laminar-flow control, 231,280                          4 E S P 74-2,323
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, 300             S o l r a d l l a , l l b , 50,313
Land, Elwood W., 89                                    S S U - 1 , - 2 , 3 , 316-317
land lines, 18                                         -TZP3. 203.327.340
land use, 105, 237, 262, 305                           -unspecified; 133; 141, 219, 312, 314, 319,
lander, 146, 147, 153, 160, 207, 217, 223,                 321,322,323,328,335
   224,260,263,264, 295                                launches, NASA
landing, 84,98,120-122,138-140, 142,146,               -Corntar 1, 2,94,252,317,339
   147, 148, 151, 153, 155, 160, 162, 168,             -Corntar 2, 157,290,324,339
   203,205,208,221,232,251,257, 260                    -Cts 1, 1,9,249,308,338
landing rights, 3, 103, 195                            --Gravity Probe A, 126,321,339
Landsat program, 4, 20, 69, 80, 133, 144,              4 e l w s 2, 1, 7,49, 272, 308, 338
   151,171,204,237,262,268-269,282,302,                -Zntekat N-A F-2, 18, 78, 311, 338
   305                                                 --Lageos, 1, 23,87, 317,339
La&& 1,69,204                                          ---Marisat 1,2,31,60,89,115,249,312,338
Landsat 2,303                                          4 a r i s u t 2, 115,249,319,339
Landsat-C, 294                                         -Marisat 3, 223,249,329,340
Langley medal, 40                                      -Nata I[Z-A, 2, 79, 315, 338
Langley Research Center (LaRC)                          -Nom 5 (JTOSH), 165, 192, 295, 325, 339
--contracts, 101, 231                                   2-76-5(DOD), 102, 318, 339
--missions. 100                                         -Pahpu 1, 1-2, 133, 141, 323, 339
-people, 18, 38,47,87, 100, 148, 171, 271,              S u t e o m 2, 61,65,315,338
   277,285,295                                          -TIP 3 (DOD), 203,327,340
-programs, 30, 47, 60, 66, 101, 117, 267,               lava, 122, 146, 148,213-214,281
   280,303                                              law, 65, 161, 165, 172, 195,229, 244
language, 119,207,214                                   Lawson, Dr. James R.,247
LaRC. See Langley Research Center.                      lawsuit. See court cases.
large-area crop inventory experiment (LACIE),           LDEF. See long-durationexposure facility.
   198                                                  lead (element), 41


                                                    375
 leakage, 120, 170                                    Livermore Laboratory (Univ. of Calif.), 216
 Lear 4 (1974 Spacelab mission), 227                  loading, 24, 77
Learjet, %,98, 231                                   lobbying, 161, 195
 Lebedev Physics Institute, USSR, 278                location-reporting system, 184, 251
 Le Bourget International Airport, Paris, %           Lock Haven, Pa., 109
 Lederberg, Dr. Joshua K., 204                        Lockheed Aircraft Corp., 47, 70, 72,102,164,
 Lee, Chester M., 91, 245                                179,180,186,190,191,219,231,282,302
Lee, Gentry, 236                                      Lockheed Electronics Go. of Houston, 179
Legostayev, V.P., 246                                Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., 141, 186,
Lemonnier crater (moon), 183, 197                       220
Leningrad, USSR, 212                                  Loening, Grover, 39, 90
Leningrad Arctic and Antarctic Institute, 6          Logan International Airport, Boston, 51, 96
Leninsk (USSR launch site), 29, 221                  logistics, 163, 232
Leonov, Aleksey, 73, 282                              London, England, 3, 102, 181,205406,269,
Les 8, Les 9 (Lincoln experimental satellites,          300,301
    DOD comsats), 50, 313                            London, Univ. of, 218
leukemia, 20                                         Long, Rep. Clarene D. (D-Md.), 149
Levin, Dr. Gilbert, 156, 175, 178, 275               long-duration exposure facility, 101
levitators, 297                                      Long Island, N.Y., 133, 242
Lewin, Dr. Walter, 101                               long-range planning, 12
Lewis Research Center (LeRC)                         Lop Nor (PRC test and launch facility), 255
-contracts, 149, 181,211                             Los Alamos, N.M., 36,83
-people, 37, 49, 54, 186, 277, 285, 295              Los Angeles, Calif., 18, 35, 37, 46, 60, 82,
-programs, 4, 10, 81, 112, 115, 116, 117,               120, 257
    144, 167,213, 235, 247, 261, 280, 285            Los Angeles International Airport, 198, 257
lexan (material), 59, 201                            Louisiana, 40,204
Lexington, Ky., 160                                  Louisville, Univ. of, 152
Leyden, John F., 167, 198                            Love, Lt. Col. Michael A., 44
LGB (laser-guided bomb), 276                         Lovelace, Dr. Alan M., 129
liability, 244, 253, 280, 287                        Low, Dr. George M., 13, 28, 54, 80, 129, 163
liaison, 48,65                                       low-temperature research, 170
Libbey-Owens-Ford Co., 116                           Lowell. Percival. 100
Liberia, 31, 293                                     Lowell Observatory, 76, 100
Library of Congress, 111, 112                        LTV Corp., 53
Libya, 20, 176, 293                                  Lucas, Dr. William R., 126, 150
licensing, 188, 231                                  Lucey Boiler Co., 77
life forms, 32                                       luminescence, 1, 14
life in space. See extraterrestrial life.            Luna 16, 183, 1%
life-detection instruments, 17, 146, 203, 205,       Luna 17, 183
    208,236-237,274,295                              Luna20, 183,1%
life sciences, 28, 104, 197, 274, 287                Luna21, 183
life support, 59,60, 145, 160,232                    Lwta23, 183
lifetime (satellite; instrument), 44,62,80, 118,     Luna 24, 182, 196, 300,307, 326
    123, 159,212,213,236, 291                        lunar landing, 5, 11, 19, 35, 36, 39, 50, 51,
lifting-body program, 44                                131, 183, 194,205
light, 1, 14, 26, 45, 60, 71, 83, 101, 115,          Lunar O b t r 5 183
                                                             rie .
    132,200,215,221,227,235,245,272                  lunar research,’ 11, 35, 36, 52, 54, 69, 74,
lighter-than-air vehicles. See airships; balloons.      76,131,168,171,183-184,192,205,212,
light years, 23                                         246,264,272,281,300
lightning, 132, 249, 279                             lunar sampIe curatorial facility (at JSC), 28,
Lin, Robert P., 132                                     57,246.300
Lincoln, President Abraham, 138                      lunarsamples, 54,76,119,196, 215,246,300
Lincoln Laboratory, MIT, 233                         Lunar Science Conference, 3 5 , M
Lind, Dr. David, 297                                 Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., 35, 54,
Lindbergh, Charles A., 137, 255                         300
Lindley, Robert N., 248                              Lundin, Dr. Bruce T., 49
Lippisch, Dr. Alexander M., 28                       Lunetta (proposed space reflector), 245
Liwcomb, Pmf* William N.. 254                        Lunney, Glynn S., 277
likid, 156, 193, 302                                 Lunokhod (Soviet mobile moon lander), 183,
                            ”

liquid fuel, 51, 138, 170, 172,240, 259,262,            197,209
    283                                              Lynchburg, Va., 239
liquid metallic hydrogen, 104                        Lyra (constellation), 115
Lisbon, Portugal, 277
Littlefield, Robert, 150                               M-2 (lifting body), 44,241
Litton Industries, Inc., 162, 302                      M-1008 (India rockets), 128


                                                 376
                                                  maons (particles), 243
McCeney, Pad, 293
McCord, Dr. Thomas B., 132                        mapping, 4, 20, 32, 67, 69, 84, 120, 131,
                                                    151, 168,209,213,247
McCoy, Gene, 159
MacCracken, William P., Jr., 85                   marble, 137
McDonald, Rob Roy, 22
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp., 47,         maria (“seas” on moon), 214
                                                  Marine Corps, U S , 98, 164, 184,265
                                                                  ..
   50, 53, 91, 94, 124, 127, 163, 164, 180,
   184, 187, 191, 198, 214, 230, 240, 253,        marine life, 67, 169,237
                                                  Mariner project, 15, 43, 49, 65, 71, 100, 245,
   258,282,289,296,302
McDowetl. Ed. 124                                    271, 272, 294
           ,
          --I   ~~




M c E ~ Y Dr. William D.,1
           ,                                      Mariner 7, 16
Mchtyre, Sen. Thomas J. (D-N.H.), 158             Mariner 9, 52,76, 121, 162,295
McLucas, Dr. JohnL., 16,125,134,149,257,          Marisat (maritime satellite system), 1, 31, 37,
   274,282                                           60,78,89,223, 249, 252
                                                  Marisat I , 2, 31, 60, 89, 115, 223, 249, 312,
McKinley Climatic Laboratory, USAF, 170
McMaster, L Roy, 109
             .                                       337,338
                                                  Marisat 2, 115, 223,249,319,337, 339
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, 79,294
                                                  Marisat 3 (Marisat-C), 223, 249, 329, 337,
McMumy, Thomas C., 66
McPhemn, R.L., 301                                    340
                                                  maritime communications, 89, 115, 205-206,
McNamara, Robert, 158
                                                     223,249,263
macrosegregation. 95
Madison Square Garden, N.Y., 120                  Maritime Safety Committee, IMCO, 206
Madrid, Spain, 4  6                               Marots (ESA maritime comsat), 130, 192,209
Magellanic Cloud, 7                               Mars (planet). See also Viking.
magnesium, 187                                    -data, 35,46,55,76,83,@, 119, 162,194,
magnetic phenomena, 14, 15, 33, 36, 43, 45,          220,246, 263-264, 281,294
   49, 54, 58, 68, 75, 131, 143, 160, 197,        -future, 13, 160, 166, 168, 196, 211, 225-
   230, 290, 294, 296,301                             226,235,264-265
magnetometer, 132, 290, 296, 297                  -manned mission, 12, 34
magnetosphere. See atmosphere; see also Jupi-     -Viking mission, 15, 17, 43, 49, 77, 100-
   ter.                                               101,120-122,137,138-140,146-147,14&
mail carriers, 135,286                                149,151-157,175,177,178,192,199-200,
Maine, 242                                           203,205,207-209,215-216,217-218,223-
maintenance, 15,74,112,113,190,220,231,               224,236-237,245,260-261,271,274-275,
   302, 303                                           295
malaria, 306                                      Mars I (USSR spacecraft), 15
malfunction, 60, 89, 93, 135, 140, 143, 169,       Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
   170,205,208, 214, 224, 239,260, 263            -contracts, 47, 72, 77, 82, 107, 116, 130,
Mali, 293                                             142, 150, 168, 169, 188, 190, 191, 198,
management, 4.2,90,153,159, 161,164,166,              203, 211, 218, 232, 240, 24.8, 258, 262,
   204, 224, 232, 241, 24.2, 257, 268, 276,           278, 300
   277, 293,298                                   -meetings, 75, 106, 148, 179, 218, 279
Management and Technical Services Co., 242        -missions, 23, 123, 148, 194
Manchester, Univ. of (U.K.), 132                  -patents, 33, 70, 144, 158
maneuver, 95, 120, 264                            -people, 81, 142, 158, 170, 194, 225, 227,
Manicouagan, Quebec, 55                               267, 270, 276, 278, 290, 295, 297
Manila, P.I., 96, 209, 239                         -programs, 25, 26, 27, 29, 37, 47, 48, 50,
manmade materials, 25,64, 135                         62, 63, 72, 80, 82, 90, 93, 95, 97, 101,
manned space flight                                   115, 124, 126, 141, 144, 150, 166, 168,
-future, 34, 35, 65, 74, 92, 107, 113, 127,           169, 179, 198-199, 204, 210, 225, 227,
    160,166,176,188,198,203,222,232,289               232, 235, 239, 240, 241, 249, 262, 265,
-history, 25, 37, 38-39, 54, 75, 91, %, 130,          267, 276
    147,162,178,231,238,241,243246,264,            marsquake, 153, 154, 155,208,224,237,295
   270,277,281,282,283,285,298-299,305             Martin, James, Jr., 43, 100, 121, 138, 148,
--policy, 8,89-90, 142, 145, 159, 192, 270            153, 156, 207-209, 217, 224, 271
-?raining, 118, 163, 194, 220,224,227,229,         Martin Marietta Aerospace Co., 73, 108, 116,
   255,256,257, 259, 301                              150, 170, 186, 209, 2444 271
-USSR, 5, 12, 15, 41, 73, 76, 92, 112, 129,        Marvin, Dr. Henry H., 219
    140, 171, 188, 190, 193, 204, 219, 220-        Maryland, 19, 57, 111, 151, 262
   222,250-251, 255,260, 303,304                   Maryland Point, Md., 151
a t h e r countries, 4.95, 123, 14.8                Maryland, Univ. of, 104
 Manned Spacecraft Center, 54,                      mascons (mass concentrations), 131, 183
 manpower. See employment.                          maser (microwave amplification by stimulated
 man-powered flight, 79                               emission o radiation), 127, 150
                                                                f
 Manson, Al, 229                                    Mason-Reguard, 199


                                                377
Masri, Sid, 191                                   metals, 60,95, 1W, 126, 140, 141,147, 183,
mass production, 227, 271                           187,222, 236,250,268, 285,294,303
mass spectrometer, 17, 142, 146, 155, 156         meteor, 37, 140, 187, 214, 236
Massachusetts, 124, 233                           Meteor (Soviet weather-satellite program), 73,
Mass. Institute of Technology, 23, 36, 69, 101,     307
  132, 208, 233, 236, 254, 268, 274, 297          Meteor24 (USSR metesat), 315
Mass., Univ. of, 74, 102                          Meteor 25,317
Masunky, Dr. Harold, 77, 121                      Meteor 26,329
materialsengineering, 24,61,88,93, 117, 166       meteorite, 35, 55, 56, 162, 171, 300
materials processing in space, 22, 65, 95, 96,    meteoroid. 105. 107. 252
                                                            I    ,



  107, 126, 203, 225, 250, 279, 292, 297,         meteorology, 5, 6, 10, 19, 34, 35, 44,46, 51,
  342, 343                                          65, 74, 76, 77, 79, 97, 106, 119, 132, 143,
materials (see also ceramics; composites: crys-     145, 165, 177, 189, 190, 192, 195, 203,
  tals; metals; synthetics), 7, 60, 131, 140,       209, 214, 217, 224, 225, 235, 236, 249,
  162, 166, 169, 184,225, 236, 272, 275,            250, 257. 261. 262, 279. 289. 291, 295,
 290                                                296.348
mathematics, 254                                  M e t k a t (proposed European satellite), 130,
Mathews, Charles W., 6, 38, 90                      192, 213,248,271,294
matter, 25, 82                                    metesats, 192,214,271,289, 293,294
Matthofer, Hans, 213                              methane, 40,70, 77
Mauna Kea, Hawaii, 53                             Methodist Hospital, Houston, Tex., 127
Maxwell (area of Venus), 214                      methodology, 57,228
Maxwell, James Clark, 214                         Metric Conversion Act of 1975,274
ME 163B (aircraft), 28                            metric system, 135, 274
Meal Systems for the Elderly, 11, 111             Metropolitan Wayne County Airport, 257
mechanical problems, 143, 154, 156, 200,          Mexico, 5, 10, 56, 205
  203, 217, 223, 224, 251, 253, 260, 261,         Miami, Univ. of, 132
  290                                             Michigan, 116, 171
media, 39, 100, 105, 151, 154, 187, 195, 220,     Michigan, Univ. of, 123, 216, 247
 230, 250, 262, 269, 270, 273, 280                Michoud Assembly Facility, La., 72, 150, 169,
medical-data communication, 93, 106                 170, 258
MedicadMedicaid, 13                               microbe, 156,274
medicine (see also technology utilization), 10,   microcomputer, 229
  13, 20, 37, 64, 66, 93, 106, 126, 130, 148,     microdetection, 47
  159, 167, 171-172, 188, 203, 236, 251,          microexplosion, 278
 254, 255                                         micrometeorites, 8
Medicine Hat, Utah, 288                           microorganisms, 156,217,226,274-275,289
Mediterranean, 20, 45, 123                        microphones, 300
Medvedev, Zhores, 273                             microprocessors, 229, 240
melting, 55, 297                                  microshock, 140
memorial, 5, 25, 41, 51, 255, 282, 285            microwave scanning-beam landing system, 98
Mendeleyev elements, 184                          microwaves, 10, 46, 80, 132, 150, 197, 219,
Mendenhall, Ted, 229                                247,275, 288
Mendota, Va., 109                                 Middendorf, J. William, 230
Meng, Dr. Ching, 2%                               Middle East, 27
Menges, Constantine, 182                          MiG25 (Foxbat, Soviet aircraft), 210, 246
Menzel, Dr. Donald H., 297                        military aircraft, 18, 81, 117, 138, 210, 257,
Menzies, Dr. Robert T., 227                         273,304
Merck & Co., 254                                  military communications, 50, 117
Mercure (French jet aircraft), 180, 187           military procurement, 268, 271
mercury (element), 41                             miyitary space activity, 7, 13,50, 79, 112, 117,
Mercury (planet), 35, 52, 55, 105                   133,255, 257,260
Mercury (program), 39, 90                         Milky Way (galaxy), 33, 75
Mercury 6, 91                                     Mill Village, N.S., 201
Mercury capsule, 90                               Miller, Charles O., 253
Mercury-Redstone (rocket), 25                     Miller, James C., In, 285
Memll, Dick, 98                                   Milwaukee. Wis.. 36
MESH: European consortium comprising              minerals, 69, 122, 131, 155, 171, 175, 209,
 Matra (France), ERN0 (W. Germany),                 221,223,224,237,245,272,293,301
 Saab-Scania (Sweden), Hawker Siddeley-           miniaturization, 147, 292
 British Aerospace, INTA (Spain), Fokker-         mining, 41, 127, 151, 191
  VFW (Holland), and Aeritalia (Italy), 209       Ministry of Higher and Specialized Secondary
Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm, 28, 165, 249            Education, USSR, 297
metabolism, 156,177,203,208,216-217,237           Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
metallurgy, 184,270                                 India, 228


                                              378
Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications,         Montgomery, Ala., 262
  USSR, 263                                       Montgomery Ward, 70
                                                  Montoya, Sen. Joseph M. (D-N.M.), 270
Minneapolis, Minn., 116
Minneapolis Honeywell. See Honeywell Inc.         Montreal, Canada, 200, 205,218
                                                  monument, 51
Minnesota, Univ. of, 278
Minor Planet Center (IAU), 298                    moon, earth's (see also lunar research)
minority, 142, 283, 303                           -history, 5, 18, 19, 37, 50-51, 54, 76, 90,
Minority Institutions Research Program,              97,137,146,147,148,150,211,215,233,
  276                                                243, 245, 256, 294, 298-299, 305
Minuteman (ICBM), 49                              -proposed missions, 131, 168,203,212,264
mirror, 7, 53, 62, 94, 173, 241)                  -USSR missions, 112, 119, 182-184, 1%-
MIRV. See multiple independently targeted re-        197,204-205,209,300
  entry vehicle.                                  -use in research, 25, 35, 46, 49, 54-57, 63,
missile (see also individual missiles; types of      69, 128, 131, 171,213-214,246
  missile; missile systems), 32, 47, 53, 106,        ALSEPs (Apollo lunar-surface experiment
  151, 158, 165, 184, 229, 261, 286, 287,               packages), 11, 36, 52, 74, 272
  288                                                rocks, 55, 57, 171, 183,215,246,272,300
mission control, 61, 112, 142, 146, 148, 153,        tree, 150
   155,200, 224, 232,261,264                      moonquakes, 11,37, 74
                                                  Moore, R. Gilbert, 245
mission specialists, 46, 59, 142, 222
Mississippi, 40, 225, 232, 240, 244               Moran, John, 105
                                                  Morgan, Maj. George T. Jr., 164
Mississippi River, 117
                                                  Morgan, Thomas H., 116
Missouri, Univ. of, 145
 MIT. See Mass. Institute of Technology.           Morley, Lawrence, 244
Mitchell, Cdr. Edgar D., 11, 19                    Morocco, 176, 293
MJS-A and B (Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mis-           Moms, Dr. Elliott C., 208
   sions), 294                                     Morrison, Dr. David, 71, 105
 mobile landers, 208, 264                          Morton, Louis, 28
mobility, 31, 60, 118, 264, 289                    Mory, Robert, 48
Mobility -Equipment Research and Develop-          mosaic, 138
  ment Command, U.S. Army, 271                     Moscow, USSR, 8, 36, 76, 78, 80, 129, 140,
mockup, 15, 113, 270                                  183,212,219,220,262,277,286,298,300
model, 25, 27, 41, 43, 58, 78, 113, 131, 146,      Moscow Institute of State and Law, 244
   159, 168, 172, 189, 195, 218, 267, 279,         Moscow State Univ., 45
                                                   Mosely, Terrell E., Inc., 239
  287,291, 292
Modisette, Jerry L., 115                           Moss, Sen. Frank E. (D-Utah), 62, 151
modular construction, 47, 60, 198, 278,            Mossinghoff, Gerald A., 65
  2%                                               motion pictures, 41, 71, 154
                                                   motion sickness, 256
Mogavero, Louis, 75
                                                   Motoren-und-Turbinen Union, 165
Mohr, Col. George C., 172
                                                   mountains, 11, 31, 35, 84, 218
moisture, 57, 179, 226
                                                   Mt. Kamunay, Philippine Is., 209
Moldavia, 177
                                                   Mt. Palomar Observatory, 25
molecular structure, 104
molecule, 139, 150, 199, 215, 225, 236, 254,       Mozambique, 306
  290                                              MRCA: multirole combat aircraft
                                                   MSFC. See Marshall Space Flight Center.
Molniya (Soviet comsat) pmgram, 59, 262,
                                                   MSBLS. See microwave scanning-beam land-
  272,307
Molniya 1-AH, 309                                     ing system.
                                                   Mueller, D . George E., 243
                                                              r
Molniya 1-AJ, 313
                                                   Muhleman, Dr. Duane O., 132
Molniya I-AK, 314
Molniya I-AL, 324                                  multichannel spectral analyzer, 268
Molniya 2-R, 331                                   multinational convention (on registration of
Molniya 111, 59                                       objects launched into space), 128
Molniya 3-E, 317                                   multiple independently targeted reentry vehicle
Molniya 3-F, 335                                      (MIRV), 283
                                                   multiple sclerosis, 252
Molodezhnaya (USSR) base, Antarctica, 294
                                                   multirole combat aircraft. See Tornado.
molybdenum, 157
Mondale, Sen. Walter F. (D-Minn.), 161             Munich, Federal Republic of Germany, 200
                                                   municipality, 2 0
                                                                  8
Mongolia, 219,224,3@4
monitoring, 7, 24, 38, 41, 50, 60, 67, 71, 98,     Murray, Dr. Bruce C., 69,71, 119, 139,245
                                                   museums, 66,127, 137, 159, 163, 215
   105, 119, 145, 151, 165, 171, 175, 176,
                                                   Musgrave, Dr. Story, 14, 132
  229, 230, 237, 240, 244, 250, 255, 267,
                                                   music, 190
  279,280,288,291,300,303,305
                                                   Mustang (P-51 aircraft), 275
Montana, 214,294
                                                   Mutch, Dr. Thomas, 153, 166,207
Montgomery, Dr. Oscar, 276


                                              379
MX (intercontinental ballistic missile), 1, 32        Coast Guard, 4, 130
mylar, 171                                            Commerce, 26
                                                      DOD, 129
N (Japanese liquid-fuel rocket), 44, 307              EDA, 93
NAA. See National Aeronautic Association.             ERDA, 13, 27, 29, 67, 75, 83, 94, 102,
NACA. See National Advisory Committee for                 112, 116, 124, 141, 142, 144, 167
   Aeronautics.                                       FAA, 94, 103
Nace, David A., 293                                   HUD, 30
Naeher, Willis K., 59                                 Interior, 116
Naimbi, Kenya, 106,237                                NAS, 101
Nantucket Island, 303                                 Navy, 46,95,97, 115, 132, 151
NaPO. See NASA Pasadena Office.                       NIH, 23
NASA. See National Aeronautics and Space               NOAA, 119, 132, 165
   Administration.                                     NSF, 63
NASA Pasadena Office, 63                               states, 38,44,60,69,93, 111, 113
NASA Planetary Geology Wice, 166                       user communities, 57, 101
NASA Tech Brie&, 63                                  National Aeronautics and Space Council, 48
NASA Technology Utilization Office, 63, 75           National Air and Space Museum, 41, 137, 163,
NASA-unique requirements, 90                           215,231,278,299,305
Nashville, Tenn., 73                                 National Air Races, 275
Nathanael Greene (nuclear submarine), 159            National Archives and Records Service
National Academy of Sciences, 52, 68, 101,             (NARS), 28, 199
   216,306                                           National Association of Black Manufacturers,
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics            303
   (NACA), 5, 38, 54, 62, 186                        National Association of Home Builden, 30
National Aeronautic Association, 79, 85, 96,         National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, 33
   98, 109, 164,229, 275,282                         National Broadcasting Company (NBC), 152
National Aeronautics and Space Administra-           National Bureau of Standards, 30, 290, 305
   tion (NASA). See also aeronautical research;      National Center for Atmospheric Research
   aircraft; Apollo program; astronaut; biology;       (NCAR), 32, 77, 190, 272
   communications; contractors; international        National Civil Service League, 259, 278
   cooperation; launches, NASA: (separate) list-     National Committee for Space Research (India),
   ings for NASA centers (ARC, DFRC,                    111
                                                     National Environmental Policy Act, 172
   GSFC, JPL, JSC, KSC, M C , LeRC,
                                                     National Environmental Satellite Service
   MSFC, WFC); manned space flight; Mars;
                                                       (NESS), 24,38, 192,279
   moon; power sources; safety; Space Shut-
                                                     National Fire Prevention and Control Admini-
   tle; space station; Viking project.
                                                       stration, 26
--commemorations, 5, 25, 28, 62, 70, 107,
                                                     National Gallery of Art, 137
   132, 137, 143, 147, 187, 210, 222, 238,
                                                     National Geographic Society, 88, 231, 283
   243, 285,292
                                                     National Heat Transfer Conference, 186
-development, 11,23,26,33,38,40-41,50,
                                                     National Humcane Center, 177
   5 W , 61, 69, 81, 83, 87, 89, 90,93, 97,
                                                     National Institute for Neurological Diseases,
   102, 111, 113, 117, 145, 166, 188, 225,
                                                       255
   258,262,291
                                                     National Institutes of Health, 23
-funding, 1, 12, 13, 43, 58, 75, 91, 129,
                                                     National Medal of Science, 133, 254
   192,201,224,230,267, 274
                                                     National Needs Science Faculty Professional
-management, 1, 23, 53, 57, 63, 76, 89, 93,
                                                        Development (NSF progam), 283
   %,99, 111, 117, 129, 133, 145,224,228,
                                                     National Oceanic and Atmosoheric Administra-
   267, 271, 277, 280, 285, 289, 295, 298,
                                                        tion (NOAA), 5, 10, 17, k, 32, 38, 47, 57,
   303
                                                        88,117,119,132,160,165,177,189,192,
-people, 6, 12, 13, 17, 19, 28, 38, 48, 49,
                                                        204, 241, 261, 277, 279, 294, 296, 301,
   50, 51, 53, 54, 64, 65, 69, 70, 71, 75,
   77, 79,83,90,%, 99,133, 145, 163, 164,               304,307,337,339
                                                     National Operational Meteorological Satellite
   178, 190, 193, 231, 237, 241, 247, 248,
                                                        System (NOMSS), 165
   250,259,271,277,278,285,288
                                                     National Parachute Test Range, 98
-plans,     1, 21-22, 34, 46, 53, 65, 68, 75,
                                                     National Park Service, 116
   80,84, 126, 131, 142, 168, 171, 197,230,
                                                     National Patterns o R&D Resources, 192
   235,288,294, 2%                                                        f
                                                     National Plan for Energy Research, A , 133
-programs, 13, 17, 35, 47, 66, 72, 75, 82,
                                                     national policy, 18, 22, 102, 107, 191, 228,
   91,95, 100, 103, 111, 126, 142, 166, 194,
                                                        229,250,263,268,274,286, 287
   210,213,235,263,290,2%
                                                     national priorities, 9, 16, 34, 119, 265, 282
-research (joint projects):
                                                     National Public Radio (NPR), 125
   AID, 106
                                                     National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 32,
   Air Force, 49, 50, 61,90,99, 102, 170
                                                        33,302
   Amy, 113


                                                   380
                                                New Mexico Institute of Mining & Technol-
national research centers, 7
National Research Council (NRC), 272               ogy, 132
National Research Council, Canada, 302          New Mexico State Univ., 72
National Safety Council, 79                     New Orleans, 41, 72, 132, 144, 150
National Science and Technology Policy,         new products, 6, 23, 24, 26, 37, 47, 50, 59,
                                                   61, 70, 75, 102, 135, 147, 162, 166, 167,
  Organization, and Priorities Act, 185
                                                   169, 188, 203, 213, 235, 246, 273, 276,
National Science Foundation (NSF), 1, 6, 7,
                                                   291,298,299
  13, 17, 32, 50, 63, 74, 82, 151, 184, 191,
                                                new techniques, 6, 11, 17, 19, 20, 24, 30, 33,
  192,201,274,283, 287,289,294,302
National Security Council, 92, 185                 38,4Q, 45,46,59,63, 126, 135, 14Q, 158,
National Security Industrial Association, 158      159, 167, 188, 203, 205, 225, 249, 254,
National Space Club, 49                            257,267,270,275,279,291, 302
                                                New York, 19, 29, 35, 102, 121, 145, 152,
National Space Institute, 12
                                                   187, 195,218,257,267,269, 273
National Space Technology Laboratories
                                                New York, State Univ. of, 25, 155
  (NSTL), 25,40,64,93,114, 169,190,232,
                                                New York, Univ. of, 132
  235,240,295
                                                New Zealand, 64,261,294
National Transportation Safety Board, 15, 16,
  134,253, 263,282                              Newcomb, Simon, 305
                                                Newfoundland, 46
National Weather Service, 190,247
                                                Newman, Robert A., 145
National Women’s Political Caucus, 270
                                                news (see also media), 36, 151, 154, 220, 262
native Americans, 72
NATO. See North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-       Niagara Falls, N.Y., 143
                                                nickel, 41, 141, 181, 213, 291
  tion.
NATO IIIA, 2, 79,315,337,338                    Nigeria, 73, 136
NATO IIIB, 79,294                               nighttime operations, 10, 66, 74, 115, 165,
                                                   215,245,250
natural gas, 41,50,58,281
                                                NIH. See National Institutes of Health.
Naugle, Dr. John E., 235
                                                Nike-Cajun (rocket), 239
Navajo, 288
Naval Observatory, U.S., 305                    Nike-Tomahawk, 187
Naval Research Laboratory, U.S., 31, 47, 99,    Nile River, 20, 41, 123, 306
  101, 132, 150,229,302,343                     Nimbw 6, 29, 146
Naval Weapons Center, 88, 160                   Nimbus-G, 303
navigation, 24, 50, 51, 61, 66, 74, 106, 124,   1976-AA (asteroid), 25
   146,148,181,20~206,229,235,247,274,          Nippon Electric Company, 239
                                                nitrogen, 78, 153, 155, 170, 271
  294,299,306
                                                nitrogencompounds, 17, 33, 57, 76, 80, 189,
Navigation Technology Satellite (SN), 181,
                                                   216, 236, 304
  291
nebula, 56                                      Nitze, Paul, 32
Navy, U.S. (see also Naval Observatory; Naval   Nixon, President Richard M., 48, 91, 151,
  Research Lab; Naval Weapons Center), 46,          158,185
  50, 53, 60, 83, 89, 95, 96, 97, 115, 160,     NOAA. See National Oceanic and Atmospher-
   181,184,203,223,230,247,285,292,294             ic Administration.
NCAR. See National Center for Atmospheric       NOM 4 , 119,192,295
                                                NOUQ5 FOS-H), 165, 192, 295, 325, 337,
  Research.
Nedelin, Marshal Mitrofan, 273                     339
Nellis AFB, Nev., 184                            Nobel prizes, 204, 251,254,278
neoprene, 60                                    noise, 3, 27, 33, 103, 113, 117, 124, 125,
Neptune (planet), 43                                144, 149, 168, 172, 240, 258, 267, 277,
NESS. See National Environmental Satellite         285,286
                                                Nolan, Bernard T., 195
  Service.
Netherlands, 4, 23, 4 8 119, 194, 207, 209,      nominations, 129, 151
                       .,
  279                                            NOMSS. See National Operational Meteoro-
                                                   logical Satellite System.
neurology, 37,254
neutral-buoyancy simulator, 270                 nonprofit groups, 52, 1%
neutrinos, 26                                    Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 194, 207, 279
neutron stars, 93                                Nordberg, Dr. William, 237
Nevada, 121                                      Norflor Construction Co., 271
                                                 North America, 18,144
New Bedford Gas Co., 125
New England, 51                                  North American Air Defense Command
New England Research Applications Center,          (NORAD), 214
   188                                           North American Div., Rockwell Intl. Cop.,
New Guinea, 252                                     107, 137, 275
new metals, 104                                  North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
                                                    1, 2,48, 117, 315, 337, 338
New Mexico, 9, 16, 27, 31, 51, 88,238, 241,
                                                 North Carolina State Univ., 119, 190
   270,280


                                            38 1
Noah Pole, 6, 27, 74                             offshore installations, 6,31,89,93, 118, 304
Northern Research & Engineering Co., 130         O’Hare International Airport, Chicago, 68, 89,
Northrop C o p , 19,27,57,95,165,273,302            167,257
Northrup Inc., 116                               Ohio, 54, 91, 151, 270
“Northwest Territory” (on Mars), 138             Ohio State UNv., 298
Northwestern Univ., 37                           oil, 6, 11, 37, 41, 58, 102, 111, 122, 123,
Norway, 48, 79, 117,263,276,294,301,343             171, 176, 177, 181, 213, 237, 245, 280,
NOSS 1 (Navy ocean-survey satellite), 316           301,303
nova, 56                                         oil spills, 105, 303
Noyes, Blanche W%ox, 275                         OIRT (International Organization for Radio
NPR. See National Public Radio.                     and Television), 225
NRAO. See National Radio Astronomy Obser-        O’Keefe, Dr. John A., 171
  vatory.                                        Okero, Isaac Omolo, 238
NRC. See National Research Council.              Okhotsk, USSR, 143
NRL. See Naval Research Laboratory.              Oklahoma, 66, 213,257
NSTL. See National Space Technology Lamora-      Oklahoma State Univ., 123
  tones.                                         Olympic games, 10, 23, 154, 200
nuclear arms agreement, 1, 34                    Olympus Mons (on Mars), 218
nuclear energy, 9, 11, 12, 24, 48, 50, 57, 83,   Oman, 176,293
  99, 101, 118, 236, 238, 253, 254, 268,         OMB. See Office of Management and Budget.
  273,278,297                                    omnidirectional equipment, 66
nuclear fuel, 9, 11, 24, 48, 50, 83, 99, 125,    ONA: Overseas National Airways
  149, 167, 238, 252, 268,278                    onboard computer (processor), 98, 224, 240
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, U.S., 48,         O’Neill, Gerard K., 127
  79, 149,268                                    O’Neill, William J., 120
nuclear waste, 11, 36, 41, 273                   Ontario, 294,302, 304
nuclear weapons, 32, 47, 83, 149, 154, 238,      OOE. See out-of-ecliptic mission.
  255, 257, 268, 283, 288-289                    Operation Paperclip, 29
nutrition, 9, 11, 13, 105, 111, 175, 199, 208,   operations research, 61, 166, 254
  216,254                                        optical navigation, 100, 273-274
nylon, 24, 25, 84                                optics, 53, 144, 150, 213, 256, 273, 290
                                                 orbit, 6, 10, 16, 23, 25, 34, 35, 44, 48, 58,
OA. See Office of Applications, NASA Hq.            59,114,120,121,128,135,140,141, 142,
OAO. See orbiting astronomical observatory.         146, 148, 163, 183, 186, 196, 218, 244,
OASI. See Office of Aeronautics and Space           251, 270-271,289,293
  Technology, NASA Hq.                           Orbita (USSR communications network), 76,
objectives, 22                                      272
Obninsk, USSR, 297                               orbital plane (earth‘s), 290
observatory, 82, 101, 108, 151, 220, 305         orbiter, Viking (see also Space Shuttle orbiter),
occultation (stellar eclipse), 80, 82               162, 215
Occupational Health and Safety Act, 172          orbiting astronomical observatory (OAO), 49,
ocean, 14, 61, 74, 97, 99, 119, 137, 171,           132
  239, 244,267,294, 303                          orchards, 270, 279
odeanography, 5, 15, 24, 35, 46, 57, 83, 119,    organic matter, 17, 37, 41, 49, 61, 104, 121,
  195, 204,237                                      146,155,156,158,199-200,207,215,217,
Odenwald (W.    Ger. earth station), 213            236-237,274
odor, 255                                        organization, 159, 205-207
Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology,      orientation, satellite, 34, 62, 165, 221, 229
  NASA Hq, 96,166,285                            origins, 35,275
Office of Applications, NASA Hq, 9 , 119,6       Orion (Canadian aircraft). See F3.
  194, 293                                       Orion 2 observatory (USSR instrument), 108
Office of Energy Programs, NASA Hq, 75           OSCAR (orbiting satellite carrying amateur
Office of Lunar and Planetary Programs,             radio), 195
  NASA Hq, 271                                   Oscar I, 195
Office of Management and Budget (OMB), 16,       Oscar 4, 1%
  124, 129, 185                                  Oscar6, 114, 1%
Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq,          Oscar 7, 1%
  75,106                                         osmosis, 45
Office of Science, Engineering, and Technol-     Os0 8 (orbiting solar observatory), 88, 178
  ogy (White House), 9, 16, 39, 58, 92, 151,     OSS. See Office of Space Science, NASA Hq.
  184-185                                        Otay Mt., Calif., 264
Office of Space Flight, NASA Hq, 70, 245,        otolith, 256
  “7-
                                                 OTS (ESA orbiting test satellite), 130, 192,
  LI 1
Office of Space Science, NASA Hq, 77, 96,           209,271,287,294
  101,271                                        Otterman, Joseph, 305


                                             382
Oulu, Univ. of (Finland), 179                      Patterson, William Allen, 229
out-of-ecliptic (OOE) mission (proposed ESA-       payload, 51, 95, % 148, 169, 194, 195, 244,
                                                                         ,
  NASA joint project), 239                             267,271,272,277,279,286,287,301
outer planets, 70, 71                              -recovery, 150, 230, 257,272,279
Outer Space Affairs Division, UN, 238,244          -specialist, 59
“Outlook for Aeronautics” (report), 84             PBS. See Public Broadcasting Service.
“Outlook for Space” (report), 21                   peace, 147, 238, 281, 282
OV-101 (orbiter vehicle). See Shuttle orbiter;     Pecora, William T., award, 237
  Enterprise.                                      Peking, PRC, 4
Overseas National Airways, 134                     Pennsylvania, 151,304
Owen Enterprises Inc., 299                         Pennsylvania, Univ. of, 254, 255
Owen, Dr. Tobias, 155                              Pensacola Mountains, Antarctica, 294
Owens-Illinois Inc., 18, 53                        Pentagon (see also Defense, U.S. Dept. of),
Owens Valley, Calif. 151                               19,117,158,164,165,281,285,287,305
oxygen, 51,80, 113, 145, 155, 175,200, 215,        Penthouse magazine, 281
  217, 232, 236, 240, 250, 259, 262, 268,          Peoples Republic of China, 4, 128, 196, 198,
  274, 298                                            238,255,290,305, 307, 332
Oyama, Vance I., 136,218, 275                      PEP (positive-electron project), 243
ozone, 3, 17, 27, 32, 38, 76, 160, 216, 261,       Pepin, Dr. Robert, 54
  272,296,304                                      Perek, Dr. Lubas, 238, 244
                                                   perihelion (Mars), 295
P-5 “Mustang” aircraft, 275                        permafrost, 122, 208, 253
P-38 (fighter aircraft), 72                        permanent space station, 130
P-76-5 (USAF satellite), 102, 318, 339             Perseids (meteor shower), 187
pacemakers, 291                                    Pershing (U.S. Army missile), 261
Pacific coast, 38                                  personnel, U.S. government (civil service),
Pacific Ocean, 5, 28, 31, 60, 76, 115, 118,            193, 263,267,282,295
   172, 181, 186, 191, 200, 223, 249, 261,         Peru, 191, 293
   288,293,299                                     pesticide, 9, 39
paint, 70, 131, 169                                Peterson, Dr. Laurence, 101
Pakistan, 176, 293                                 petroleum. See oil.
Pal, Dr. Yash, 228                                 Petrov, Dr. Boris N., 244, 245, 250
Palapa I (Indonesian comsat), 133, 141, 323,       Petrov, Georgy, 204
   337,339                                         Phantom (bomber aircraft). See F4.
Palapa-B, 294                                      pharmaceuticals. See drugs.
Paleozoic era, 44                                  Phi Beta Kappa, 247
Palestine, Tex., 190                               Philadelphia, Pa., 19, 36, 129, 138, 150
Palmer, Arnold, 96,98                              Philadelphia Centennial Exposition. See cen-
Pan American Technical Services, Inc., 78             tennial exposition, U.S.
Pan American World Airways, 4Q, 74, 166,           Philippine Islands, 209, 239
  209,213,261                                      Phillips, Dr. Roger J., 132
Panama City, Ha., 292                              phlebitis, 20
Panavia, 165                                       Phobos (moon of Mars), 162,220, 264,295
Papago Indian reservation, N. Mex., 93             photofax, 279
Papazian, Dr. John, 297                            photography, 5, 39, 43, 80, 122, 131, 138-
parachute, 24,82,93,97,116,146, 148,150,              140, 143, 146, 148, 151, 153, 156, 158,
   193, 199, 230, 262, 272, 279, 288, 297,            162, 168, 171, 177, 194, 205, 207, 213,
  300                                                 215,217,219,220-221,224,226,247,269
paralysis, 37                                      photosynthesis, 44, 156, 203, 208, 215, 226,
Paris, France, 3, 4, 29, 41, 44, 48, 91, 95,          275
  96,97, 98, 102, 130, 164, 238, 239, 248,         photovoltaic technology, 14, 116, 144
   253,256,269,282,286,300,302                     physical sciences, 274
particle accelerator, 25, 242-243                  physiology, 254, 255
particle physics, 25, 64, 77, 104, 242-243,        physics, 25, 35, 51, 68, 77, 142, 166, 173,
  255,272                                             204,242,254,278
Pasadena, Calif., 43,63                            Pickard, Robert H ,29
                                                                       .
passengers, 8, 26, 59, 67, 84, 85, 103, 134,       Pickering, Dr. William H., 64, 69, 133, 173,
   166,180,198,212,232,253,269,277,286                254
passive systems, 72,87, 171                        pigap (USSR experiment), 15
PATCO. See Professional Air Traffic Control-       piggyback launch, 37, 50,210
   lers Organization.                              pilot, 16, 4 , 66, 71, 94, 95, %, 98, 142,
                                                                4
Patent Office, U.S., 50                                194,225,231, 240,251,256,274
patents, 6, 23, 33, 4 ,50, 65, 70, 87, 102,
                       0                           -training (see also training, Space Shuttle),
   158,167,188,299                                    229,273-274
Patten, Dr. James W., 95                           pilotless craft, 47


                                                 383
pinkeye, 45                                           position determination, 114, 205
Pioneer project, 39,49, 103,272, 278                  positron, 25
Pioneer IO, 24, 58                                    Postal Service, U.S., 67, 213
Pioneer 11,104,189,290                                potassium, 187
Pioneer Parachute Co., 150                             Potemra, Dr. Thomas A., 2 69
Pioneer Venus, 211,288                                 Poulos, Leah, 23
pipeline, 281                                         Powder Puff Derby, 275
Pitcairn Is., 172                                     power sources, 11,22,58,127,133-134,176,
Pittsburgh, Pa., 35                                      203,241
planetary atmosphere. See atmosphere, plane-          --chemical, 80, 145, 213,291
                                                      --electric, 143
  tary.
planetary nebula, 108                                 -galactic, 101, 105, 132, 301
planetary research (see also individual planets),     -nuclear, 36,48,83,99,118,149,181,242-
   14, 15, 34, 35, 39, 59, 70, 76, 90, 104,              243,252,268,297
   120, 127, 137, 138, 146, 147, 148, 152,            --solar, 13, 26, 29, 52, 70, 72, 75, 80, 94,
   154, 160, 162, 166, 168, 192, 193, 196,               111,116-117,124,136,141,142,144,160,
   204,212,217-218,225,235-236,245,264,                  172-173,197,219,225,227,239,240,243,
   271-272,283                                           247,265,270,271,288, 291,299,301
planets (see also individual planets), 25, 45,        --steam, 35
   54,69,70, 76,225,265                               -thermal, 115, 189,278
planning, 44, 142, 272, 282                           -wind, 67, 102, 124-125, 167, 181, 280
plants, 38                                            “power tower,” 240
plasmas, 49,92,102,127,142,148,250,343                Pratt 81 Whitney Aircraft Group (United Tech-
plastic, 61, 63, 88, 147, 160, 227, 245                  nologies), 134
Plateau of the Moon (region of Mars), 140             precipitation, 132
platinum, 56                                          precision, 290, 302
Plesetsk, USSR, 283                                   prediction (see also future; meteorology), 142,
Plum Brook Station, LeRC, 67, 181                        176,277,289,299
Pluto (planet), 35, 43,70, 291                        preservation, 111
plutonium, 48, 149, 268                               Presidential Medal of Merit, 40
pneumatic testing, 170                                President’s Committee on Science and Tech-
Pogue, Col. William R., 66, 129                          nology, 185
Poker Flat Range, Alaska, 63                          presolar particles, 56
Poland, 128, 219, 224,304                             press conference. See media.
Polar Experiment North-76 (USSR), 73                  pressure, 39, 60, 78, 92, 95, 123, 168, 170,
polar research, 6, 73, 79, 139, 225, 261                 198,229,255,262,278,279,282,286,300
polar-orbiting spacecraft, 24, 54, 131, 142,          prestige, 265
   165, 192, 203,215,219,225,239,2%                   prices, 141,219
polarity, 33                                          Princeton Institute for Advanced Study, 35
polarization, 88, 162                                 Princeton Univ., 189, 298
police, 199, 210                                      printing, 262,279
politics, 141, 151, 161, 163, 181, 195, 210,          Priroda (USSR science journal), 278
   286                                                private enterprise, 67,134,191,212,267,289
Pollack, Dr. James B., 48                             probe (see also rockets), 126, 128, 280, 288
Pollack, Louis, 6                                     process. See data processing; materials proces-
pollution (see also air pollution; heat sensing;         sing; new techniques; sewage.
   noise reduction; water pollution), 3, 34, 39,      procurement, 63, 78, 83, 111, 158, 163, 164,
   40,76, 133, 137, 160, 171, 195, 227,235,              206, 226,260,287,289, 303
   261,267,285,300,303                                productivity, 9, 50,81
“pollution tax,” 285                                  Profesional Air Traffic Controllers Organiza-
polyethylene, 167, 230                                   tion (PATCO), 16, 167, 198
Polymde (USSR experiment), 23,83                      Prognoz (Soviet science satellites), 73, 212,
polyurethane foam, 50                                    307
polyvinyl chloride, 24                                Prognoz 5, 307,331
Pond, Robert B., 95                                   program planning, 22, 268
Ponnamperuma, Dr. Cyril, 104                          programming, 254
PoDe Paul. 10                                         progress, 137
po&~tion, 34, 47, 111, 154, 159, 171, 176,            Project Blue Book (WAF), 199
   228,230,270                                         Project Icewam, 4
Porcupine (project), 49                               propagation, 44,102, 187,287
Port Matilda, Pa., 109                                propane, 259
portable equipment, 10, 24, 60,93, 232, 278,        -propellant, 82, 83, 106, 181, 188, 216, 259,
   281,293                                               262,283
Portland (Ore.) International Airport, 257             propellers, 5,67,81
Pon-Wahn, W. Germany, 44, 194                          propulsion system, 123, 149, 169, 181, 259
propulsive-lifttechnology, 33                         Radio Corporation of America (RCA), 34, 62,
protection, 130, 236, 280                                65,186,212,214,226,337
proton, 25,26, 165,242, 250                           radioactivity, 36, 156, 158, 175, 177, 178,
protostar, 1M                                            199,208,215,226,236,253,254,273
prototype, 47, 53, 108, 123, 142, 164, 185,           radioisotope thermal generator (RTG),  118
  248,249,287,292                                     radiolaria, 289
provinces (planetary regions), 218                    radiometer, 44, 67, 165, 277
Proxmire, Sen. William A. (D-Wis.), 1, 228            radiotelescope, 31, 33, 46,77, 84, 150, 213,
Pryor, Harold E., 163                                    268,302
psi particle, 255                                     Radojlovic, Zika, 238
                                                      Rad~lga(Soviet comsat, Statsionar lB), 214,
Public Broadcasting Service, 18, 125
                                                         327
public communications, 44,63,195,228,235,
  251, 253,273, 293                                   RAF: Royal Air Force
public health, 60, 216                                Ragusa, Dr. James, 159
public lands, 69                                      railroads, 142, 219,276
public opinion, 12, 51, 54, 56, 75, 119, 152,         rain, 162, 177,226, 249, 279, 305
   158, 195,208, 211, 246                             Rainey, Ed, 229
public policy, 17, 22, 39, 50, 124, 125, 152,         Raleigh, N.C., 119
                                                      Ramo, D . Simon, 9
                                                                r
   172, 176,228,244,250,268,272, 292
public radio, 125                                     RAMS: random-access measuring system
Public Registry of Space Flights (UN), 307            Ramstein, W. Germany, 242
public television, 18. 125, 228                       Rancho Los Amigos, 37
public transportation, 18                             RAND Corp., 119, 132
public utilities, 125, 225, 24Q, 268, 280             random-access measuring system, 29
Puerto Rico, 33, 77,94, 213,225,24Q                   Ranger (project), 65
Pulitzer prize, 28                                    ranging, 133
pulsar, 23, 74                                        Rasquin, John, 290
pulse, 26, 63, 263                                    ratification, 128
pump, 130, 146                                        Rayhrer, Benno, 302
Puppis A (supernova remnant), 93                      Raymond, Dr. Louis, %
Purdue Univ., 276                                     RB-57 (USAF research aircraft), 2%
Purkey, L. L., 98                                     RCA. See Radio Corporation of America.
“purple pigeons,” 168                                 RCA-B. See Satcorn 2.
Puthoff, Richard L., 181                              RCA-C, 295
pyrolytic reaction, 61                                reaction control, 20, 297
pyrolytic-release experiment (Viking), 156,           reactor, 149, 268, 273, 278
  200, 215,217,260                                    real property, 218
                                                      receiver (communications), 6, 106, 242, 263-
                                                         264,292
Qantas Airways Ltd., 261
                                                      recession, 12, 26, 166, 181
Qattara Depression, 123                               reclamation, 151
QSRA. See quiet short-haul research airplane.
                                                      RECON (information-retrievalsystem), 303
quality control, 78, 259, 267, 292
                                                      reconnaissance (see also surveillance), 7, 141,
quantum mechanics, 254
                                                         164,219,230
quarks (particles), 243
                                                      record systems, 103, 127, 131, 133, 147, 150,
quartz, 2 0
         9                                               221,230
quasars, 31,45, 52,82, 302
                                                      recovery (equipment; payload; vehicle), 5, 82,
quiet short-haul research airplane, 33
                                                         97, 169, 189, 229, 239, 251, 272, 279,
Quonset Point, R.I., 79
                                                         297,300, 301,305
                                                      rectenna, 197
R&D. See research and development.                    recycling, 61, 83, 291
Rabat, Morocco, 176                                   red shift, 126, 337
racine. 145                                           Redstone test site, 25, 170
radarY.4, 14, 16, 47, 52, 73, 77,84, 102, 108,        redundancy, 90, 181
   132, 14Q, 153, 165, 168, 171, 177, 184,            redwoods, 38
   213, 214, 225, 227, 233, 236, 247, 251,            Reed, Jack, 290
   274,281,305                                        Reed, John H., 15
radiation, 26, 33,35,39, 105, 122, 150, 172,          Reed, Thomas C., 161,287
   229,236,253,273,277,290                            reentry, 33,87, 168,221,303
radio, 16, 34, 38, 45, 66, 75, 105, 125, 127,         refan program, LeRC, 285
   136, 143, 144, 146, 148, 154, 225, 250,            refitting, 285
   263,268,276,291,295,298                            reflector, 23, 52,62,87, 157, 171, 245, 290
Radio Amateur Satellite Corp., 114, 1%                refraction, 46
radioastronomy, 32, 41, 77, 150-151, 213-             registration (of objects launched into space),
   214,233,270,302                                       128,244,307


                                                385
rehabilitation, 25, 39, 66                           rocket launches, 6, 17, 28, 49, 51, 63, 128,
Reid, Dr. George C., 32                                 187,239,250,273,297,301
reimbursable launch, 1,28,62,149,223                 mcket-powered aircraft, 28,241
relativity (see also Einstein), 52, 126, 337         Rocket Propulsion Laboratory (USAF), 106
relay. See communications relay; data relay;         rocks, 57, 139, 148, 155,207, 223,236,260,
   satellite relay.                                    294
reliability, 6, 20, 28, 61, 67, 81, 144, 149,        Rockwell International Corp., 25, 47, 50, 57,
    161,232,240,259,272,276,277                        66, 73, 78,81, 94,99, 107, 108, 123, 149,
remote control, 71, 198, 219                            158, 161, 168, 187, 203, 204, 210, 218,
remote manipulator, 59, 198, 257                       222, 232, 235, 2 4 4 245, 248, 257, 259,
remote sensing, 20, 43, 46,54, 82, 105, 118,           275,277,287,301,302,303
    122, 131, 204, 235, 237, 244, 261, 267,          Rockwell Intl. &iece Center, 297
   276, 282,293, 303                                 Rockwell, Willard F., Jr., 99,222
remote transmission, 10, 93, 281                     Roddenberry, Gene, 159,222
remotely piloted research vehicle (RPRV), 144        Rodina (Soviet ship), 143
rendezvous, 162, 251, 260, 268, 282                  Roederer, Juan G., 68
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 54, 89             Rogaland, Norway, 276
reorganizations, NASA, 63                            Rohr Industries, Inc., 82,292
repair, 118, 160, 247, 253, 303                      Rohr Marine, Inc. See Rohr Industries.
repeaters, communications, 94, 264                   Rolls Royce (Aero Engines Inc.), 134, 165,
replication, 104, 113                                   180
reprocessing, 11, 83, 268                            Romania, 219,238,304
 Republic of China (Taiwan), 20, 128                 Roosa, Col. Stuart A., 19
rescue, 59, 114, 171, 1%, 232,242,243-244            Roosevelt, President Franklin D., 92
research and development (R&D), 50, 58, 59,          Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP), 294
    113,149,191,201,219,221,229-230,252,             Rossiyu (Soviet ship), 143
    265,274,275, 276                                 Rostoker, Dr. Gordbn, 2%
 Research Initiation in Minority Institutions        Rotary Club, 51
    (NSF program), 283                               rotation, 189,290,304
residence, 142, 301                                  rotor, 67, 102,113, 167
 resolution (optical; spectral), 32, 84, 88, 166,    rotor aircraft, 84, 113
    262,273                                          round-the-world flight, 72
“resonance region” (of magnetosphere), 301           roving vehicle (planet exploration), 168, 235,
resource survey, 123,175,192,204,244,276,               264
    306                                              Royal Academy of Sciences (Sweden), 254
 retirement, 12, 13, 18, 19, 38, 48, 50, 54,         Royal Air Force (U.K.), 165
    64,67, 77, 83,96, 133                            Royal Navy (U.K.), 164
 retrieval, 101, 160, 169, 199, 257, 276, 297,       Rozhdestvensky, Lt. Col. Valery, 250, 255,
    300                                                 342
 reusable equipment, 37,61,82, 118,130, 145,         RPI. See Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
    169,188,199,220,229,235,239,299,300              RPRV. See remotely piloted research vehicle.
 reverse polarity, 33                                RS-27 (engine), 73
 Rho Sigma Company, 116                              RSRA: rotor systems research aircraft
 Rhode Island, 225, 24x)                             Rumania. See Romania.
 rhodopsin, 45                                       Rumsfeld, Donald H., 129, 161,281, 285, 287
 Rice Institute, 72                                  Russell, D . Christopher T., 132
                                                                r
 Rice Univ., 54                                      Russia (see also USSR), 59, 69, 76, 250, 281
 Richter, Prof. Burton, 254                          Rutland, Mass., 290
 Richter scale, 11                                   Rutland, Vt., 167
 Rincon Indian reservation, 299
 Rind, David, 300                                    Saab-Scania AB, 209
 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3, 269                      Sabreliner, 66
 Ripley, S. Dillon, 137                              Sacramento, Calif., 38
 rivers, 121, 138, 177,306                           Sacramento Peak Observatory,N.M., 27
 RMI Co., 81                                         Sadat, Anwar, 20
 Robinson, Prof. Alan, 83                            safetv
 Robinson, Charles, 212                              -ai&&spacecraft,      15, 16, 66, 77, 78, 89,
 robot, 47, 139, 160, 183                               94, 100, 120, 138,148, 153,243,257,277
 Rockefeller, Vice President Nelson, 92, 137         -airport. See air safety.
 rocket (see also launch vehicles; probe), 6, 27,    --environmental, 158,168,172
    35, 46, 51, 61, 68, 73, 79, 93, 95, 137,         --equipment, 59, 89-90, 102, 169, 172, 205,
    138,140,160,163,172,267,288                         232-233,277
 Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Intl. Corp.,          -manned flight, 59,231,243
    25, 73,94, 149, 169, 211, 232, 235               -maritime, 205



                                               386
 -NASA contract, 199                                 Saturn (planet), 13, 24, 43, 58, 71, 104, 168,
 --nuclear, 9, 268, 273                                 189,245,271,291,294
 Sagamore Hill Observatory, 233                      Saturn (program), 64,72, 302
 Sagan, Dr. Carl, 33,153,166,208,274                 Saturn (rocket), 50, 51, 64, 137, 150, 24.0,
 Sagdeyev, R. Z., 246                                   262,299
 Sagittarius (constellation), 23                     Saturn-Apollo, 298
 Sahara, 122, 154,297                                Saudi Arabia, 27, 165, 179
sailplanes, 109                                      SCAD strategic armed cruise-missile decoy
 St. Augustine, N.M., 31                             scandal, 191
 St. Louis, Mo., 36, 65, 88, 99, 117, 160, 186       scanning, 93, 146, 165, 268
 St. Joseph‘s Hospital, Houston, 128                 Scanoprobe, 298
St. Peter (Bering ship), 144                         Schafer, Charles F., 297
Saito, Shigebumi, 244                                schedule, 68, 73,85, 162, 167, 207, 300
salinity, 20, 45                                     Schempp-Hirth Standard Cirrus (sailplane),
Salisbury, Winfield W., 298                             109
 SALT: strategic arms limitation talks               Schiaparelli, Giovanni, 100
 Salt Lake City, Utah, 80,218                        Schiff, Prof. Harold, 304
Salyut program (USSR), 49, 73, 80,245, 260,          Schmitt, Sen. Harrison H. (R-N.M.), 51,270
    307                                              Schneider, Dr. William C., 248,277
Salyut 3, 41, 260                                    Schnittker Associates, 141
Salyut4, 5, 38,92, 129, 140, 171, 222                Schonfeld, Ernest, 281
Salyut 5, 129, 140, 177, 190, 193, 204, 221,         Schuler, Ed, 145
    250,255,260,307,321,341,342                      Schurmeier, Harris M. “Bud,” 71
Samoa, 261                                           Schutzenhofer, Luke A., 33
sampling, 60, 61, 154, 155, 156, 160, 183,           Science Academy, USSR, 129
    1W200,204,208,223,300                            science adviser, White House, 151, 184-185,
SAMSO. See Space and Missile Systems                    239,299
    Organization, USAF.                              Science Applications, Inc., 203
San Antonio Logistics Center (USAF), 99              science court, 9,39
San Diego, Calif., 60, 73,244                        science fiction, 20, 100, 152, 154, 176, 281,
San Francisco, Calif., 35, 94, 145, 187, 242,           298
    301                                              Science Research Council, U.K., 283, 301
San Francisco International Airport, 257             Scientific and Technical Information Office,
San Gabriel mountains, 43                               NASA Hq, 163, 194
Sun Marc0 C-2, 19                                    scientific community, 1, 7, 9, 16, 27, 30, 57,
San Mateo, Calif., College of, 231                      107, 126,230, 238
Sanchez, Maria-Elena, 231                            scientific equipment, 117, 26.2
sand, 220                                            scientists, 30, 35, 36, 48, 133, 142, 14.8, 151,
Sandia Laboratories, ERDA, 9, 160, 241                  153, 160,166, 168, 193,265,287
Sanduskp, Ohio, 67                                   scintillation, atmospheric, 20, 179
Santiago, Chile, 7                                   Scorpio (constellation), 115
SAO. See Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-          Scott, James E., 280
    tory-                                            Scott, Dr. Ronald, 156
Sarett. Lewis H.. 254                                Scott Aviation, Inc., 102
Sarychev, Vasily A., 246                             Scout (launch vehicle), 99,102, 126,203,295
Sas 3 , 2 3                                          Scoville, Herbert, 149
Satcom 1 , 34,65                                     SDAS: site data acquisition system
Satcom 2, 61, 65, 315, 337, 338                      SDS-2 (DOD satellite data system spacecraft),
“Satellite Access Cities,” 35                           325
Satellite Business Systems, 78                       Sea of Crises (Mare Crisium) on moon, 183,
satellite communications, 6, 14, 21, 37, 59,           300
   65,82, 117, 135, 175, 179, 181,212, 213,          Sea of Felicity, on moon, 183
   214,225,226,227,239,240,262                       Sea of Serenity, on moon, 183
--control, 240,250-251                               sea state, 46
-imagery, 24, 120, 143, la,198,225,262,              sea-surface temperature, 24
   268-269,279                                       seagulls, 134
Satellite Instructional Television Experiment        Seamans, Dr. Robert C., Jr., 11, 134, 231
   (SITE),111, 175, 228                              search and rescue, 114, 171, 196, 205, 242,
satellite interception. See interceptor.               251
satellitepower systems (see also power sources),     search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI),
    75, 118, 120,127,203,270-271                       268.269
satellite relay (see also communications relay;      Seasat’program,57, 144,302
    data relay), 47,93                               seasonal variations, 17
Satellite Telecommunications Experiments             Seattle, Wash., 166, 187
    F’roject (STEP), 248                             Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, 257


                                               387
 security, 22, 199, 210, 215, 229, 245, 246,     Simonds, Dr. Charles, 300
                                                 Simons, Vera, 3 160,
    257,273,305
 sediment, 138,281, 289                          Simpson, Dr. John, 105
 Sedov, Leonid, 41                               simulation, 15, 25, 43, 44,64, 72, 91, 113,
 seed, 150                                          114, 117, 118, 127, 130, 162, 169, 194,
 Seep project, 173                                  199, 204, 220, 226, 227, 240, 257, 262,
 seismic activity (seismology, seismometer),        267,270,280,288,301, 302
    11,23,27,37,84,140, 153,155,177,178,         simultaneous measurement, 46,67, 121, 131,
    208,224,237, 281,294, 295                       163,261,268-269,296,301,304
bneiz, USSR, 151                                 Sinai, 122
Semenov, Y.P., 246                               Singapore, 73
semiconductors, 259                              Singer Co. Simulations Products Div., 91, 162
senior citizens, 12, 111                         Sioux Falls, S.D., 230, 242
Senate Committee on. See Congress; general       Sirio (Satellite Italian0 Ricerca Industriale
   subject.                                         Orientata), Italian comsat, 249, 271, 294
sensors, 8, 14,43,60,88,131,155,229,235,         SITE. See Satellite Instructional Television
   256,267,279,2%, 297,302                          Experiment.
sensory deprivation, 190                         site data-acquisition system (SDAS), 247
SEP. See Socidtd Europdenne de Propulsion.       Sivertson, Gene, 171
Serling, Robert J., 9 ,98
                       6                         skating, 23
SESP 74-2 (DOD spacecraft), 323                  skin, 172, 231
SETI. See search for extraterrestrial intelli-   Skylab project, 11, 26, 39, 49, 60, 96, 109,
    gence.                                          126, 137, 140, 172,256,267, 298
S u s s , Hans, 56                               Skylab 2, 96
Sevastyanov, Vitaly, 92, 129, 171                Skylab 3, 66
747 aircraft. See Boeing 747.                    Skyjab 4, 129, 190
sewage treatment, 40, 60,61, 267                 Skylab solar workshop, 179
Shackleton Range, Antarctica, 294                Skylark (U.K. mcket), 93, 301
shale, 11                                        SLAR. See side-looking airborne radar.
Shamsin, V., 272                                 Slayton, Donald K. “Deke,” 27, 53, 259, 282
SHAPE. See Supreme Headquarters, Allied          SLBM (surface-launched ballistic missile), 257
   Powers in Europe.                             Slidell Computer Complex. See Earth Resources
Shatalov, Lt. Gen. Vladimir, 219, 221, 251          Laboratory, La.
Shavchenko, USSR, 273                            slingshot effect, 43, 291
Sheldon, Dr. Charles S., 11, 112                 Sloan Foundation. See Alfred P. Sloan Foun-
Shepard, Capt. Alan B., Jr., 11, 19, 25             dation.
Shimada, Dr. Katsunori, 299                      slowdown, 167, 198
ship, 129,130,143, 145, 154, 159, 173,204,       small business, 116
   205, 230,303                                  Small Business Administration, 193
shipping, 4, 31, 38, 50, 60, 73, 89, 115, 142,   Smith, Cliff, 264
   236, 247,249                                  Smith, Dr. Edward J., 290
shipset (aircraft; spacecraft), 220, 248         Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 101,
shock waves, 33, 267, 281                           127, 166, 298,343
short takeoff and landing (STOL) aircraft, 33,   Smithsonian Institution, 40,913, 103, 137, 193,
   84,164                                           238,278,299
shortwave, 1%, 250,263,264,276                   smoglsmoke, 46, 105
Shuang-Cheng-Tze (PRC launch site), 196,         Smolensk, USSR, 297
   290                                           SMS. See synchronous meteorological satel-
Shuttle. See Space Shuttle for all entries.         lite.
Siberia, 90, 215, 252, 272,280, 297              Smylie, Robert E., 285
Sicily, 190                                      SNECMA: SociCtd National #Etude et de Con-
side-looking airborne radar system (SLAR), 4,       struction de Moteurs #Aviation
    171,247                                      SNIA-Viscosa (Italy), 275
Sidewinder (missile), 165                        SNIAS: Socidtd Nationale Industrielle Aero-
Sierra Club, 150                                    spatiale (France)
Sierra Leone, 293                                snow, 51, 74, 138, 139, 249, 251,279
Signal Corps, U.S. Army, 40,237                  soaring, 109
signal-relay satellites, 10                      social goals, 119, 149, 159, 199,262,287
Signe 3 (proposed French satellite), 212         social security, 13
Sikorsky Aircraft Division, 113, 304             social services, 13
silica (insulation), 220                         Socictd des Tdlkommunications Internation-
silo (launch complex), 1                            ales du Cameroun, 181
silicon, 56, 109, 123, 157, 272                  SociCtd Europdenne de Propulsion (SEP), 275
silver, 122, 158                                 Socidt6 Nationale d’ktude et de Construction
Silverman, Jack, 94                                 de Moteurs d’Aviation (SNECMA), 188


                                             388
 soCi&t& Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale         solar research, 8, 12, 26, 27, 52, 80, 88, 92,-
    (SNIAS), 286                                         127, 178, 179-180, 187,239,294
 Society of Automotive Engineers, 81                 Solar Sailor (future project), 160, 168, 235
 Soffen, Dr. Gerald S., 100, 156, 157, 215,          solar simulator, 124
    226                                              solar system, 24, 25, 35, 43, 55, 56, 58, 65,
soft landing, 148,221                                   69,70, 71, 76, 104, 139,218, 254
software, 28, 112, 162, 194,232                      solar wind, 8, 11, 14, 58, 74, 235, 236, 291
soil, 142, 155, 157,209,224,254, 281                 Solargenics, Inc., 116
--erosion. 76                                        Solaron Corp., 116
s a m p l i n g and analysis, 49, 146, 154, 155,     Soletta (proposed space reflector system), 245
    156,160,175,177,178,183,199-200,208,             solid-fuel (rocket) booster (SRB), 33, 65, 82,
    215, 217, 223 224, 226, 236, 253, 260,
                  223,                                  89, 97. 168, 188, 198, 210, 232, 262, 275,
    274                                                 289,300
Sokolov, M.V., 246                                   solid-fuel (rocket) motor (SRM), 82, 89, 188,
sol (Mars day), 120                                      198-199,267,283,295,300
solar activity, 5, 8, 12, 50, 88, 92, 180, 229,      solid-propellant rocket. See solid-fuel rocket.
    278,295, 296                                     solid-rocket booster. See solid-fuel rocket.
solar array. See solar conversion devices.           solid waste disposal. See sewage treatment.
solar atmosphere, 178                                Solrad 11-A, 11-B, 50, 313
solar cells. See solar conversion devices.           sonar, 106
solar conjunction, 261                               Sones, William K., 6
solar conversion devices                             sonics, 27, 144. 267, 300
-array, 8, 10, 26, 75,94, %, 111, 136, 144,          sounding rocket (see also Appendix D; indi-
    2%                                                  vidual rockets), 49,128, 143,166,250,272
- c e l l , 45, 111, 116, 117, 136, 144, 145, 146,   South Africa, 149, 294
    165, 186,219, 271, 291                           South America, 18, 76, 106, 176, 279
--collector, 124, 141, 227, 235, 247, 302            South Carolina, 151
-concentrator, 227, 299                              South Dakota School of Mines, 132
Tenerator, 172, 240                                  South Pole, 27
-panel, 19, 70,96, 118, 165, 186,203, 227,           Southern California, Univ. of, 37
    297                                              Southwest United States, 18
-receiver, 94, 240                                   sovereignty, 293
solar corona, 8, 80, 179, 297                        Soviet Academy of Sciences, 76, 160, 183,
solar emission. See solar radiation.                    212,221,246, 278
solar energy (see also solar conversion devices;     Soviet Intercosmos Council, 212, 244
    solar heating and cooling; solar radiation;      Soviet space activity (see also USSR), 5, 14,
    solar wind), 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 26,          38, 39, 41, 59, 73,95, 112, 119, 120, 127,
    52, 58, 62, 70, 75, 80, 94, 96, 99, 107,            129,140,146,171,177,182-184,190,193,
    111, 116, 124, 127, 136, 137, 141, 144,             196,204,214,220-222,230,250-251,255,
    156,172-173,176,197,225,227,235,240,                256, 260,272, 280-281, 303,305, 307
    243, 248,254, 265, 270,288,301                   Soviet Union. See Union of Soviet Socialist
Solar Energy Products Co., 116                          Republics (USSR).
Solar Energy Research, Development, and              Soyuz pmgram, 80, 245, 303, 306, 307, 341,
    Demonstration Act of 1974, 52                       342
Solar Energy Systems, Inc., 116                      Soyw I , 251
solar flares. See solar activity.                    soyw2,260
solar heating and cooling, 11, 14, 29. 30, 72,       Soyw3, 251, 260
    116, 141, 142, 227, 239, 247, 254, 301           s o y w 5 , 140
solar magnetic field, 290, 301                       Soyur 7 , 260
Solar Maximum Mission, 296                           Soyur 8, 251,260
solar nebula, 56                                     Soyur 11, 251,303
                                                     sqw 13, loa
solar observatories, 163. 290-291
solar orbit, 8, 31                                   Soyur 15, 251,260
solar panel. See solar conversion devices.           S y I S , 90, 171, 222
                                                      ow
solar physics, 12, 26, 88, 92, 127, 198, 254,        S y 19 (ASTP), 282
                                                      ow
   278, 343                                          Soyw 20,38
solar polar mission (ESA), 239                       Soyw21, 140. 190, 193, 204, 221, 250, 255,
solar power. See solar energy; see also solar          322, 341, 342
    conversion devices; solar heating and cool-      Soyuz22,220,221, 328,341,342
    ing; solar radiation; solar wind.                Soyw 23, 250,255, 260,329,341,342
solar-Dower satellite. 265. 270                      Space Activities Committee of Japan, 244
solar iadiation, 5,33,88: 124, 127, 160, 163,        Space Age, 171
    168, 175, 193, 196, 200, 235, 236, 250,          Space and Missile Systems Organization
    274. 2 9 1 -                                       (SAMSO), USAF, 9 . 106, 193,267
                                                                          0
      1   -
  ~




solar receiver. See solar conversion devices.        “Space as a Habitat,” 160


                                                 389
                                                      169, 203, 218, 222, 245, 249, 257, 270,
space biology and medicine, 14, 15, 17, 38,
    49,66, 100, 126, 148, 153, 155-156, 159,         271, 277,279,289
                                                  -propulsion, 33, 81, 82, 90, 150, 168, 186,
    177, 178, 199-200,212,215,218,231
-animal experiments, 140                              188, 193, 232,240,295,300
-human research, 5, 20, 23, 171, 172, 190,        -safety, 78, 130, 169, 245
    231, 255, 256                                 -testing, 14, 25, 27, 33, 37, 53, 61, 62, 64,
space colonies. See colonization.                    77, 80,81, 90,96, 98, 99, 113, 130. 161,
                                                      168-171,192,210,232-233,235,2~,262,
space exploration, 7, 12, 14, 17, 22, 23, 24,
    25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33, 35, 39, 43, 44, 45,      267
                                                  -training, 91, 118, 162, 220, 222, 224, 229,
    46, 48,49, 50, 52, 54-57, 58, 59.65, 80,
                                                     257-258,301
    127, 139, 150, 152, 238, 241, 282
                                                  -upper stage, 90, 186, 193, 218,289
Space Exploration Day, 147
                                                  space station
space facilities, 112
                                                  -assembly, 166, 204, 265, 278
Space Hall of Fame, 238,241,259
                                                  --crew, 92, 159, 190,204,255
space industrialization, 75, 80,106-107, 203,
                                                  -mission, 22, 35, 75, 129, 140, 148, 204,
    235
                                                     250-251,260
“Space Industrialization as a Concept,” 107
                                                  ---observations, 41, 177, 204
space law, 243-244
                                                  -planning, 47, 193, 203, 204, 265, 278
space manufacturing, 80, 107, 184, 193, 203,
                                                  -power, 83, 265
    250,278
                                                  -research, 5, 15, 38, 73, 159,204
space medicine, 14, 159, 203
                                                  space suit (see also rescue), 59, 63, 145, 255,
“Space Medicine and Biotechnology,” 160
space physics, 14, 272                               303
space platform. See space station.                Space Task Force Group, NASA, 241, 277
 space power source, 83, 107, 127, 237, 270,      space technology, 21, 64, 69, 76, 83, 197,
    278                                               205, 235, 265
 space processing applications rockets (SPAR),    Space Telescope (future project), 53, 80, 239
                                                  space tourism, 59, 107,203,244
    95, 126,225, 279,297
 space processing of materials. See materials
    processing in space.                          Space Transportation System (STS, Shuttle),
 Space Sailer, 160                                   75, 80, 91, 201, 222, 243, 245
 space science, 68, 77, 95, 142, 195, 265         space vehicle debris, 214, 252-253, 281
 Space Sciences Board, 225                        spacecraft
 Space Science Steering Committee, 148            --communications, 127, 146, 291
 Space Shuttle                                    d e s i g n , 18, 54, 65,83, 186,220, 275, 303
 -administration, 12, 33, 53, 61, 64,75, 80,      -handling, 23, 127, 152, 220, 221
    91, 192, 211, 224, 227, 243, 245, 259,        -operations, 121, 221, 245
    289                                           Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network
 -budget,      13, 59, 95, 192, 193, 222, 224,       (STDN), 227
    228,246                                       Spacelab (ESA program), 14, 48, 53, 65, 66,
 -cargo bay, 218                                     78,91, 113, 123, 133, 134, 136, 148, 159,
 -contractors, 19, 28, 77, 78, 80, 81, 112,          192, 194, 197, 203, 227, 241, 244, 248,
     145, 150, 162, 188, 192, 232, 259, 277,         249, 269, 270, 279,292
     300,303                                      Spacelab 1, 148, 197-198, 270
 --crew, 14, 46, 59, 66,89, 91, 95, 96, 118,      Spacelab 2, 194, 197
     123, 142, 145, 162,222, 232,255, 301         Spacelab payload integration and coordination
 -data, 107, 112, 232                                in Europe (SPICE), 44
 d e s i g n , 130,220                            spaceport, 132,301
 -development, 33, 35,72,90, 118, 130, 161,       spacewalk. See extravehicular activity (EVA).
     192, 194, 198,222, 228,232, 257,262          Spain, 4
 -experiments, 65, 116, 126, 230                  SPAR. See space processing applications
 -external tank (ET), 72, 73, 77, 81, 82, 168,       rockets.
     169,170,198-199,210,222,240,258,262          SPEAR (Stanford positron-electron accelera-
 -launch, 27,64,65,66,82,89, 160,301                 tor), 243
                                                  Special Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Phy-
 -main engine (SSME), 25, 33, 64,89, 168,
                                                     sics, 68
     169,172,198-199,204,210-211,232,235,
     240,245,262,295,300                          spectrum (spectrography, spectrometry, spec-
  -operations, 17, 53, 89, 91, 99, 118, 142,         troscopy), 17, 63, 88, 108, 115, 131, 142,
     162,227,232,245,249,257-258,265,289,            146, 155,217, 221,227,247,268, 278
     292. 297. 299. 300. 301                      speed, 23, 44, 51, 52, 71, 74, 87, 96, 108,
  -orbiter, 14, 27, 28,’59, 62, 66, 78, 90,98,       144, 164, 165, 220, 231, 267, 275, 277,
     118, 123, 129, 130, 145, 166, 169, 187,         287,292,302
                                                  Speny, Albert F., award, 241
     193, 199, 204, 210, 220, 222, 229, 240,
     245, 257,295                                 Speny Rand, 161, 190
  -payload, 96, 101, 113, 126, 142, 159, 160,     Spica (star), 115


                                             390
SPICE. See Spacelab payload integration and        storage, 23, 50, 72, 162, 165, 262, 268, 273,
   coordination in Europe.                            276,291,298,302
spin-scan camera, 10                               straddle carrier transporter, 258
spinning solid upper stage (SSUS), 218             strategic armed cruise missile decoy system,
spinoff, 20,41, 111                                   158
Spirit o S t . Louis, 137, 256 .
        f                                          strategic arms limitation talks (SALT). 47, 230
splashdown, 251                                    strategic weapons, 47, 81, 108, 158,229-230,
spare, 24                                             257, 281, 286, 287, 289
sports, 23,36                                      stratosphere. See atmosphere.
spray cans, 216                                    stress, 47, 167, 170, 172, 210, 222, 290
Sputnik (Soviet satellite), 76, 92                 Striedieck, Karl, 109
spy satellite, 7                                   strike, 26, 150, 198, 288-289
SR-71 (reconnaissance aircraft), 164               strip mining, 105, 151
SRB. See solid-faeled rocket booster.              structure, 61, 71, 80, 81, 117, 123, 130, 137,
Sri Lanka, 96                                         142, 159,225, 262, 278,303
SRM. See solid-fueled rocket motor.                STS. See Space Transportation System.
S.S. Arco Prudhoe Bay,37                           student, 166, 172, 231, 245,276
SSME. See Space Shuttle main engine.               Sturtevant Aeroplane Co., 41)
SSN-8 (Soviet missile), 283, 288                   submarine, 47, 53, 159, 249, 283, 286, 287,
SS-NX-18 (Soviet ICBM), 283                           288,301
SST (supersonic transport). See Concorde.          subsatellite, 131
SSU-I, SSU-2, SSU-3 (spacecraft support            subsidy, 125,212, 285
   unit, DOD satellite), 316
                                                                       2
                                                   subsonics, 84, 123, 65, 189, 220, 230, 269
STA: Shuttle training aircraft                     subsystem testing, 1 3
                                                   Sudan, 41, 176, 293, 306
stability; stabilization, 10, 20, 24, 62, 108,
   135, 186, 200, 205, 208, 210, 218, 221,         Sudbury, Ont., 294
   249. 289.290                                    Suez, 123
Stafforh, Maj. Gen. Thomas P., 27, 51, 231,        Suitland, Md., 38, 242
                                                   Sukhanetr, Sribhumi, 238
   282,283
                                                   Sukhoi-22 (Soviet aircraft), 191
standardized parts list, 1
Standing Committee for Post and Telecommuni-       sulfur compounds, 117, 158, 160
   cations. See CEMA.                              sulfuric acid, 48
Stanford Research Institute, 269-270               sun-earth physics, 68, 105, 150
Stanford Univ., 127, 203, 243, 254                 Sunbelt, 111
Stapleton Airport, Denver, 89, 257                 Sunfire project, 172
star, 32, 33, 52, 62, 69, 82, 93, 104, 108,        sunlight, 45, 111, 116, 122, 189, 216, 227,
   115, 132, 150,297                                  240,248,302,305
“Star Trek” (TV series), 159, 211, 222             Sunworks, Inc., 116
state governments, 52, 219, 246, 276               Superdome, 132
State, U.S. Dept. of, 59, 128, 149, 212, 281       supernova, 56, 93
static testing, 114, 262                           superoxides, 175
statistics, 141, 263                               supersonics, 3, 8, 51, 58, 84, 87, 102, 123,
Statsionar 1 series (Soviet comsat. See Ekran;         125, 130, 144, 149, 151, 168, 185, 189,
   Raduga), 214,307                                    195, 217,269,286,300
status review, 218                                 support facilities, systems, 6,8, 145, 162, 165,
STDN. See Spaceflight Tracking and Data Net-           179, 199, 249, 265, 267, 269, 272, 273,
   work.                                              275,278, 280, 289, 303
steady-state operation, 25                         Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers in
steam, 27, 35, 94, 115, 173, 225, 240                 Europe (SHAPE), 48
steel, 67, 137, 210, 246, 285                      surface-effect ship, 292
stellar eclipse. See occultation.                  surfaces, planetary; lunar, 49, 71, 119, 121,
stellar object, 23                                     146, 148, 154, 155, 157, 160, 168, 175,
STEP. See Satellite Telecommunications                 183,189,1%,19%200,203,216,218,221,
   Experiments Project.                               223, 261,274,281, 294, 307
Stephens, Col. R.L., 164                           surgery, 28,47,63
Sterba, James P., 246                              surplus, 66, 219
stereoscopy, 131                                   Surinam, 293
sterilization, 23, 24, 147, 157, 200               surveillance (see also reconnaissance), 7, 99,
Stever, Dr. H. Guyford, 27, 151. 184-185,299           101, 106, 131, 133, 142, 170, 204, 219,
stewardess, 229                                        271, 295
Stoeckenius, Dr. Walter, 45                        Surveyor (spacecraft), 49,65, 100
Stoewer, Heinz, 91                                 survival, 204
STOL. See short takeoff and landing.               suspension, 297
Stone Age, 252                                     Sweden, 4, 49, 130, 163, 209, 254, 263, 343
Stone, Dr. Edward, 278                             Swenson, Dr. George W., 302


                                                 391
Swider, Nancy, 23                                   temperature
swing-wing aircraft, 123, 165,287                   -air, 8, 38, 70, 305
Switzerland, 4, 23, 46, 130, 238, 243, 263,         -atmospheric, 27, 170, 301
   294                                              -building, 11, 29, 30, 71, 115, 116, 227,
Syrnphonde 1, 2 (Fr.-German comsats), 69,              239, 247-248, 301-302
   135, 186,249                                     --earth, 19.34-35, 74, 165,279, 289
Synchronous Meteorological Satellites (Sm 1,        -moon, 36, 54, 74
  sm 2), 4, 5, 10, 38, 301                          -planetary, 39,43,48,70,76,104,108,120,
synchronous orbit, 6, 10, 21, 34, 47, 60,61,            122,139,146,189,1W-200,205,208,209,
   65,115,165,218,226-227,229,265,272,                 226, 288,295
   290,294                                          --simulation, 8, 72, 124, 127, 274, 288
synchrotron, 242                                    -solar, 26, 56
synthetics (see also manmade materials; new         --space, 165, 245, 291
  products), 24, 56, 134, 156, 254                  -utilization, 19, 21, 23-24, 32, 35, 36, 49,
System Development Corp. 243                           50, 60, 83, 94, 130-131, 142, 145, 166-
systems analysis, 47, 116, 166, 265                     167,220,236,240,278,279,290,299
                                                    -water, 4, 6, 24, 67-68, 118-119, 192, 247
 tactics, 47, 257                                   Tengiz, Lake, 251
 Tanegashima, Japan, 44                             Tennessee, 137, 151
 tape recorder, 147, 205, 214, 221, 230, 237,       Tennessee State Univ., 99
     264,291, 293                                   Tereshkova, Valentina, 46  .
 target, 120, 163, 229, 273, 281, 305               Terman, Frederick E., 254
 --spacecraft, 34                                   terracing, on Mars, 225
Tarzan, 154                                         terrain, 122, 140, 146, 148, 165, 171, 207-
 Taurus-Littrow (on moon), 51                          209,218, 230, 264,277,281
 taxes, 12, 106, 160, 269, 285                      terrestrial applications. 112, 244
 TCOM Corp., 136                                   Tesla, Nikola, 143
TDRSS. See tracking and data-relay satellite        test facility, 8, 25, 27, 64,72,-77, 78, 124,
     system.                                           169, 170, 188, 227, 240, 249, 255, 258,
 teacher in the sky. See Ats 6.                        262,271, 27%279,295, 301-302
 Teague, Rep. Olin E. (D-Tex.), 19, 222             test pilot. See pilot.
 Tech House, 30                                     testing, 24, 25, 64, 78, 80, 95, 99, 113, 116,
 technicians, 120                                      159, 167, 171, 194, 204, 222, 231, 249,
 technological innovation (see also new pro-           255,259-260,261,276,277,280,283,288,
    ducts; new techniques), 9, 50, 70, 147, 235,       303, 306,343
    256                                             tethered satellite, 166
 technology applications, 4, 5, 17, 71, 148,       Texas, 111, 115, 224, 225, 240, 262, 264,
     152, 188,251,265,267                              279
 technology exchange, 48, 93, 106, 175, 245,       Texas Governor’s Committee on Aging, 111
    291. 293                                       textiles, 23, 93
Technology Utilization Office, NASA Hq, 63,        Thailand, 176, 238, 293
    66,93, 130, 163                                theoretical physics, 26, 51, 52, 56, 291
 tectonics, 84, 208, 218                           thermal coating. See thermal protection.
Teem, Dr. John M., 13                              thermal mapping. See heat mapping.
Tehran, Iran, 44, 9 .98
                     6                             thermal protection, 26, 59, 236, 245
tektites, 171                                      thermal scanning, 115
Tel Aviv Univ., 305                                thermodynamics, 56, 104
 telecommunications, 6, 209, 213, 244, 263,        thermonuclear reaction, 26, 273, 278
    287,288, 293                                   thermosphere (earth). See atmosphere.
Teledyne Brown Engineering, 77                     Thiokol Corp., 82, 188, 199, 232, 245,283
Teledyne McCormick Selph, 99                        Third Century America (exposition), KSC. 70,
Teleglobe Canada, 200                                  107, 147, 210
telegraph, 206, 215, 225                           Thomas, Colin, 263
telephone, 21, 31, 69, 92, 94, 120, 136, 137,      Thomas, Dr. Roger, 178
    141, 152, 157, 186, 206, 215, 225, 276,        Thompson trophy, 275
    288,292,302                                    Thor-Agena (launch vehicle), 195
Telesat (Canadian comsat), 141                     Thor-Burner 2, 214
telescope, 7, 31, 35, 48, 53, 62, 77, 82, 83,      Thor-Delta, 218, 276, 299
    93, 123, 148,213,230,272, 283, 288, 302        Thorne, Dr. Kip S., 45
teletvoe. 279                                      thrust-vector control, 232
tele&on, 10, 18, 36, 70, 92, 106, 111, 115,        Rumba, India, 128
    136, 141, 144, 147, 151, 154, 159, 200,        thunderstorm, 10, 132
    215, 222, 225, 227, 250, 257, 264, 270,        tidal wave, 38
    272,281,287, 293                               Tidbinbilla, Australia, 151
telex, 31,62, 79, 115                              tiles (Shuttle insulation), 130, 220


                                             392
 tilt-rotor aircraft, 258                        transmitter, 6, 138, 147, 152, 155, 196, 217,
 timber, 34,69, 252-253                              225,260,262,272,281, 292
 time, 104, 126, 127, 129, 146, 152, 159, 167,   transoceanic aircraft, 14,212
     170,305                                      transonics, 24, 33, 168
time capsule, 150,210                            transponder, 18,62, 125,275
Ting, Prof. Samuel C.C., 254                     transportation, 16, 18, 71, 72, 81, 84, 89,
TIP. Transit Improvement Program (U.S.               97,118, 138, 144, 149,166,276,293,294
                                                 Transportation, U.S. Dept. of, 3, 102, 124,
     Navy)
TiP4,203,327,3#                                      201, 212, 285, 296,304
T i m (metesat) program, 165                     traveling-wave tube (TWT), 6, 10, 62
Titan (moon of Saturn), 168                      Treasury, U.S. Dept. OS, 299
Titan (missile), 99                              treaty, 128, 243, 263, 281
Titan IIIB, 219                                  Trella, Prof. Massimo, 134, 241
Titan IIIC, 50, 133, 228                         Triad (U.S. Navy satellite), 296
Titan IIID, 141                                  Tricentennial, U.S., 80,150, 154, 210
Titan IIIE-Centaur, 295                           Trident 3, 214
Titan-Centaur, 7, 49                              trisonic facility (MSFC), 168
titanium, 81, 157, 222                           TriStar (jet transport). See L-1011.
Titanium Metals Corp., 81                        Tritonis Lacus (region of Mars), 121
Tito (Josip Broz), 143                           Trombka, Dr. Jacob L., 132
Todd, Webster B., Jr., 134                       trucking, 38,62, 72
Tokamak (fusion machine), 36, 278                Truly, Richard H., 222
Toksoz, Dr. Nafi, 208                            TRW Systems, Inc., 20, 81, 92, 101, 145,
Tokyo, Japan, 187,256                                186, 212,214
Toledo, Ohio, 116                                TRWIAerojet Defense Support Program, 133
Tomahawk (Navy solid-fuel rocket), 267, 286      tumors, 130
Tomcat. See F-14 aircraft.                       tungsten, 124
tools, 135                                       Tsarev, A.I., 2%
topography, topology, 218,254,281                Tselinograd, USSR, 193,221, 251
tornado, 10                                      Tucson, Ariz., 7
Tornado MRCA (multirole combat aircraft),        Tucumcari, N.M., 16
     165                                         Tunguska, Siberia, 252-253
Toronto, Univ. of, 302                           Tunney, Sen. John B. (D-Calif.), 222
torpedo, 53, 286                                 Tupolev-144 (TU-144, Soviet supersonic trans-
tourism, 107, 182, 203, 215                          port), 4,8,286
Toth, Robert, 36                                 turhines, 236, 240
Toulmin, Dr. Priestly, 111, 157, 236             Turbo-Union, 165
Toulouse, France, 187                             turbulence, 5, 64,186, 231, 267, 277, 280
toxic substances, 11, 40, 172                    Turkey, 253
trace elements, 41, 157, 216                     Turkish Airlines, 253
tracking and data-relay satellite system         TWA. See Transworld Airlines.
     (TDRSS), 226-227                            200 Yankee (aircraft), 98
tracker station. See earth station.              TWT: traveling-wave tube.
tracking systems, 14, 29, 31, 67, 100, 119,      Tyuratam (Soviet launch site), 29,34, 250,273
     144, 145, 165, 181, 240, 273,297,305
training, 14, 44, 51, 66, 91, 118, 140, 142,       U-2 (earth-survey aircraft), 76, 158, 170
     158, 162, 164, 190, 194, 219, 220, 222,       UFO. See unidentified flying objects.
     224,227,231, 251,256, 270,280,301             Uganda, 293
traffic, 61, 120, 144, 166, 198                    Uhlmann, Dr. Donald R., 297
trajectory, 43, 118                                U.K. See United Kingdom
Trans Siberian Railroad, 297                       Ukraine, 177, 276, 297
Transworld Airlines, 16, 26, 166                   ultrahigh frequency (UHF), 223
transatlantic communications, 18, 59, 87, 195,     ultrasonic equipment, 47, 102
     233                                           ultraviolet, 105, 109, 115, 131, 163, 175, 216,
transatlantic flights, 102, 182, 212, 256, 269        223,236, 272, 274,283
transcontinental flight, 71, 229,275               U r n (ISS-1, Japanese ionosphere-sounding
transfer orbit, 18, 94, 276, 290                      satellite), 44, 307, 312
transcomer, 143                                    U.N. See United Nations.
transfusion, 251                                   U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
transistor, 259, 275                                  Space, 128
Transit 19 (Navy navsat), 294                      underground testing, 255
Transit 20, 295                                    underwater communications, 301
Transit Improvement Program (TIP), U.S.            underwater testing, 283
                                                   Underwood, Maj. E.B., Jt., 44
transition period (budget), 12, 75, 285            unemployment, 12


                                             393
unidentified flying objects, 16, 199                urethane, 59
                                                    Urey, Dr. Harold C., 56
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR).
                                                    urokinase, 20
   See also Russia; Soviet listings.
                                                    Uruguay, 293
-cooperative activities, 45, 68, 78, 80, 83,
                                                    USAF. See Air Force, U.S.
   119,128,141,150,159-160,162,191,195,
                                                    USDA. See Agriculture, U.S. Dept. of.
    198, 212, 219, 224, 231, 243-246, 250,
                                                    user-operated communications, 4, 10
   293- 294, 296, 299,300, 304
                                                    USGS. See Geological Survey, U.S.
-history, 1, 29,46, 47, 59, 76, 90,92, 128,
                                                    USRA. See Universities Space Research Assn.
   143, 149, 158, 163, 207, 214, 238, 252-
                                                    USSR. See Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-
   253, 265,273
-technology, 4, 6, 8, 9, 15, 30, 32, 34, 36,          lics.
   50, 73, 79, 108-109, 117-118, 176-177,                 80,82, 188,216, 232
                                                         es, 167, 225, 240, 265, 280
   210,214-215,220,229,242-243,246,262,
   263,276,277,278,280-281,283,286,287,             Utopia Planifia (region of Mars), 203, 205,
                                                      208,215-216, 217,224,237,274
   288-289,297,298,299,30.5-306
s p a c e . See Soviet space activity.              Uzbekistan, 41
United Air Lines, 229, 261
United Aircraft Corp. See United Technolo-          VAB. See vehicle assembly building, KSC.
   gies.                                            Vachnadze, V.G., 246
United Arab Emirates, 27, 176, 293                  vacuum, 19, 51, 70, 105, 107, 127, 170, 183,
United Kingdom (U.K.), 4, 87, 93, 115, 117,           215, 235, 247,271,281
    130, 164, 165, 181, 187, 192, 209, 212,         Valles Marineris (region of Mars), 121, 139
   233, 238, 263, 269, 273, 283, 294                Van Allen, Dr. James, 105
 United Nations (U.N.), 21, 30, 106, 107, 128,      vanadium, 157
   205,238, 244,273, 307                            vandalism, 215
 United Space Boosters, Inc., 198, 300              Vandenberg AFB, 1, 23, 87, 99, 102, 141,
 United States Air Force (USAF). See Air Force,        165, 168, 172, 193, 195, 203, 214, 219,
  us.                                                 267,295
United States Arms Control and Disarmament          Vanguard project, 29
  Agency, 149                                       Vaughn, O.H., 249
United States Army. See Army, U.S.                  VC-10. See Vickers.
United States Bicentennial. See Bicentennial,       Vega (star), 115
  U.S.                                              vegetation, 5, 105, 305, 306
United States Coast Guard. See Coast Guard,         vehicle assembly building (VAB) at KSC, 70,
  U.S.                                                 107
United States Department of Defense. See            vehicle systems, 142, 144, 160, 207, 213,232,
  Defense, U.S. Dept. of.                             264,343
U.S. Geological Survey. See Geological Sur-         velocity. See speed.
  vey, US.                                          Venera 9, IO, 39, 59, 120, 127, 212
United States Marine Corps. See Marine Corps,       ventilation, 71
  U.S.                                              Venus (planet), 14, 39, 46, 48, 52, 55, 59,
United States Navy. See Navy, U.S.                    69,84, 120, 127, 168, 197, 211,212,214,
United States Postal Service, 67                       288, 294
United Technologies Corp., 108, 134, 145,           Vereshchetin, Dr. V.S., 244, 246
   167, 198,232, 300,302                            verification, 154, 164,262, 281,286
Univac 110/46 (computer), 161                       Vermont, 102
universe, 32, 56, 82, 139                           vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL), 97
Universities Space Research Assn (USRA),            Vertikal4 (Soviet geophysical rocket), 250
   101, 148                                         Vertol Div., Boeing Corp.. 304
university community, 1, 52, 56, 101, 104,          Very Large Amy (telescope), 31
   166, 179, 191, 241, 247, 274, 276, 287,          very long-baseline interferometry (VLBI), 150
  2%                                                Vessot, Dr. R.F.C., 127
Univ. of Calif. See California, Univ. of.           veterans, 13, 161
unmanned space flight, 35, 131, 146, 152,           VFW-FokkerERNO, 113,292
   182, 1%, 219, 264,272, 298,303,305               vibration, 15, 26, 113, 140, 155, 168, 170,
unpowered flight, 37                                   204,210, 237,240,286
                                                    Vickers VC-10 (British jet aircraft), 180, 191
unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine, 99
upper atmosphere (earth). See atmosphere.           video broadcasts, 36
Upper Volta, 293                                    videotape, 150
“upside down” aircraft wing, 87                     Vietnam, 13, 138
upsilon particle, 25                                Viking (mission), 80, 83, 100, 146, 152, 154,
                                                       160, 166, 175, 194,235,245,271,295
upwelling, 24
Ural mountains, 273                                  Viking (project), 15, 49, 76, 77, 80,83, 100,
uranium, 48, 122, 123,254,268                          138, 153, 166, 192, 194, 200, 260-261,
Uranus (planet), 24, 43, 294                           263, 264,271, 272, 274, 295


                                                  394
                                                 water, 27, 35, 61, 70, 77, 78, 83, 120, 122,
Viking 1, 17, 43, 49, 76, 120, 137, 138, 139,
                                                    130, 138, 141, 153, 155, 157, 169, 171,
   146, 147, 148, 151-152, 154, 155, 160, 162,
   168, 175, 177, 178, 194, 196, 199, 203,          178, 179, 199, 204, 209, 224, 226, 239,
                                                    240,251, 268,276,280,281
   208,215,217,224,225-226,236,246,263,
                                                 -hyacinths, 10, 306
   281
VLking2, 15, 17, 43, 49, 77, 121, 148, 153,      -pollulion, 40, 60, 61,67, 105, 267, 303
   155, 203, 205, 207, 215, 217, 223, 224,       --resources, 4, 20, 4 ) 60, 61, 67, 83, 123,
                                                                        1.
   225-226,25237,246,260                            171,267, 276,306
“Viking 1 Early Results,’’ 194                   -vapor, 122, 150, 183, 200, 203, 216, 226,
Viking Undergraduate Intern Program, 166            261,277,295,296, 305
village programs, 111                            “waterhole,” 268
Villar Furtado, Romulo, 238                      Waters, Dr. Joe W., 46
Virgin Islands, 246                              wave measurements, 119, 277
Virginia, 3                                      weapons systems, 13, 14, 135, 149, 165, 172,
Virginia, Univ. of, 101                             257,273,276,280,283,285,288,304,305
Virgo (constellation), 115                       --testing, 299, 305
virus, 61, 252                                   weather. See meteorology.
visibility, 247, 257, 274, 281                   Weatherfax (weather facsimile broadcast sys-
vision, 45                                          tem, NOAA), 10
vitamins, 254                                    Weaver, Leon B., 227
VLA. See Very Large Array.                       Webb, James, E., 62, 90
Vladivostok, USSR, 143                           weight, 15, 20, 26, 61, 64, 65, 66, 67, 75,
VLBI. See very long-baseline interferometer.        89, 140, 169, 222, 240, 246, 248, 264,
                                                    270, 272
Vogel, Orville A., 254
                                                 weightlessness (see also zero gravity), 5, 20,
voice, 36, 62, 79, 89, 93, 94, 115, 120, 223,
   275                                              92, 95, 140, 150,225,249,257, 297
                                                 Weitz, Paul J., %
volcano, 35, 55, 139, 148, 171, 218, 273,281
Volynov, Boris, 140, 177, 190, 193, 204, 342     welding, 247
von Braim, Dr. Wernher, 12, 49, 51,99, 159       West (comet), 31, 45
von Eckardt, Wolf, 137                            West Ford (project), 41
von K h i n lecture, 18                          West Germany. See Federal Republic of Ger-
vortexes, ocean, 83                                  many.
Voskhod 1 , 92                                    West-Northwest region (of Mars), 140
                                                 West, Richard M., 31, 45
Voskhod 2, 73
Vostok (Soviet spacecraft series), 38, 46         West Virginia, 151, 302
Vought Cop., 53                                   Westar (comsat system), 35, 125, 141
Voyager mission, 100                              Western Hemisphere, 106
vulnerability, 163                                Western Test Range. See Vandenberg AFB.
                                                  Western Union Telegraph Co., 18, 35, 125,
Wabash College, 90                                  226
WAC Corporal (rocket), 261                        Westford, Mass., 233
Waddington, Dr. Cecil, 278                        Westinghouse Aerospace Electric Div., 81
Waddy, Judge Joseph, 191                          Westinghouse Electric Corp.. 136, 248
Wadi el Arish, 123                                Westphal, Prof. James, 69
Wake Island, %. 98                                Weyerhaeuser Corp.. 269
                                                  Weymann, Dr. Ray J., 82
wake vortexes, 89
Wall Street, 19                                   Whalen, Albert A., 293
                                                  Whipple, Dr. Fred L., 298
Wallops Flight Center
                                                  Whitcomb, Richard T., 87
-people, 282, 295
                                                  White, Gen. Thomas D., trophy, 231, 283
-programs, 47, 79, 118-119, 126, 133, 143,
   187, 239, 242,247, 270,303                     white dwarf (star), 104
Walsh, John B., 158                               White House, 9, 16, 39, 48, 75, 151, 184,
Walterhouse, Mae, 164                                211.299
Wdton, Bob, 263                                   White House science adviser, 91
Walton, W.B, 302                                  White Nile, 41
war, 154, 230, 276, 281                           White Sands Missile Range, N.M., 47, 95,
Wasatch Div., Thiokol Corp., 82, 188, 232           227,229, 279,288,297,301
Washington, D.C., 17,35,137,150,242,257,          White Sea, 283
  298                                             Whitecloud (Navy surveiilance system), 99
                                                  Whitten, Les, 78
Washington State, 38, 214
Washington, State Univ. of, 254                   Wichita, Kans., 81
Washington Univ. (St. Louis, Mo.), 254, 278       wideband communications, 263
Washington, Univ. of, 166                         widebody jet. See jet aircraft.
Wasserburg, Prof. Gerald J., 300                 Wieland, Richard J., 288
waste disposal, 11, 36, 60,61, 107, 142, 144,    Wilcox Electric Co., 257
   273                                           wildlife, 256

                                             395
Wilhelm, John, 293                                    X-24A (lifting body), 44
William Research Corp., 53                            X-24B, 44,241
Williams, Darrel, 269                                 x-lay test facility, MSFC, 62
Williams, Dr. Gareth P., 189                          x-rays, 23, 45, 62, 88, 93, 101, 106, 131,
Williams, Dr. Robert E., 82                              132, 155, 156, 157, 163, 188, 216, 217,
Wilmington, Del., 36                                     223-224, 229
Wilmington, N.C.., 119                                xenon, 181, 200, 226
Wilson, E. Bright, Jr., 254                           XV-15 (tilt-rotor research aircraft), 258
                               lb,146, 209,
wind, 5, 63, 89, 120, 125,
  248,277,280,300                                     Yak-42 (Soviet transport plane), 286
wind-operated power generators, 14, 67, 102,          Yakutsk, USSR, 272
  125, 167, 176, 181,280                              Yalta, USSR, 195
wind tunnels, 5, 24,33,95, 130, 168,258               Yankee Clipper. See space sailer.
windmills, 67, 102, 167, 181, 280                     Yardley, John F., 17, 91, 95, 243, 290
windshield, 172                                       Yeliseyev, Aleksey, 221
wing, aircraft, 87, 144, 231, 248, 280                Yemen, 176, 293
Winkfield, England, 46                                Yen, J.L., 302
wireless, 143                                         YF-12A (lightweight fighter plane), 164
Wisconsin, Univ. of, 254                              YF-16 (USAF fuselage design), 135
Woiceshyn, Peter M., 76                               YF-17, 95
Wolfe, Dr. John H., 58                                Ying Manufacturing Corp., 116
women in space, 46, 59, 95, 142, 250, 255,            York Univ., Ontario, 304
  270,288                                             Yost, Ed, 242
                                                      Young, A> Thomas, 100, 154, 245, 271
Wonder of Engineering award, 241
Woodfin, R.Adm. Kenneth L., 83                        Young, Sheila, 23
Woomera rocket range, Australia, 93                   Yugoslavia, 143, 207, 214, 238, 245
Worcester, Mass., 190                                 Yuri Gagarin (training) Center, USSR, 219,
Worden, Col. Alfred M., 66                              304
workshop, 81, 179                                     Yuri Gagarin medal, 282
World Administrative Radio Conference, 10
world government, 176                                 Zaire, 73, 293
World Health Organization, 146                        Zamengoe, Cameroon, 181
world records, 40, 71, 96, 98, 109, 140, 164,         Zeiss MKF-6 (multispectral camera), 220-221
  190, 242,253, 256, 282                              zerogravity, 95-96, 107, 140, 172, 249, 256,
World War 11, 3, 17, 28, 67, 92, 98, 143,               270, 279
  211, 256                                            Zholobov, Vitaly, 140, 177, 190, 193, 204,
World Wildlife Fund, 256                                255,342
Wouch, Jerry, 247                                     zinc, 213
Wright brothers, 40, 137, 229                         Zinno, Joseph A., 79
Wright Patterson AFB, 29, 129                         zipper, 60
Wu, Chien-Hsung, 254                                  Zirker, Jack, 179
Wyle Laboratories, 227                                zodiacal light, 8
Wyoming, 121                                          Zolotov, Aleksey, 252-253
Wyoming, Univ. of, 17                                 Zond2 (USSR spacecraft), 15
                                                      Zook, Herbert A,, 167
X-15 (supersonic research aircraft), 137, 241         Zudov, Lt. Col. Vyacheslav, 250, 255, 342




                                                396
                               ERRATA
     In Earlier Volumes of Astronautics and Aeronautics
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1966
  p. 331: In top line, first two words, substitute “October 26” for “October
           27 .’I)


           At beginning of next item, insert “October 27:”
  p. 410: Appendix A, launch table, top item: Change date to Oct. 26 for
           lntelsat 11-A.
  p. 421: Appendix B, NASA launch table, top item: Change launch date to
           Oct. 26 for lntelsat 11-A.
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1967
  p. 432: Appendix B, NASA launch table: In Feb. 4 entry, change launch
           vehicle to Atlas-Agena D, instead of B.
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1969
  p. 1 10: In second sentence from the bottom of the page, delete “for Space
           Science and Applications.’’
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1973
   p. 289: Substitute for first sentence at top: “An early explorer, probably
           Lucas Vasques de Ayllon, gave the name Cape Canaveral some
           time before 1536. It appears on a map dated 1536 and on most
           maps thereafter.” In next to last line of item (sources), insert
           “4/17/73, S7555;” following “H8880;”.
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1974
   p. 146: In lines 6 and 8 from bottom, change “Castro 11” to “Castor II.”
           (Index entry is correct.)
   p. 203: In third line of last paragraph, change “Office” to “Organization.”
   p. 314: Index, under U.S. Air Force, change “Space and Missiles Systems
           Office” to “Space and Missile Systems Organization.”
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1975
   p. 110: Last item on page, second and seventh lines, change “Kramer” to
           “Kraemer.”
   p. 313: Index, change “Kramer, Robert S.” to “Kraemer, Robert S.”




                                     397
National Aeronautics and                                    Postageand Fees Paid
                                SPECIAL FOURTH CLASS MAIL
                                                            National Aeronautics and
                                          BOOK
Space Administration                                        Space Administration
                                                            NASA-451
Washington, D.C.
20546
Official Business
Penalty for Private Use, $300




                                                               POSTMASTER:     If Undeliverable (Section 158
                                                                               Pwtal Manual) Do Not Refurn