                                      NASA SP--4022




ASTRONAUTICS AND
AERONAUTICS, 1977
              A Chronology




             Eleanor H. Ritchie   '




          The NASA History Series




                                                  1986
Scientific and Technical Information Branch
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                        Washington, DC
Four spacecraft launched by NASA i 1977: left to right, top, ESA’s Geos 1 and
                                   n
NASA’s Heao 1; bottom, ESA’s Isee 2 on NASA’s Isee 1, and Italy’s W o .
(NASA 77-H-157,    77-H-56, 77-H-642,77-H-484)
Contents
Preface ...................................................... v
January .....................................................         1
February .................................................... 21
March ......................................................         47
April .......................................................        61
May ........................................................         77
June ......................................................         101
July ....................................................... 127
August ....................................................         143
September .................................................         165
October ...................................................         185
November ................................................. 201
December ..................................................         217
Appendixes
A . Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights, 1977 .......237
B.Major NASA Launches, 1977 ...............................         261
C. Manned Space Flights, 1977 ................................      265
D.NASA Sounding Rocket Launches, 1977 .....................         267
E .Abbreviations of References ................................     273
Index ...................................................... 279


Illustrations
                                                                       ..
Four spacecraft launched by NASA. 1977 .........................        n
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise en route to testing ................ 17
Artist’s concept. world’s largest wind-turbine blade ................34
Artist’s concept. solar sail rendezvous with comet .................49
Landsat images. Sierra Nevada snowcover. 1975 and 1977 ..........81
Dr .Wernher von Braun with Saturn V. 1969 .....................       116
“Sounds of Earth” recording goes on Voyager2 spacecraft .........144
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on first free flight ................151




                                                                       iii
NASA maintains an internal history program for two principal reasons: (1) Spon-
sorship of research in NASA-related history is one way in which NASA responds
to the provision of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 that requires
NASA to “provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of in-
formation concerning its activities and the results thereof.” (2) Thoughtful study
of NASA history can help agency managers accomplish the missions assigned to
the agency. Understanding NASA’s past aids in understanding its present situa-
tion and illuminates possible future directions. The opinions and conclusions set
forth in this book are those of the author; no official of the agency necessarily en-
dorses those opinions or conclusions.




For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U S Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
                                               ..
20402 (paper cover) Library of Congress Catalog Number 65-60308
Preface
   Astronautics and Aeronautics for 1977 is the 17th volume in a series of
annual chronological digests of principal events in the fields of
astronautics and aeronautics. Initiated in 1961 with a compendium of
events from 1915-1960, this series is designed to serve as a reference for
policymakers, reference librarians, and researchers. Each entry is fol-
lowed by one or more citations of sources to which users may turn for
further information on the particular event or development being chron-
icled.
   The Astronautics and Aeronautics series is one way in which the
NASA History Office has attempted to implement its charter to
disseminate information about the activities of the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, and to provide support for historians and
other researchers in the area of United States aeronautical and space pro-
grams. As a result of staff and budgetary limitations, the NASA History
Office has been unable to maintain the annual currency of this series. We
expect, however, to bring the series up to date with a forthcoming com-
pendium volume covering principal events over a six-year period.
   This volume was written by a member of the NASA History Office
staff, Eleanor H. Ritchie. Michael A. Dennis, Stuart Rosenbaum, and
Charles Scott also worked on the volume.
   Reliability is essential to the usefulness of any reference work of this
scope. As with previous volumes, readers can contribute by notifying our
office of any errors so that we can publish them in subsequent volumes.



                                                        Sylvia D. Fries
                                         Director, NASA History Office




December 1985


                                                                          V
January



January 2: Leaders of 28 major U.S. scientific societies had endorsed
tests to determine the value of a “science court”-an impartial quasi-
judicial body -in evaluating conflicting claims on controversial national
issues such as nuclear-reactor safety, food additives, pesticides, and off-
shore oil exploration, and in determining the facts, according to New
 York Times science reporter John Noble Wilford. The concept, debated
for several yr, had received the endorsements in the last months of 1976.
Although it had the support of President Ford’s scientific advisers, pro-
ponents were not sure how President-elect Carter’s advisers stood. (NYT,
Jan 2/77,28)

January 3: NASA announced award of what Aviation Week called “the
largest NASA contract ever issued for an unmanned space program” to
Western Union Space Communications Co., TRW Systems, and Harris
Electronics Systems Div. for development of the tracking and data-relay
satellite system (TDRSS) aimed at replacing present ground stations by
offering orbital-communications coverage for 85 to 100% of spacecraft
orbit, compared to 15% coverage now available from ground-based
facilities. The system would consist of two specialized relay spacecraft in
synchronous earth orbit plus a ground terminal at White Sands, N.M.,
supporting 20 or more satellites orbiting at up to 5000km altitude. The
 lOyr contract at $79.6 million per yr would include work on spacecraft
and ground stations, as well as all operating costs.
   TRW would be prime manufacturer under subcontract with WU to
build six spacecraft plus components for a seventh, using technology
developed for the FltSatCom spacecraft and hardware used in WU’s
Westar domestic comsats; Harris Electronics would build the White
Sands station and provide antenna components. Missions using the
TDRSS would include scientific, applications, and manned satellites
such as Space Shuttle, Spacelab, and Shuttle-launched spacecraft
scheduled for the 1980s. (AvWk, Jan 3/77, 14; NASA Release 76-213)

  Seven European nations planning to use data from the U S Seasat A,
                                                         ..
due for launch in May 1978, were forming an organization to coordinate
their activities, Aviation Week magazine reported. Denmark, Finland,
France, West Germany, Britain, Norway, and Spain would use Seasat
measurement of wave heights to forecast floods in the North Sea area

                                                                          1
JANUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



and to design ships or offshore structures such as oil rigs, or in harbor
construction. The group planned to have five laser-ranging stations and
up to 10 Doppler tracking stations ready by the time Seasat would be
operational. (AvWk, Jan 3/77, 20)

January 4: Kennedy Space Center announced it would hold a sym-
posium Jan. 15 on minority opportunities at the Spaceport, to include
talks on KSC procurement, future construction plans, and explanations
of the KSC affirmative action plan and equal employment opportunity
program. KSC had invited representatives of minority business firms and
the general public to attend the symposium. (KSC Release 2-77)

January 5: The U.S. Air Force Systems Command reported it had work-
ed out a way to suppress noise of jet-aircraft engines during maintenance
operations on the ground, as a means of reducing hearing loss in
maintenance personnel and noise impact on the community. Fifty-eight
Air Force bases worldwide had received the suppressor units, consisting
of primary and secondary air intakes and enclosures, augmenter tube,
exhaust muffler, and support structure to house controls and water
pumps. After backing an aircraft into the secondary enclosure, workers
would enclose the air intakes at the front in the primary-intake mufflers;
the secondary enclosure, covering the aft fuselage and engine exhaust,
would include openings to be sealed against the fuselage and stabilizers
to keep noise inside. Inside the augmenter tube, secondary cooling air
would mix with the exhaust, and spray bars in the tube would spray
water at 800gal per min during afterburner operation. (OIP Release
284.76)

  The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization
0

(INTELSAT) announced it would award to a British company, AERE
Hartwell, a 15mo $71 540 fixed-price contract to develop low-pressure,
nickel-hydrogen power cells that would use a lanthanum-alloy member
both as hydrogen reservoir and as negative electrode. Use of lanthanum
would lower pressure in the cells, reduce the heat dissipated during
discharge, and reduce the volume of cell density. If successfully
developed, the cells would operate at a maximum pressure of about 6 at-
mospheres and would have a minimum life of 500 charge-discharge
cycles when used in synchronous-satellite applications. (INTELSAT
Release 77-1-M)

   INTELSAT announced award of a 15mo $72 536 fixed-price contract
to EIC Corp. of Newton, Mass., for development of an improved high-
pressure nickel-hydrogen power cell that would increase reliability and
attain a minimum lOyr cyclical life in synchronous-satellite applications.
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917                               JANUARY



Such an advance would permit about 4O00 daily charge-discharge cycles,
or about lOyr of maintenance-free operations. (INTELSAT Release
77-2-M)

January 6: NASA formally adjudged the Viking 75 mission, launched
toward Mars on Aug. 20 and Sept. 9, 1975, successful, according to the
post-landing mission operations report. All Viking instruments except
the seismometer on the first lander (which failed to uncage itself‘)
operated successfully and were continuing to send data to earth. The
prelaunch mission objectives (advancing knowledge of Mars by orbital
observation and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the
planet’s surface) had been realized, the report said. (MOR
S-815-75-01/02)

   NASA announced that a test model of Pioneer IO, first spacecraft to
0

reached Jupiter, would be on display at the Natl. Air and Space Museum
in Washington, D.C., beginning Jan. 11. The actual spacecraft,
launched March 3, 1972, had reached Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now
about 1.6 billion km (about a billion miles) from earth headed for the or-
bit of Uranus, which it should reach in Sept. 1979, by the time its sister
spacecraft Pioneer I1 would reach Saturn.
   Headed generally toward Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus,
Pioneer I O would reach the orbit of Pluto (about 4 billion miles out) in
1987, but radio-signal reception would be doubtful beyond the orbit of
Uranus. The model of the first spacecraft scheduled to leave the earth’s
solar system would appear in the Milestones of Flight hall with the
Wright Flyer, the Spirit of St. Louis, and the Apollo 11. (NASA Release
77-1; ARC Release 77-1)

   NASA Hq announced appointment of Curtis M. Graves as director of
0

the Community Affairs Division, effective Jan. 3. Graves came to NASA
from the Natl. Civil Service League, where he was managing associate
for continuing education from 1973 to 1977. For 6yr he was a member of
the Texas legislature, representing a Houston district beginning in 1966
as the first black elected to that body since 1891. Born in New Orleans,
he received a bachelor’s degree from Texas Southern University and an
honorary doctorate from Union Baptist Bible College in Houston. He
also served as- branch manager of a savings and loan association and as
advertising manager and editor of two Houston newspapers. In his new
assignment with NASA he would supervise the agency’s relations with
communities where NASA centers and installations are located, pro-
moting understanding of NASA’s economic and social impact on these
areas among local citizens and NASA personnel nationwide. (NASA
Release 77-3)

                                                                        3
JANUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



  India and the Soviet Union had reached agreement on coordinating
@



their satellite systems, said the Indian news agency Samachar, as
reported by the Foreign Broadcast Information Service. The agreement
resulted from a recent visit to Moscow by a team of experts from India’s
Ministry of Communications and Department of Space. The problem
arose because of possible interference between the proposed India
domestic comsat Insat, to be placed in geostationary orbit over the In-
dian Ocean, and existing or proposed satellite systems of the USSR. The
aim of the talks was to ensure avoidance of satellite interference through
discussion of the technical aspects of the systems, including the distance
between satellites. Satellites already in operation in that area included
those of the Intl. Telecommunications Satellite Organization, Indonesia,
and others. (FBIS, Delhi Patriot, Dec 26/76, 1)

January 7 NASA announced that four customers had signed up for
           :
“getaway special” payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle on a space-
available basis beginning in 1980. The small self-contained payloads
must weigh no more than 90kg (2001b) each, measure no more than
0. 15m3(5ft3), and require no services such as electrical power or deploy-
ment into space.
   Owners of the research and development packages were R. Gilbert
Moore of Utah, a private citizen who offered half his payload to Utah
State Univ., which in turn would make the space available to high school
students who submitted proposals to fly their own experiments; Dr. L.R.
Megill, chairman of the space science experiment committee at Utah
State, who funded a payload as a follow-on to Moore and also planned
to invite student proposals; and Reiner Klett , representing independent
West German researchers, who signed for two payloads, one biological
and one for space processing. (NASA Release 77-4)

   Radio signals between the four Viking spacecraft on Mars and earth-
based antennas had provided the most accurate confirmation so far of
Einstein’s theory of relativity in an experiment conducted Nov. 25, 1976,
when Mars moved behind the sun relative to the earth, causing a total
blackout of communications with the Viking spacecraft. Radio signals
transmitted to the Viking spacecraft from antennas at Goldstone, Calif.,
and Canberra, Australia, had produced “incredibly precise” measure-
ment of the radio transmission. According to Adam I. Braufman of the
Mass. Institute of Technology, the “uncertainty” over a space of some
322 million km was less than 2m, an accuracy of five parts in 10 million
millionths.
   The Viking radio science team was trying to confirm Einstein’s predic-
tion that the sun’s gravitational force would bend and delay radio signals

4
ASTRONAUTICS’AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   JANUARY



(or any form of radiation) traveling close to a massive body such as the
sun. Previous tests using the spacecraft communications systems tended
to confirm the theory, but the Viking test proved much more accurate
than the previous ones. (NYT, Jan 7/77, A-8; W Post, Jan 7/77, A-1)

  NASA announced it would participate in a joint agro-environmental
Q


monitoring system that would improve crop management in the state of
Virginia through knowledge gained from the automated data-collection
and processing systems developed for satellite and space-exploration pro-
grams. Funded by Wallops Flight Center at Wallops Island, Va., and by
the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, a net-
work of data collection stations would automatically track “degree-day”
units necessary for the emerging of certain insects or diseases; when a
certain total was reached, the system would alert a farmer to spray his
crop. Savings would result from reduced use of insecticides during less
effective periods, reduced possibility of pollution, and fewer re-
quirements for labor and equipment. Loyd C. Parker, Wallops project
manager, said design work was complete and by early spring the five
monitoring stations and central computer should be ready for use.
(NASA Release 77-6)

   Marshall Space Flight Center announced it would accept proposals for
Q


a study contract to define possibilities of receiving electrical energy from
the sun in large quantities for use on earth, through a concept called
Satellite Power Systems, consisting of a number of spacecraft in sta-
tionary orbit using photovoltaic or solar-thermal power instrumentation
to capture solar energy, convert it to electrical energy, convert that to
microwave energy, transmit it to earth stations for conversion back to
electrical energy, and distribute the power to users. Other NASA studies
had established the technical and economic feasibility of satellite power
systems, but an agreement between NASA and the Energy Research and
Development Administration would result in additional data on key
issues and critical areas, and the ability of the concept to deal with these
issues and areas. MSFC would accept proposals for the study through
Jan. 24. (MSFC Release 77-1)

January 8 James B. Irwin, eighth astronaut to walk on the moon, re-
          :
mained in satisfactory condition after triple bypass surgery at the Texas
Heart Institute. “He is still in intensive care but is doing very well,” said a
spokesman at St. Lukes Episcopal Hospital in Houston. The operation
consisted of replacing three vein segments with veins removed from
Irwin’s legs. Irwin, 46, lunar-module pilot on the Apollo I5 mission July
26, 1971, had resigned from the astronaut corps in May 1972. (NYT, Jan
8/77, 17)

                                                                             5
JANUARY                                ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



January IO: Av Wk reported that the seismometercarried on the Viking 2
lander might have recorded the first seismic event since the spacecraft
touched down Sept. 3, 1976, on the Utopia Planitia area of the planet
Mars. Beginning about 7pm local time for the lander, on Sol 60 (Nov. 7,
1976), the activitq continued for about 30min. Viking project observers
said the data seemed to have the “proper signature” of a seismic event,
similar to data recorded on the lunar surface during seismic events.
Donald Anderson, leader of the Viking seismology team, said rough
estimates put the center of the activity several thousand km from the
lander, but cautioned against labeling the activity a “marsquake” until
further studies were done. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 21)

   MSFC reported that the number of visitors to the center in 1976 had
increased 11Vo over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each
of the 50 United States and several foreign countries. The guided bus
tours of the center, cosponsored by MSFC and the Alabama Space and
Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some
of the former Saturn test sites. The tour stop presenting the story of the
Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of the Shut-
tle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of Skylab
to see how the astronauts lived in orbit; and the east and west test areas
being converted for Shuttle testing were now available for viewing. The
Redstone test stand already on the tour route had been refurbished and
was added to the Natl. Register of Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3)

   The U.S. Dept. of Defense had begun development of plans to wage
0

war in outer space, the Washington Post reported, and had contracted
with six manufacturers to study ways of letting its satellites sound an
alarm if approached, sound another alarm if attacked, and defend itself
from an enemy satellite that approached too close.
   Quoting “knowledgeable sources . . . close to the Pentagon,” the Post
said the USSR’s resumption last year of hunter-killer satellite testing
after a 5yr hiatus had caused growing concern over the threat of war in
space. The Pentagon presently had at least a dozen comsats in orbit link-
ing U.S. military bases, ships, and aircraft around the world, and
another dozen navigation satellites to guide Navy surface ships and sub-
mqrines. A killer satellite launched by an enemy could knock out the en-
tire U.S. defense communications system within a wk, according to the
Post account, and the Pentagon had considered putting an entire array
of comsats in orbit and turning off their radios until needed: “With their
radios off,’’ said a source, “the opposition couldn’t track their radio
beacons. And if they can’t track them they can’t find them.” No one had
forecast a war in space within the next lOyr, the Post added, but the Pen-
tagon planned to be prepared after that. Asked if the U.S. could fight a

6
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                                 JANUARY



war on earth today if it had lost its satellites in space, a source replied:
“Not successfully.” (W Post, Jan 10177, A-26)

January 17: NASA announced plans to launch NATO 111-B, second in a
new series of comsats to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 27 as
NASA’s first launch of 1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase I11 series,
funded entirely by NATO, were built by Ford Aerospace; the third
would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space
Flight Center that would put NATO 111-B in orbit had successfully laun-
ched three previous NATO satellites: Nato ZI-A and -B, in March 1970
and Feb. 1971, and Nato 111-A in April 1976. (NASA Release 77-5)

   Rockwell Intl.’s B-1 Division announced award of contracts for more
0

than $3 million to two Phoenix, Ariz., firms-Sperry Rand Flight
Systems Division and AiResearch Manufacturing Co. - for work on the
new USAF B-1 strategic bomber. The B-1 Division was system contrac-
tor to the Air Force for the program, which received DOD production
approval on Dec. 2, 1976. Sperry would receive a $1 840 500 contract to
build a gyrostabilization subsystem and a vertical situation display for a
B-1 prototype that would enter flight testing in 1979; AiResearch would
receive a $1 218 102 contract to produce a secondary power subsystem
for the same prototype. The gyrostabilization subsystem would provide
the €3-1 crew with the aircraft’s course heading and flight angle with rela-
tion to the horizon; the secondary power subsystem would provide extra
power for engine start and operation of support systems on the B-1.
(Rockwell Release LA-1)

January 18: MSFC announced that the state of Georgia would be first in
the nation to have its own Landsat digital-analysis system, under a con-
tract between the Georgia Institute of Technology and MSFC enabling
state planners to assess land-resources usage and to monitor changes,
and to set up a standard data base for a statewide land-use program. The
two Landsat satellites now in near-polar orbit would provide images and
recorded magnetic tape transmitted to a ground receiving station. A
data-retrieval system developed by Johnson Space Center would help in
establishing a state organization structure to distribute the data to
regional, county, and local users. A local official could find out how a
tract as small as 10acres was being used, merely by dialing a central com-
puter at Ga. Tech and getting a printout by telephone into a local ter-
minal. (MSFC Release 77-8)

January 19: NASA announced it would share with the city of Hampton,
Va., the cost of building a refuse-burning, steam-producing plant to

                                                                           7
JANUARY                                  ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



serve the city and four federal agencies in the Tidewater area. First of this
type of community facility to be jointly sponsored by a city government
and federal agencies, the project was the result of studies at Langley
Research Center on better use of potential energy sources and improve-
ment of the environment. Cost of the plant, about $8 million, would be
shared by Langley Air Force Base, the City of Hampton, and LaRC, and
should be amortized within 2Oyr. Beginning in 1979, it would consume
about 70% of the city’s waste and all refuse from LaRC, the air force
base, the Army’s Fort Monroe, and the VA hospital in Hampton, and
would produce about 306 million lb of steam per yr. Bcilt on NASA-
owned land, the plant would remain the property of NASA though leas-
ed to and operated by the city for at least 2Oyr. Ash produced through
special incineration at up to 1800°F would be sterile, nonorganic, and
nonpolluting, amounting to a seventh of the refuse bhrned. (NASA
Release 77-8)

   A Trident missile successfully launched from Cape Canaveral had
0

passed its first flight test and met all major test objectives, according to a
NY Times account. The U.S.Navy reported that the missile, carrying an
inert payload, flew nearly its 9500km range to an area near Ascension Is.
in the South Atlantic. Like its predecessors, the Polaris and Poseidon
strategic missile systems, Trident would become the nation’s primary
undersea intercontinental weapon. At a cost of $21.5 billion, the Trident
missile would be operative well into the 1980s. New Trident class sub-
marines would carry 24 of the new missiles, whereas the Polaris and
Poseidon had carried only 16. Ohio, first Trident class submarine under
construction, and costing $882 million, would be ready for patrol duty in
1979 with a full complement of 24 Trident missiles, the report said.
(NYT, Jan 19/77, A-14; W Post, Jan 19/77, A-16)

  The Dept. of Defense announced plans to begin full-scale development
0

of cruise missiles made by Boeing Go. and General Dynamics Corp.,
with the first to be available in 1979, the Wall St. Journal reported.
Cruise missiles (small low-flying pilotless jet planes designed to evade
enemy radar) could carry either nuclear or conventional warheads and
could be launched from ships, planes, or trucks, or submerged sub-
marines. Boeing and General Dynamics had each developed a cruise
missile: Boeing the Air Force version, and General Dynamics, the Navy
version called the Tomahawk, designed for launch from submarines and
surface vessels. Although the two versions used different airframes, they
used the same engines, guidance systems, and warheads. After reviewing
both versions, the DOD decided to continue both, and established a joint
program office under the direction of Navy Capt. Walter Locke, whose
orders required maximum cooperation with the Air Force. In addition to

8
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 JANUARY



its “short” cruise missile, 1083cm long with a range of 1127km, the Air
Force supported development of a stretch version 1470cm long with a
range of 2254km for more distant targets. The DOD also expressed sup-
port for advanced technology to refine missile accuracy and for a super-
sonic version to exceed present speed of 885kph. It had asked Congress
for $402.7 million for the programs in FY 1978, up from $198.7 million
in 1977. (WSJ, Jan 19/77, 38)

January 20: The Netherlands had “finally decided” at the end of 1976 to
join the U.S. and ESA in financing a second astronomy satellite (IRAS,
the infrared astronomy satellite), but not all its citizens were enthusiastic
over the anticipated expense, said a report in Nature magazine. Starting
with a preliminary definition study in Jan. 1975, followed by 13 pro-
posals for experiments in response to a NASA announcement, a U.S.
study team of 11 astronomers had begun discussion with Dutch
colleagues on the scientific program and had reached agreement at the
beginning of 1976.
   NASA had expected signing of a memorandum of understanding be-
tween the U.S. and the Netherlands by July 1976; the Dutch government
had agreed in principle in July, but it had taken 6mo to find the money
for the project. The U.S. and the Netherlands would each pay about 110
million guilders, and the United Kingdom Science Research Council,
which had taken active part in the US-Dutch negotiations, would con-
tribute 10 million guilders. Plans were to launch IRAS from the Western
Test Range in the spring of 1981, to trace and map about 10 million in-
frared sources. Dutch associations of scientific workers had protested in
1974 against further space activity, especially in behalf of
underdeveloped countries lacking means to take advantage of such ef-
fort. (Nature, Jan 20/77, 202)

* The Max Planck Institute of Astronomy announced that, for the first
time, astronomers had observed the presence of water outside earth’s
galaxy, indicating the possibility of life in outer space, the NY Times
reported. Astronomers from the U.S., France, and West Germany, us-
ing the 32.91m Effelsberg radiotelescope, largest in the world, found
rotating molecules of water at the edge of nebula IC 133, 2.2 million
light-years from earth. The water molecules, when struck by light, ap-
parently emit excess energy and (like laser beams) vibrate in unison, giv-
ing off radio signals. The discovery meant that other solar systems with
the same physical conditions as earth’s might exist, along with planets
and stars also formed by condensation of dust and gas, with the same
type of lifespan.
   “What is decisive,” according to Otto Hachenberg, director of the

                                                                           9
JANUARY                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



Bonn Institute for Radio Astronomy, “is that we find the same condi-
tions of physical matter one billion light years away from earth as on
earth.” Discovery of water vapor in another galaxy was expected to in-
spire scientists to look for such vapor in other galaxies. (NYT, Jan
20/77, 23)
January 2: The United States planned to orbit in 1983 a 9080kg 645cm
           Z
telescope that would observe images almost to the edge of space and the
beginning of time, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post.
“Without the blurring of the atmosphere,” said Dr. John Bahcall of
Princeton Univ.’s Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to see
things that are 10 times smaller than we have seen, or 10 times farther
away. It would be like reading the writing on a quarter that we could only
tell was round before.”
    If approved by Congress, the $435 million Space Telescope would be
carried from earth by astronauts manning the Space Shuttle. The
telescope would investigate quasars radiating thousands of times the
energy generated by ordinary stars of the same size, and would observe
the birth of stars, map nearby planets and galaxies, and compute
distances to the nearest stars.
    In addition to optics half the size of Mount Palomar’s, the Space
Telescope would carry lenses and instruments to scan ultraviolet and in-
frared spectra not accessible to earthbound telescopes because of at-
mospheric blockage. The telescope would relay its views to earth using
geostationary satellites over the U.S. NASA would send Shuttle
astronauts to the telescope every 5yr to replace wbrnout or damaged
parts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C-24)
 0 The Communications Satellite Corporation announced that its earth

 stations in Andover, Maine; Etam, W.Va.; and Jamesburg, Calif., had
operated with two TV channels in each of four Intelsat satellites to
transmit coverage of President Jimmy Carter’s inauguration to about 70
countries around the world. Total transmit-receive time for the satellite
 TV coverage was 61-1/6 half-channel hr. The European Broadcasting
 Union (EBU), the U.S. Information Agency (USIA), the Armed Forces
 Radio and TV Service, and other organizations had reached audiences in
 both western and eastern Europe through the ComSat network. Coun-
tries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia, and Australia had
 seen inaugural events transmitted either live or on film and videotape
 news services transmitted by the satellites. (ComSat Release 77-8)
    The Soviet Union had radioed commands to its orbiting Salyut 5 space
 station to position it for rendezvous with a forthcoming Soyuz launch,
 according to a story in the Washington Post. Ideal time for a Soyuz
 launch would be within the next 5 days, the report said, and two Soviet
 tracking ships were already on station in the Atlantic Ocean and Carib-
bean Sea to keep in touch with the cosmonauts. (W Post, Jan 21/77, C8)
10
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               JANUARY



January 24: NASA H announced appointment of R.D. Ginter as as-
                      q
sistant administrator for energy programs, effective Jan. 2. Ginter had
been acting in that position since Sept. 1975, following the departure of
astronaut (now U.S. Senator) Harrison H. Schmitt (R-NM).
   Ginter had joined NASA in 1960 after 8yr as a missile project officer
with the U S Navy and served in a variety of positions, including chief
          ..
of the Scout launch vehicle program, director of the Technology Ap-
plications Division, and director of the Energy Systems Division. He
received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1966 for his work as pro-
gram manager for the Atlas-Centdur launch vehicle. (NASA Release
77-9)
January 25: MSFC announced selection of a Huntsville, Ala., firm for
award of its largest contract to a minority business under the Small
Business Act. Robinson Printing Co. would receive $998 474 to provide
reproduction, documentation, and photographic services for the
Michoud Assembly Facility at New Orleans; the cost-plus-fixed-fee con-
tract would be for lyr with two lyr renewal options. Robinson would be
one of four minority firms working at Michoud under MSFC contract.
(MSFC Release 77-12)
   MSFC announced that four of its engineers had received awards con-
0

ferred by the Soviet Union for participating in the Apollo-Soyuz test
project of 1975. Dr. William R. Lucas, director of MSFC, presented the
S. Korolev medal to Harold Ledford (now of the Shuttle projects office)
for “outstanding management and technical proficiency as chief engineer
for science and engineering” from beginning to end of the ASTP.
   The USSR also sent Yuri Gagarin diplomas for “exemplary leadership”
to three engineers who had chaired stress-corrosion review teams after
prelaunch inspection of the long stored Saturn 1B launch vehicle revealed
a cracked fin. The teams had investigated all launch stages and
associated hardware, independently assessing use of corrosion-
susceptible materials. Jewel W. Moody’s review team and a Chrysler
Corp. team assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn 1B; Charles E.
Cataldo’s team, with personnel from McDonnell Douglas and the
Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell, investigated the S-IVB stage and
rocket engines used on the various launch stages to assure they were
flightworthy; and Paul H. Schuerer’s team, with personnel from IBM
and the Bendix Corp., assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn instrument
unit and inertial-guidance platform. (MSFC Release 77-13)
  The Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) an-
0

nounced plans to use a new tool- satellite pictures -in establishing hunt-
ing regulations for Canada geese and other arctic-nesting game birds.
Wildlife managers in Canada and the U.S. would use imagery from the
Noaa 5 polar-orbiting satellite, showing snow and ice conditions in tradi-
                                                                        11
JANUARY                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



tional nesting areas too remote for on-site inspection, to monitor habitat
conditions.
   Identification of probable areas of castastrophic or outstanding goose
production would enable managers to impose restrictions to prevent
overkill of birds or to bring the populations to levels suitable for hunting.
Factors affecting the nesting of arctic geese would include the timely
disappearance of snow and ice, and availability of melt water to allow
rearing of young; late seasons or adverse weather could prevent nesting
or reduce clutch or brood sizes. (Dept. of Commerce/NOAA Release
77-13)

* Timothy Leary, once described by the media as “high priest of LSD,”
visited Washington, D.C., on behalf of his latest enthusiasm, space
migration, according to a story in the WashingtonStar. Leary, at his first
press conference in 7yr, described “a raging epidemic of hope in this
country” and sqid it was time to find a new frontier. He wanted his sup-
port taken seriously, and cited the studies by Gerard K. O’Neill of
Princeton Univ. and those of the L-5 Society. “Soon people will find it
cheaper to build a new world than to fight over an old one,” he added.
When would space migration become a reality? “Ten years after people
stop laughing about it,” Leary replied. ( W Star, Jan 25/77, D-3)

January 26: Lewis Research Center announced it would participate in
programs to demonstrate the feasibility of using an airborne infrared
scanner to pinpoint residential heat loss. The cities of Cleveland, Ohio,
and Springfield, Ill., would reimburse the center for its services. A
NASA C-47 aircraft, flown over areas designated by Cleveland’s city
council as eligible for low-interest winterizing and rehabilitation loans
from the U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), would
record on magnetic tape the images of rooftops showing hot areas as
white, warm areas as gray, and cool areas as black. Homeowners in the
target areas could view the results at community centers and apply for
block grant money from HUD as necessary. The city of Springfield had
requested similar assistance for a HUD loan program. LeRC had used a
thermal infrared technique in 1975-76 to scan NASA centers for energy
loss, saving the agency about $350 OOO in the first yr of the program.
(NASA Release 77-13; Lewis News, March 11/77, 3)

  A television relay satellite 22 OOO miles in space was the focus of an ex-
0

periment Jan. 25 in using TV transmissions to conduct judicial pro-
ceedings, reducing the travel time and cost of witnesses and lawyers, and
to increase the efficiency of the courts, the New York Times reported.
  The project, result of a yr’s planning between the Univ. of Maryland
law school in Baltimore and that of Ohio Northern in Lima, was only

12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                                 JANUARY



partly successful because the yr-old communications technology satellite
Cts orbiting over the equator south of Denver repeatedly sent to
Baltimore the jagged horizontal lines of TV “snow” during the closing
arguments of the mock hearing at Lima. Also, the voice-activated TV
cameras, two at each location to cover the two pairs of lawyers and
judges, would take over the projection screen whenever anyone wearing
a lapel microphone coughed or cleared his throat.
   The Maryland Center for Public Broadcasting, which sponsored the
experiment, had paid nothing for use of the system, and the Cts project
leader (Herbert Nunelly of Westinghouse Electric Corp.) operating the
teleconference for NASA said he could not compute the cost of an hour’s
or day’s use of the satellite. The American Bar Assn. had approved the
mock appeals hearing before Judge Joseph F. Weis, Jr., of the U.S
Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and three lawyers before whom
law school students were arguing the case. Judge Weis’s ABA project
director, Howard Primer of Chicago, cited several actual trials con-
ducted with TV assistance. (NYT, Jan 26/77, B-1)

   First appraisals pf a Soviet MiG-25 aircraft flown by a Soviet pilot to
Japan on Sept. 6, 1976, had been revised, according to U.S. Air Force
specialists quoted by the NY Times. Further analysis had revealed that
the airctaft did not lag behind the advanced technology of U.S aircraft,
as previously stated, but contained some surprises. After 7wk of study,
officials reported the MiG-25’s radar to be more powerful and less
vulnerable to enemy jamming than U.S. radars, although operated on
vacuum-tube technology. The Soviet aircraft’s radar also lacked the
“look-down” capability of U.S. aircraft, so that Soviet MiG-25’s could
not detect low-flying enemy aircraft that blended in with the earth’s sur-
face. Similarly, Air Force specialists described the MiG-25’s Tumansky
jet engines as 15yrs outmoded: the flight computer -called impressive
even though it too was based on vacuum-tube technology -required
extra space, maintenance, and cooling mechanisms. The USSR apparent-
ly was reluctant to entrust its pilots with total control of their aircraft,
which explained the “very sophisticated data base” which could not only
handle fire control and sensor systems but could also return the craft to
any of four predesignated landing fields. “The biggest advantage,” said
one U.S. Air Force officer, “is that we allow, we train, our men to think,
to adapt. This does not occur in many cases with the Soviet air force.”
Designed in 1960 to combat the U.S. B-70 bomber, which never went
into production, the MiG-25 had been altered later for use against the
highflying Lockheed SR-71 reconnaissance plane. (NYT, Jan 26/77,
A-1 1)

* The New York Times reported that France had inaugurated its first

                                                                          13
JANUARY                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



operating solar power plant, in what officials predicted would b.e a race
with the U.S. to sell solar power to Arab and third world countries. The
plant, located at Odeillo in the Pyrenees mountains of southern France,
would contribute about 64 kilowatts to the national electricity grid
(enough to run about 60 household electric irons, the NYT said). Jean-
Claude Colli, the government’s director for new energy sources, noted
that the French could claim operational equipment, whereas “the
Americans are presenting futuristic projects.” France expected to sign a
major solar energy development contract with Saudi Arabia within the
week and to host a sales meeting at the end of the week wiih 26 countries
from the Persian Gulf and Mediterrranean regions. The new plant was
said to receive about 180 days of sun per yr, and to use collector mirrors
for reflecting the rays to a boiler heating steam to drive a turboalternator
that would produce the electricity. (NYT, Jan 26/77, A-9)

January 27: NASA announced publication of a “space photo album”: an
atlas-size book containing 400 images of earth’s natural and cultural
features taken by the Landsat earth resources satellite, most of the pic-
tures in full color and ne& full-page size. Authors were three scientists
from GSFC (Drs. Nicholas M.Short, Paul D. Lowman, and Stanley C.
Freden) and Dr. William A. Finch, Jr., from San Diego State Univ.
Designed as a reference, a textbook, a teachers’ guide, and a
supplemental tool for research specialists, the book devoted 40% of its
content to images of the 50 United States but included images from all
over the world, and repeated some standard views to show seasonal
changes. The pictures had a grid-number system for quick location of
geological and geographical features described in the captions. The book
included sections telling the story of the Landsat program, its systems,
applications, and accomplishments, and a supplemental teacher’s guide
with glossary and suggestions for classroom use. (NASA Release 77-14)

January 28: NASA launched from the Eastern Test Range on a Delta
vehicle the second in a series of three communications satellites for use
by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, into an orbit with 35,797km
preliminary apogee, 35 777km perigee, 1436.2min period, and 2.6” or-
bital inclination. The cylindrical Nato ZZZB spacecraft had a covering of
solar cells for power generation and was gyrostabilized, providing stabili-
ty for the antenna system which would counter-rotate to point to the
earth at all times. All active communications components were redun-
dant, having an identical backup part on board. After fifth apogee,
about 48hr after launch, firing of an apogee motor would put Nato ZZZB
into a circular synchronous orbit at about 35 900km altitude, where its
onboard reaction-control system would take it to a predetermined loca-

14
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               JANUARY



tion. The U.S. Air Force’s satellite-control facility would operate these
activities on behalf of NATO, which had funded three Phase I11 comsats
built by Ford Aerospace to replace the Nato IIsatellites in the NATO in-
tegrated communications systems. (NASA Release 77-5; Spacewarn
SPX-280; Sf Satellite Digest, July-Aug 77, 298)

* NASA announced resumption of communication with the four
Viking-mission vehicles -two landers and two orbiters -at the end of the
“conjunction” period during which contact was degraded and temporari-
ly lost because of the changing position of Mars, behind the sun with
relation to the earth since Nov. 1976.
   The Viking mission extended into the post-conjunction period would
use the functioning spacecraft to obtain seasonal-variation data, do long
duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and gather ad-
ditional information not possible during the primary mission because of
time or observational constraints. No known limitations would preclude
completion of tit least a year of extended mission and probably more, the
announcement said, as the orbiters had made minimal use of their con-
sumables during the early mission and had performed a minimal number
of battery-recharge cycles. Lander B’s location at Mars 44”N would en-
counter temperatures below the qualification limits in the winter season,
but the effect of this was unpredictable because lander tests had not gone
beyond qualification limits.
   Extended-mission data collection had actually begun last Nov. when
controllers had used the spacecraft transponders passively to measure
ranging, tracking, signal-time delay, and solar-corona-induced perturba-
tion. The extended mission would continue through May 1978, the an-
nouncement said, and data analysis would continue through Sept. 1977;
requirements for data analysis beyond FY 1978 were under study.
(MOR-S-815-75-01/02)

* NASA announced plans to join with the Energy Research and
Development Administration (ERDA) in a program to use solar energy
for heat and hot water supply at 6 space centers from Va. to Calif.
NASA would invest $500 000 and ERDA $1.25 million in up to 10
separate projects that had been scheduled for completion at NASA
facilities by the end of the fiscal year, Oct. 1977. The programs could
reduce utility bills by up to a quarter million dollars/yr.
  Five of the solar projects, all at MSFC, would heat an office building;
heat liquid nitrogen to a gas, for experiments and manufacturing at 2
MSFC facilities; supply hot water for the cafeteria and restrooms in a
10-storybuilding; and heat a warehouse used for storing hydraulic equip-
ment. Other projects would supply hot water for cafeterias at Dryden
Flight Research Center in Calif. and KSC in Fla.; hot water for photo

                                                                        15
JANUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



labs at Ames Research Center in Calif. and LaRC in Va.; and heat and
dehumidification for areas containing sensitive computer and other elec-
tronic equipment in the mission control center at JSC in Tex. NASA
would also provide funds for 5 smaller solar heat projects at ARC, KSC,
and MSFC, to be operational by the end of Aug. The program should
demonstrate the possibility of offsetting the comparatively high initial
cost of solar energy systems through substantial savings on oil, gas, and
electrical energy. (NASA Release 77-15; MSFC Release 77-15; ERDA
Release 77-18)

  The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that its 1977 budget
0

for scientific and general activities had been unanimously approved by
the ESA Council meeting in Paris. Individual budgets for projects
Aerosat, Ariane, Marots, Meteosat, OTS, and Spacelab had already
been approved by their respective program boards. The Council had
reduced by 3 million accounting units (MAU) the total 481.8 MAU pro-
posed for all ESA work in 1977, approving the equivalent of $526.68
million in U.S. dollars. (In 1977, one AU was equal to 1.1 U.S. dollars.)
(ESA news release, Jan 28/77; ESA newsletter, Jan 77, 1)

January 29: H. Julian Allen, originator of the concept of bluntness as an
aerodynamic technique for reducing heating of spacecraft reentering
earth’s atmosphere, died of a heart attack at Stanford Univ. hospital at
the age of 66. A major figure in modern aerospace technology, Allen’s
work had made possible the safe return to earth of U.S. astronauts and
had revolutionized the design of ballistic missiles. After earning
bachelor’s and engineering degrees from Stanford, Allen in 1936 had
joined the Natl. Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) at its
Langley laboratory in Hampton, Va., and had returned to Calif. in 1941
when the Ames installation came into being. He had worked there ever
since, serving as ARC director from 1965 to 1969.
   His scientific contributions included a general theory of subsonic air-
foils which led to use of low-drag airfoils in World War I1 on aircraft
such as the Mustang fighter. He led in developing high-speed wind tun-
nels at ARC, now recognized as primary national resources for advanc-
ing aircraft design and national defense. He had received national and in-
ternational honors, including NASA’s distinguished service medal and
medal for exceptional scientific achievement. He was a fellow of many
societies, including the Royal Aeronautical Society of London. (ARC
Release 77-06)

January 30: The possibility of teleportation-transfer of objects from one
place to another by radio waves came closer with the announcement of a
new way to create identical copies of a three-dimensional object by using

16
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                     JANUARY



a sculpture-photography system based on the same principles of
chemistry and electronics now used in making printing plates. As
reported in the Chicago Tribune, Wyn Kelly Swainson, a young man
with a degree in English literature and some training in science, had ob-
tained his first patent on a device being developed with the help of the
Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio.
   Swainson began with the idea of reproducing great works of sculpture
without painstaking handwork: a plastic material hardened by light rays
would be targeted by intersecting laser beams, controlled by a computer
programmed with the image of the object to be copied. Swainson said
IBM had already produced an instrument to record computerized
shapes, convert the electronic data into light rays, and feed them through
the lasers scanning a container of plastic. Where the beams intersected,
they would cause a chemical reaction hardening the plastic; washing off
the unhardened material would leave an exact copy of the object
previously computerized. In theory, a three-dimensional hologram of an
object even of complex metals could be analyzed for its precise composi-
tion, converted to electronic data, transmitted, and reproduced as often
as desiqd. (C Trib, Jan 30177, 1-5)




Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, with tailcone covering engine-nozzle location,
moves on a 90-wheel rig January 31 from the Rockwellplant to DFRC35mi away
in preparation for approach and landing tests. (NASA 77-H-77)


January 30-Febmary I : Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle, towed atop
a %-wheel trailer from Rockwell Intl.’s plant in Palmdale, Calif., made
its first trip to Edwards AFB 57km away. Escorted by a convoy of securi-
ty and patrol cars, the Enterprise moved at 8kph and drew hundreds of
spectators to view its configuration (24m wingspan and 21m vertical
tailfin). Tests of the 38m-long space vehicle would begin Feb. 18 with a
series of “captive” flights; first manned flight to an unpowered landing
would occur July 22. (WStur, Jan 30/77, A-7, NYT, Jan 31/77, 12; W
Post, Feb 1/77, A-3)

                                                                              17
JANUARY                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



January 31: MSFC announced that on Jan. 28 NASA had invited in-
dustry to submit proposals for supplying design, development, and
manufacture of Space Telescope support systems module and optical
telescope assembly. The telescope should permit observation of about
350 times the volume of space now acessible to ground-based telescopes.
MSFC said it expected award of contracts by Oct. or Nov. 1977 if Con-
gress authorized the mission and appropriated the necessary funds.
   The 2.4m telescope, included in NASA’s FY 1978 budget recently sub-
mitted to Congress, would weigh about 10 tons. The Space Shuttle would
carry it as a payload in 1983, launching it to orbit ai about 500km
altitude at an inclination of 28.8” to the equator. Once there, it could
serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the
ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space-
suited astronaut or for retrieval and return by Shuttle for overhaul and
subsequent relaunch. NASA would announce to the scientific communi-
ty in Feb. an opportunity to submit proposals for scientific instruments
to be carried on the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release
77-16; NASA Release 77-19)


  LaRC announced that Alex Haley, author of Roots, would be the
0

speaker Feb. 7 at an LaRC colloquium and at an “Our Future in the
Cosmos” public lecture. Demand for tickets to the lecture, part of a
series sponsored by LaRC and the College of William and Mary, was so
great that LaRC had shifted the Haley lecture from the Hampton high
school to the Hampton Coliseum. Title of Haley’s talk was “A Saga of
Black History.” (LaRC anno Jan 31/77)

  The U.S Air Force Systems Command announced plans to experiment
0

with dispersal of cloudcover by sowing minute amounts of silver iodide
into supercooled clouds over a sparsely populated area of Michigan,
using two small civilian aircraft, one to dispense the chemical and the
second to photograph effects of the treatment. North American Weather
Consultants of Goleta, Calif., contractor to the AF Geophysics
Laboratory, would conduct the experiments to disperse cloudcover that
could interfere with military or civilian flight operations.
  The experiments, aimed at clearing specific areas of cloud during lan-
dings, would occur only on days that were overcast with little or no
precipitation, said Bruce A. Kunkel, project scientist for AFGL. Clouds
sought for the tests would be supercooled (consisting of water drops re-
maining liquid though below freezing temperature) so that they would
form ice crystals when treated with the chemical and would fall from the
sky, clearing up to a few square miles for up to an hour. Some snow
might reach the ground, but most should evaporate after falling from the

18
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   JANUARY



cloud, and the amount of silver iodide needed would be extremely small
notwithstanding its visually dramatic effect. (OIP Release 004.77)

   Canadians monitoring the mysterious radio signals emanating from
the Soviet Union, said to have disrupted worldwide communications [cf.
A&A76, Oct. 29 and Nov. 10-111, suggested that the signals might cor-
respond to transmission of electrical energy without the use of wires,
through a process developed by Nikola Tesla, Yugoslav inventor who
died in 1943.
   A&ording to a story in the Wash. Star, the Canadian Department of
Communications received a request some months ago to have its nine
listening posts analyze the radio signals in an effort to identify electrical-
energy problems in eastern Canada. By this time, the signals had caused
complaints from European governments and were becoming shorter in
duration. Although the signals were high frequency (3 to 30megahertz)
and Tesla’s experiments had been on low frequencies (6 to 10k cycles per
second), the Canadians theorized that the transmissions might have been
harmonics of VLF transmissions. Tesla had discovered in 1900 that the
earth itself could serve as a conductor of electricity, being “responsive as
a tuning fork” to electrical vibrations of a certain pitch; he had succeeded
in lighting 200 electric lamps from a distance of 25mi without wires. One
scientist working with the Canadians suggested that the signals might aid
in modifying weather by affecting electrically charged particles in the up-
per atmosphere. (W Star, Jan 31/77, A-5)

During January: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. reported that 1975 was one
of the safest years experienced by scheduled U.S. airlines, with a
passenger-fatality rate of 0.07 per 100 million passenger miles, beating
the railroads’ record of 0.08 fatalities per 100 million passenger miles. In
1975, over 205 million passengers on scheduled U.S. airlines (almost as
many as live in the entire country, the newsletter noted) had flown more
than 162 million passenger miles; only 124 persons had died in 3 U.S.air-
carrier accidents, whereas highway accidents had killed 44 690. On the
basis of the 1975 accident rate, the newsletter calculated a passenger’s
chances of safe arrival at destination to be 99.99998%. (NAA newsletter,
Jan 77, 3)

  MSFC employees Alfred G. Orillion, Advanced Projects Office, and
0

James E. Downey, 111, deputy director for program develspment, re-
ceived special awards for the Alabama section of the American Inst. of
Aeronautics and Astronautics at the A I M honors banquet in
Washington, D.C., Jan 13. The awards were for a 1975 space
industrialization symposium at MSFC of which Downey was general

                                                                            19
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917
SANUARY



chairman; Orillion was chairman of AIAA’s Alabama section. (MSFC
Release 77-9)

    Av Wk reported that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking proj-
ect, would receive the Goddard award for “brilliant leadership of the
Viking project to land an instrumented, automated spacecraft on the
planet Mars.” (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9)

   Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany
0

had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dee. to begin training
for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from
Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for
training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9)




20
February


February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its
Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15
pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline far applications
would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to
Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; ap-
pointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the
course.
   NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency,
and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications
received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board
would receive applications from members of the military services just
before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission
specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both.
   Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and
landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission
specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with
the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment
operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: com-
mander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists
(who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors
of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific
payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to
recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA
Release 77- 18)

* Kennedy Space Center reported that NASA had awarded the Univ. of
Ariz. a $50K contract extension to continue studying thunderstorm elec-
trical fields and other phenomena in the Spaceport area. Total value of
the contract, awarded in April 1974 and now extended to Jan. 15, 1978,
would be $1 16 OOO.
   Under the direction of Dr. Phillip Krider of UA’s Inst. of Atmospheric
Physics, scientists working with UA graduate and undergraduate
students would use KSC’s sophisticated instrumentation during summer
thunderstorms to study electrical-field changes and recovery curves
created by lightning under varied conditions, and would create computer
programs to determine and display the location of lightning discharges
and thunderstorm characteristics. Techniques resulting from the study

                                                                        21
FEBRUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



would help make Space Shuttle vehicle-processing, launch, and landing
at KSC safe and efficient even in marginal weather.
   The U.S. studies would supplement a program known as TRIP
(thunderstorm research international program), cosponsored by the Am.
Geophysical Union and the Am. Meteorological Society, under which
teams of atmospheric scientists would conduct research at KSC between
1976 and 1978. (KSC Release 33-77)
   At least 7 defense contractors had performed studies on space defense
systems, Aerospace Daily reported, predicting that spending on this ac-
tivity would double in the upcoming federal budget (from $61 million to
$126 million in FY 1978, and double again to $265 million in FY 1979).
   In its concern for detection of hostile satellites, especially in the in-
frared frequencies, the Dept . of Defense had officially confirmed four
USSR intercept launches last yr. DOD considered comsats and early-
warning satellites in synchronous orbits most vulnerable; the USAF was
also concerned about its reconnaissance satellites, especially the Big Bird,
only one of which is normally in orbit at a time.
   Contractors working on the problem were Science Applications, Inc., '
doing a $60 OOO study of charge-coupled device (CCD) sensors for a ter-
minal optical-warning system; Rockwell Intl., with a $50 OOO study of
potential maneuvers for the NavStar global-positioning satellite to be
used for guidance aid in tactical-weapons delivery; TRW, Inc., a $50 OOO
study to identify maneuvering possibilities for the AfSatCom (USAF sat-
com) system; and three other firms studying standby survival launch
capabilities applicable to all USAF missions (Hughes, $250 OOO; Boeing,
$250 OOO; and Lockheed, $100 OOO). The Air Force also reported that
Westinghouse had made a $50 OOO study of an impact sensor to detect at-
tacks with non-nuclear pellet warheads against a spacecraft in orbit.
(ASD, Feb 1/77, 158)
   Western Union Corp., first of the 1OOO largest U.S. industrial com-
panies required to publish replacement-cost data called for this year by
the Securities and Exchange Commission, claimed that its 1976 earnings
of $34 million would be erased had it based its depreciation charges on
current costs of replacing its entire physical plant. New York Times
reporter Robert D. Hershey, Jr., cited the argument of many companies
that releasing the figures required by the SEC would depress prices of
their stocks. WU said its plant and equipment would have cost $1.61
billion to replace at the end of 1976, not the $1.11 billion its books
showed as historical cost. The SEC ruled that, for fiscal yrs beginning
after Dec. 1975, the annual reports of companies with at least $100
million in physical assets representing at least 10% of total assets must
give actual replacement-cost data, to let stockholders see the effect of in-
flation on financial statements. (NYT, Feb. 1/77, 37)

22
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                FEBRUARY


  The Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science at the Univ. of Tokyo
0

announced postponement (until Feb. 15 or later) of the launch of a
satellite-carrying MU-3H rocket, because of mechanical trouble. An in-
spection had revealed problems with the rocket’s attitude-control system,
the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 1/77)
February 2: The new administration of President Jimmy Carter was
reevaluating the NASA budget submitted by President Ford, and would
study the possibility of increases, however marginal, in that budget,
Defense/Space Dairy reported. NASA’s energy program, budgeted at
$4.5 million in FY 1958 ($1 million to study satellite solar power and $3.5
million for energy technology that could be transferred to ERDA),
would probably be recommended for increase within the next few weeks,
the report said. (D/SD, Feb 2/77, 185)

February 3: Tass reported that Soviet space station Salyut 4, launched
Dec. 26, 1974, to house cosmonauts working in space up to 90 days,
disintegrated over the Pacific Ocean when it moved on ground command
into “a descent trajectory” and burned up. Tass noted that the station
had flown for 3mo joined to the unpiloted space capsule Soyuz 20. The
longest, most successful career of a Salyut in the 16yr-old USSR space
program had included what Tass called “an extensive program of medical
and biological research” as well as study of the sun, stars, and planets in
the electromagnetic spectrum; views of Soviet territory in the middle and
southern latitudes; and a great amount of data on physical processes in
earth atmosphere and in space.
   Cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Aleksey Gubarev had docked Soyuz
17 with Salyut 4 for 29 days between Jan. 10 and Feb. 9, 1975; Vasily
Lazarev and Oleg Makarov failed to dock with Salyut 4 on Apr. 5 of that
yr; and Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov had docked Soyuz 18 with
Salyut 4 May 25 and remained for 63 days, during which they talked with
their compatriots on the ASTP mission and returned July 24 with the
Soviet duration record for a manned mission. SaQut 4 had completed
12,188 orbits around the earth before being destroyed, Tass said. (To-
day, Feb 4/77, 1OA; FBIS, Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 3/77)
February 4: NASA announced a yr-long schedule of test runs and
captive-flight tests on the first-built Space Shuttle orbiter, Enterprise,
that would take place at the Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards,
Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of flights with
a modified Boeing 747 serving as a ferry aircraft and airborne launch
platform would begin with several taxiing tests with the orbiter atop the
carrier; following would be six inert-captive flights in which the jumbo
jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to a 762Om (25 OOOft) altitude. Un-
manned flights would verify performance of the two vehicles in mated

                                                                        23
FEBRUARY                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



flight. Then would come a series of captive-active flights with the
orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts.
   The first orbiter off the assembly line arrived at DFRC Jan. 31 from
Rockwell Inti.% Palmdale plant; upon completion of ALT, the carrier
would take the prototype to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground-
vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return
to Palmdale to be prepared for orbital flight in the early 1980s. The or-
biter now under construction (OV-102) would be the first used in actual
orbital-flight tests, now scheduled to begin in mid-1979; six test flights
would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start
of operational flights, scheduled to begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16)

  Two giant crawler-transporters that had ferried Saturn V rockets to
0

the launch pad at KSC and were scheduled for similar work in the Space
Shuttle program had been designated National Historic Mechanical
Engineering Landmarks, Today newspaper reported. At ceremonies held
Feb. 3 beneath one of the vehicles, more than 100 persons watched the
unveiling of a plaque noting the creation of the 18th national landmark
identified since the Am. Society of Mechanical Engineers began singling
them out in 1973.
   Present at the ceremony were KSC employees who had helped build
the pair of 2.7-million-kg platforms; ASME officials and members from
across the U.S. on their way to a national meeting in southern Fla.; and
former astronaut Donn F. Eisele, who had been command-module pilot
on the 1968Apollo 7 flight that resumed moonshots more than a yr after
the fatal fire in an Apollo training exercise. Eisele had since become a
manager for Marion Power Shovel Co., the Ohio firm that built the
transporters at a cost of $14 million. Ray Clark, KSC director of design
engineering, accepted the plaque from Dr. Stothe P. Kezios, president-
elect of ASME, with the comment that the transporters were “barely
broken in” with mileage on each at just over 800km; they might ac-
cumulate 10 times that amount carrying Shuttle equipment during their
second yr of operation, he added. (Today, Feb 4/77, 1OA)

  JSC announced award of a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract worth
$9 083 303 to Northrop Services, Inc., for operation and maintenance at
JSC of life sciences and engineering laboratories and the lunar curatorial
facility, effective Feb. 1, 1977, and expiring Jan. 31, 1978. (JSC Release
77-08)

February 7 NASA revealed the contents of the space and aeronautics ex-
           :
hibit that would appear in the U.S. pavilion at the 32nd Paris Air Show,
under the theme “The Continuous Challenge: 50 Years Since
Lindbergh.” NASA planned to display concepts of space communities

24
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                              FEBRUARY



and their construction; living, farming, and manufacturing in space; and
solar-power stations in space, together with a 3-screen presentation of
the 50yr of flight since Lindbergh. A 2.4m Shuttle model would include
the European Space Agency's Spacelab, part of a major international
cooperative space program, in its cargo bay.
  Also on display would be the Galileo 2 flying laboratory, its interior
configured to simulate the reusable Spacelab with facilities for space ex-
periments in medicine, manufacturing, astronomy, and production of
pharmaceuticals. A life-size model of Mars landscape viewed by the Vik-
ing lander would demonstrate space exploration, and Landsat stereo
photographs of earth would show the increasingly routine use of space to
survey crops and natural resources, monitor pollution and weather, and
collect global weather data. Other models and presentations would show
the scope of NASA programs such as government-industry work to halve
fuel consumption by transport aircraft and to develop safer, more effi-
cient, and more environmentally acceptable civil aircraft. (NASA
Release 77-20)

   MSFC announced award of a 15-mo contract worth $99 663 to Desert
0

Research Institute - part of the Univ. of Nevada system - for develop-
ment and fabrication of a prototype particle generator for possible use in
the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL), a payload sched-
uled for an early Shuttle or Spacelab flight. The generator would form
nuclei with diameters of a hundredth to a thousandth of a micron (one
thousandth of a mm) upon which water would condense to form clouds.
Researchers would use the zero-gravity environment on Shuttle flights to
perform cloud-physics experiments leading to an understanding of
microphysical processes in the atmosphere, and to eventual prediction,
alteration, and control of weather. (MSFC Release 77-19)

   MSFC announced that a special hammer developed in the 1960s for
0

Saturn fabrication had solved a major problem of manufacturing exter-
nal tanks for the Space Shuttle. Martin Marietta Aerospace, prime con-
tractor for the tanks, in welding four large sections of a liquid-oxygen
container at the Michoud assembly facility, had found that peaking of
the weld joints left some areas as much as 5" out of tolerance. The special
tool MSFC had created for removing distortions in component welds
would not impact a surface in the usual sense but, when in contact with
the metal, would send a hydrodynamic force uniformly into the thickness
of the metal when an electrical charge dumped into the hammer's coil
created an expanding magnetic field. The field would exert an evenly
distributed three-dimensional force that would remove the distortions
without leaving hammer marks on the target.
   After Robert M. Avery of MSFC's Materials and Processes

                                                                        25
FEBRUARY                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



Laboratory showed how to use the tool at the Michoud facility, the con-
tractor was able to remove most of the distortions during the week of
demonstration. Two working hammers would remain at the plant for
future use. (MSFC Release 77-21)

   U.S. aviation experts had changed their minds about the USSR’s
0

MiG-25 “Foxbat” interceptor plane and now considered it superior to
western planes of its type, the Chicago Tribune reported. New Scientist
magazine had quoted aviation experts who had examined the Foxbat
flown to Japan last Sept. by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclu-
sions were completely opposed to earlier assessments that described the
Foxbat as crude and outdated.
   Shortly after its landing in northern Japan, the Foxbat had been
described as a “manned rocket” less advanced than previously thought.
The magazine said that U.S. officials now considered it unsurpassed in
ease of cockpit maintenance and a masterpiece of standardization un-
matched in the US. The experts said they were impressed not only with
the speed and rate of climb, but also with the electronics on the Foxbat,
now believed to have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the
world as well as a highly sophisticated computerized flight-
communications system that could perform most of the missions without
the pilot [see Jan. 261. U.S. and Japanese experts had examined the Fox-
bat for 2mo before returning it to the USSR; Belenko, now in the US.,
was still being debriefed. (C Trib, Feb 7/77, 1-2)

February 7-25: The Soviet Union launched a manned Soyuz spacecraft
from its Baykonur space center at 9:12 local time (1612 GMT) to try for a
rendezvous with the Salyut 5 space station, following an unsuccessful
docking attempt last Oct. Soyuz 24 carried as commander Col. Viktor V.
Gorbatko, who had flown on Soyuz 7 in Oct. 1969 as part of a 7-man
mission using 3 Soyuz spacecraft, and rookie engineer Lt. Col. Yuri
Glazkov, who became the 39th cosmonaut launched into space. Lt. Gen.
Vladimir Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, described the Soyuz 24
mission as routine, adding that the scientific and economic possibilities
for using the Soyuz-Salyut combination were “inexhaustible.”
   Orbit parameters reported Feb. 8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee,
89.2-min period, 51.6” inclination. This first manned launch of the year
was part of a USSR program of earth-orbital research using the Soyuz
capsules on a one-mission basis, according to NY Times reporter
Christopher S . Wren, who noted that the USSR had continued manned
flights while the U.S. was waiting until the Space Shuttle became
available in 1979 or 1980. Thomas OToole reported in the WPost that
the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been

26
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                               FEBRUARY



trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated
that Soyuz 24 might be a military mission,
   Tass reported successful docking and occupation of the Safyut 5; it
later described housekeeping and biological experiments, plus com-
munications with ocean-going vessels, studies of crystal growth and sur-
face tension, and use of an infrared radiometer for long-distance night-
time observation of earth’s surface and temperatures. The cosmonauts
continued exercising with special equipment to measure body functions.
On Feb. 21, they tried a new system for recharging the space‘station at-
mosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the
system for future prolonged flights. A multifunctional system would
supply compressed air to control stabilization or to ctmpensate for leaks
in the compartments. Tass announced Feb. 23 that the crew had begun
preparations for leaving the station.
   (The unexpectedly early termination of the Soyuz 24 mission recalled
reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Safyut
5 environmental-control system had produced an “acrid odor” that
“became unbearable” [A&A 76,Oct 181.)
   A commentary recorded by Gen. Shatalov for broadcast Feb. 24 on
the Moscow Domestic Service noted “a whole series of cyclones and
strong winds with snow” over the landing site in Kazakhstan. However,
the cosmonauts landed safely at dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on
the Kustanay steppe, and were brought to the local airport by helicopter
and flown from there to Baykonur. They held a press conference at
Baykonur Feb. 24, in which Glazkov called the Safyut 5 spacecraft “a
fine old work horse” that had brought them home safely. (NYT, Feb
9/77, 11, B6; WPost, Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77, A12; C Trib, Feb 9/77,
1:12; FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77; Moscow Dom Svc Rusn, Feb
IO-25/77; Moscow Intl Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77; W Star, Feb 25/77, A4)

February 9: Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S.placed its first
man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enter-
prise- first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line- to be carried
piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through
earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb.
20, 1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S.had accumulated
22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned
missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and
3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab.
  Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with
barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had
parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would
weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was
FEBRUARY                               ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1917


designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within
weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by
the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the
Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release
77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)

   NASA announced it had certified the General Aviation Design and
0

Analysis Center at Ohio State Univ. airport in Columbus to make
analyses of single-element airfoils, a first step toward providing a com-
plete service for the general aviation community. Developed under a 3yr
contract with LaRC and OSU’s aeronautical and astronautical research
laboratory, the ADAC would provide directly to aircraft designers and
manufacturers services such as analysis and design of 2-dimensional air-
foil shapes, investigations of high-lift devices and aerodynamic controls,
compilation of airfoil aerodynamic characteristics, and technical
assistance (including consultation and data interpretation) for wind-
tunnel and flight testing of airfoils. ADAC would provide the services on
a fee basis. ADAC personnel under Dr. G.M. Gregorek would work with
NASA on refining present codes used in computation; as NASA
developed new techniques and improved codes, ADAC would use the im-
provements to solve more difficult design problems. (NASA Release
77-22)

   JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans for the 8th an-
0

nual lunar science conference in Houston, March 14-18. More than 600
scientists from around the world would discuss new data about the
moon, derived from studies of lunar samples and from Apollo surface
and orbital experiments, as well as new interpretations of previous
models of lunar origin and history. Several Soviet scientists would at-
tend, to give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr.
Michael G. Duke, acting chief of JSC’s Lunar and Planetary Sciences
Division, and Dr. Robert Pepin, outgoing director of the Lunar Science
Institute, would cochair the conference.
   The conference would also be the second meeting on “planetary”
science, continuing the practice of the 1976 conference, where planetary
interests were discussed for the first time as a result of the accumulation
of data from NASA and USSR missions to Venus, Mercury, Mars, and
the outer planets. The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution
had proved of primary interest to lunar scientists. (JSC Release 77-09)
February 10: KSC announced it would reduce its dependency on fossil
fuels as early as Oct., when 3 of its buildings would begin heating water
with solar energy: the Visitors Center cafeteria and the Banana River
repeating station, which should be operating on solar by’late May, and

28
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1911                                 FEBRUARY



the KSC headquarters building. Up to 70% of hot water for the cafeteria
would be heated in a flat-plate collector on the ground next to the
cafeteria, with a conventional water heater as backup for long periods of
cloudy weather.
  A larger flat-plate collector would provide up to 70% of the energy
needed by the Banana River station, an electronic-communications relay
near the eastern shore of Merritt Is. ,for hot water used in heating and air
conditioning reheating. All three systems would be able to heat water to
about 370K, although flow through the collectors wou’rd move the hot
water into storage tanks at a maximum 333K. The flat-plate collectors
would face south at a 28” angle for maximum efficiency. ERDA would
fund the headquarters conversion jointly with NASA, which would fund
the other projects alone. Energy savings over an 8yr period would be
about $185K. (KSC Release 56-77)

* Soviet news agency Tass reported the death at age 82 of Sergei V. 11-
yushin, designer of more than 50 planes from dive bombers of World
War I1 to modern passenger jets. The report did not give the date or
cause of death.
   Mobilized into the czarist army in 1914, Ilyushin had begun as a
sweeper in an airplane hangar, became a mechanic, and graduated from
flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the
Soviet army and rose to be a lieutenant general. After graduating from
the air force engineering academy, where he had designed and built
gliders, he was put in charge of airplane construction and after 1931
devoted himself exclusively to aircraft design. His most famous design
was the 11-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of the first to prove
the effectiveness of small single-engine craft operating near ground level.
The 11-2, a two-seater carrying a rear gunner behind the pilot, was the
first close-support plane to fire rockets to any degree and was known to
the German forces in WWII as the “flying death.” The 11-62, a 4-jet
passenger plane, had begun Aeroflot passenger service from Moscow to
New York in July 1968.
   Ilyushin was fourth of the “big six” Soviet aircraft designers to die:
A.A. Mikoyan, who with M.I. Gurevich designed the MiG series of
fighter planes, died in 1970; A.N. Tupolev, father of the Tu-144 super-
sonic transport, in 1972; Gurevich in Nov. 1976. Survivors were O.K.
Antonov, designer of An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close
associate A.S. Yakovlev, whose Yak fighter usually teamed with the
11-2. Ilyushin’s son Vladimir, a test pilot, might have beaten Yuri A.
Gagarin into space in 1961 by several days; officials denied this. (NY
Times,Feb 11/77, A24; W Post, Feb 11/77, C6)
  Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced that launch of a

                                                                         29
FEBRUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



three-stage “N” rocket carrying an engineering test satellite had been
postponed to Feb. 14 because of trouble in the control system of the
rocket’s first stage. Launch had been scheduled originally for Feb. 6
from the space center at Tanegashima Is. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in
English, Feb 10/77)

February ZI: Langley Research Center announced award of a cost-plus-
fixed-fee contract worth about $1.8 million to Vought Gorp. for design,
development, and qualification of a Scout launch-vehicle guidance
system. Teledyne would do the designing under subcontract and Vought
would integrate the system into the Scout. Work would proceed at the
Vought plant in Dallas and Teledyne’s plant in Northridge, Calif., under
LaRC direction. (LaRC Release 77-3)
  NASA announced it had adjudged successful the mission of Gravity
0

Probe A (GP-A), launched June 18, 1976, on a Scout vehicle from
Wallops Flight Center. Trajectory parameters computed for GP-A were
within preflight predictions, and the experiment and support systems had
operated normally. Principal investigator Dr. R.F.C. Vessot had begun
data reduction and reported achieving an accuracy of 150 parts per
million, surpassing the prelaunch accuracy objective of 200ppm.
Associate Administrator for Space Science Dr. Noel W. Hinners noted
that the payload had impacted in the Atlantic Ocean as planned and was
not recovered. (MOR S-879-76-01 [postlaunch], Feb 14/77)
   Analysis of telemetry data and flight films from the SPAR 111 mission
launched Dec. 14 at White Sands Missile Range indicated successful per-
formance of the electromagnetic levitation device designed to provide the
first “containerless” way to process materials in space, MSFC an-
nounced.
   ContainerIess processing, in which materials could be suspended,
melted, and resolidified without touching a container, was thought to
permit a degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature
processing, as the material in a conventional container would always ex-
hibit contamination in some degree from the container itself. Apparatus
used on SPAR I11 to process beryllium satisfied all operational re-
quirements, like two other items in the payload: thermal migration of
bubbles, and liquid mixing. An apparatus anomaly resulted in only “pro-
bable” success of an experiment on epitaxial growth; a fifth experiment,
on coalescing of viscous bodies, apparently failed but would be carried
again on a later flight. SPAR 111 rocket flights could offer 5min of near-
weightlessness in suborbital coast. (MSFC Release 77-23)

  WPost staff writer Thomas O’Toole quoted administration sources as
0

saying President Carter had chosen Dr. Frank Press, head of the depart-

30
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               FEBRUARY



ment of earth and planetary sciences at the M s .Inst. of Technology, to
                                             as
be White House science adviser. Press, considered one of the world’s
leading seismologists, had been one of a team of geophysicists who first
described Antarctica as a continent rather than as an island of ice
floating on earth’s crust. He had also helped design and build the
seismometers left on the moon by six crews of Apollo astronauts. A
member of the Natl. Science Board, Press had been consultant to 7
federal agencies including DOD, the State Dept., and the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency. Offered the job of science adviser to the
president, Press apparently had not accepted it at once, and said by
telephone from MIT that “nothing is settled.” ( WPost, Feb 11/77, A-2)

February 13: NASA announced it had commanded the Viking 1 lander
on Mars to dig a ft-deep trench in the surface and bring up soil samples
to use in finding out more about the complex chemistry of the planet.
The sequence, which would continue through March 15, would include
pictures taken by the lander to show mission controllers how the digging
progressed. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory had sent commands to the
Viking 2 lander Feb. 10 and would start the Viking 2 lander’s digging se-
quence about Feb. 16. Viking 1’s orbiter would make a series of close
passes near Mars’s satellite Phobos to take pictures and measure its
temperature, while observing the effect of its gravity on the course of the
spacecraft. Afterward, mission controllers would drop the orbiter to
about 300km altitude over Mars from the current close-approach altitude
of 1500km. (NASA Release 77-24; JPL Release Feb 10/77)

February 25: A project known as DUMAND (deep underwater muon
and neutrino detection) would use a large area of the Pacific Ocean near
Hawaii to detect the arrival of extremely high-energy particles from
space, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times.
   Neutrinos, considered the clues to several astronomical mysteries, had
been hard to detect because of their lack of mass or electrical charge;
moving at the speed of light, they apparently could pass entirely through
the earth with no trace. A new science, neutrino astronomy, would use
an array of microphones laid out on the sea bottom northeast of the
island of Maui, in an area shown to be “pool-table flat” by survey ships
from the Hawaiian Inst. of Geophysics, to listen for sound impulses
generated by high-energy neutrinos colliding with atoms in the sea water.
Collision would produce particle showers that should generate sound
pulses as well as flashes of light known as Cerenkov radiation, resulting
from the passage of particles through the water at speeds faster than the
speed at which light proceeds through water. The original plan would
have recorded the flashes to detect particles ejected by stellar explosions

                                                                         31
FEBRUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



(supernovas); Soviet scientists had offered the use of 10 OOO photodetec-
tors for the experiment.
  The first stage of the project would probably use acoustic detection,
however, because of its greater sensitivity and economy: sound waves
would travel through water far more efficiently than light would, the
report said, and the project could use microphones spaced as far apart as
900meters in an array measuring lOkm*, linked by a 56km undersea cable
carrying data to a laboratory on Maui and supplying electrical power to
the detectors. Recording the precise arrival time of a pulse at each detec-
tor would indicate the direction from which the neutrino came. As the
neutrinos’ paths (unlike those of other particles) would not be bent by
magnetic fields in space, the way in which they had come would point to
the source, first clue to cosmic ray origins. The high-energy particles and
the muons produced when they hit the atmosphere were among the most
energetic radiation known. (NYT, Feb 15/77, 14)

  Telesat Canada expected to award contracts in Nov. 1977 for three
0

commercial telecommunications satellites, the Wall Street Journal
reported. The new comsats would use higher frequency bands than the
three Telesat Canada satellites now providing television, telephone, and
message communications throughout Canada. First of the high-
frequency comsats would be delivered early in 1980 p d launched later
that yr. (WSJ, Feb 15/77, 3)

February Id: NASA announced selection of 222 scientists representing
the U.S. and 14 other countries to participate in the first Spacelab flight
scheduled for 1980. More than 2 OOO candidates had responded to invita-
tions to participate in the joint NASAIESA mission. NASA chose 86 of
the scientists, 81 from the U.S. and others from India, Japan, Canada,
France, and Belgium. ESA had selected 136 from 10 other ESA-member
states plus Austria and Norway.
   Prime objective of the first Spacelab flight would be to verify systems
and subsystems performance and to measure the environment around the
Shuttle; secondary objective would be the scientific, applications, and
technology data that would demonstrate Spacelab’s ability to perform
space research. First-flight emphasis would be on stratosphere and
upper-atmosphere research, with other experiments in plasma physics,
biology, botany, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, and earth observa-
tions, plus areas such as thermodynamics, materials processing, and
lubrication.
   Manager of NASA’s Spacelab 1 payload would be the Solar Terrestrial
Division of the Hq Office of Space Science; manager of ESA’s payload
would be its office of Spacelab Payload Integration and Coordination in

32
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                FEBRUARY



Europe (SPICE) at Porz-Wahn in West Germany. (NASA Release 77-26;
MSFC Release 77-27)

   NASA announced it had developed a new system with the U.S. Army
0

Corps of Engineers to monitor the Mississippi River from St. Louis,
Mo., to the Gulf of Mexico this spring, providing information to the
Corps on the vast water resources of the river valley, including the At-
chafalaya River basin in La.
   Using off-the-shelf space technology, the system-called Geosta-
tionary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) Data-Acquisition
System-would take vital measurements using data transmitters at
strategic locations along the river and its tributaries, and would relay in-
formation on river or reservoir water level, rainfall, and water quality
through the GOES satellite to a central ground station. There, Corps
workers would process, store, and display the data on a board that would
give water-control managers real-time data on the river’s status. NASA
had set up the system at the request of the Lower Miss. Valley Div. of the
Corps, to permit quicker response to flood situations and levee-
reinforcement calls than in the past. The automated system would start
with 80 stations, 20 now operating. (NASA Release 77-25)

   Launch preparations had begun for the 2-spacecraft mission to outer
0

planets Jupiter and Saturn scheduled for late summer 1977, KSC an-
nounced. The center described them as “almost a replay” of the Mars
Viking launches in 1975.
   Launch date for the first Mariner Jupiter/Saturn (MJS) at complex 41
would be Aug. 20, with the second scheduled 10 days later. Preparation
for two major launches within a 10-day timeframe had required “the
choreography of an intricate ballet,” the center said. Checkout of the
Titan Centaur rockets 6 and 7 was in progress; operations personnel ex-
pected arrival Apr. 11 of a pathfinder spacecraft to be used for pad tests,
along with 2 flight craft expected Apr. 25 and May 23. The MJS
spacecraft would weigh 3 times more than the Pioneer 10 and ZZ that
reached Saturn in 1973 and 1974, respectively, and would carry addi-
tional instrumentation such as narrow- and high-resolution wide-angle
TV cameras, cosmic-ray detectors, and infrared spectrometers and
radiometers to study the outer planets and satellites.
   John Noble Wilford reported in the NYT that the new vehicles would
have a new name-either Voyager or Discovery-fitting the new design
for outer planet environments characterized by pale sunlight and great
radio distances. The new craft looked like “a giant round ear,” Wilford
said, consisting of a dish antenna with struts and booms resembling
spider legs. The powerful lightweight radio-transmitter tubes that had

                                                                          33
FEBRUARY                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



been the major problem in building the spacecraft had arrived from the
contractor a year behind schedule, reducing the time for “life tests” of
their durability and performance.
   Each of the spacecraft would also carry a 3-computer system to handle
failures during flight, in view of the 2.5hr required for round-trip radio
signals between earth and Saturn. Trajectories chosen should provide
data on particles and magnetic currents (magnetosphere) around Jupiter
and Saturn, and if possible Uranus; on the atmospheres of those planets,
believed to have gaseous rather than solid surfaces; and on the surfaces
of any solid moons of the outer planets. The Uranus encounter would oc-
cur in Jan. 1986, nearly 8.5yr after launch from earth. (KSC Release
65-77; NYT, Feb 22/77, 15)

Februury 17: NASA announced that Lewis Research Center had named
Kaman Aerospace Corp. of Bloomfield, Conn., to build the world’s
largest windmill blade: 45.7 meters, more than twice as long as the 19m
blades powering the lOOkw generator at LeRC’s Plum Brook station in
Sandusky, 0. The $Zmillion contract would cover design, fabrication,
and test and evaluation of the giant turbine-rotor blade, representing the
type needed for production windmills generating 1.5 megawatts of elec-
tricity, enough for several hundred homes.




Artist’s concept of the 15-story wind-turbine blade, world‘s largest at 150f t and
weighing about 17 tons, to be built of gIassj?ber ai a cost of $2 millionfor LeRC
by Kaman Aerospace of Conn. (NASA 77-H-156)


  The 15-story blade, weighing about 19 400kg and made of glass fiber,
would require expensive special tooling and technology advances to per-
mit large-scale production of such blades in future. NASA and ERDA
planned detailed design studies on 2-megawatt wind turbines using two
     e giant blades to produce power in average winds of 22km per hr.
     A’s decision to develop giant wind turbines had followed studies

34
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 FEBRUARY


showing that the big machines could produce electricity at lower cost per
kwh. (NASA Release 77-27)

* LaRC announced it had awarded a contract worth about $3 million to
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for development and flight testing of active-
control concepts for subsonic commercial-transport airplanes. Scheduled
for introduction in the 1980s, the concepts (including maneuver load
control, gust alleviation, elastic-mode suppression, augmented stability,
and envelope limiting) would help make future aircraft safer, quieter,
more comfortable, and more energy-efficient. Work uvcler the contract
would be done at Lockheed’s Burbank plant over the next 2yr. (LaRC
Release 77-4)

   MSFC announced that United Space Boosters, Inc., the firm that
would assemble and check out the solid-fuel rocket for the Space Shuttle,
had begun a manpower buildup that would eventually include about 150
employees. The present contractor work force of about 60 had been
housed in Bldg. 4666 at the center. The firm, a subsidiary of United
Technologies Corp. of Sunnyvale, Calif., had received in Dec. 1976 a
contract for work at both MSFC and KSC to include stacking, launch
operations, and refurbishing the reusable rockets. Responsibilitieswould
include designing tools for applying thermal-protection materials to the
boosters, electrical and instrument-verification testing, and installing in-
strumentation on the booster structure and on the booster aft skirt for
tests scheduled at MSFC and at the Thiokol plant in Utah. Employees of
USB doing MSFC work at KSC later in 1977 would number from 150 to
200, but the contractor would keep a cadre of about 80 at MSFC through
the Shuttle test period. (MSFC Release 77-26)

   LaRC announced that Katherine G. Johnson, aerospace technologist
0

at LaRC’s flight dynamics and control division, was among 24 black
scientists and inventors honored in Philadelphia who had “advanced
technology and helped move the world forward.” For Black History
Month, Philadelphia’s Afro-American Historical and Cultural Museum
had unveiled a display including Johnson’s portrait among “examples of
singular achievement in technology” to “inspire the young, gratify the
old, and encourage all who are made aware of these accomplishments.”
Johnson was cited for her work on interplanetary trajectories, space
navigation, and spacecraft orbits. (LaRC Release 77-5)

  President Carter would propose budget changes to reduce emphasis on
nuclear power and increase research on energy conservation, predicted
Les Gapay in the Wall Street Journal. Sources in and out of the Carter
administration said that Carter would amend the Ford budget for FY

                                                                          35
FEBRUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



1978 by cutting money for two major nuclear-power research projects: a
multimillion-dollar program to develop a fast-breeder nuclear reactor
that would produce more fuel than it consumed, and research on nuclear
fusion, a new technology intended to provide commercial electrical
power within several decades. Fusion was said to be more environmental-
ly acceptable than other nuclear programs, and the U.S. had been spend-
ing several hundred million a yr on this research. Funds cut from the
Energy Research and Development Administration would go toward
research on energy conservation; ERDA had been studying ways to save
fuel in building, transportation, and industrial processes. The Ford
budget had asked for a 28% increase in energy research for FY 1978
(from $2.9 billion to $3.7 billion), most of it for ERDA and for nuclear
power studies. (WSJ, Feb 17/77, 3)

February 18: The $500-million Space Shuttle with no crewmembers
aboard took its first ride over the Calif. desert, carried piggyback on its
converted Boeing 747 for a 2hr test at nearly 5km altitude. Operating the
747 were veteran NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr.; copilot
Thomas C. McMurtry; and flight engineers Victor W. Horton and Lewis
E. Guidry, Jr. The Enterprise, prototype of the reusable craft designed
to carry cargo and scientists into space in the 1980s, was secured to the
747 by mounts at its nose and tail; the combination craft stood almost
20m from the ground to the top of the orbiter’s tail. The explosive bolts
provided to separate the two craft in free flight were armed during this
first test, in case of emergency.
   NASA officials said the weight of the Enterprise (about 65 000kg) did
not strain the capacity of the 747, which weighed nearly 200 00Okg empty
and had carried much greater loads in cargo and passengers. “Most of
the time we couldn’t even tell the Shuttle was here,” Fulton said after the
flight, which reached ‘speeds of about 450kph as the crew turned and
banked the combined ships, shut down some of the 747 engines, and per-
formed other maneuvers to check stability. The Enterprise would be un-
manned during the next 5 combined test flights; in May, a 2-man crew
would conduct 6 more tests of the 747/orbiter combination, and in July
the orbiter would be released from its carrier for a series of unpowered
flights. (WPost, Feb 19/77, A3; W Star, Feb 19/77, A-8)

  The U.S. Air Force announced plans to launch an Honest John-Hydac
0

rocket from Santa Rosa Is. near Pensacola, Fla., after sunset on Feb. 22
to release a high-altitude multicolor cloud visible throughout the
Southeast. Release of a 48kg payload of barium 72km above the Gulf of
Mexico would reveal whether or not the resulting cloud would interfere
with radio signals between an airplane and a comsat, a USAF spokesman

36
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 FEBRUARY



said. A similar test Dec. 1, 1976, created a colored cloud visible as far
away as Tennessee. (WPost, Feb 18/77, A23)

   NASA announced it had signed an agreement with McDonnell
0

Douglas Corp. allowing the company as a commercial venture to design,
manufacture, and test an upper-stage system, including integration serv-
ices, for Space Shuttle missions having payloads weighing up to 2000kg.
Carried into low earth orbit on the Shuttle, the upper stage called SSUS-
A (for spinning solid upper stage, Atlas Centaur class) would take
payloads into transfer orbit where a kick motor would put it into a cir-
cular geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above earth.
   A similar agreement last yr with McDonnell Douglas was for an upper
stage called SSUS-D (for Delta class) suitable for use with payloads
weighing up to 1100kg, like those being orbited on Delta vehicles. NASA
had planned to procure SSUS-A systems only from firms with which it
had such an agreement; under the agreements, firms would be free to sell
stages either to NASA or directly to customers. The agreements would
specify performance requirements, define a delivery schedule to meet
NASA’s Shuttle schedule, and establish unit ceiling prices and a ceiling
profit. (NASA Release 77-29)

    S x NASA rockets launched from Australia in Feb. would investigate
     i
@



stars, hot stars, white dwarfs, and exploding galaxies, NASA an-
nounced. Goddard Space Flight Center’s Richard M. Windsor, working
as project manager with the Australian government, the Univ. of
Adelaide, and several U.S. universities and scientists, would oversee
launch of the lorn-long Aerobee sounding rockets from the Woomera
range during the wk of Feb. 16-24. The Aerobee, which could lift a
l8lkg payload to an altitude of 210km, had carried nearly a thousand
scientific payloads since it came into use in 1947.
   U.S.investigations would include a Columbia Univ. study of bursting
x-ray stars to see if they resembled black holes; a Naval Research
Laboratory study to determine whether the Large Magellanic Cloud
resembled earth’s galaxy, comparing x-ray stars for luminosity,
temperature, and fluctuation; another NRL study of x-ray sources in the
Coma Cluster; a Johns Hopkins Univ. study of Alpha Centauri A, 4.5
light-years distant, and other stars similar to earth’s sun, for evidence of
a solar corona in far ultraviolet; another JHU study, this one in UV
measurement of early or “hot” stars, to obtain data for use in calibrating
satellite-borne UV telescopes; and a GSFC study of the Large Magellanic
Cloud using UV filters on a Schwarzchild camera to define distribution
o hot stars, galactic dust, high-energy gas, young remnants of super-
  f
novas, and other celestial phenomena. (NASA Release 77-28)

                                                                         31
                                                                  mi
                                       ASTRONAUTICSAND AER~NAUTICS,
FEBRUARY



February 19: Global communications systems used by the Dept. of
Defense were inadequate, inefficient, and incapable of surviving nuclear
attack, according to the investigation subcommittee of the House Com-
mittee on Armed Services.
   A United Press report carried in the W Star quoted subcommittee
criticism of the Pentagon’s topsecret command post which, “while
located in the basement of the Pentagon, [showed] little possibility that
the National Military Command Center would survive a nuclear attack
directed against it.” The report cited “dismay over the department’s in-
ability to deploy a satellite communications system after 16 years of ef-
fort,” “security deficiencies” in the computer software of the worldwide
Military Command and Control System, weaknesses in the Tri-Service
Tactical Communications program, and “urgent need for early deploy-
ment of improved voice security equipment throughout the military serv-
ices.” The report commended the use of airborne command posts such as
the converted Boeing 747 “doomsday plane” that had taken President
Carter to Georgia the previous wk. (WStar, Feb 19/77, A-3)

   Canadian scientists recovered a fragment weighing about 2kg from a
meteorite seen streaking across the sky over Alberta earlier in Feb., the
Associated Press reported. Ian Halliday of the Natl. Research Council
noted that the find was only the third time a meteorite had been located
after it had been photographed coming down; most meteorites reported-
ly had burned up or exploded before reaching earth. The AP report
noted that four fragments of a meteorite that exploded Jan. 31 over
Louisville, Ky., had been recovered, and that all four had struck man-
made objects (two rooftops, a house window, and an automobile hood),
reportedly a rare occurrence. (W Post, Feb 20/77, A19)

  The Univ. of Toyko’s Inst. of Space and Aeronautical Science
launched a 13kg experimental satellite called Tansei 3 from the
Uchinoura space center into an orbit with 3940km apogee, 826km
perigee, using a 3-stage MU3H rocket developed at the university. The
rocket, used in preparation for next yr’s launch of Japan’s 5th aurora-
observation satellite, was 23.8m long and weighed 49 tons. The MST-3
satellite, 7th launched by the university and 9th by Japan, carried control
equipment for testing and would sent back scientific data for an
estimated 15 days. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 10/77)

February 20: Distant planets Uranus and Neptune had turned out to have
spin rates similar to earth’s, so that their days correspond to earth days
and they had probably come from the same debris that earth did,
reported Kitt Peak astronomers Michael J.S. Belton and Bethanne
Hayes. Using the observatory‘s just-over-400cm telescope, world’s sec-

38
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 FEBRUARY



ond largest, the astronomers found that (contrary to previous theory)
spin rates of the outermost planets (except for Pluto) resembled not those
of Saturn and Jupiter but rather those of earth and Mars. The discovery
indicated they were solid ice-like bodies, not big balls of gas, Dr. Belton
said.
   Using a smaller telescope at Kitt Peak, a separate 4-member team of
scientistshad reported the first observation of weather patterns in the up-
per atmosphere of Neptune. Dr. Richard Joyce and 3 scientists from the
Univ. of Hawaii had found a marked increase in Neptune’s reflectivity
between April 1975 and March 1976, suggesting the presence of thin
transient clouds high in that planet’s atmosphere. Astronomers had been
using the planet as a standard measure of brightness, thinking that it ex-
perienced no atmospheric changes. (W Post, Feb 20177, F16)

   Meteorites-so rare that museum collections around the world con-
0

tained no more than 2000, and no curator had reported finding one on
his own- had turned up in quantity in Antarctica several years ago when
a team of Japanese scientists found an area of the ice-covered continent
where hunting meteorites was “as easy as picking mushrooms,” the
Chicago Tribune reported.
   Dr. Edward J. Olsen, chief of geology at Chicago’s Field Museum and
curator of one of the largest meteorite collections, had returned from the
first U.S. meteorite expedition to Antarctica reporting that his team had
found pieces of 11 different meteorites, weighing about 450kg in all, at
two sites more than 200km northwest of the U.S. research station on
McMurdo Sound where movement of the ice cover had concentrated
meteorites at certain spots.
   Scientists valued the meteorites as the oldest objects yet located, dating
back as far as 4.5 billion yr, whereas earth’s oldest rocks were only 3.7
billion yr old. Meteorites in pristine condition, preserved by the ice,
might contain information about organic chemicals in space, Olsen said,
and cosmic-ray traces might show whether the sun was running down or
getting hotter. (C Trib, Feb 20177, 1-3)

February 22: A lack of sunspots during the past yr and a half might have
caused recent unusual cold weather and drought in the U.S., Dr. John A.
Eddy of the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research told the 143rd
meeting of the Am. Assn. for the Advancement of Science. Dr. Eddy, an
astronomer who had studied the complex relation between solar activity
and historic and climatic events, had traced short- and medium-term ef-
fects over several thousand yr in history records and as far back as
7000yr by measuring carbon-14 levels in tree rings.
  The theory was that sunspots increased the solar wind (solar particles
and radiation that fan the earth) which determined the amount of cosmic

                                                                          39
FEBRUARY                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



and galactic radiation striking the earth. Tree-ring studies echoed abnor-
mal conditions of cold weather and drought when the rings exhibited
high levels of carbon- 14 resulting from reduced solar-wind activity,
resulting from fewer sunspots.
      . . The record of climate [has] a one-to-one correspondence that’s      /

so good I don’t want to believe it,” Dr. Eddy told the Denver meeting.
History reported the reign of King Louis XIV of France (1643-1715) as a
time of high carbon-14 levels; Eddy said the most severe temperature
drops on earth in the last thousand yr occurred in that period. Crops
failed in the British Isles, a Norse colony in Greenland perished of cold,
and Spanish conquistadors had ridden their horses into Mexico across a
frozen Rio Grande. The aurora borealis produced by solar particles strik-
ing earth’s magnetic field did not appear during that period; astronomer
E h u n d Halley was 60yr old when he first saw northern lights in 1715,
when the “little ice age” ended. “The fact is, we should have been into a
rise of solar activity in the autumn of 1975,” Eddy noted, “and here we
are a year and a half overdue into getting that rise.” ( WPost, Feb 22/77,
A-3; NYT, Feb 22/77, 13)

   Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced rescheduling to
Feb. 23 of the launch of a 3-stage N rocket carrying the first geosta-
tionary meteorological satellite to be orbited by Japan. The launch had
been postponed because of trouble with the system controlling the
rocket’s first stage. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 21/77)

February 22: Pressures from inside and outside the scientific community
might result in restricting the freedom of inquiry that had enabled science
to flourish since the Renaissance, the annual meeting of the Am. Assn.
for the Advancement of Science heard. Walter Sullivan reported in the
NY Times that a session on the role of science as the key to man’s
political future had as discussion leaders George W. Ball, senior director
of Lehman Bros. investment bankers; Lord Zuckerman, former chief
science adviser to the British government; and Charles J. Hitch, presi-
dent of Resources for the Future, Inc., of Washington, D.C. The panel
cited controversies in the Cambridge, Mass., city council over regulating
use of genetic material in that city’s research laboratories; the Calif.
legislature’s proposal to regulate research on genetic hybrids; and other
attempts to control the directions of research.
   The panel expressed the feeling that checks and balances within the
scientific community should be able to deal with such problems, and said
that misgivings about “too much knowledge” harked back to prehistoric
and classical times when mankind feared probing into nature’s secrets.
Although restraints on export of equipment and knowledge might delay
the spread of nuclear weapons, Ball noted that the only real control
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               FEBRUARY



would be “to create a climate where nations don’t find it [nuclear
weaponry] useful.” (NYT, Feb 23/77, B-4)

February 23-27: Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced
launch Feb. 22 of its engineering test satellite ETS-I1 from the space
center at Tanegashima at 550 local time (0850 GMT) on a 3-stage 32.5m
N rocket developed with the help of U.S. technology. The rocket
weighed about 90 tons and had a thrust of 148 tons at liftoff.

   The satellite, a 1.4lm-diameter cylinder 93cm long, carried a transmit-
tedreceiver and five small rockets for attitude control, orbital shift, and
speed adjustment. At about 6:45 pm local time, the satellite (called Kiku
2 in orbit) reached an elliptical transfer orbit with 191km perigee and
apogee of about 36 000km, the altitude at which it would go into syn-
chronous orbit within a few days. Its synchronous station would be at
130”E over Indonesia, the announcement said. This was the third
satellite orbited by the agency and the tenth by Japan. (FBIS, Tokyo
Kyodo in English, Feb 23/77; NYT, Feb 25/77, A7; CSM, Feb 24/77,2)
   NSDA officials announced Feb. 25 that Kiku 2 would change orbit a
day early, on its seventh pass over the Indian Ocean, as data from track-
ing stations in Japan and on Christmas Is. had confirmed its success in
elliptical orbit. The satellite would reach station by March 5 if all went
well, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb
25/77)
   The NY Times carried a Feb. 26 item from Associated Press confirm-
ing that “Japan’s first experimental stationary satellite” had shifted to a
circular orbit. (NYT, Feb 27/77, 7)
   NSDA announced Feb. 27 that Kiku 2’s apogee motor ignited at 2:32
pm local time on Feb. 26 to move the satellite from an elliptical to a cir-
cular orbit with apogee of 35 756km and perigee of 34 034km, close to
preflight predictions and fast enough to permit drift to its permanent sta-
tion over Indonesia at 35 800km altitude. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in
English, Feb 27/77)

February 2 : JSC announced plans for NASA Symposium 77 to be held
          4
at the center March 1-3 for more than 2000 students from junior and
senior high schools in Texas, a first-of-its-kind event for NASA, de-
signed to motivate youth (especially female and minority students) to
seek careers in engineering and science. Special guest at the event would
be actress Nichelle Nichols, best known as Lt. Uhura, communications
officer on the Star Trek television series. JSC and contract employees
would conduct workshops and describe their own careers as scientists or
engineers, and would take the students on tours of various work areas at
the center.

                                                                        41
FEBRUARY                              ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



  The symposium would include a seminar for college and university ad-
ministrators from schools having high enrollments of minority and
female students, giving information on NASA research, training, and
employment opportunities. NASA had conducted programs similar to
Symposium 77 at 3 universities, but not at a field center. (JSC Release
77-10)

   The initial phase of Shuttle approach and landing tests (ALT) that
began Feb. 18 at DFRC might end ahead of schedule, DFRC announced,
if the 4th and 5th flight of the combined 747-and-orbiter vehicles con-
tinued to meet program objectives. Donald K. Slayton, ALT program
manager, said that if performance measured up to previous successful
flights, the 6th test (now scheduled for Mar. 4) would be dropped. Pro-
gram officials had praised the performance of the 747 and its piggyback
passenger, Slayton said; flight data had verified preflight wind-tunnel
test results and simulations conducted by Boeing.
   Early completion of inert tests with an unmanned orbiter would put
the orbiter in its hangar a week ahead of schedule to prepare for its next
flight, in the captive-active phase. Five flights scheduled in this phase
would carry astronaut crews to perform systems checks and go through
crew procedures as the 747 went through maneuvers up to, but just short
of, actual release of the orbiter. Tests later in the summer would release
the orbiter for an unpowered landing on DFRC’s dry lakebed. (NASA
Release 77-36; DFRC Release 8-77)

February 25: NASA announced selection of Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space
and Communications Group, El Segundo, Calif., for negotiation of a
cost-plus-award-fee contract valued at between $37.5 and $43.5 million,
depending on the option selected, for design and fabrication of a
thematic mapper to be used on Landsat D, scheduled for launch early in
1981. The thematic mapper would be a remote-sensing instrument offer-
ing improved data for land-resources management by making observa-
tions with repetitive temporal coverage and delivering to the users infor-
mation with better spatial and spectral resolution (mapping on a
 1:250 OOO scale compared to 1:1 OOO OOO on the present Landsat.)
   The basic contract, including assembly, test, and qualification of a
prototype flight model and one set of bench-test and calibration equip-
ment, as well as support services, would have two options: either an addi-
tional flight unit with an additional set of test equipment and support
services, or two additional flight units and support services. Completion
and delivery of the prototype would be scheduled for late 1980. GSFC
would manage the thematic-mapper program. (NASA Release 77-34)

* NASA announced development of ultrathin large-area silicon solar
42
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                 FEBRUARY



cells thinner than a sheet of newspaper for increasing the power-to-
weight capability of solar arrays, considered a major breakthrough in ap-
plying solar energy to missions requiring multikilowatts, even millions of
watts, of electricity. The Solarex Corp. of Rockville, Md., had made the
thin cells some 40 to 50 microns thick (only one-sixth as thick as cells in
present solar arrays) in sizes up to 38cmZ,proving both structurally flexi-
ble and less fragile than expected. Energy conversion of the new cells vir-
tually equaled that of conventional cells, 11% compared to 12 or 13%
for the thicker cells.
   Lightweight cells would mean larger solar arrays for ion-propulsion
systems in extended space exploration, and could supply power for plat-
forms and remote-satellite power stations in the future. Solarex had
delivered hundreds of the new cells to JPL at Pasadena, Calif., for test,
evaluation, and design-application studies. (NASA Release 77-3 1)

* More than half the 1497 reports received under the NASA aviation
safety reporting system (ASRS) in its second quarter of operations in-
cluded unsolicited recommendations for solutions of a variety of air-
traffic problems, NASA announced. The reports, dealing with air opera-
tions nationwide, reflected an increase in the quality of reporting for the
period ending Oct. 14, 1976, the agency said. NASA’s ASRS had been
designed as an “early warning system” consisting of voluntary reports
submitted by pilots, air traffic controllers, and others in the national
aviation system.
   During the first and second quarters, an average of 100 reports came in
each wk; the number of reports from pilots declined during the second
quarter, with reports from controllers now constituting half rather than a
third of the total. At least three-fourths of all reports concerned incidents
occurring in controlled air space, and some type of flight plan had been
filed in 84% of the flights described. NASA had prepared and sent to the
Federal Aviation Administration a total of 58 alert bulletins during the
report period.
   NASA personnel had initially screened all ASRS reports to remove the
names of persons reporting; the reports went for analysis to the ASRS
office of Battelle’s Columbus Division in Mountain View, Calif. At-
tempts to verify information in 340 of the reports, by telephone contact
with the reporter, were successful in 270 instances. Names of persons
were removed to protect the right of free comment without fear of
reprisal, and 80% of the reports were reviewed within 2 working days of
their receipt. (NASA Release 77-30)

* NASA issued requests for proposals from industry to design and
manufacture the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) recently approved
by the U.S. and the Netherlands. Scheduled for launch in March 1981,

                                                                           43
FEBRUARY                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



the observatory would use a telescope furnished by the U.S., a spacecraft
built by the Netherlands, and a control facility supplied by the United
Kingdom. The IRAS in a 900km polar orbit would survey the entire sky
for a yr, at infrared wavelengths not usable by earth-based telescopes
because of atmospheric interference, to study stars forming and at the
end of their life cycle.
  JPL would manage the project and would design and operate a facility
to produce an infrared sky map and a catalog containing up to 1 million
infrared sources. NASA’s Ames Research Center would be responsible
for the 60m-aperture infrared telescope. Prof. Gerry Neugebauer of the
Calif. Inst. of Technology (operating JPL for NASA) would head the
U.S. scientific team, working with as many as 500 U.S., Dutch, and U.K.
scientists, engineers, and technicians. Industry proposals were due by
Mar. 1, with contractor selection later in 1977. (NASA Release 77-33)
   MSFC reported NASA’s Michoud assembly facility had shipped the
0

first of four major pieces of test hardware for the Space Shuttle external
tank, an intertank structural-test article scheduled to arrive by barge at
MSFC about Mar. 5 . It would go from New Orleans to Huntsville by
way of Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennessee Rivers, the route NASA had
used to ship Saturn stages for testing during the Apollo program. The
other test articles (liquid-hydrogen tank, liquid-oxygen tank, and
another intertank) would arrive later in 1977.
   The external tank, one to be used for each Shuttle mission, would hold
containers for liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen, connected by the inter-
tank; the combined assembly would measure about 47m long. Test data
would serve to verify the intertank‘s structural integrity before static test
firing of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system at the Natl. Space
Technology Laboratories later in 1977. The test firings would use a full-
size external tank, three Shuttle engines, and an Orbiter aft-structure
simulator, attached to the test stand through the intertank. (MSFC
Release 77-30)
   JSC announced it had awarded a cost-plus-award-fee contract worth
0

$12 million to Lockheed Electronics Co. for a third yr of site-support
services to JSC’s White Sands Test Facility at Las Cruces, N.M.
Estimated total value of the 3yr contract was $24 million. (JSC Release
77-11)
  NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher gave the agency’s
distinguished public service medal to United Nations Secretary General
Kurt Waldheim, at a ceremony at the Natl. Air and Space Museum. Dr.
Waldheim received the award for outstanding leadership as chairman of
the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space from 1965 to
1968 and from 1970 to 1971, and for “enduring contributions to the

44
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               FEBRUARY



development of a constructive international consensus, during the
critical formative years, on the challengingissues presented by man’s first
uses of outer space.” (Text of presentation)

February 28: NASA announced that MSFC had issued requests for pro-
posals from industry to make studies of, and supply data for NASA to
use in developing techniques for packaging, transporting, fabricating,
erecting, and operating large structures in space, in preparation for a ma-
jor demonstration in space in 1983or 1984. An early Shuttle flight would
carry an automated beam-fabrication module to make aluminum struc-
tural members; later flights would demonstrate use of both aluminum
and composite materials. After a few beams were manufactured on early
flights, later missions would perform limited assembly, culminating in
fabrication and erection of a large structure for continuing use, such as a
lOOkw solar-power facility to supplement onboard Shuttle power for
various experiments.
   The capacity demonstrated in these missions would aid in creating a
more complex assembly as part of a space-construction base in 1985 or
thereafter. The proposal called for completion in 9mo and another 2mo
to prepare a report. MSFC would receive proposals until Mar. 18, 1977,
and would manage the study project for the Office of Space Flight.
(NASA Release 77-35)

   JSC announced it had awarded a contract worth $2 million to
0

Hamilton Standard Division, United Technologies Corp., Windsor
Locks, Conn., to supply space suits for Shuttle crews. The system, an ex-
travehicular mobility unit (EMU), would consist of a suit with integrated
life-support backpack for use outside the Shuttle orbiter’s pressurized
cabin. The suit would come in small, medium, and large upper- and
lower-torso standardized sections, to replace the individualized suits of
earlier manned programs. The contract called for equipment and spares
for seven suits and supporting hardware, plus training, manpower, and
field support at JSC and other NASA centers, at an estimated ultimate
cost of about $18.5 million. (JSC Release 77-12)

   JSC reported it had signed a contract valued at $200K with American
0

Airline’s maintenance and engineering center at Tulsa, Okla., for
maintenance and operations support of NASA’s Boeing 747 Shuttle-
carrier aircraft NASA 905. Work would be done primarily at DFRC, site
of the first atmospheric and glide-flight landing tests of the Shuttle or-
biter. Eventual value of the contract could reach $806K. (JSC Release
77-13)

During February: Japan, one of five countries that previously had agreed

                                                                        45
FEBRUARY                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



to be major investors in a $200 million international maritime satellite
organization (Inmarsat), had declined to participate in a preparatory
committee set up to act until formal documents were ratified, AvWk
reported.
   Forty countries would be Inmarsat members; besides Japan, the other
four major shareholders were to be the U.S., the U.K., the USSR, and
Norway. The preparatory committee had met in London in Jan. under
sponsorship of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organiza-
tion, an arm of the UN, and had set up three panels: one on satellite-
system parameters; one on economic, marketing, and financial matters;
and one on organization procedures, all of which were to meet in the in-
terval before the next committee meeting set for Oct. 1977. Japan gave
no reason for withdrawing. (AvWk, Feb 7/77, 23)




46
March I: NASA announced the first use of a link between the com-
munications technology satellite Cts and the portable earth terminal
(PET): a teleconference between Housing and Urban Development
Secretary Patricia Roberts Harris in Washington, D.C., and a group of
California mayors at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View,
Calif. Mrs. Harris conferred with the mayors from the PET bus parked
outside the HUD building. Cts, a joint effort between the Canadian
Dept. of Communications and NASA, had been built and integrated by
Canada; NASA provided the 200w transmitter and developed the PET at
Lewis Research Center. The PET bus, based at LeRC, would travel
around the U.S. demonstrating how to save money through teleconfer-
encing. (NASA Release 77-40)

  NASA announced it would join the Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Land
0

Management in using Landsat, the earth resources monitoring satellite,
to inventory wild land resources (major streams, ground cover and
vegetation types, reservoirs, and fire hazards) in south central Alaska,
northwestern Arizona, and southwestern Idaho. The project would ex-
amine each of the 3 different regional ecologies for about lyr. During the
3yr project, the BLM and NASA would set up an automated inventory
system to provide accurate and timely data on BLM land as another ex-
ample of Landsat usefulness in solving public and private resource-
oriented problems. (NASA Release 77-37)

  Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded a $634 250
contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design, build, and test a
machine that would demonstrate, on earth, the automatic fabrication of
beams for space construction. Ground demonstration would be needed
to develop a safe and efficient facility for use in space. Beam fabrication,
part of the Space Industrialization Program, would be the first step in
building large space structures. (MSFC Release 77-33)

  MSFC reported that the contractor for the first high-energy astronomy
observatory (HEAO-A), TRW Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif.,
would ship the spacecraft to Kennedy Space Center on Mar. 7. HEAO-
A, a 2660kg unmanned mission scheduled for launch Apr. 15 into low

                                                                          41
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
MARCH



circular earth orbit, would survey celestial x-ray sources and gamma-ray
flux. (MSFC Release 77-32)

March 3: President Carter’s first budget proposal contained additional
funds for NASA, Nature magazine noted. The new administration had
recommended $15 million for studies of potential missions to Mars after
Viking; the previous administration had requested $5 million. Planetary
scientists, pleased with the increased budget request as well as with
Carter’s recent remarks on the Space Shuttle, viewed these actions as
presidential support of the space program. (Nature, Mar 3/77, 5 ;
Spaceflight, Mar 77, 8)

   NASA announced it had used Landsat, the earth resources monitoring
satellite, to inventory irrigation systems in Nebraska. The 12 OOO central-
pivot irrigation systems proved easily recognizable by their circular shape
in photos from Landsat’s 1480km-altitude orbit. Annual inventory of the
irrigation systems had become necessary when the number of central-
pivot sites increased by 40 to 60% each yr, affecting property values,
land use, and fuel and water allocation. Landsat had proved the cheapest
way to acquire an accurate and timely inventory. (NASA Release 77-38)

  Prof. James L. Elliot of Cornel1 Univ. reported sighting a large
number of objects -possible satellites of Uranus, the seventh
planet -while he was using the 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper Air-
borne Observatory flying above the Indian Ocean. Another U.S.
astronomer, Dr. Robert Millis of the Lowell Observatory in Ariz.,
reported similar observations while viewing Uranus from Perth in
Australia. Each of the scientists claimed that the planet might have as
many as 100 satellites ranging from 18 to 24mi in diameter. If confirmed,
the new observations would give Uranus more satellites than any other
planet in the solar system. (NYT, Mar 3/77, 77; C Trib, Mar 12/77)

March 4: NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of
former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day
Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERN0 of Bremen, W.Ger-
many, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload).
Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to
become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif.
Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed
by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)

  NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that, as part of the
Solar Sail Development Project, it had awarded 6 contracts to build a
spaceship powered by solar wind. The craft, using large extremely thin

48
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                    MARCH




Artist’s concept of solar sail making rendezvous in 1982 with Halley’s comet.
Launched from an orbiting Space Shuttle, an 800m-sq structure could carry an
800 to 900kg spacecraft on such a mission. (NASA 77-H-128)


metallic sails to capture the energy of solar photons, would tack like a
sailboat into the “wind” to head toward the sun or would use photon
energy to head for the outer planets. Speed of the ship would vary with
distance from the sun, following the inverse-squarelaw that solar intensi-
ty would decrease as the reciprocal of the distance from the sun, squared.
Cost of the contracts for fabricating sail material and designing sails,
booms, and navigation systems would total $800 OOO. (NASA Release
77-39)

  A 25-article series in ScienceNews by Jonathan Eberhart on the Viking
0

mission won the 1976 AAAS-Westinghouse science writing award Feb.
22, Science reported. Henry S.F. Cooper’s New Yorker article on the
Space Shuttle received honorable mention. (Science, Mar 4/77, 864)

March 7: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA administrator, announced that
the planetary probes scheduled for launch Aug. 20 and Sept. 1 would be
named Voyager 1 and Voyager 2. The two craft would view Jupiter,
Saturn, and their respective satellite systems, and might also look at
Uranus and Neptune. JPL had designed and built both probes.
   In March 1979 Voyager 1 would pass within 357 OOOkm of Jupiter, the
solar system’s largest planet, and go on to rendezvous with Saturn in
Nov. 1980, passing within 209 OOOkm of the ringed planet’s cloud tops
and within 6430km of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon and the only satellite
in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. (NASA Release 77-41)

                                                                           49
MARCH                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



  NASA’s upcoming 5yr plan (1978-1982) had projected annualbudgets
0

for fiscal yrs 1980-1982 in excess of $4.7 billion, Aviation Week
reported. The plan, an internal document used to guide the agency,
would allow NASA as many as 7 major new mission starts in FY 1979,
including a Mars rover and a Halley’s Comet rendezvous. (Av Wk, Mar
7/77, 47)

  MSFC announced it would consider using the Space Shuttle’s external
fuel tank (ET) as a permanent space platform. James E. Kingsbury, head
of MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate, proposed to replace
57m3 of an ET’S liquid oxygen with provisions for 90 days, then launch
another Shuttle to bring a crew, a Skylab-airlock module and multiple-
docking adapter, and a solar electric-conversionwing to the orbiting ET
to constitute a habitable space station. All the required equipment, now
in storage or on display in the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space
Museum, had been flight-tested. (MSFC Release 77-36; NASA Release
77-42; Htsvl Times, Feb 20/77, 8)

  JSC announced it would use CAMAC, a European innovation used in
worving between computers and hardware to produce standard scientific
electronic subassemblies, as a link between Shuttle computers and on-
board experiments. CAMAC would reduce costs by permitting actual
onboard assembly of major electronic sections from a CAMAC
subassembly pool. MSFC had been studying the equipment to ensure
reliability during Shuttle operations. (JSC Release 77-14)

   JSC announced award of a $2 752 OOO contract to Hamilton Standard
0

Division of United Technologies Corp., Windsor Locks, Conn. , for
development and production of a Space Shuttle portable oxygen system
for use independently or connected to the orbiter’s oxygen system. Con-
sisting of a face mask, rebreather loop, heat exchanger, oxygen bottle,
and recharge kit, the system would operate during emergencies and for
prebreathing before spacewalks to denitrogenize the crew’s circulatory
systems. (JSC Release 77-18)

  NASA might undertake a Cosmic Background Explorer satellite pro-
gram, Av Wk reported. The satellite would examine the character of
cosmic background radiation claimed by many scientists to prove the
big-bang theory of the universe’s formation. (AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)

  A cryogenically cooled infrared telescope carried aboard the Space
Shuttle would become the major infrared research instrument in space,
AvWk reported. NASA studies had indicated such a telescope could

50
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                MARCH



gather spectroscopic data on objects 1000 times fainter than now visible.
( A v W . , Mar 7/77, 11)

* New infrared detectors at Kitt Peak Natl. Observatory might have
detected frozen methane on the surface of Pluto, AvWk reported. If
verified, the observations would indicate a smaller size for Pluto and
would change current theories of Pluto’s interaction with other planets.
(AvWk, Mar 7/77, 11)
 c

March 8: MSFC announced a $1 046 100 amendment of a contract with
Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell Intl. Corp., Canoga Park, Calif., con-
tractors for the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME). The amended con-
tract, totaling more than $66 million, would include equipment to build
SSME. (MSFC Release 77-37)

March 9: NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-
module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice
president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of
marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC.
Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and
made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent
phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA
Release 77-44)

* Reduction of data from NASA’s      1976 gravity probe (GP-A) experi-
ment had confirmed the equivalency principle, a cornerstone of
Einstein’s general theory of relativity, MSFC reported. Using data from
two identical atomic maser clocks, principal investigator Dr. Robert
Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) in Cam-
bridge, Mass., had demonstrated that time actually went faster in a
weaker gravitational field, one removed from the earth’s mass. The clock
that had been carried aboard a rocket to an altitude of 10 O O m had run
                                                            Ok
faster. (MSFC Release 77-41)

  MSFC reported plans to request another $18 610 000 in NASA’s FY
1978 budget for construction or modification of facilities to be used in
building the Space Shuttle external fuel tank (ET) at the Michoud
assembly facility (MAF) near New Orleans. With addition of a chemical
waste-treatment plant and alterations of the manufacturing, vertical-
assembly, final-assembly, and checkout buildings, MAF could produce
28 ETs each yr. (MSFC Release 77-35)

March IO: NASA launched Palapa 2 (formerly Palapa-B), an Indonesian

                                                                       51
                                      ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
MARCH



telecommunications satellite, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape
Canaveral on a Delta at 2316 GMT, into a transfer orbit with 36 499km
apogee, 231.2km perigee, and inclination of 24.6”. Palapa 2, second In-
donesian domestic comsat, would use its apogee kick motor Mar. 12 to
move into synchronous orbit above the Indian Ocean. Forty ground sta-
tions throughout the archipelago would link the islands with the 2
satellites, each capable of handling 4OOO phone calls or 12 simultaneous
color TV channels. (MORS M-492-208-77-02, [prelaunch] Feb 2/77,
[postlaunch] Apr 12/77; NASA Release 77-23; FBIS, Jakarta Domestic
Service in Indonesia, Mar 11/77)

 MSFC reported it had established a project office responsible for
0

managing all Space Telescope activities. Manager and deputy would be
William C. Keathley and James C. McCulloch. (MSFC Release 77-38)

   NASA planned to send a roving laboratory over the Martian surface
during the next Mars landings, Nature reported. Dr. Gerald A. Soffen,
chief Viking project scientist, said that, although no future Mars mis-
sions were officially scheduled, the outlook was favorable given the
scientific success of, and public enthusiasm for, the two Viking landers.
Speaking at a Paris conference to disseminate Viking information, Sof-
fen invited U S and foreign scientists to participate in examining Viking
              ..
data and in developing experiments for the next generation of Mars mis-
sions. (Nature, Mar 10/77, 112)

  President Carter had suggested the U.S. and USSR “forgo the oppor-
0

tunity to arm satellite bodies and also forgo the opportunity to destroy
observation satellites,” the W Post reported. Recent Soviet antisatellite
experiments had alarmed Pentagon officials, who revealed that the U.S.
military space program budget for FY 1978 was $478 million greater than
the FY 1977 appropriation. (WPost, Mar 10/77, A-11)

March 11: The W Post reported that NASA Administrator James C.
Fletcher would resign effective May 1. Appointed by President Nixon in
1971, Dr. Fletcher had headed the agency during the end of the Apollo
project; the successful Skylab missions; the Apollo-Soyuz test project;
and numerous unmanned missions including the launch of the earth
resources monitoring system, Landsat, and the Mars probe Viking. Dr.
Fletcher planned to return to private life after his resignation. (W Post,
Mar 11/77, A3; NASA Release 77-48)

  NASA announced it had awarded a cost-plus-fee contract worth about
0

$43.5 million to McDonnell Douglas Technical Services, Inc., Spacelab
Integration Division, Huntsville, Ala., for Spacelab integration. The

52
ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 MARCH



contract, lasting from March 1977 thmugh Dec. 1983, would include
design, development, manufacturing, and operational testing of NASA's
Spacelab components. NASA planned to provide a l operational services
                                                  l
including flight operations, crew training, and maintenance, after the
European Space Agency delivered the lab. Spacelab would remain in the
Space Shuttle cargo bay to perform earth observations and experiments
in materials science, physics, life science, communications, navigation,
and space systems. (NASA Release 7747)

* MSFC reported that parachutes to recover the Space Shuttle's reusable
solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRB) were undergoing dynamic testing at
Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, Colo. Scheduled for completion Mar.
31, the tests simulated in-flight parachute deployment from the SRB.
(MSFC Release 77-44)
March 14: NASA announced appointment of Maj. Gen. Kenneth R.
Chapman, USAF (Ket.), as assistant administrator for its Hq Office of
DOD and Interagency Affairs, effective Apr. 1. He would replace Lt.
Gen. William. W. Snavely, USAF (Ret.), who left NASA in Sept. 1976
to accept a position in Saudi Arabia. Chapman, a nuclear chemist, was
formerly director of the Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safe-
guards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). (NASA Release
77-50)

  NASA announced that LeRC had supplied news media in the
0

Cleveland area with readings of daily solar energy available for use dur-
ing the winter. Using a pyranometer, a device to record total solar energy
reaching a surface, LeRC staff measured the kilowatt hrs of solar energy
received on a 150mz surface facing south at a 37" angle. Other NASA
centers had made similar measurements, all related to solar energy
research being pursued by the Energy Research and Development Ad-
ministration (ERDA). (NASA Release 7749)

* JSC announced construction of a new lunar curatorial facility, a $2.02
million 4200m2 addition to the old facility, Bldg. 31. The new facility,
being built by Spaw Glass, Inc., of Houston, would provide clean secure
storage space as well as processing, experiment, and simulation labs for
NASA's 480kg of lunar samples. (JSC Release 77-20)

  NATO had not made a choice between the US.-built Boeing AWACS
0

(airborne warning and control system) or the British Hawker Siddeley
Nimrod as its airborne-radar plane, the W Star reported. Britain and
France favored selection of the already operational Nimrod in retaliation
for U.S. refusal to grant New York landing rights to the Anglo-French
Concorde, and in order to preserve 7000 jobs on the Nimrod production

                                                                        53
MARCH                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



line. Nimrod's performance on North Atlantic patrol might hamper sale
of the AWACS to NATO, the Star noted. ( W Star, Mar 14/77, A-11)

  Researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center using data from Orbiting
Solar Observatory 8 (Os0 8) determined that iron-line x-rays had come
from hot gas between the galaxies in the Milky Way's local cluster,
AvWk reported, meaning that the space between galaxies in the local
cluster was not a perfect vacuum, but the amount of matter between
local galaxies was probably about the same as that present within the
galaxies. (AvWk,  Mar 14/77, 11)

  NASA had planned to fly approximately 150 research missions on its
Gates Learjet during 1977, Av Wk reported. Eight different research
groups, using the 30cm telescope on board, would conduct infrared
observations to obtain upper-atmosphere and magnetodynamic data.
(AvWk,Mar 14/77, 11)
   A NASA earth resources monitoring satellite, Landsat 1, had ex-
0

perienced a malfunction in band 1 of its multispectral scanner on Mar. 3,
Av Wk reported. Although the malfunction affected only band 1 (a green
spectral band identifying sunlight reflected from green plants), NASA
had shut down the entire scanner pending a safety investigation by con-
trollers. Landsat 1 had performed satisfactorily since its 1973 launch.
(AvWk,Mar 14/77, 16)

  The USSR had increased its military use of space, AvWk reported.
0

Killer-satellite systems tested during 1976 appeared operational. The
Soviets in 1976 had launched 33 reconnaissance missions (the core of
their military space program) and apparently had added to their military
comsat system as well. (AvWk,Mar 14/77, 63)

March 15: DQD would request $2.77 billion for space-related activities in
FY 1978, $478.5 million more than its F 1977 appropriation, Defense
                                          Y
Daily reported. The increase, resulting from procurement of the Navstar
global positioning satellite system and increased DOD activity on the
Space Shuttle, would include costs of ground security at JSC and KSC
for defense-related Shuttle payloads. DQD had planned to use the Shut-
tle for critical manned military observations, and had agreed on a for-
mula to reimburse NASA for launching military payloads. (DD, Mar
15/77, 57)

March 16: MSFC announced award of a $279 714 contract to Sperry
Support Services, a division of Sperry Rand Corp., Huntsville, Ala., for
design, construction, and delivery of equipment for the mated vertical

54
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 MARCH



ground-vibration test (MVGVT) of the Space Shuttle, scheduled for
1978. The test would confirm the theoretical model used in dynamic
analyses of the Space Shuttle, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket
boosters. (MSFC Release 77-39)
   Dr. Albert Rango of GSFC and Dr. K.I. Itten of the Univ. of Zurich
0

announced that orbiting earth satellites could monitor winter snowpacks
and their runoff as accurately as ground-based or airborne observations,
NASA reported. Their findings appeared in the journal Nordic
Hydrology. Comparing costs and relative accuracy of ground, airborne,
and satellite measurements, the two scientists decided that the use of
NASA’s Landsat earth resources monitoring satellite and the Natl.
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental satellite Noaa
2 would provide timely and accurate information at lower cost than the
alternatives. (NASA Release 77-52)
March 17: A short-circuit in the power supply of Viking Z’s gas-
chromatograph mass spectrometer (GSMS) had forced controllers at
JPL to turn off the instrument Mar. 12, NASA reported. JPL received
confirmation of the command from the Viking system Mar. 14. NASA
had shut down the GCMS, which had analyzed the composition of Mar-
tian atmosphere and soil early in the mission, to avoid damage to other
instruments such as the onboard computer and communications system.
(NASA Release 77-51)

March 18: NASA reported that an F-8 aircraft using the digital fly-by-
wire control system would simulate the Space Shuttle’s flight-control
system during a series of 3 flights at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research
Center. The flights, simulations of orbiter maneuvers after separation
from the Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft, would determine the
thresholds of sensor failure and would test the programming of the Shut-
tle’s flight-computer system. (NASA Release 77-53; DFRC X-News,Mar
25/77, 2)
  NASA announced a successful 60-sec firing of the Space Shuttle main
0

engine on Mar. 12 at rated thrust conditions of 2 082 560 newtons.
Employees of the Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Intl. Corp., contractor
for the SSME, conducted the test at NASA’s Natl. Space Technology
Laboratories. (NASA Release 77-54)

   NASA announced it had turned over the Saturn-rocket test stand at
NSTL to Rockwell Intl. Space Div. for testing the Shuttle’s main propul-
sion system. Modification of the 90m-high stand to accept Shuttle
elements ended in late 1976. Static firing tests would begin in Dec. 1977.
(NASA Release 77-55)

                                                                        55
MARCH                                  ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977


March 21: Candidates for the post of NASA administrator, according to
the WPost, included Christopher C. Kraft, director of JSC; Al Kelly and
Rocco Petrone, former NASA officials; and Frank Moss, former chair-
man of the Senate Space Committee and an early Carter supporter. ( W
Post, Mar 21/77, A3)

  ESA and Canada’s Centre for Remote Sensing (CCRS) announced
they had signed an agreement to cooperate in studying remote-sensing
applications, developing microwave remote sensing, and improving
ground stations for processing satellite data. (ESA release, Mar 21/77)

March 22: NASA reported that MSFC had awarded a lyr $150 000 con-
tract to the Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI) in
Chicago to set up a team to find uses for aerospace technologies in
manufacturing. The team would work with U.S. industries, industrial
associations, and professional groups in areas related to machine tools,
electronics assembly, and light fabrication and assembly. The team
would be another of the groups created by NASA’s technology-
utilization office to expand the use of aerospace technology on earth.
(NASA Release 77-57)

   TROPEX, an international tropical weather experiment sponsored by
0

the Soviet Union, would use USSR satellites with research vessels from
some of the 70 participating countries to gather data on atmospheric con-
ditions, the FBIS reported. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 22/77)

March 23: NASA announced it had invited scientists to submit proposals
for use and development of the unfunded Space Telescope [see Feb. 11.
Capable of holding five different instruments at the focal plane of its
2.4m mirror, the Space Telescope would expand the volume of observ-
able space 350 times beyond that of the largest ground-based telescope,
offering new information for astronomers and other scientists interested
in fundamental questions of cosmology and astronomy. GSFC would
manage operations of the telescope’s missions and develop its instrumen-
tation; MSFC would be responsible for overall management of the
telescope system. (NASA Release 77-58)

March 24: The White House had ordered a review of NASA’s 28 ad-
visory committees with the idea of abolishing all those lacking a compell-
ing need for their services, a balanced membership, or open conduct of
business within the framework of the law and their mandate, NASA
reported. The review should serve to reduce the number of committees
except as required by statute and to ensure quality and utility in their
recommendations. (NASA Release 77-59)

56
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  MARCH



  ARC announced selection of 10 women volunteers aged 35 to 45 with
0

nontechnical backgrounds as test subjects in an experiment to help set
medical standards for future Space Shuttle passengers. The experiment,
w e of a series using varying ages and sexes, would require 9 days of total
bedrest to simulate weightlessness, and occasional spins in a centrifuge to
simulate Shuttle reentry. Results would show whether or not age and
gender affected the ability to cope with spaceflight. (ARC Release 77-15;
NASA Release 77-61)

   The eighth annual session at JSC of the Lunar Science Conference had
e
discussed the possibility of mining asteroids for the raw materials of
space industrialization, the Chicago Tribune reported. Dr. David
Criswell, associate scientist at the Lunar Science Institute, said that two
developments would make asteroid mining feasible: an engine capable of
towing an asteroid, and a method of locating asteroids rich in needed
resources. Materials from asteroids would be loo0 times cheaper than
materials launched from earth into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 24/77, 4-11)

   The Soviet Union had successfully tested a submarine-based missile
e
with a range twice that of its U.S. counterpart, the Chicago Tribune
reported. Two SSN-8 missiles fired from a Soviet Delta-class submarine
in the Barents Sea had traveled approximately 9120km to targets in the
Pacific Ocean. Ships carrying the missiles reportedly could endanger
U.S. targets without leaving their home-port areas. (C Trib, Mar 24/77,
1-2)

March 25: KSC announced award of a $25 970 contract to the research
institute at the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta to develop an
automatic manatee-tracking system for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Serv-
ice. Attempts to track the manatee, an endangered aquatic mammal, had
failed because of poor monitoring systems. Tracking the movements of
about 100 manatees in the Banana and Indian Rivers and Mosquito
Lagoon near KSC would provide scientists with data on their living
habits. (KSC Release 77-77)

March 26: The U.S. should orbit solar-power stations and mine the
moon for raw materials, science fiction writer Isaac Asimov told Presi-
dent Carter in an open letter printed in the Chicago Tribune. Citing the
benefits of orbital stations capable of transmitting solar energy in
microwaves to earth stations, Asimov stressed the need for international
cooperation in using space and in preventing the extinction of humanity.
(C Trib, Mar 26/77, 1-7)

March 28: Direct-readout equipment for GOES, the geostationary

                                                                         57
MARCH                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



operational environmental satellite, installed in the USAF global weather
center at Offutt AFB, Neb., to support Air Force meteorology re-
quirements, would improve the center’s forecasting and accuracy, Av Wk
reported. (Av Wk, Mar 28/77, 11)

  Project Halo (high-altitude large optics), a space-based system pro-
posed by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency to detect and track
foreign missiles and aircraft, would require 6 Space Shuttle payloads to
orbit its structures and equipment, A v Wk reported. ARPA’s Halo
research had focused on systems analysis, infrared focal planes, optics,
cryogenic cooling, power sources, data utilization, and phenomenology.
(Av Wk,  Mar 28/77, 11)

  The USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory had successfully test-fired
0

small solid-fuel rocket motors having nozzles molded into the end of the
propellant grain instead of externally mounted, Av Wk reported. Use of
integral nozzles would reduce costs of manufacture and would allow
more propellant per rocket. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)

  Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency planned to launch 2
0

satellites in 1978 to replace missions that failed during 1976, AvWk
reported. Scheduled for Feb. 1978 was an ionospheric-research mission
to replace an identical craft that malfunctioned in orbit in March 1976.
An x-ray research satellite similar to a mission that failed during launch
Feb. 4, 1976, might lift off in Aug. or Sept. 1978. (AvWk, Mar 28/77,
26)

March 29: NASA announced it had ended an aerial survey of the Pacific
Ocean along the west coast of the U.S. that was an operational prelude to
the use of SeaSat-A, the oceanographic satellite scheduled for launch in
May 1978. The survey had used high-flying NASA aircraft to test four
sensors from SeaSat-A: a synthetic aperture imaging radar, a wind-field
scatterometer, a scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer, and a
radar altimeter. The mission was a rehearsal in research cooperation that
scientists would need when SeaSat became operational. (NASA Release
77-62)

  The future of Japan’s space program was not a sure thing, the Wall
0

Street Journal said. Those who had claimed that a program of launching
satellites for resource-rich, technology-poor nations would increase
Japan’s technological growth and ensure a supply of raw materials had
met with complaints that the program wasted t x money and that J a p e
                                              a
should have relied on the U.S. and NASA to orbit the payloads. Japan’s

58
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 191                                 MARCH


space agency would have to convince official and public skeptics of the
program’s value, the paper said. (WSJ, Mar 29/77, 44)

* A yr-long (Dec. 1978-Nov. 1979) international program of global at-
mospheric research using Soviet and U.S. satellites would attempt to
construct a model of the atmosphere, Tass reported. (FBIS, Moscow
Tass in English, Mar 29/77)

* Soviet satellites might help predict the cotton harvest in South
Transcaucasia, Tass reported, through enhanced photographs of the
regional cotton crop. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77)

March 30: NASA announced that Project FIRES (firefighters integrated
response equipment system), a joint program of NASA’s Technology
Utilization Office and the Natl. Fiie Prevention and Control Administra-
tion, had begun with NASA’s award of a $478 375 contract to Grumman
Aerospace Gorp., Bethpage, N.Y., for new standards in firefighting
clothing and for development and fabrication of a complete ensemble.
The project would use space technologies to achieve greater safety and
maneuverability of firefighting equipment. A Users Requirements Com-
mittee of firefighters and safety officials would evaluate Grumman’s
products and fire-test them in 10 cities under actual firefighting condi-
tions before commercial production began. (NASA Release 77-64)

  MSFC announced that NASA had invited researchers to propose
materials-processing experiments to be performed on the Space
Transportation System (STS), as the Shuttle missions would be called.
The experiments, basic or applied research projects in materials science,
would exploit the weightless and ultra-high vacuum conditions of space
to demonstrate their applications in materials science and technology.
(MSFC Release 77-52)

  The Pentagon had been working on an interceptor spacecraft capable
of knocking Soviet satellites out of orbit, DOD officials told Congress.
The Washington Post reported that the program, begun under President
Ford, had aimed at producing weapons to protect U.S. space systems
from attacks by foreign satellites. ( W Post, Mar 30/77, A-8)

March 31: Dr. James L. Elliott of Cornel1 Univ. announced he had
found 5 rings around the planet Uranus. Observations above the Indian
Ocean with a 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper airborne observatory
had revealed the rings during Uranus’s occultation of a bright star (SA0
158687). Dr. Elliott had concluded earlier [see Mar. 31 that Uranus was

                                                                      59
MARCH                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



surrounded by 100 moons; during the occultation, the same objects ap-
peared as rings, not moons. Uranus and Saturn were the only two planets
in the solar system found so far to have ring systems. Dr. Elliott’s
original mission was to check Uranus for atmosphere and diameter;
discovery of the rings was unexpected. (NYT, Mar 31/77, 63)

   Developing future telecommunications systems would pose few
0

technical problems, Nature reported: the real bottlenecks would be find-
ing the financial resources to build, and estimating the’social implica-
tions of, such systems. A British Royal Society conference on “Telecom-
munications in the 1980s and After” had discussed the possible social ef-
fects of highly developed telecommunications systems, especially the
ability of a system to foster integration in different populations or to in-
crease isolation of individuals within their local groups. (Nature, Mar
3 1/77,409)

During March: A House subcommittee on aviation and transportation
R&D had called on NASA to expand its program on aircraft energy effi-
ciency (fuel conservation), said Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine.
The subcommittee report with 16 specific recommendations, signed by
chairman Rep. Dale Milford (D-Tex), said the U.S. should establish a
comprehensive national policy on civil aviation R&D. (A&, Mar 77, 7)
April



April I : NASA reported it had begun working on its plan to make Ames
Research Center the lead center for helicopter research. Approved last
summer, the plan resulted from NASA’s assessment of its research to see
where realignment would improve effectiveness and reduce costs. As lead
center, ARC would do research on small- and large-scale helicopter hard-
ware using its aeronautical facilities such as the 40x 80ft wind tunnel and
flight-simulation equipment, and flight-test items like the tilt-rotor and
rotor-systems research aircraft.
   A helicopter program office at NASA Hq would direct the overall
helicopter program and coordinate research between ARC and the
Langley and Lewis Research Centers. LaRC, working mainly on
helicopter structures, would continue its studies of acoustics, airfoils,
aeroelasticity, and avionics. LeRC would continue to emphasize propul-
sion, its first task being a proposed new program in helicopter transmis-
sion technology leading later to work on helicopter engines.
   NASA estimated that over the next 3yr the change would result in add-
ing 72 positions to the ARC staff; LaRC helicopter work would phase
down during that period but would continue to employ 72. The expected
growth in long-haul aircraft technology at LaRC would add up to little
long-term impact on that center’s manpower or the local economy.
(NASA Release 77-8; ARC Release 77-19)

  Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had commenced studies
0

on turbulence caused by insects sticking to aircraft wings. It would use a
small jet transport flown at low altitudes to collect insects on the wings,
in turbulence tests at higher altitudes and greater speeds. The Johnson
and Kennedy Space Centers would assist the studies aimed at developing
high-speed fuel-efficient aircraft, by taking advantage of their differing
insect populations. (DFRC Release 13-77; KSC Release 93-77)

  KSC reported that the number of visitors in the first 3mo of 1977 was
0

283 734; the number in March, 114 845, highest so far this yr was 2.8%
below the March 1976 level. The 3mo total was 9.3470 less than the first
3mo of 1976. The visitor center had displays, exhibits, space science lec-
tures, and space movies, plus a new hall of history opened in 1976.
Visitors could see the vehicle assembly building for Space Shuttle
preparations and the Apollo Saturn on display nearby, drive around Pad

                                                                         61
APRIL                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



A where Shuttle operations were in progress, and visit the Cape
Canaveral Air Force station. (KSC Release 87-77)

   LaRC announced that Dr. Charles Thiel, director of the Natl. Science
0

Foundation's advanced environmental research division, would speak at
the LaRC colloquium Apr. 11 on earthquakes. Dr. Thiel had been in
charge of U.S. research on earthquake phenomena for the past 5yr and
had traveled the world to view effects of quakes, analyze prediction
techniques, and evaluate construction practices in quake-prone regions.
His illustrated talk would cover causes and probabilities of quakes, with
modern methods of forecasting and monitoring them. (LaRC Release
77-9)

   NASA announced appointment of Dr. John R. Carruthers as first
director of a new division in the Hq Office of Applications that would
manage materials processing in space. Dr. Carruthers, formerly of Bell
Labs, had headed crystal-growth and glass research in developing optical
fibers for lightwave communications. (NASA Release 77-67)

   Reform of the aviation industry was in order, Transportation Dept.
0

Secy. Brock Adams told the aviation subcommittee of the Senate Com-
mittee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Regulatory changes
should include freer entry into the system, competition in routes and
rates, and provisions for exiting the system. Any changes should protect
service to smaller communities, he said, and should address the problems
of how market shifts would affect airline users and of financial damage
to airport owners and airline investors. Secy. Adams noted that the presi-
dent should retain his authority over international aviation, since the
Constitution required him to conduct foreign policy there as well as in
other fields. (DOT Release 44-77)

April 4: The rapid approach of the Martian winter, whose temperatures
would fall below - 123"C, had halted science experiments using the Vik-
ing 2 lander, NASA announced. Problems with the lander's sample arm
had forced controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to cancel a final
biology experiment. The meteorology station and the seismic instrument
would use power to gather data during the winter; all other power would
go toward maintaining survivable heat levels inside the lander. (NASA
Release 77-69)

  Aviation Week reported that President Carter had nominated
0

Langhorne M. Bond, state secretary of transportation for Illinois, to
head the Federal Aviation Administration, and Quentin Taylor, FAA

62
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 APRIL



director in New England, as deputy administrator. (AvWk, Apr 4/77,
23)

  The Apollo program was a tough act to follow, Space Shuttle pilot Lt.
Col. Charles Fullerton said in a Today wire service report. Acknowledg-
ing the declining public interest in space, Fullerton noted that, after
Apollo, “Everything else has to be anticlimactic.” (Today,Apr 4/77, 1A)

April 5: NASA, which had issued a press kit on plans for an April 15
launch of the high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-A, said it had
postponed the launch because of a malfunction in one of the gyroscopes
controlling altitude, essential to the mission. The agency had not set a
new date for the launch; it had returned the defective gyroscope to the
manufacturer, Bendix Corp., in Teterboro, N.J. (NASA Releases 77-45,
77-71; Marshall Star, Apr 6/77, 1)

   NASA announced it would join EPA and the Univ. of Md. in sponsor-
ing a conference on the use of remote sensing to solve Chesapeake Bay
ecological problems. The 80 participants would discuss use of satellites
(particularly NASA’s earth resources monitoring satellite Landsat) to ob-
tain information on land use, resources exploitation, and pollution.
(NASA Release 77-70)

   Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $918 523 contract
0

to T.H. Taylor Construction Co., Montgomery, Ala., for construction
of permanent and semipermanent steel working platforms on the
modified dynamic test stand. The stand would hold an entire Space Shut-
tle assembly during mated vertical ground-vibration tests scheduled for
1978. (MSFC Release 77-54)

  NASA announced that Miles Ross, KSC deputy director since 1971,
0

had resigned to become European regional manager in Brussels for his
previous employer, TRW Systems Intl. (NASA Release 77-76; KSC
Release 88-77)

April 6: NASA announced it would join the EPA in field-testing a new
detector of fecal coliform bacteria at the New York Bight off Craven
Point, N. J. The electrochemical monitor, developed by Dr. Judd
Wilkins of LaRC, was a buoy with 10 coliform-sampling units and a
transmitter to relay data to a monitoring center in a NASA truck on
shore about 3mi away. Surveillance of fecal coliform concentrations
would measure the environmental impact of public sanitation. (NASA
Release 77-73; LaRC Release 77-1 1)

                                                                      63
APRIL                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   NASA reported that Goddard Space Flight Center engineers had
0

tracked a sailboat through the Bermuda Triangle to test the use of
satellites for small craft search-and-rescue missions. Signals from a small
transmitter on the vessel, relayed by meteorological satellite Nimbus 6
and applications technology satellite Ats I, allowed GSFC controllers to
monitor the ship’s position. The experiment also successfully tested a
push-button distress-alarm system designed by retired NASA engineer
James L. Baker. (NASA Release 77-72)

   MSFC announced it had awarded a $276 597 contract to Bryson Con-
0

struction Co., Decatur, Ala., for modification of the Redstone Arsenal
airfield to accept the Space Shuttle and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft.
The contractor would install a concrete pad 75m long and 55m wide for a
derrick to unload the orbiter from the 747. (MSFC Release 77-56)

  LaRC reported that its visitor center was showing a NASA film,
0

“Universe,” one of 5 documentaries recently nominated for a motion pic-
ture Academy Award. The 28min Graphic Films Corp. movie, showing
an imaginary trip through space, offered a new look at the solar system,
the release said. (LaRC Release 77-10)

  The Carter administration would not request government funds to
0

develop a supersonic airliner, OMB Director Bert Lance assured Sen.
William Proxmire (D-Wis). The Chicago Tribune story noted that Prox-
mire, who had worked to defeat the U.S. supersonic transport program
in 1972, was concerned because the House Committee on Science had
asked NASA to do a feasibility study on advanced supersonic aircraft. (C
Trib, Apr 6/77, 1-5)

April 7: MSFC announced it had begun test assembly of large-scale space
structures in its neutral buoyancy facility. The NBF, a 12m-deep water
tank simulating the weightless environment of space, was in use for the
first time since the Skylab program. (MSFC Release 77-57)

  The liquid-oxygen tank of the Space Shuttle’s external tank had
undergone successful hydrostatic tests at NASA’s Michoud Assembly
Facility near New Orleans, MSFC reported. Martin Marietta Aerospace,
prime ET contractor, had scheduled additional tests to simulate flight
pressures. (MSFC Release 77-58)

  NASA officials, assuming a constant purchasing power for the agency
over the next 10 to 15yr, had made plans for some 560 Shuttle flights be-
tween 1980 and 1991, averaging 60 flights per yr between 1985 and 1991,
Nature reported. Assuming a maximum payload of about 29 500kg,

64
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1911                                     APRIL



Shuttle users (including NASA, DOD, other government agencies,
private industry, and foreign organizations) would pay fees from $3000
for a simple automatic payload to $20 million for the entire cargo bay.
NASA had claimed a 40% savings in launch costs for the Shuttle com-
pared to expendable rockets; a higher discount for U.S. users would in-
crease its cost-effectiveness. Nature said early Shuttle critics, like space
scientists who viewed it as a competitor for limited NASA resources,
were now supporting the Shuttle as a research tool. (Nature, Apr 7/77,
489)

* Spacelab, ESA’s manned reusable space laboratory scheduled to fly on
the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments in life, physical, and
materials science, Nature reported. Although Spacelab’s multinational
management and unique financing scheme (ESA members would pay for
the laboratory on a voluntary basis) could limit its scientific potential,
participants would receive a proportionate share of construction con-
tracts and experiment facilities. Management problems included the
question of apportioning payment of NASA’s $10 million launch fee.
(Nature, April 7/77, 491)

* ComSatCorp, in a notice of its upcoming election of directors, said the
nominees for a first term were Howard J. Morgens, director and chair-
man emeritus of Procter & Gamble; and Charles J. Pilliod, Jr., board
chairman and chief executive officer of Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.
The other 10 nominees were current board members. (ComSat Release
77-14)

April 8: President Carter announced that the U.S. would “defer in-
definitely” commercial reprocessing and recycling of plutonium from
nuclear power plants, and would stop developing a commercial breeder-
reactor (a nuclear power facility producing more fuel than it consumed),
the Chicago Tribune reported. Critics had contended the reactor would
increase proliferation of nuclear weapons. The administration would
significantly increase funding for solar energy research and synthetic
production of oil and gas from coal, the paper said. (C Trib, Apr 8/77,
1-2)

* INTELSAT, the Intl. Telecommunications Satellite Organization,
reported it had appointed three deputy directors general to serve under
Director General Santiago Astrain: Reginald Westlake of the U.K. for
finance; Andrea Caruso of Italy for administration; and H. William
Wood, formerly with the U.S. Navy and Defense Communications
Agency and systems management director for ComSatCorp, to supervise
operations and development. Transfer of functions from ComSat, cur-

                                                                         65
APRIL                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



rent contractor for management services, to the INTELSAT executive
would occur over the next 2yr. (INTELSAT Release 77-5-1)

April 9: Kitt Peak astronomers had suggested designs for a telescope 5
times larger than the 4.5m telescope at Mt. Palomar, Calif., to comple-
ment the Very Large Array radiotelescopes in New Mexico and the
planned Space Telescope, the NY Times reported. An instrument using
multiple-mirror technology (several mirrors connected by laser, aligned
by computer to within an eighth of the wavelength of the observed light)
would have the light-gathering potential of a huge single mirror without
the high cost of manufacture or maintenance. The resolution possible
with such telescopes would permit observation of weather patterns on
other planets. (NYT, Apr 9/77, 22)

* Operators of the Anglo-French supersonic airliner Concorde had
claimed that new flight procedures would lower Concorde noise levels to
those of subsonic aircraft, and should get it approved to land at Kennedy
Intl. airport.
  A 40-page report to the NY Port Authority, obtained by the NY
Times, said that Concorde takeoff noise (though it would affect a larger
area than noise from other aircraft) was actually comparable to noise
from the long-range Boeing 707. The Concorde had also met airport
noise standards. Residents of the Five Towns area of Long Island, who
had opposed Concorde overflights, would be subject to fewer than
originally planned, the report added. Port Authority commissioners,
scheduled to meet during the upcoming week, had refused to make a
decision without spending more time on the report. (NYT, Apr 9/77,22)

April ZZ: A v Wk reported that French space technicians would be allowed
on site at the USSR’s Kapustin Yar launch facility for the first time when
the Soviets launched Signe 3 in June. Swedish technicians had been pre-
sent there last July 27 when Intercosmos 16 carried a Swedish solar ex-
periment into space. Third French satellite scheduled for launch by the
USSR, Signe 3 was designed by France’s Natl. Center for Space Studies
(CNES) for astronomical and atmospheric research; it had arrived at the
USSR Cosmic Research Institute recently for launch preparation.
(AvWk, Apr ZZ/77, 9)

April 12: GSFC controllers and Navy meteorologists at the U.S. Navy
Fleet Weather Facility in Suitland, Md., had used since 1971 a
microwave radiometer on weather satellite Nimbus 5 to track an Antarc-
tic iceberg the size of Rhode Island, NASA reported. Satellite tracking
had allowed Navy forecasters to minimize ice damage to ships in polar
ice fields. (NASA Release 77-68)

66
    ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   APRIL



    April 13: NASA announced that principal investigators for Spacelab ex-
    periments would attend briefings at MSFC Apr. 13 to 15 on Spacelab
    mission management as an Investigative Working Group (IWG). Dr.
    C.R. Chappell, mission scientist at the MSFC space sciences laboratory,
    and Dr. Bernt Feuerbacher, ESA project scientist, as IWG chairman and
    vice chairman, would channel recommendations on selection of payload
    specialists directly to management. (NASA Release 77-77; MSFC Release
    77-61)

       The Dept. of Commerce reported that a Boeing 747 in regular
    0

    passenger service for Pan American World Airways had been doing dou-
    ble duty as a flying laboratory for 2 government agencies, NASA and
    N O M , carrying an electronic package collecting data from the plane’s
    instruments to show that ordinary planes could get weather information
    in flight and relay it to the ground. This yr, five more packages would be
    put on planes of international carriers.
.      The prototype package, weighing about lSkg and the size of an electric
    typewriter, used about 200w power and transmitted at 401.7MHz. LeRC
    had built the package under technical management from GSFC to tap
    into the inertial-navigation systems of widebodied jets like the 747 and
    DC-10 series, recording data on air temperature, wind direction and
    speed, and aircraft location and altitude. The package converted the data
    to a format transmitted hourly to the ground through NOAA’s Goes 1.
       The idea was to enable planes flying over areas where such informa-
    tion was sparse or unobtainable to collect and transmit the data as a help
    to aircraft operations as well as to weather prediction and analysis.
    NOAA had begun negotiations with foreign weather services and inter-
    national airlines to put the packages on their aircraft, especially those
    flying over equatorial regions. (NOAA Release 77-91)

       The Natl. Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., counted its 7
    0

    millionth visitor, Mrs. Elizabeth Weber of Queens, N.Y. However, she
    and many other visitors exemplified the fading public interest in space:
    none of them recognized the date as the 16th anniversary of Yuri
    Gagarin’s historic feat, man’s first spaceflight.
       A NY Times article contrasted the festive feeling at the museum (the
    capital’s largest tourist draw) and the almost melancholy mood at NASA
    Hq across the street. NASA employees had cause for despair, said the ar-
    ticle, with a space program rarely in the public eye and funding that had
    delayed long planned projects. Even President Carter, during a cursory
    30-minute inspection of the museum, omitted mention of the space pro-
    gram or the space agency. (NYT, Apr 13/77, D-10)

    April 14: NASA reported that it and the’European Space Agency (ESA)

                                                                           67
APRIL                                    ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



had invited scientists to propose experiments for a joint out-of-ecliptic
(OOE) mission in 1983 that would study the interstellar/interplanetary
medium as a function of solar latitude. Although the mission still lacked
Congress’s approval, the agency wanted proposals for investigations that
would allow definition of the undertaking and give it a prompt start
when approved.
  As planned, the Shuttle would launch 2 spacecraft (one supplied by
NASA, one by ESA) on similar paths from earth to Jupiter, deflected by
that planet’s gravity into trajectories at right angles to the plane of earth’s
orbit. One craft would enter over the sun’s northern hemisphere, the
other over the southern; both would reach solar latitudes near the sun’s
pole. So far studies of the sun had covered only a narrow region on the
ecliptic plane; the OOE, or solar polar, mission would look at the sun
over a full range of heliographic latitudes and enable more accurate
assessment of the total solar environment. The mission would last about
5yr. (NASA Release 77-79)

  NASA announced award of $350 OOO design study contracts both to
0

McDonnell Douglas Corp., St. Louis, Mo., and to a team representing
Hughes Aircraft Co., El Segundo, Calif., and General Electric Co. in
Philadelphia. The companies would develop for NASA’s Jupiter-orbiter
mission a probe able to measure the Jovian atmosphere during descent.
The mission wouId reach Jupiter in 1984 if the project were approved for
FY 1978. ARC would manage development of the probe under JPL’s
general direction. (NASA Release 77-78; ARC Release 77-20)

   KSC announced it had awarded a $39 812 contract to Ky. State Univ.
0

for continuing research on effects of prolonged exposure of experimental
animals to variations in the atmospheric level of oxygen. Previous studies
in the field had been on short-term exposure to 100% oxygen, but little
was known about prolonged exposure to oxygen at low to moderate
concentrations.
   Ky. State’s first grant for this work in March 1974 had exposed vinegar
flies to higher levels of oxygen than normal and drastically shortened the
life span, whereas exposure to lower than normal levels had greatly
reduced reproductive capacity. This work had also suggested that certain
individuals might prove better adapted genetically for survival in abnor-
mal oxygen environments. The findings would be useful in planning at-
mospheres for long-term manned space missions aboard the Space
Shuttle or on space colonies. (KSC Release 91-77)

 KSC announced award of a $95 025 OOO contract to the Space
0

Division, Rockwell Intl. Corp., Downey, Calif., for activation of the
Space Shuttle facilities and systems, and for Orbiter support during

68
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   APRIL



checkout, launch, and postflight operations, in the first six Space Shuttle
missions. Rockwell would also support postflight operations at the
DFRC landing site for the first four missions. (KSC Release 92-77)

  MSFC announced it had requested price quotations on designing a
0

space spider (a device capable of building large-scale structures). The
spider, containing prefabricated materials, would attach itself to the core
of a planned structure and spin a larger structure, of any diameter,
around the core. MSFC engineers had sought estimates of costs and data
on the best size of spider to fit inside the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release
77-62)

  Wallops Flight Center announced it‘ would welcome visitors to the
0

rocket launching facilities on Wallops Island Apr. 23-24 as part of a
special observance by federal actkties in the area. Assateague Natl.
Seashore Park, Chincoteague Coast Guard Base, Chincoteague Natl.
Wildlife Refuge, the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
and Wallops Flight Center had all planned special exhibits or tours.
Visitors to Wallops Island could drive their own cars to see launch pads,
rocket storage structures, long-range tracking radars, weather towers,
blockhouses, rocket assembly shops, actual launch vehicles, and related
range facilities. Cameras would be welcome. The main NASA base
would not be included in the visit. (WFC Release 77-2)

   Nature magazine reported further on the recognition of ring systems
9

around the planet Uranus announced earlier by Dr. James L. Elliot of
Cornel1 Univ. [see March 311. The occultation (shutting off from view)
by Uranus of a bright object (star SA0 158687 in Libra) had been
predicted by the Royal Observatory at Greenwich as visible only from an
area on earth extending from equatorial Africa across the Indian Ocean
to western Australia. No useful observations of a Uranian occultation
had been made before; astronomers considered such observations
important because they could furnish data on the size of the planet or
stellar object, on limb darkening, and on extent and composition of any
atmosphere, as well as an accurate measurement of the object’s position,
valuable in calculations of celestial mechanics.
   Heavy rain at Johannesburg prevented observations there on March
10, but astronomers on the Kuiper observatory plane flying over the
southern Indian Ocean east of Kerguelen Is. were able to see an occulta-
tion lasting about 25min with secondary occultations lasting 8 to 9min
before and after. Observers at Madras and Perth also viewed the event
and decided independently that the extended occultation resulted from
satellites forming a belt about 48 O O m from the center of Uranus. The
                                    Ok
belt was apparently circular, lying in the plane of the planet’s equator,

                                                                        69
APRIL                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



and about 12 O O m wide. Nature reported that Dr. Elliot was continu-
                Ok
ing detailed study of the event, and that direct observation of the belts
might be possible with a sufficiently large telescope. (Nature, April
14/77, 587)

April 15: JSC announced award of a $5 189 500 supplement to an ex-
isting contract with Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division, Downey, Calif.,
covering 8 engineering changes in the Space Shuttle orbiter to
accommodate the European-built Spacelab in the Shuttle’s cargo bay.
(JSC Release 77-26)

  Industrial exploration had made sweeping changes in today’s society,
0

ranging from thumbnail-size computers to Space Shuttles operating with
the regularity of commercial airlines, Rockwell Intl. chairman W.F.
Rockwell, Jr., told the annual Explorers Club dinner in New York City.
A microprocessor small enough to balance on the end of a thumb could
compute 10 times faster than a 30-ton device introduced in 1946, and
would cost $15 to $20, compared to the millions of dollars that the old
computer cost, he said. Forecasting the potential of the Shuttle, being
developed largely by Rockwell for NASA, he reviewed possible payloads
including solar power satellites and navsats; he ended by comparing ex-
plorers setting out in search of new discoveries and new knowledge with
the explorers in industry searching to improve products and service.
(Rockwell Release R- 18)

  ERDA announced it had selected Shenandoah, Ga., as the site for
0

building a second solar total-energy experimental plant. The factory,
manufacturing knitwear, would be the first in the U.S. to get all its
electric power, steam, heating, and cooling from solar energy. A West
German firm, Wilhelm Bleyle K.G., would operate the factory and the
Georgia Power Co. would operate the solar-energy plant to provide up to
200kw of electricity and 1200kw of heat energy. Construction should
begin in 1979 and be completed in 1981.
   Robert Fri, acting ERDA administrator, said the knitwear factory
would demonstrate the production of hot water and steam as byproducts
of solar-power generation, making year-round use of the heat that would
otherwise be wasted during the mild weather of spring and fall in that
area. ERDA had planned another experimental total solar-energy plant,
scheduled to begin construction in 1978 to serve Ft. Hood army base in
Killeen, Tex. (ERDA Release 77-70)

April 18: The Viking I lander’s gas-exchange experiment had developed a
leak during the final analysis of soil from a deep trench at the Chryse
Planitia landing site, NASA reported. Failure of the gas-exchange

IO
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   APRIL



package, designed to detect respiration in soil samples, would not affect
the lander’s other biology experiments. (NASA Release 77-82)

  MSFC reported it had purchased 5 large solar collectors to heat an ex-
0

hibit at the Ala. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The collectors
would provide 70% of the heat for the Lunar Odyssey, a space voyage
simulation in a modified Sdturn launch vehicle. (MSFC Release 77-65)

  MSFC announced it would sponsor a 2-day symposium May 11-12 on
engineering and productivity advances from space technology. The
center’s technology utilization office and the Huntsville chapter of the
Ala. Society of Professional Engineers would cosponsor discussions by
speakers from industry, universities, NASA, and other government
agencies on industrial uses of space technology in energy management,
materials processing, and electronics. (MSFC Release 77-66)

   A Space Shuttle orbital-maneuvering system engine had completed
0

acoustic environment testing at JSC, and a second engine had fired lo00
times in life-cycle testing at the White Sands, N.M., test facility, Avia-
tion Week reported. The latter achievement demonstrated the engine’s
ability to perform 100 missions, a project requirement. (AvWk, Apr
18/77, 13)

  Rockwell Intl.’s Space Division and Autonetics group had won an Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) design competition for a Teal
Ruby sensor to detect and track aircraft targets from space, AvWk
reported. The DOD sensor, using up to a quarter million mosaic infrared
detectors with charge-coupled processors, would fly on the Space Shuttle
in 1980. A Lockheed-Grumman team had also competed. (AvWk,         Apr
18/77, 13)

   During confirmation hearings, Dr. Frank Press, President Carter’s
0

nominee as director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, had
stated that NASA should broaden the scope of its technology-transfer ef-
forts and its planned use of the Space Shuttle, AvWk reported. The ad-
ministratiofi should continue funding planetary exploration and space
science (areas adaptable to the Shuttle’s unique capabilities), but should
also make NASA’s technological knowledge available to industry. Press,
former chairman of MIT’s Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences,
had specialized in earthquake research and detection of underground
nuclear tests. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 21)

   Israel Aircraft Industries had modified an Arava twin-turboprop
transport plane using winglets designed by Richard T. Whitcomb of

                                                                        71
    APRIL                                  ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



    LaRC, Av Wk reported. Winglets would reduce drag during takeoff and
    enhance short takeoff and landing capabilities. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 21)

       NASA had decided to plan construction of an orbiting space station
    -from existing hardware because the Carter and Ford administrations had
~




     refused funds for major space station development, Av Wk reported.
     Four station concepts were under examination: increasing the duration
     of Space Shuttle missions, using Skylab Apollo telescope-mount
     components to supply additional electricity for any extended mission;
     making a Space Shuttle external fuel tank into a Skylab-type station [see
     Mar. 71; launching unmanned platforms to be occupied in the future;
     and modifying the ESA-NASA Spacelab to fly as an independent
     orb$ing laboratory, without Space Shuttle. (AvWk,Apr 18/77, 42)

    * Comsat General, wholly owned subsidiary of the Communications
    Satellite Corp., announced that former FAA administrator Dr. John L.
    McLucas had been elected president and a member of the board of
    directors. ComSatCorp. president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk said the
    subsidiary would benefit from Dr. McLucas’s “long and distinguished
    career as administrator, engineer, and scientist.” Holding a Ph.D in
    physics and electrical engineering from Penn. State Univ., Dr. McLucas
    had been president of the Mitre Corp. before serving as assistant
    secretary general for scientific affairs of NATO, undersecretary and
    secretary of the Air Force, and FAA administrator before April 1977.
      Programs engaged in by Comsat General included Marisat (maritime
    satellite communications), Comstar (domestic satcoms), and Satellite
    Business Systems, in which it shared with IBM and Aetna Casualty plans
    for a U S . domestic satcom system. (CGC Release 77-2)

     April 19: The gyroscope malfunction [see Apr. 51 that delayed the launch
     of HEAO-A planned for Apr. 15 would postpone the launch until mid-
     June or later, NASA reported. HEAO-A, which could observe the elec-
     tromagnetic spectrum at altitudes inaccessible to ground-based
     observers, would seek out celestial x-ray sources. (NASA Release 77-83)

        ASSESS 2 (airborne science/Spacelab experiment-system simulation),
     0

     scheduled on May 16-26 at ARC, would simulate a Spacelab mission us-
     ing NASA’s flying laboratory Galileo 2 (a converted Convair-990 jet
     transport) to acquire data on earth resources, atmospheric pollution, and
     infrared astronomy. A mobile van would isolate the crew (mission
     specialist Karl Henize of JSC and four payload specialists: Robert T.
     Menzies and David S. Billiu of JPL, and Claude Nicollier and Michael
     Taylor of ESA) when they were not flying. ASSESS 2 would also serve to

     12
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  APRIL



rehearse Spacelab’s joint NASA-ESA management. (NASA Release
77-80; ARC Release 77-21; MSFC Release 77-67)

April 20: NASA launched Geos I, planned as the first “purely scientific”
geosynchronous satellite, for ESA from Eastern Test Range on a Delta
rocket at 1015 GMT, into an anomalous transfer orbit (11,710km
perigee, 241.5km apogee, 26” inclination) because of premature separa-
tion of the Delta second and third stages. Failure to achieve spin
stabilization would prevent Geos I from attaining the desired geosyn-
chronous orbit. ESA planners said they would meet April 26 with the
mission’s prime investigators in an-attempt to salvage the $12 million
mission. Geos 1, chief tool of the Intl. Magnetospheric Project, carried
instruments to gather data on effects of the solar wind on earth’s
magnetic field. (NASA Release 77-66; MOR M-492-302-77-01 [preflight]
Apr 13/77, [postflight] Aug 10/77; ESA Release Apr 22/77; W Post,
Apr 21/77, B10)

* Rockwell Intl. Corp. reported higher earnings and sales for the second
quarter of FY 1977 in spite of a 3wk strike in its automotive operations
and an energy crisis last winter. Earnings of $36.2 million ($1.05 a share)
increased 13% over same quarter earnings in 1976, $32.1 million ($0.95 a
share). Robert Anderson, president of Rockwell, said the earnings
resulted partly from improvements in the aerospace operations area,
which had done more business in military aircraft. (Rockwell Release
R- 19)

April 21: The USAF reported it had begun joint research with LeRC on
use of synthetic fuels in military and commercial jet aircraft, which cur-
rently accounted for about 8% of the nation’s petroleum consumption.
The proposed lOyr study, costing $8 million, would look into the refining
required to use as fuel liquids derived from coal or oil shale.
  The USAF energy conservation effort arose from increasing fuel costs,
which more than tripled for military jets alone in the last 18mo. NASA
and the USAF had contracted with Exxon Corp. to define chemical and
physical properties of coal and oil shale synthetic crudes compared to
fuels derived from petroleum. Usability of the crudes would depend on
their adaptability to existing engine and component requirements and on
the environmental impact of such fuels. Processing (mostly hydro-
genation) of the synfuels would be costly but could be affected by more
specific data on engine and fuel system needs. Saving only 1CC per gallon
would save the USAF alone more than $50 million a year, the report
said. (USAF Release OIP 070.75)

    Columnist Jack Anderson reported in Today that a Senate sub-
0



                                                                         73
APRIL                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



committee had asked the Pentagon for military equipment, including
planes, radar, sensors, and satellites, to be used in the “battle against
drug abuse.”
   Senators Sam Nunn (D-Ga.) and Charles Percy (R-Ill.) had sent a
private letter to Defense Secy. Harold Brown saying that drug abuse was
costing the U.S. $17 billion a yr and that more than 5000 Americans were
dying each yr from drug abuse. DOD alone had the vehicles needed to
pursue and overtake the drug traffickers, the senators said, calling the
fight against drugs a “war.” “When fighting a war,” they added, “you use
the best resources available and make every effort to win. This is not be-
ing done.” A spokesman for the Pentagon said an answer was being
prepared. (Today, Apr 21/77, 16A)

April 22: JSC reported that its engineers had designed, built, and in-
stalled an emergency communications console at the medical center in
Odessa, Texas, control center for the 17-county Permian Basin
emergency medical system. The prototype console would allow physi-
cians and nurses to consult with paramedics in the field, receive incoming
electrocardiograms, set up radio-to-telephone patches, page hospital
staff members, and automatically dial special care centers and other
facilities in the area. After field tests and modification, JSC engineers
would make console plans available to interested communities,
according to a NASA announcement. (JSC Release 77-27; NASA
Release 77-86)

   MSFC announced receipt from Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., of the
first two integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle’s solid fuel
rocket boosters. Each SRB would contain 2 electronic assemblies to con-
trol communications and internal power distribution. (NASA Release
77-68)

April 25: NASA reported it had selected Trudy Tiedemann, former
public information specialist at DFRC, as its first female commentator.
She would serve as announcer during the Shuttle orbiter flight-test pro-
gram. (NASA Release 77-84)

  MSFC announced award of a 1-yr $450 540 contract to Sperry Univac,
0

Washington, D.C., for on-site maintenance of the center’s Univac 1108
computer system. (MSFC Release 77-69)

April 25-28: Controllers at ESA’s European space center at Darmstadt,
West Germany, had fired Geos Z’s apogee kick motor at 0738 GMT to
boost the satellite into a new 12hr elliptic orbit (38 498km apogee,
2131km perigee, 25.85’ orbital inclination) that would maximize return

74
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   APRIL



of scientific data. Although ESA officials had hoped to delay the orbit
change until after a meeting of Geos experimenters scheduled for April
26, the spacecraft’s anomalous transfer orbit, caused by a malfunction
during launch Apr. 20, had endangered its solar cell power supply. (ESA
Release Apr 25/77)
   ESA officials and Geos satellite experimenters during a meeting April
26 at the European space operations center in Darmstadt agreed on a se-
quence for experiment activation and boom deployment. After increas-
ing satellite “visibility” at the Odenwald ground station near ESOC by
moving the Geos I apogee from 90”E to 35”E, controllers planned to ex-
tend the short radial booms completely and the long booms to 10cm. If
this ploy worked, the 20m-long radial booms would extend completely
Apr. 30 to help establish the satellite’s moment-of-inertia ratio and
dynamic stability. (ESA Release Apr 27/77)
   Scientists of Geos I believed its new orbit, whose apogee was high as
that of the intended orbit, could salvage most of its scientific objectives,
Nature reported. The new path would put Geos I where ESA had
planned to orbit its spare “qualifications” geosynchronous satellite in
1979; launch costs had made use of the spare unlikely, the report said.
(Nature, Apr 28/77, 767)

April 26: Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle
employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from
the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported.
The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but
the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had
estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mis-
sion; the Shuttle program should continue for.at least 5yr, agency of-
ficials said. (NYT, Apr 26/77, 13)

April 27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified
the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter
possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr.
William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the find-
ings - first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in
1964-at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C.
If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges
of + 1, - 1, and 0, respectively), quarks-the building blocks of these
particles-would have fractional charges of + 1/3, - 1/3, +2/3, and
 - 2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the
university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NUT, Apr 27/77, A18)

April 29: MSFC announced award of a $110 096 contract to General
Dynamics Convair Div., San Diego, Calif., to study and define ideas for
APRIL                                  ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



an automatic structural-beam fabrication machine for use in the Space
Shuttle [see Mar. 11. The beams, made of a composite material, would
support large scale space structures and act as electrical and thermal in-
sulators. (MSFC Release 77-72)

  MSFC announced award of a $695 OOO contract to Rockwell Intl.
0

Space Div., Downey, Calif., for a study of solar power satellite systems.
The study would identify and suggest solutions for technical and social
problems that might occur in harnessing solar energy from space. (MSFC
Release 77-73)

During April: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. reported that Kingswood
Sprott, Jr., had broken his own world class hot air balloon altitude
record March 26 when he reached 41 Oooft over Lakeland, Fla. The
previous record set March 26, 1977, also by Sprott, had been 38 789ft.
(NAA newsletter Apr 77)

  Recent photographs of the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by
0

the Viking I orbiter in Feb., had revealed “the nature of that satellite in
unprecedented detail,” said Scientific American. Earlier pictures by
Mariner 9 or the Viking 2 orbiter were at a distance of 880km; the new
pictures were taken at a distance of 660km to as little as lOOkm, with
resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than 10m across.
The surface of Phobos was known to be pitted with craters from the im-
pact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of irregular craters like
those seen on the surface of the moon, although Phobos’s crater chains
paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars. Pictures from Viking 2 had
shown grooves on Phobos concentrated near its northern pole; the new
pictures defined the grooves as crater chains possibly caused by objects
hundreds of meters across. Further study of the images should reveal
more about the nature of Phobos, the magazine said. (SciAm, Apr 77,
57)

   Nature reported that the largest radiotelescope in the world-the
0

Soviet RATANdOO -was “at last” officially in operation at Zelenchuk,
USSR. A formal message of congratulations from Soviet leader Leonid
Brezhnev had been issued March 20. Constructed jointly by the USSR
Academy of Sciences, the Ministries of Power and Electrification and of
Power Plant Construction, and the Univ. of Moscow, the device had
four sections each able to operate independently. Part of the RATAN
had been receiving signals since 1974, Nature said, and had already
undertaken studies of the moons of Jupiter, the galactic nucleus, and the
fine radio structure of the sun. (Nature, Apr 7/77, 493)


76
May I : RCA (formerly the Radio Corporation of America) observed the
17th anniversary of the first weather picture received from space through
the first Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS), Today
newspaper reported. The 26011b TIROS delivered “a pretty shabby prod-
uct compared to today’s images from space,” RCA admitted. The
company had since built a series of 24 other weather watchers that had
taken 3.5 million pictures and logged more than 7 billion miles in orbit.
Managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the
spacecraft had gone from pinpointing major storms to predicting runoff
from snowmelt, helping ships navigate through icefields, and assisting
commercial fishermen to find promising areas for their efforts. RCA was
currently developing a fourth-generation TIROS. (Today, May 1/77,
18A)

May 2: Aviation.Week reported that a controversy within the U.S. in-
telligence community had kept the U.S. National Security Council and
the president from learning that the USSR had developed a directed-
energy weapon designed to destroy U.S. intercontinental and submarine-
launched ballistic missile nuclear warheads. (Directed-energy weapons
was a term coined to include both laser beam weapons and high energy
lasers.) Events that convinced some U.S. analysts that USSR weapons
were nearing prototype test stage included:
-Detection by a USAF early-warning system of large amounts of
gaseous hydrogen in the upper atmosphere with traces of tritium, con-
sidered relics of charged particle beam device tests carried out since 1975
at Semipalatinsk.
-USSR ground tests of a small high energy laser destined for spacecraft
launch, possibly related to manned space station activities.
-Tests of a new magnetohydrodynamic generator to provide power for
a charged particle beam system near the Caspian Sea, monitored by a
TRW early-warning satellite stationed over the Indian Ocean.
-Establishment of a new test site at Azghir, the Caspian Sea location,
under direct control of the USSR national air defense force.
-Confirmation by a USAF-sponsored team of U.S. physicists and
engineers that the USSR had achieved success in 7 areas of high energy
physics needed to develop a beam weapon.
-Admission by previously unconvinced U.S. physicists that the USSR

                                                                        77
MAY                                    ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



could have developed the technology for a charged particle beam device.
-Hints by a visiting Soviet physicist last summer that the USSR was far
ahead of the U.S. in controlling fusion by compression of small pellets of
thermal nuclear fuel, and thus in potential weapons based on fusion
technology. The information given by Leonid I. Rudakov during his visit
to the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory had later been classified top
secret by DOD and ERDA.
   Maj. Gen. George J. Keegan (USAF, Ret.), former head of Air Force
intelligence, had in 1975 reported to CIA head William Colby on Soviet
beam technology; the CIA’S nuclear intelligence panel had written a
report, no CODY of which was ever given to USAF intelligence.
  AvWk s a d Colby just before a meeting on strategic arms limitation
had notified then Secretary of State Henry Kissinger of a Soviet facility
“related to nuclear functions that were unknown”; except for that, no
mention of the beam weapon potential had ever been made to the
president, the secretary of state, or the National Security Council. A v Wk
also charged that influential U.S. physicists had sought to discredit Gen.
Keegan’s report, their general attitude being that “if the U.S. could not
successfully produce the technology to have a beam weapon, the
Russians certainly could not.” (AvWk, May 2/77, 16)
   The next issue of AvWk quoted President Jimmy Carter’s reply to a
query from the WashingtonPost’s Dave Broder on the report of a Soviet
                                            ..
breakthrough in high energy weapons: “. Is there any such develop-
ment and does it threaten the U.S.strategic deterrence?” Carter replied:
“We have no evidence, Dave, that the Soviets have achieved any major
breakthrough in the kind of weapon described . . . the assessment of the
report in the aviation magazine has been exaggerated.” (AvWk, May
9/77, 13)

May 3 Langley Research Center announced award of a 5yr $23 million
      :
contract to Wyle Laboratories for electronic instrument support to test
and research facilities at the center. The contract, running from Oct.
1977 through Sept. 1979 with options to extend for another 3yr, covered
inspection, calibration, maintenance, and satisfaction of measurement
requirements on some 30 OOO instruments and transducers valued at
more than $50 million; also, design, modification, and maintenance of
hardware and computer programs associated with digital data systems
and special purpose computers used in the research facilities. (LaRc
Release 77-15)

  The Senate confirmed the nomination of Dr. Richard C. Atkinson as
director of the National Science Foundation. (NASA Legis. Act. Rpt.,
May 3/77)

78
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 MAY



May 4: Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had awarded to the
Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Intl., a contract modification for additional
work and services to the Space Shuttle main engine program, covering
long leadtime hardware and material procurement to provide follow-on
engines. Each engine, designed for use up to 50 times before overhaul,
would be capable of 1 668 075 newtons (375K lb) of thrust at sea level
and 2 090 654 newtons (470K lb) at altitude. (MSFC Release 77-78)

  Ames Research Center reported that on May 10, 1 female volunteers
                                                    0
0

would complete a month-long test [see March 241 to set standards for
passengers on future spaceflights. The test included 9 days of total bed
rest, to simulate effects of weightlessness, and centrifuge rides to
simulate reentry into earth atmosphere. ARC had scheduled a press con-
ference to announce and discuss the results of the test; Dr. Harold
Sandler, principal investigator, would attend with members of his staff
and the volunteers. (ARC anno’May 4/77)

May 5: NASA announced it had awarded McDonnell Douglas Aircraft
Go. a 6.5yr, $15.6 million contract to develop and evaluate composite
vertical stabilizers for DC-10 transport aircraft. A NASA program called
ACEE (aircraft energy efficiency) would pursue the use of composite
materials to decrease structural weight of aircraft by about 25% and to
reduce fuel consumption by 1 to 15Vo .LaRC would manage work under
                               0
the contract at the Douglas plant in Long Beach. (NASA Release 77-89;
LaRC Release 77-16)

   NASA announced that Det Norske Meteorological Institute in Oslo,
0

Norway, had asked that the Nimbus 6 satellite help it track a huge oli
slick resulting from an oil well blowout in the North Sea. By May 1 the
                                                                   6
Norwegians would put 5 random-access measurement-system (RAMS)
buoys into the oil slick to send environmental information to the
spacecraft. Goddard Space Flight Center engineer William W. Conant,
noting that similar buoys earlier this year had helped the U.S. Coast
Guard track an oil slick off Nantucket Sound, said NASA would support
the Norwegian effort by transmitting locations of all the buoys twice
daily for 3 days, adding “We don’t normally provide daily teletype in-
            0
formation.” For more than a yr, the Norwegians had been tracking ice
drift in the Spitzbergen region north of Norway, using a RAMS system
as an accurate method of tracking in all weather. (NASA Release 77-30)

  Transportation Secretary Brock Adams gave Congress proposals by
the Carter administration to help the airlines finance modification or
replacement of commercial jet aircraft failing to meet FAA noise-level
standards, through revising the present 8% passenger ticket and waybill

                                                                      79
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
MAY


taxes now earmarked for the Airport and Airway Trust Fund. The Civil
Aeronautics Board would let the airlines add a 2% surcharge to be
deposited in a special environmental fund to pay for retrofitting existing
aircraft or acquiring replacement aircraft that would meet the new noise
standards. Airlines whose revenues reached a certain allowable cost level
would have the surcharge terminated. (DOT Release 55-77)

May 6: MSFC announced its engineers had found a new way to recondi-
tion and lengthen the lifespan of nickel-cadmium batteries used in low
earth orbit space missions. Using a device with a converter circuit and
load-resistor relays to ensure proper discharge and avoid damage to the
cells, the engineers had tested batteries with 2yr normal life in orbit, and
had kept them running for 4.5yr, the equivalent of 23 600 orbits. Main-
taining stored energy on low-orbit missions had been a NASA concern,
especially after a power failure during the Skylab I mission had meant a
loss of battery capacity that equipment then available could not correct
in orbit. Besides offering longer life and higher reliability, the new device
could detect low cell voltage and bypass failed cells. MSFC would build
and test a battery of 116 series cells, using the new device for protection
and reconditioning. (MSFC Release 77-8 1)

  MSFC announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Aerospace’s Denver
division a $928 217 contract for construction work on a test stand for the
Space Shuttle program. Modification of the giant hydrodynamic support
system last used for Saturn V dynamic tests in the 1960s would allow
mating all elements of the Shuttle for vertical ground tests scheduled to
begin in 1978. The complete vehicle (orbiter, external tank, and two solid
fuel rocket boosters) would occupy the stand together for the first time.
(MSFC Release 77-79)

   Earth-orbiting satellites had improved forecasts of water availability
0

and warned of impending low water supply as a valuable tool to water
management agencies in Arizona, California, Colorado, and Oregon,
NASA announced. Other cooperating agencies included the U.S.
Geological Survey, the U.S. Soil Conservation Service, the U.S. Bureau
of Reclamation, and the Bonneville Power Administration. The 4 states
had begun a combined 4yr operational program using NASA Landsat
earth resources satellites and Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration meteorological satellites to produce imagery of the snow
lines along the Sierra Nevada that was faster and less expensive than con-
ventional aerial surveys. Satellites also offered repeated mapping of the
same snow cover area with a relatively constant perspective.
   A continuing drought in the western U.S. had resulted from below-
normal snowfalls in the mountains, source of stream flow water supplies;

80
                                           ORjGi
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977




Landsat images of the same area of the Sierra Nevada show the difference in
snowcover between Feb. 1975 and Feb. 1977. The 1977 snowline was 2OOOft
higher than in 1975, a yr of near-normalsnowfall. Lake Tahoe is in the center of
both pictures. (NASA 77-H-225, -226)

reservoirs on the western slopes of the mountains had already dried up.
Some areas had experienced drought for a longer period than others;
Calif. had been hardest hit, with minimal snowfall in the Sierra Nevada
for the second consecutive yr. (NASA Release 77-91)

   ESA announced it had completed a revised program of switching on
0

and testing the Geos satellite launched Apr. 20, since a malfunction of
the launch vehicle had prevented the spacecraft from achieving its in-
tended geostationary orbit. The 7 experiments were reported opera-
tional, and the two 20m booms had been extended to 2.5m without dif-
ficulty. Although the satellite could transmit 8hr of data a day, only half
would be outside 5 earth radii (where the experiments had been designed
to operate). The booms should deploy fully during the upcoming wk; the
journal Nature called for prompt launch of the backup Geos. (ESA anno
May 6/77;Nature, May 5/77,8; May 12/77, 100)

* Science magazine carried an article by Drs. T.B.H. Kuiper of the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory and M. Morris of the Calif. Inst. of Technology
on the search fo1 extraterrestrial intelligence, based on extrapolations of
known physical processes and known behaviors of terrestrial animals
and humans. Concluding that interstellar travel would be practicable and
that advanced beings might have reasons for making contact with
humans, the authors reviewed the options and the interstellar-beacon fre-
quencies proposed for use in such contact. (Science, May 6/77,616)

May 9: Australia’s Minister for Science J. J. Webster announced that his
department had studied the technical feasibility of installing a temporary

                                                                              81
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
MAY



NASA satellite-tracking laser in the western area of the continent for use
in geodetic research, mapping, and earthquake prediction. NASA would
operate the laser for about a yr, beginning in mid-1978, but neither
government had made a final commitment. The proposed site in western
Australia would be part of a future network of tracking lasers scattered
around the world for use by geologists and geophysicists, in conjunction
with NASA’s Seqat and existing lasers such as the one near Canberra at
the Orroral Valley satellite-tracking station, to gather data for use in
research such as refining the measurement of the shape of the earth.
(NASA Release 77-92)

   Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber
0

to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in
research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in
its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by
decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber
tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms,
carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administra-
tion of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber)
for periods up to 24hr.
   The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s
immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC
had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release
101-77)

May 10: MSFC reported that the NASA barge Poseidon was on its way
to Seal Beach, Calif., to pick up a Space Shuttle orbiter simulator and
deliver it to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis,
Mo., to stand in for the orbiter during firings next year of the main pro-
pulsion test article, consisting of the simulator with an external tank and
thrust structure covering 3 main engines. MSFC had used the Poseidon
in the 1960s to move stages of Saturn rockets. (MSFC Release 77-84)

   MSFC announced completion of pressure and structural-load tests on
0

the liquid hydrogen tank that would be part of the Shuttle external tank
being built at the Michoid assembly facility by Martin Marietta
Aerospace. The tests to certify that the tank met design and manufactur-
ing standards included filling the tank with nitrogen at 42psi for 14hr and
applying hydraulic loads as high as 600tons where the orbiter and solid-
fuel rocket boosters would be attached. Largest of 3 major elements of
the external tank, the hydrogen container about 30m (97ft) long and
8.3m (27.6ft) in diameter would now go for cleaning, corrosion protec-
tion, and insulating. (MSFC Release 77-83)

82
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   MAY



May ZZ: Johnson Space Center announced it had awarded a $399 600
cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to ESL, Inc., of Sunnyvale, Calif., for using
Landsat data in a vegetation inventory for eastern Alaska under a NASA
project conducted jointly with the Bureau of Land Management. The
BLM had begun an automatic inventory system for 474 million acres
under its jurisdiction; the Alaska area would represent a tundra ecology.
If the joint task were successful, NASA had options for work on
grassland and sagebrush ecologies. (JSC Release 77-31)

  NASA announced it had awarded a $2.3 million contract to Douglas
Aircraft Co., as part of its aircraft energy efficiency (ACEE) program,
for improving wing lift-to-drag ratio to reduce fuel use. Douglas would
design and test a supercritical wing like that invented by LaRC’s Dr.
Richard Whitcomb, shaped to decrease shock waves on wing surfaces,
with a high aspect ratio (long span relative to its width). LaRC would
manage work to be done under the contract at the Douglas plant in Calif.
(NASA Release 77-93; LaRC Release 77-17)

   MSFC announced it had awarded a 45mo contract to the Universities
0

Space Research Association of Houston to provide support for develop-
ment of the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory, scheduled to fly as
a partial payload twice a year on Spacelab beginning in 1980 or 1981. The
Texas-based consortium would review proposals for scientific ex-
periments and provide a liaison between NASA and the cloud-physics
community as an aid to the project scientist. (MSFC Release 77-86)

   Strategic arms limitation might suffer another blow, the Washington
0

Post said in a column by Victor Zorza, from the USSR’s test of a killer
satellite viewed by the U.S. as a new weapon intended to deactivate U.S.
observation satellites if and when the Soviets decided to launch a first
strike. Zorza noted that current agreements did not cover hunter-killer
satellites; by the time a aew agreement was reached, both powers might
have passed another point of no return in the arms race. ( W Post, May
11/77, A21)

May 12: The U.S. Air Force launched a pair of “jam-proof” Triple-7
defense satellite communications system spacecraft from Cape
Canaveral Air Force Station at 10:27am on a Martin Marietta Titan 3C
booster, largest developed by the USAF, into an elliptical parking orbit
with 35 943km (22 333mi) apogee, 285km (177mi) perigee, and 26.6” in-
clination. At 5:30pm the USAF confirmed that the two 13001b spacecraft
had separated and had been fired by the Titan third stage into stationary
orbit at about 22 300mi where they would remain for 2mo above the
Galapagos Islands in the Pacific for system checkout.

                                                                       83
MAY                                    ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



  The two satellites (fourth attempt in 6yr to launch a Triple-7 package,
but only the second successful one), with a DSCS already in orbit and
another pair scheduled for launch in November, would form a global
communications network that the USAF had been trying to establish for
several yr. A Titan 3C malfunction in 1975 had prevented an earlier pair
of spacecraft from akhieving orbit. (Today, May 12/77, 12A; May
13/77, 1A; C T i ,May 14/77, 1-9; NYT, May 11/77, 19; AvFVk, May
                rb
16/77, 19)

   NASA announced that simulation of a 1980s Spacelab mission using
0

the Galileo I1 (a Convair 990 jet transport converted to a sophisticated
flying laboratory) would begin May 16 with the first of nine daily 6hr
flights from ARC carrying four payload specialists and a mission
specialist. Known as ASSESS (airborne science/Spacelab equipment-
system simulation), the flights would rehearse NASA and ESA personnel
in the roles they would perform in actual Spacelab missions, giving the
managers practice in coordinating payload management between experi-
ment operators on Spacelab and investigators on the ground [cf. Apr.
191. The actual missions would be the first chance for scientific personnel
without astronaut training to obtain in orbit data on earth resources, in-
frared astronomy, medicine, and atmospheric pollution.
   The Spacelab program that began in 1972 had included 6 simulations
to gather data on Shuttle-Spacelab operations; the first set of flights,
called ASSESS 1, had consisted of 5 simulations on Galileo over 6 days
in June 1975. The new series, ASSESS 2, would fly a different route each
of the 9 days, ranging over the Pacific and to the northern and southern
borders of the United States, as far east as the Dakotas, and would end
May 26. The Galileo I1 would fly to Paris May 30 for exhibition at the
Paris Air Show, then fly to Cologne in West Germany where the ESA ex-
periments would be removed.
   Mission specialist on ASSESS 2 would be astronaut Karl Henize of
JSC with astronaut Robert Parker, also of JSC, as backup. NASA
payload specialists on ASSESS 2 would be David S. Billiu and Robert T.
Menzies of JPL, with Leon Weaver of MSFC as backup to both; ESA
payload specialist would be Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, with
Juergen Fein of West Germany as backup. The other payload specialist
position would be shared by Michael Taylor of England (on 6 flights)
and Klaus Kramp of West Germany (on 3 flights). The simulation would
confine the crew to the aircraft and an adjacent mobile van containing
living quarters similar to those available on the Shuttle. (NASA Release
77-94; ESA anno May 10/77)

* The Natl. Space Club announced that Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director
of GSFC since July 1976, would speak at its May 26 luncheon. Dr.

84
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                      MAY



Cooper came to NASA from DOD, where he had been assistant director
for research and engineering since 1972, heading establishment of the
joint services NavStar global positioning system. He had begun at Mass.
Inst. of Technology in 1958 as instructor of electrical engineering, was
assistant professor there from 1963 to 1966, and had been a manager at
MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory until joining DOD. (NSC anno May 12/77)

May 13: JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a
7-day simulation of a typical Spacelab mission planned for the Space
Shuttle in the 1980s. Living aboard a high-fidelity mockup of the
Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would be physician Dr. William
E. Thornton, mission specialist, and Dr. Carter Alexander, payload
specialist, both of JSC, plus payload specialist Dr. Bill A. Williams of
ARC. Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health serv-
ices for the simulation crew.
   ARC had shipped a rack of 20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the
simulation, and JSC had provided 6 other experiments. Life sciences
payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab
missions to show the effects of space on living organisms, improve health
care for the crews of actual missions, and help in designing life-support
systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC
Release 77-32)

May 15: NASA announced the expected arrival of a USSR research ship
off the Virginia coast near Wallops Flight Center about June 1 to par-
ticipate in a series of rocket launches to investigate ionization sources in
earth’s upper atmosphere. The research ship Professor Vize would
operate offshore as the Soviet launch platform. The joint American-
Soviet particle intercalibration (JASPIC) project would compare tech-
niques used by both nations to measure the intensity of electrons and
protons entering the lower ionosphere, and to define the role of these
particles in nighttime ionization of the lower ionosphere in the
midlatitudes, thought to cause high-latitude auroras.
   The researchers would base comparisons on results of 4 sounding-
rocket launches from Wallops and 5 Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from
the ship. One of the NASA rockets would release a chemical cloud that
might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint activity in Aug. 1976
had launched 22 pairs of rockets over a 2wk period. U.S. and Sov et
scientists had decided in 1975 that discrepancies shown by the scientific
literature in measurements of ionosphere energetic particles might arise
from instrumentation differences, and had agreed to joint measurements
and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place. (NASA Release
78-7 1)

                                                                         85
MAY                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   Airline service between the U.S. and the United Kingdom might be
disrugted by failure to agree on new rules for sharing the traffic,
Transportation Secy. Brock Adams told the Washington Post. The Ber-
muda Agreement that had governed air transportation between the two
countries since 1946 would expire in June, and talks had begun in Sept.
1976 on new provisions. The British government was said to want exactly
half the passengers traveling between the two nations or their territories
to fly on British carriers, although almost two-thirds of the passengers
were Americans. U.S. officials were reported in dismay at the British de-
mand for a bigger share of the traffic, although the U.K. had earned $1.4
billion in revenues from aviation and tourism combined, 55% of the
total between the two countries.

   The U.S. had generally viewed international aviation as part of its
overall foreign policy, whereas other nations generally had a single car-
rier either publicly owned or publicly supported whose officials were in-
terested solely in increasing their carrier’s share of passengers; U.S.
philosophy had favored more rather than less competition in both
domestic and international aviation, U.S. Ambassador Alan S. Boyd,
who would head the U.S. delegation to the talks, said he could give “a
succinct summary of our differences . . . The United States wants equal
opportunity for all carriers; the British want equal benefits.” A complica-
tion would be the New York port authority’s refusal to allow British and
French Concordes to land at JFK Airport, declared unlawful by a recent
court decision presently under appeal. (W Post, May 15/77,K1)

  The W Post reported that 9 USSR ships would join U.S. ships during
June in “Polimode,” a joint study of ocean currents in the so-called Ber-
muda Triangle where numbers of ships over the years had disappeared
without trace, inspiring best-selling books on the subject. A USSR
research team had detected by satellite “powerful whirl formations” ex-
tending hundreds of miles and resembling cyclones on land, the
Washington Post said. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the formations
apparently reached from the surface to a depth of several thousand
yards. (W Post, Parade, May 15/77,6)

  Threats to the earth’s ozone layer remained a matter for concern,
0

Walter Sullivan reported in the N Y Times, especially fluorocarbons
widely used as aerosol propellants and accumulating as chlorine
byproducts in the atmosphere where they would break down ozone and
expose the earth to more ultraviolet light. Health records from the
United Nations had shown that people living in low latitudes where the
ozone layer was thinner and sunlight more abundant had a markedly
higher rate of skin cancers, especially of the often fatal melanoma.

86
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                      MAY



Although some scientists noted that atmospheric ozone would normally
vary with latitude, season, and even with the sunspot cycle, public health
officials said any total increase in ultraviolet exposure would probably
increase the incidence of cancer.
   Other dangers to the ozone layer included supersonic planes and other
high-flying aircraft, nuclear explosions, and the heavy use of nitrogen
fertilizers. The Natl. Academy of Science had proposed outlawing
fluorocarbon gases as propellants except in medical products. (NYT,
May 15/77, 4-9)

May 26: NASA announced that the 10th annual U.S. industrial film
festival had presented the Chairman’s Special Award, Best of Festival, to
NASA’s motion picture “Universe.” Finalists among 970 movies from 5
nations were the NASA film, the Smithsonian Institution’s “TOFly,” and
IBM’s “Parade of the Tall Ships.” Produced for NASA by Graphic
Films, “Universe” had also received an Academy Award nomination, a
CINE gold-eagle rating, and awards from the San Francisco and Golden
Gate Festivals. It Would be the U.S. entry in a number of international
film festivals during 1977. (NASA Release 77-96)

  The Natl. Aeronautic and Atmospheric Administration announced it
0

would conduct a pilot project this summer with the U.S. Dept. of
Agriculture to improve accuracy of crop forecasting, based largely on the
amount of solar radiation, available moisture, and air temperatures for a
given area. Using devices on NOAA spacecraft to measure cloud cover
and relate it to the amount of sunlight reaching ground-based
pyranometers, NOAA and USDA investigators would compare hourly
readings from the Goes I geostationary satellite with measurements from
a network of pyranometers across the Great Plains, to determine the
amount of solar energy available to crops in any given period.
  The researchers emphasized solar energy as a vital factor in plant
photosynthesis and in evapotranspiration (loss of water directly from the
soil by evaporation and from plants by transpiration). A Great Plains
Agricultural Council representing land grant colleges in Texas, N.M.,
Okla., Colo., Kans., Nebr., S.D., N.D., Wyo., and Mont., and the
USDA agencies serving those states had requested the pilot project as an
aid in the production of corn, wheat, and sorghum. (NOAA Release
77-122)

  Aviation Week reported that NASA had chosen “key missions” for the
six orbital flight tests of the Shuttle and had assigned payloads as well as
the weight and volume available for additional experiments. Chester M.
Lee, director of Space Transportation System operations, would give
Associate Administrator John E. Naugle a list to begin assigning ex-

                                                                          87
MAY                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



periments on the basis of the key payloads. For the first mission (ten-
tative schedule, March 1979) the Shuttle would carry only a developmen-
tal flight-instrumentation unit that would also ride on other flight hsts.
On the second mission (July 1979), the first true Shuttle payload would
be an instrumented pallet for scientific research amounting to only a
small weight in the payload bay but offering the NASA program office a
first research opportunity on the Shuttle.
   On subsequent missions the Shuttle would carry (Sept. 1979) a remote
manipulator built by Canada to maneuver a payload on the end of a
jointed arm, plus a scientific payload; (Dee. 1979) a large spin-stabilized
upper stage to boost an undetermined spacecraft payload into a higher
orbit; (Feb. 1980) an interim upper stage for attachment to Skylab, to
boost it into a higher orbit, or an alternate payload such as the long-
duration exposure facility; (March 1980) a possible classified payload
(such as the USAF Teal Ruby system for detecting and tracking aircraft
from space) plus a GSFC-designed multimission spacecraft. The seventh
orbital mission set in May 1980 would probably be a NASA-ESA
Spacelab launch, unless another flight test was needed. NASA noted that
unforeseen circumstances could change the key-payload schedule for the
first orbital flight tests. (AvWk, May 16/77, 13)

May Z: NASA announced it had investigated a unique propulsion
       7
system for sending a spacecraft to rendezvous with Halley’s Comet in
1986. The comet had made some 30 visits since 467 B.C., and its next ap-
pearance would offer NASA an opportunity to find out more about the
origin of the solar system.
   A device using solar electric propulsion, suggested by MSFC and
tested for several yr at Lewis Research Center, would aim solar energy
concentrated by reflectors at conventional solar cells to provide electric
power for a system of 8 ion engines capable of taking a spacecraft to an
encounter with the Halley comet around Christmas Day 1985 just outside
earth’s orbit. The spacecraft would reach the comet during its most active
state as it passed near the sun, and could send pictures of the comet to
earth, possibly sending a probe through the comet’s tail toward its
nucleus to define its properties. NASA would decide in August 1977
whether to use the solar electric system, or a solar sail being developed by
JPL, in its rendezvous with Halley’s Comet. (NASA Release 77-97;
MSFC Release 77-87)

  NASA announced it would launch on or about May 28 a new en-
0

vironmental monitoring satellite GOES-B, latest in a series to be
operated by NOAA, to keep watch over the eastern half of the U.S. and
the Atlantic Ocean, just in time for this yr’s hurricane season. Built like
the first three in the series by Ford Aerospace Corp., GOES-B would

88
                                                                       NAY
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



replace Goes 1 as NOAA's east coast satellite at about 75"W; Goes I
would move to standby status at about 105"W. (NASA Release 77-88)

   NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp. a $41
0

million contract for support services to communications and instrumen-
tation at KSC, the major site for Space Shuttle launches beginning in
1979.

   Services would be in 2 categories: the first, covering 3yr, would include
modification, installation, operation, and maintenance of an operational
intercommunications system, operational TV system, and checkout-
control-monitor subsystem. The second category, lyr with 2yr option to
renew, would cover KSC work on communications, measurements,
telemetrics, computer services, data storage and retrieval, program plan-
ning, and reliability and quality assurance. (NASA Release 77-104; KSC
Release 104-77)

   MSFC reported that the Energy Research and Development Ad-
0

ministration had selected 80 new projects for installing solar heating and
cooling, on 27 of which MSFC would monitor technical design and con-
struction. MSFC was already monitoring 32 commercial demonstration
projects selected by ERDA in April 1976 as the first of a series; ERDA
would issue a third solicitation for proposals later this summer, the an-
nouncement said.
   Dr. Henry H. Marvin, director of ERDA's division of solar energy,
said cooperative agreements negotiated by MSFC with the 27 proposers
of projects would be signed within approximately 3mo. Government
funding on a cost-sharing basis would cover only the solar portions of
the projects; more than 90% of the funds would go to projects with
substantial small business participation, and more than half the awards
would go to teams using solar energy systems supplied by small
businesses. (MSFC Release 77-89)

   NASA announced that it and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had
9

agreed to continue joint technical, scientific, and operational activity
developed in the Apollo-Soyuz mission July 1975 by starting studies of 2
programs, one for a joint orbital manned flight, the other for an interna-
tional space station.
   The agreement signed May 6 by Acting NASA Administrator Dr. Alan
M. Lovelace and May 11 by Anatoly P. Aleksandrov, president of the
Soviet Academy of Sciences, envisioned preliminary project documents
within 6 to 12mo and definitive documents within a yr, noting that the
working groups should proceed on the assumption of a first flight in
1981. Working groups to study experiments, basic and applied, and the

                                                                          89
MAY                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



operation of a Salyut-Shuttle mission would be named within 3 days
after the agreement became effective; a third group, which would con-
sider development of an international space platform, would be ap-
pointed within 2mo. NASA stressed that neither side would be commit-
ted beyond initial studies, and either could proceed with its own space
station interests. (NASA Release 77-98; NYT, May 18/77, A15)

May 18: NASA announced it would launch on or about May 26 the third
Intelsat IV-A commercial comsat from KSC on an Atlas Centaur for
service over the Atlantic Ocean, initially as a backup for Intelsats IV-A
F-1and F-2offering communications services to countries from Central
America to Iran. The IV-A spacecraft built by Hughes Aircraft Co. had
communications capability almost two-thirds greater than the Intelsat IV
series now operating: it had a 7yr design life and capacity to relay more
than 6 OOO simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. (NASA
Release 77-99; MOR E-491-633-77-05 [prelaunch] May 20/77;
INTELSAT Release 77-10-M)

   NASA reported that its research and technology advisory council
0

(RTAC) panel on general aviation technology had named stalls and spins
as the greatest safety problem for designers of light aircraft, accounting
for 30% of all fatalities in those planes. LaRC had established a program
in response to requests for additional research on the problem, including
definition of the aerodynamic characteristics of aircraft at high angles of
attack; ways to avoid stalling; ways to recover from spin; and ways to en-
sure satisfactory spin characteristics. The program would also cover
development of test methods such as use of radio-controlled models, and
consultation services to industry. LaRC had been a leader in such studies
since the 1930s when it began operating a 15ft spin tunnel, enlarged in
1941 to 20ft and used since then in testing more than 400 aircraft designs;
this was still the only operating spin tunnel in the U.S. (NASA Release
77-100; LaRC Release 77-21)

   NASA reported that its data-analysis facility at KSC had been using a
0

GE multispectral image analyzer developed for screening Landsat im-
agery to detect early stages of breast cancer, where diagnosis would nor-
mally be difficult and rapid multiplication of cancerous tissue would re-
quire massive surgery. The only solution previously available had been
repeated diagnoses by x-ray, itself a health hazard.
   Radiological examinations of x-rays had been limited by the range of
intensity detectable by the human eye, which was unable to distinguish
more than 32 shades of gray, meaning that much of the data would be ef-
fectively invisible. However, the microdensitometer on the GE analyzer
was able to differentiate 256 shades of gray with great accuracy. The
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS. 1977                                      MAY



computerized output of the densitometer would enter the analyzer with
orders for enhancement, so that data previously invisible to a doctor’s
eye could be available for earlier diagnosis.
   Robert L., Butterfield, electronics engineer at the KSC data-analysis
facility, had worked with radiologist Br. William L. Walls of Titusville,
Fla., for 2yr on a process for automatic enhancement of mammograms
to detect early stages of breast cancer before radical surgery would
become necessary. The aim of the study had been to differentiate women
at low risk of breast cancer from those at high risk, based on the rate of
change in the gray shades of the enhanced images, to reduce the need for
repeated x-ray diagnoses. (NASA Release 77-102; KSC Release 105-77)

   The Intl. Academy of Astronautics announced that the 28th congress
of the Intl. Astronautical Federation would take place from Sept. 25 to
Oct. 1,1977, in Prague, in conjunction with the 1lth symposium on con-
tributions to the history of rocketry. Theme of the congress would be
“Using Space-Today and Tomorrow.” Dr. Charles Stark Draper was
IAA president. (IAA anno)

May 19: NASA reported that MSFC had received 119 proposals for ex-
periments in materials processing to be performed on Space Shuttle and
Spacelab flights. As lead center for the Spacelab program, a cooperative
venture of NASA and ESA, MSFC had been given project management
responsibility for the first three Spacelab payloads. An MSFC team had
evaluated the proposals, and the center would announce selection of be-
tween 10 and 20 experiments by the end of July. (NASA Release 77-103;
MSFC Release 77-91)

   NASA announced it had issued proposals to buy 6 spinning solid fuel
upper stages (SSUS) for boosting spacecraft launched from the Space
Shuttle into higher orbits. The decision was the first step following agree-
ment earlier this yr with McDonnell Douglas and Boeing Aerospace,
allowing them to design, build, and test the devices and market them in-
dependently of NASA. The agency as part of a procurement agreement
would normally bear cost of development and production; the current
bidding would be limited to the 2 companies that had agreed to develop
the stages with private funds.
   The purchase would include hardware, analyses, logistics, and services
needed to put a spacecraft into higher orbit after launch and orientation
by the Space Shuttle. The contractor would build the vehicle, provide
services, and operate the systems. First delivery in Dec. 1979 would be a
flight demonstrator; 3 others would launch advanced Intelsat V comsats;
the other 2 would serve for other missions. (NASA Release 77-101;
MSFC Release 77-90)

                                                                          91
MAY                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   Press reports said a 23 9001b solid-fuel rocket had fallen off a Delta
0

launch vehicle standing on its pad at KSC May 18 awaiting the mid-June
launch of ESA’s high-frequency communications test satellite (CTS). In
its 12ft fall, the booster had plunged through a platform and damaged
the Delta’s liquid-oxygen tank; the entire assembly would have to b%
removed for repairs. Cause was probably failure of one of the at-
tachments holding the motor in place, a spokesman said; an investigation
was under way. The Delta had on its first stage 9 of the solid-fuel
boosters, each more than 36ft tall and 4ft in diameter, normally jetti-
soned about a minute and a half into flight. (Today, May 19/77, 8A;
photo, 1A; AvWk, May 23/77, 27)

   Nature magazine reported that the NASA budget had met unexpected
opposition in Congress, endangering 2 major scientific missions: the
large space telescope, long regarded by space scientists as NASA’s top-
priority project, and the Jupiter orbiter probe planned as a twin launch
in 1982 of craft to orbit the planet and send probes into its atmosphere.
Lobbying by NASA and the scientific community might rescue the proj-
ects, but loss of either would be a serious blow to the agency’s program.
Nature said this yr’s efforts would be crucial because space science
money had been squeezed out of NASA’s budget for 4yr to pay for the
Space Shuttle, and further delay would probably kill future chances for
approval of these missions. (Nature, May 19/77, 196)

  The Chicago Tribune reported that U S . Secy. of State Cyrus Vance
0

and USSR Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko had begun high-level arms
control talks in Geneva by signing a convention against environmental
warfare and extending a previous agreement on space that had governed
the 1975 hookup between Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, calling for
cooperation in space science such as exchange of data on Mars, Venus,
and the moon. (C Trib, May 19/77, 1-1)

May 20: LaRC announced it had developed an ocean-surface wind sen-
sor for SeaSat-A, managed by JPL and scheduled for launch in 1978.
SeaSat instruments would record wind and pressure data over the
oceans; lack of this information had prevented accurate long-range
weather forecasting. LaRC research had shown the sensitivity of
microwave scatterometers to sea-surface winds; LaRC’s sensor for
SeaSat contained a scatterometer able to measure wind speed and direc-
tion over a thousand-kilometer area. (LaRC Release 77-20)

* ARC reported successful completion May 19 of a test to qualify the
Pioneer/Venus probe for entry into the Venus atmosphere. One of the
two spacecraft scheduled for the Pioneer/Venus mission arriving there in

YZ

                                          C-2-
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  MAY


1978 would carry a main probe and three smaller probes to be dropped
off at 8000km intervals to measure the Venus atmosphere from top to
bottom. At 47km above the surface of Venus, the probe would separate
from its heatshield, leaving its parachute behind, to descend as far as
possible before the planet’s heat destroyed it. Venus surface temperature
would exceed 500°C (92OoF), hotter than the melting point of zinc.
  At White Sands Missile Range, N.M., the U.S. Air Force’s Geophysics
Laboratory launched a high-altitude plastic balloon measuring 90K m3
(about 3 million ft3) to an altitude of about 28km; about 8hr later when
wind conditions were right, the balloon released from a height of about
30km an instrumented probe equipped to record system performance
while White Sands personnel tracked and recovered the probe pressure-
vessel and parachute. At an altitude of 15km above earth, the heat and
density of the atmosphere and the probe velocity resembled those ex-
pected on Venus at 67km above the surface, the point of actual
parachute deployment. (ARC Release 77-30)

   NASA announced it had awarded to Lockheed-California Co. a con-
tract to demonstrate compositematerial technology in manufacturing
L-1011 vertical stabilizers. NASA would cover $1.57 million of the cost
of the 6.5yr contract, Lockheed $1.7 million, like others in the agency’s
program to increase by 50% the fuel efficiency of civilian transport air-
craft. LaRC would manage the contract. (LaRC Release 77-22; NASA
Release 77-108)

May 2: President Carter announced the nomination of Dr. Robert A.
      3
Frosch, 49, associate director of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institu-
tion in Mass. since 1975, to head the Natl. Aeronautics and Space Ad-
ministration. Dr. Frosch would succeed Dr. James C. Fletcher, who
resigned May 1 after 6yrs as administrator of the agency.

  A native New Yorker, Dr. Frosch had earned A.B., A.M., and Ph.D
degrees from Columbia Univ. From 1973 to 1975 he was asst. secretary
general of the United Nations and assistant head of its environmental
program. From 1966 to 1975 he was asst. secretary of the Navy for
research and development, working on naval-research projects at the
Hudson Laboratories of Columbia Univ. where he had been director
from 1956 to 1963. Dr. Frosch had received the Arthur S. Flemming
award in 1966 and the Navy’s distinguished public service award in 1969.
(NASA release 77-107; NYT,May 24/77, 19)

   MSFC reported results of a gamma-ray detector launched on a balloon
0

May 11 from the Natl. Scientific Balloon Facility at Palestine, Tex., to
study sources of bursting and pulsating x-rays and gamma rays during an

                                                                       93
                                         ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
MAY


18hr flight. MSFC scientists headed by Dr. Charles Meegan, principal in-
vestigator and associate of the Natl. Research Council, had sent a
420 000m3 (15 million ft3) balloon carrying an array of 12 large-area
detectors with total payload weight of 590kg (13001b) to an altitude of
39km (126 OOOft) to transmit data back to the launch site for recording.
High winds had interrupted the successful mission and brought the
balloon down with some payload damage. Investigators would use the
data for the scheduled June 30 launch of NASA’s high-energy astronomy
observatory (HEAO). (MSFC Release 77-93)

   NASA announced that the Arizona Dept. of Transportation and 2
0

federal agencies had demonstrated solar energy potential by using an ar-
ray of solar cells to power a dust-storm warning system in central Ariz.
The state had installed the system over an 80mi area on Interstate 10 be-
tween Phoenix and Tucson, and west on Interstate 8 near Casa Grande,
to help motorists avoid accidents in low-visibility conditions resulting
from blowing dust. In normal mode, the signs would display directional
information; when dust storms struck, the message would change to give
motorists the radio frequencies on which storm-alert instructions would
be available.
   The state agency (working with LeRC, which had managed the ap-
plications project for the Energy Research and Development Administra-
tion) would replace propane-fueled 6Ow generators at 40 signs in the
system with solar arrays, halving the cost. Each sign would use solar elec-
tricity to power the lighting, changeable-message feature, and radio com-
munications activated by a link from Phoenix when dust storms were im-
minent. (NASA Release 77-106)

   MSFC reported that Teledyne Brown Engineering Co. had built for
0

Shuttle tank testing at the center an “upper reaction structure” resem-
bling a mammoth doughnut, 42ft in diameter, 12ft high, and weighing
124 500kg (137tons), so large that the manufacturer had to remove a wall
at its plant to get it out of the building. The structure, riding on a special
32-wheel lowboy trailer with a 16-wheel dolly, would block roads during
a 3 to 4hr trip from the builder to the MSFC test stand where Bendix per-
sonnel would install it at the 46m (150ft) level, to support the structural
test article simulating the external tank and to record test loads and
stresses. (MSFC Release 77-94)

May 24: The Washington Star reported that the USAF had launched a
“spy satellite” from Cape Canaveral at 2: 13pm May 23 as part of a series
to monitor rocket tests in the USSR and PRC and give early warning of
any missile attack. Defenseh’paceDaily said the “experimental payload”
launched on an Atlas Agena was either a test of improved early-warning
                                                                          MAY
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



equipment or part of a more advanced early-warning system. Orbit
parameters deleted from NORAD and NASA records but reported by
the UK Royal Aircraft Establishment were 40 800km apogee, 30 200km
perigee, and 9” inclination. The USAF had not announced the launch,
visible to residents of the area, before liftoff and issued only a brief state-
ment afterward. ( W Star, May 24/77, A-3; D/SD, May 25/77, 138)

  NASA announced it would launch no earlier than May 25 GOES-B,
0

second in a series funded by NOAA to meet DOC requirements for a
geostationary operational environmental satellite system. Sms I and Sms
2, prototypes funded by NASA and still in orbit, had been launched in
May 1974 and Feb. 1975; Goes 1, first operational spacecraft funded by
NOAA, was launched Oct. 1975. GOES-B would augment existing
coverage of earth weather and would become part of the global at-
mospheric research program (GARP). (MOR E-608-77-04 [prelaunch]
May 24/77)

   ESA announced it had postponed launch of its experimental comsat
0

OTS (orbital test satellite) originally scheduled to, go June 16. The
spacecraft had left Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport May 9 headed for
prelaunch checkout at ETR; it had not been mounted on its launch vehi-
cle at the time when one of the solid-fuel booster rockets fell off and
damaged the first stage [see May 191. An inquiry into the April 20
malfunction of a Delta carrying ESA’s GEOS had already delayed the
OTS launch for at least a wk. (ESA release May 24/77)

* MSFC announced it had completed modifications of the Saturn test
stand used in the 1960s for static-test firings of the first stages of the
Saturn 1 and 1B and scheduled for structural tests of the Space Shuttle
solid-fuel rocket booster. The tests would use a short-stack SRB (lacking
two center segments, measuring 18.3cm less than the actual boosters) to
simulate prelaunch, flight, and recovery reactions. Each Shuttle launch
would need two SRBs each simultaneously generating 11.79-million
newtons (2.65 million lb) of thrust at liftoff; separating at burnout from
the external tank, the casings would parachute into the ocean for
recovery and reuse in as many as 20 flights. (MSFC Release 77-95)

  NASA reported that Dr. Herbert Frey, a NASA-Univ. of Md. scientist
0

working at GSFC, had prepared a paper for presentation June 2 at the
meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., sug-
gesting that asteroid bombardment more than 4 billion yr ago that
created earth’s ocean basins had resulted in the development of life on
this planet.
  Building on the work of other scientists, including that of GSFC’s Dr.

                                                                            95
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,
MAY                                                                 1977



Paul Lowman on earth’s crustal evolution, Dr. Frey used data from
Apollo lunar landings and photography from spacecraft studies of the
moon, Mercury, and Mars to show that during the reference period al    l
the inner bodies suffered heavy asteroid impacts which must have af-
fected earth as well. The impacts led to geological changes on earth that
resulted in plate tectonics and the formation of seabeds. If the presence
of life had eventuated from catastrophic bombardment by asteroids, the
paper noted, then life elsewhere might also depend upon such events.
(NASA Release 77-105)

May 25: Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had developed an
autopilot device during flight tests of the YF-12 aircraft that would
enable future high-speed planes to fly closer to the preset flight path. Ex-
perience gained from aircraft cruising at high speeds and high altitudes
had shown deviations up to f 4OOOft in altitude and more than 30mph in
speed from those planned. An aircraft flying across the country at Mach
3 could encounter normal changes in temperature and pressure as rapid
changes that could affect the Mach number; conventional techniques to
correct for those changes had caused large altitude deviations and poor-
quality passenger comfort. The deviations could degrade aircraft per-
formance or overrun the plane’s operating limitations. The new control
system combining surface motion and throttle motion, aot previously
used together, with newly developed data sensors, had kept the YF-12 on
a highly precise flight path even at high-speed conditions over extended
periods of time. (DFRC Release 19-77) ,        c




   KSC announced it had awarded to the Univ. of Fla. a $16 200 sup-
0

plemental grant to continue a study of the effects of lightning strikes.
University personnel had been doing research on lightning under this
grant since 1973; working as consultants, they had used advanced in-
strumentation available at KSC together with engineers from the space
vehicle operations and information systems directorates to measure high-
frequency radiation from lightning activity within a cloud, intensity of
lightning strikes, and the extent of damage to structures or aerial and
underground cables. The study would improve handling of Shuttle
launch, processing, and landing under marginal weather conditions.
(KSC Release 108-77)

  A KSC spokesman said work was proceeding slowly on dismantling
0

the Delta vehicle that had lost one of its solid-fuel rocket boosters May
18 while waiting on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Today newspaper
reported. The second stage of the Delta had already been removed to
clear the way for detaching the boosters from the first stage and then
removing the first stage, damaged when one of the 9 boosters crashed

%
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   MAY


12ft through a support platform. The accident, which interrupted an
ESA comsat launch scheduled for June, had also delayed launch of a
US. weather satellite. (Today, May 25/77, 12A)
  The Natl. Science Foundation reported that Census Bureau figures for
9

the end of 1975 had shown a 5yr decline in private industry employment
of scientists and engineers. Private industry had been by far the largest
employer of scientists and engineers, using about 2/3 of all those
employed. Engineers constituted 72% (850000) of all <that group
employed by private industry, the largest numbers being electrical
engineers (292 OOO) and mechanical and aeronautical engineers
(201 OOO). Computer scientists were the largest group (143 OOO) among
scientists, as well as the largest group (100 OOO) employed by non-
manufacturing industries. Among physical scientists (104 OOO), the most
numerous specialty was chemists (65 OOO), more than 3/4 of them work-
ing in nondurable goods manufacturing industries including chemical in-
dustries. Private industry employment of scientists and engineers
decreased 5670 between 1970 and 1975, compared to a 14% gain in
1965-1970 and a 19% gain in 1960-1965. The drop in employment be-
tween 1970 and 1975 was mostly in durable goods manufacturing; non-
manufacturing industries showed an 11% increase in engineers employed
during that period. (NSF 77-132)

May 26: NASA launched Intelsat IVA F-4, third in the series of Intelsat
IVA global comsats, from Cape Kennedy on an Atlas Centaur at 5:47pm
EDT into a transfer orbit with 35,904.4km apogee, 548.9km perigee,
21.8" inclination, and 641.87min period. ComSatCorp, U S member of
                                                           ..
the Intl. Telecommunications Satellite Corp. (INTELSAT) and its
management services contractor, fired the apogee kick motor at 850pm
EDT May 27 over the western Pacific, putting the spacecraft into a near-
circular synchronous orbit at about 35 784km (22 24Omi) altitude to drift
eastward to its station over the Atlantic at 34.5"W after a mo of com-
munications tests. INTELSAT, owner of the comsat series, would reim-
burse NASA for costs of the launch vehicle and launch services.
   The Hughes Aircraft-built spacecraft weighing 1515kg (33401b) at lift-
off measured about 7m (23ft) tall and 2.4m (8ft) in diameter and carried
a new design of antenna that would provide coverage from Central
America to Iran by using shaped beams. The 320MHz bandwidths point-
ing east and west were sufficiently isolated to allow the frequency spec-
trum to be used twice, once eastward and once westward, doubling the
use of that spectrum. The spacecraft with a 7yr lifetime would offer
about 6250 two-way voice circuits plus 2 TV channels, two-thirds more
capacity than that of the Intelsat IV series. It would initially serve as
backup to the two Atlantic area comsats, Intelsat IVA F-I at 24.5"W and

                                                                      97
                                        ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
MAY


Intelsat,IVA F-2 at 29.5”W. (NASA Release 77-99; KSC Release 103-77;
MOR E-491-633-77-03 [prelaunch] May 20/77, [postlaunch] Aug 30/77;
INTELSAT Release 77-11-M)

   DFRC announced that the first manned test flight of the Space Shuttle
orbiter, previously scheduled for May 26, had been postponed to a date
no earlier than June 9, depending on successful completion of orbiter
ground tests. The manned test would begin the second phase of Shuttle
approach and landing trials to verify aerodynamic and flight-control
characteristics of the orbiter. Cause of the postponement was delay in or-
biter systems checkout and verification testing after completion in March
of the first flights of the orbiter linked to its 747 carrier. (DFRC Release
18-77)

  KSC announced it had awarded to Planning Research Corporation,
0

McLean, Va., a $25 720 364 contract extension for engineering support
services to the Space Shuttle program and other activities where the
design-engineering directorate at KSC had design responsibilities. The
12mo cost-plus-award-fee extension through May 1978 had brought the
value of the contract originally awarded in May 1974 to $72 616 061. The
company employed more than 1100 workers at KSC and Cape Canaveral
Ar Force Station in Fla., and at DFRC and KSC’s Western Launch
 i
Operations Division in Calif. (KSC Release 111-77)

May 27: MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to build a
tethered satellite system for launch on an orbiting Space Shuttle. The
idea had been to provide long-duration measurement, observation, or
performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude,
where density would be insufficient to support the flight of aircraft or
balloons, but too thick for free-flying satellites. Exploration here had
been limited to short-term flight of sounding rockets or low-level
satellites.
   One concept had been to use a l00km cable to “troll” a tethered
satellite from an orbiting Shuttle; the pull of gravity, with constant ten-
sion on the cable, would keep the captive craft at the end of its string,
oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be
global mapping of earth’s magnetic or gravity fields; cargo transfer be-
tween space vehicles; retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle
maneuvering; transfer of large amounts of energy to a remote experi-
ment, or from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source to a space sta-
tion. MSFC would manage tethered satellite activity for NASA’s Office
of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-82)

     A NY Times editorial said that criticism of the Apollo-Soyuz mission

98
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                    MAY



on the basis that the U.S. learned too little and the USSR too much was
misguided: the U.S.space program from its beginning was open “to any
Russian who reads American publications.” It was the Soviet program
that was secret, and only because of Apollo-Soyuz had American
observers been able to visit key Soviet space installations. Proposed
cooperation in space would cost comparatively little and bring con-
siderable benefit from sharing costs and improving relations. (NYT, May
27/77, A-24)

* Science magazine said the stir caused by Aviation Week’s claim [see
May 21 that the USSR had tested a charged-particle beam capable of
neutralizing U.S. strategic missiles had been “the sensation of the week”
in Washington, giving rise to secret briefings for congressmen, an “infre-
quent” statement from the CIA, and even a presidential assurance that
the US. was not in jeopardy. AvWk responded that the president had
been “screened from vital technical developments” by the CIA and the
Defense Intelligence Agency. Science said AvWk has made use of
technical and intelligence information “too esoteric for easy evaluation”
that Science had been unable to verify independently.

   An article in Nature magazine on the same subject said AvWk had
based its charges of Soviet weapons testing on “hydrogen with traces of
tritium in the upper atmosphere -which could mean almost anything.”
(Science, May 27/77, 957; Nature, May 26/77, 304)

May 3 : JPL announced that its controllers had turned off the biology
      Z
instrument on Viking lander 2 May 28 and that on lander 1 on May 30.
Lander 1 had started biology investigations July 28, 1976, and lander 2
on Sept. 1 1, both operating continuously since that time, depleting their
high-pressure helium, nutrients, and other consumables. They had car-
ried out all the tests originally scheduled and “several that hadn’t been
planned,” the announcement said. Both of the landers would continue to
operate except for the biology and organic analysis instruments, and
both of the orbiters had continued to operate normally. Biologists in
laboratories across the U.S. were trying various combinations of soil and
chemicals to duplicate results from the biology instruments on the Mars
landers. (JPL anno May 31/77)

During May: Natl. Research Council’s News Report said a committee
chaired by MIT’s Wilbur B. Davenport, Jr., had recommended that
NASA resume support of comsat services research and development but
stay out of the business of operating such services. The committee said
that agency support of an operational program of public service satellite
communications would “obscure the real costs of the public service”;

                                                                        99
MAY                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



agencies that needed to use or provide such services “would not be faced
with the hard reality of determining whether a program is worthy of ex-
ecution when compared with its actual cost,” the report said. (NRC News
Report, May 77, 1)

* The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. newsletter reported that the USAF in-
dustry team that produced and demonstrated the B-1 aircraft system was
1976 recipient of the Collier trophy, rather than the NASA Viking proj-
ect with its “spectacular success” in landing spacecraft and instrumenta-
tion on Mars. The AFSCNewsreview said that the B-l team represented
the Air Force, Rockwell Intl. Corp., General Electric, Boeing Co.,
Cutler-Hammer’s airborne instruments laboratory division, and more
than 3000 other subcontractors and suppliers.
   The NAA noted that 50yr earlier the solo flight of Lindbergh across
the Atlantic, considered a shoo-in, had failed to receive the trophy given
for “the greatest achievement in aviation in America, the value of which
has been demonstrated by actual use during the preceding year”; that
trophy committee had unanimously awarded it to Charles L. Lawrence,
designer of the Wright Whirlwind aircooled radial engine that had
powered not only Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, but also a number of
other notable flights in 1927. (NAA newsletter, May 77, 1; AFSC
Newsreview, May 77, 4)




100
June


June 1: NASA announced it had appointed Gerald D. Griffin, deputy
director of Dryden Flight Research Center since 1976, to be deputy direc-
tor of Kennedy Space Center as of July 1. He would replace Miles Ross,
who resigned from NASA in May. Griffin had worked at NASA Hq for
3yr, as asst. administrator for legislative affairs, then as deputy associate
administrator for operations in the Office of Space Flight. At Johnson
Space Center, Griffin had been a flight controller during the Gemini pro-
gram, a flight director on all 11 Apollo missions, and lead flight director
on Apollo 12, 15, and 17. Among his awards were NASA exceptional
service medals for his work on Apollo 12 and 15, the presidential Medal
of Freedom group achievement award for Apollo 13, and the Hq creative
management award. (NASA Release 77-109; DFRC Release 20-77)

   DFRC announced it would drop-test at the Natl. Parachute Test
0

Range, El Centro, Calif., the parachutes for recovering the reusable
solid-fuel rocket boosters on the Shuttle. The tests would be a series of
air drops to evaluate design, deployment, performance, and structural
integrity of full-scale parachutes loaded with two configurations of drop-
test vehicles offering various limit and overload conditions for the
drogue and main parachutes at reefed and full open-canopy shapes.
Engineers from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had responsibility
for developing the Shuttle boosters, and from Martin Marietta,
developer of the parachute system, would use the results to evaluate the
adequacy of the system. (DFRC Release 21-77; MSFC Release 77-98)

   The Washington Post reported that biology instruments on both Vik-
ing landers on the surface of Mars had been shut off, according to a
spokesman at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who added that they had
detected no signs of life, although combinations of soil and chemicals
like those on the landers were under test in laboratories across the U.S.
trying to duplicate the unexpected results of the instruments on Mars.
Those results were still being studied, and one test “leaves the question
very much open.” Don Bane of JPL said the two landers were continuing
other operations such as meteorology and telephoto transmission. (W
Post, June 1/77, A-10; NASA Release 77-111)

    The W.Post reported that the latest test of a satellite-destruction
0



                                                                          101
JUNE                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



weapon conducted by the USSR despite an appeal by President Carter
had apparently ended in failure. In a test May 23, first by the USSR in
about 5m0, the Soviet interceptor spacecraft had missed the target
satellite by about 50mi, according to U.S. intelligence sources. The of-
ficials said that, without knowing the objectives of a test, it would be
hard to assess results, but the consensus was that the operation had
failed. Five USSR tests in the past 18mo had failed to destroy a target
satellite; the attempts had not been aimed at any U.S. satellites but were
confined to their own. Both nations had used observation satellites to
monitor each other’s military activities, including strategic-weapons
testing, missile-base construction, and similar indicators. Still in the
research stage was a U.S. system to knock out Soviet satellites, with first
flight tests at least 3yr away and first deployment estimated in about 5yr.
( W Post, June 1/77, A-21)


June 2: NASA announced it had selected Boeing Services Intl., Seattle,
Wash., for final negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee
contract to provide ground-systems support for launch operations
managed by KSC and for USAF operations at the Eastern Test Range
and Cape Canaveral, to include operation and maintenance of launch
systems and facilities; estimated cost of the 3yr contract would be
$80 500 OOO. (KSC Release 77-113; NASA Release 77-113)

  U.S. interplanetary spacecraft had confirmed that the planet Jupiter
9

was emitting high-energy electrons over a vast region of space, Walter
Sullivan reported in the NY Times. The spring meeting of the Am.
Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C. heard Dr. John A. Simpson of
the Univ. of Chicago and others describe the Jupiter emissions as similar
to pulsars -electromagnetic radiation appearing as pulses sweeping
through space like airport beacons -but carrying the “signature” of the
planet’s spin rate, picked up every lOhr as a rotation was completed. Dr.
Simpson said Jupiter was not a direct analogy of pulsars but would offer
common features that might provide clues to an understanding of both.
   Observations of the Jupiter emissions had come from Pioneer IO,
which had passed Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now beyond the orbit of
Saturn, and from Pioneer I I , which had first passed Jupiter in Dec. 1974
and was scheduled to approach Saturn in Sept. 1979. The volume of
Jupiter’s magnetosphere had been estimated as 5 times that of the sun’s;
Io, innermost moon of Jupiter, had an orbit within the magnetosphere
and its radiation belt (a greatly intensified version of earth’s Van Allen
belt), and the unusual brightness of Io on emerging from Jupiter’s
shadow had been attributed to particle activity. The 2 Voyager spacecraft
to be launched this yr toward Jupiter and Saturn would be programmed

102
 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                      JUNE



 to investigate further when they arrived nearby in March and July of
 1979. (NYT, June 2/77, B4)

 June 3: NASA reported that Pioneer ZZ would cross the orbit of Jupiter
 on June 10 for the second time on its trip to the outer reaches of the solar
 system. It had first flown past Jupiter in Dec. 1974 when the planet’s
 gravity had kicked it into a path that would go past Saturn in Sept. 1979.
 This was the first time a spacecraft had used the gravity of an outer
 planet to accelerate it toward a different planet; the Voyager spacecraft
 to be launched this summer would also use this maneuver.
---

    Pioneer ZZ had covered two-thirds of its 2.3-billion-km (1.5-billion-mi)
 journey from Jupiter to Saturn; passing Saturn, it would head out of the
 solar system in the direction that the solar system takes through the
 galaxy, nearly opposite the path of Pioneer IO, now between the orbits of
 Saturn and Uranus, also on its way out of the solar system. Ames
 Research Center had managed the Pioneer project for NASA’s Office of
 Space Science; TRW Systems, Inc., had built the spacecraft. (NASA
 Release 77-112; ARC Release 77-33)

   DFRC announced that a malfunction during a June 2 test of the Space
 0

 Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power system would delay the orbiter’s first
 manned captive flight from June 9 for 1 or 2 weeks, depending on suc-
 cessful completion of ground tests. (DFRC Release 22-77)

    United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim and delegates from
 0

  14 nations had recorded messages to be carried with music and natural
 sounds on a copper phonograph record by the Voyagers scheduled for
 launch from Cape Canaveral Aug. 20 and Sept. 1, Today newspaper
 reported. Messages were from Australia, Canada, the U.S., Chile,
 France, Belgium, Austria, Sweden, Egypt, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Iran,
 Pakistan, and Indonesia. They included poems in French and Swedish, a
 passage from the Koran in Arabic, and various texts in Esperanto,
 English, Flemish, German, Spanish, Persian, Urdu, Indonesian, the
 Creole language of- Sierra --
                             Leone, and the Efik language of Nigeria.
                      -- -
               _.__~.
    In his message, Waldheim said: “AS the Secretary General of the
 United Nations, an organization of 147 member states who represent
 almost all of the human inhabitants of the planet Earth, I send greetings
 on behalf of the people of our planet. We step out of our solar system
 into the universe seeking only peace and friendship, to teach if we are
 called upon, to be taught if we are fortunate.” NASA spokesman
 Timothy Ferris said the messages, aimed at extraterrestrial intelligences,
 would be “like a note in a bottle for the extraterrestrials, if they exist.”
 Voyager 1, which would reach Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in 1980, would

                                                                          103
JUNE                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



pass out of the solar system several yr later. (Today, June 3/77, l O A ,
NYT, June 3/77, A4)

* Scientists at the McDonald Observatory in Los Alamos, N.M., had
discovered that the red-giant star Betelgeuse, familiar feature of the con-
stellation Orion, was 3 250 OOO times larger than earth’s sun. Pictures
taken at the observatory, using a new process with a special one-of-a-
kind television camera tube produced by RCA, had shown the star ex-
panding and throwing off matter into space at a prodigious rate; the
photographs for the first time had viewed and measured the shell of mat-
ter around a red giant.
   Betelgeuse and its shell had proved to be 400 times larger than the orbit
of Pluto; it had measured nearly 3 trillion miles across (2800 billion
miles). Earth’s sun in comparison was 864 OOO miles in diameter at its
equator, and earth itself was only about 8000 miles in diameter at the
equator. The pictures had verified a theory that red-giant stars were a
primary source of raw material for making new stars, according to
astrophysicist Maxwell Sandford of McDonald laboratory. The red
giants would routinely lose matter to relieve internal pressures built up by
consumption of nuclear fuel, and the pictures had shown the loss to be
much greater than previously thought. (Today, June 3/77, 11A)

  NASA belt-tightening measures that might cut pay for about 60 high-
ranking JSC employees might have the same effect at KSC, Today
newspaper reported. The Houston Post reported earlier that the JSC
employees had heard their Civil Service job grades would be reduced,
with possible loss of $5000 to $10 OOO in annual pay to follow 2yr later. A
JSC spokesman said the grade reductions had resulted from a slowdown
in space programs requiring reorganization of the center. Similar grade
reductions were a possibility for KSC, which had been told by NASA Hq
to cut its operating budget from $119 million to $109 million. KSC Direc-
tor Lee Scherer had ordered a freeze on new hiring to allow a complete
review of operations and consideration of measures to save money.
KSC’s director of public affairs, Charles Hollinshead, said activities sub-
ject to possible funding cuts after Oct. 1 would be “things we can cut that
don’t impact the launch schedule [for expendable rockets] or Space Shut-
tle preparations.” (Today, June 3/77, 16A)

June 4: The NY Times reported that the General Accounting Office,
Congress’s investigative arm, had told the lawmakers to consider delay-
ing completion of the Space Shuttle fleet, originally planned to include
five ships. Two had been built so far. GAO said Congress should go
ahead will building a third Shuttle but should put off construction of the
other two until “there is sufficient confidence in the shuttle development

104
                                                                       JUNE
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



program and more information is available on the space transportation
system operations cost and plans for future space activity.”
   Today noted that this report was “the most sweepingly and harshly
critical” of a number of negative assessments of the Shuttle issued by
GAO. Among its charges were that the Shuttle would cause sonic booms
over Calif. and Fla. upon landing; that its tires would blow out and cause
a crash when it tried to land; that it could make too few orbits; that there
was no proof it would reduce the costs of carrying cargoes into space;
and that hardly anyone would want to use its services except DOD and
NASA itself. GAO pointed out that other nations, led by Japan, had
been developing their own launch vehicles and were likely to use them in-
stead of paying to use the Shuttle; it also said NASA had erred in setting
its fees low to encourage users to change over from expendable launch-
ers. NASA’s plan to recover expenses later, when costs had fallen with in-
creased use, might never be possible, the GAO said.
   Former NASA administrator James C. Fletcher said he disagreed with
most of GAO’s comments: NASA would solve the technical problems as
it had solved others, he said, and delaying acquisition of the fourth and
fifth Shuttles would be wasteful. “If they are procured while tooling and
assembly lines are in place, they unquestionably can be procured at far
less cost than would be incurred by delay.” A 3-yr delay would run up the
program cost by from $3 billion to $4.5 billion, he said. (NYT, June
5/77, 43; Today, June 4/77, 8A)

   The N Y Times reported that a new USAF A-10 antitank attack jet
crashed June 3 at the Paris Air and Space Show, killing Howard W.
Nelson, chief test pilot for Fairchild Industries. Nelson, who had flown
105 missions during the Korean War and had over 10 O O r total flight
                                                           Oh
time, had flown 5OOhr in A-10s; he was over the runway and hit the
plane’s tail on the ground in view of his wife and thousands of spectators.
No one else was injured. This was the 6th crash in 12yr at these shows,
held yearly to exhibit the latest aircraft to the world market; at the 1973
show, a Soviet Tupolev SST jetliner had crashed into a group of houses
near the field killing 5 crewmembers and 8 residents.
  A Fairchild spokesman said the USAF would set up a board to in-
vestigate the crash. The USAF had bought 30 A-10s at $4 million each,
and a squadron of these was scheduled to go into operation June 10 at
Myrtle Beach AFB, S.C. This was the first major accident since the A-10
was first flown in 1972. (NYT, June 4/77, 3; Today, June 4/77, 8A)

June 6 MSFC announced that SPAR IV,fourth of the space-processing
      :
applications rockets, would be launched June 21 carrying four ex-
periments including a new acoustic-levitation device for containerless
processing and a device to magnify in-flight photographs of the materials

                                                                         105
JUNE                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



being processed. Principal investigators would be Dr. Taylor Wang of
JPL, using acoustic pressure to handle a drop of water without touching
it; Dr. Donald Uhlman and Dr. Bennett Joiner of MIT, studying
solidification of 7 different materials in low gravity; Dr. John Papazian
of Grumman Aerospace, studying castings produced in low gravity; and
Dr. Arthur Lord of Drexel Univ. with Jerry Wouch of General Electric,
using the electromagnetic levitator to make an alloy in low-g and study
its properties. (MSFC Release 77-80)

   INTELSAT announced it had awarded to Miteq Inc., Happauge, NY,
a $34 800 contract for up-converter and down-converter units to be used
with time-division multiple-access test-bed equipment. (INTELSAT
Release 77-13-M)

   The Natl. Space Development Agency of Japan had decided to build a
0

third version of its N launch vehicle before the mid-l980s, AvWk
reported. The N-3 would be able to put into synchronous orbit a payload
weighing 500kg (more than 1OOOlb). N-1, first of the series, had used a
liquid-propellant first stage like that in the McDonnell Douglas Delta,
with three Nissan-designed strap-on motors instead of the 9 on the Delta.
(AvWk, June 6/77, 203)

June 7: The NY Times reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, testifying at
the Senate hearing on confirmation of his nomination as NASA ad-
ministrator, had told the committee that no U.S. manned landing on
Mars could occur before 1990. If NASA had an operating Space Shuttle
by 1980 that could be used to assemble a vehicle in space and t store the
                                                                 o
fuel needed for a trip to Mars, work on a manned Mars ship could begin
in 1984 or 1985 at the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two
later. (NYT, June 7/77, 13)

  The Chicago Tribune reported that A. Thomas Young, NASA’s head
of lunar and planetary programs, had presented to the Washington,
D.C. meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union a planetary-exploration
plan to launch two roving vehicles to Mars in 1984, a possible robot-
vehicle landing on Mercury, and flights to Venus, Jupiter, Saturn,
Halley’s Comet, and four asteroids. The plan also included launch of
automated ships to Mars in 1990 to collect samples of rock and soil and
return them to earth. (C Trib, June 7/77, 4-16)

June 8: NASA announced it had published a book, Space Settlements: A
Design Study (NASA SP-413), describing construction and operation of
permanent settlements in space where up to “lO,OOO people work, raise
families, and live out their lives.” The 185p volume contained results of a
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                    JUNE


10-wk study in 1975 sponsored by NASA and the Am. SOC. of Engineer- ,
ing Education at ARC and Stanford Univ. Chapter topics included
physical properties of space, human needs in space, habitat design, space
manufacturing, agriculture, and settlement locations. Concluding that
permanent communities could be built and inhabited away from earth,
the report said the obstacles to further expansion of human frontiers
were “principally philosophical, political, and social rather than
technical.” (NASA Release 77-118)

   The Wall St Journal reported that the government of France had an-
nounced plans for a major overhaul of its “financially troubled
aerospace industry,” that would include partial nationalization of Avions
Marcel Dassault-Breguet, maker of the Mirage jet fighter. A sharp drop
in orders for civilian and military aircraft had forced companies to
dismiss workers and cut down operations; the government hoped to in-
troduce new products, step up sales, and increase cooperation with other
European aircraft firms. (WSJ, June 9/77, 13)

June 10: ARC announced that a team of scientists using the 91cm (36in)
infrared telescope on the Kuiper Airborne Observatory and the ground-
based 230cm (9Oin) infrared telescope at Steward Observatory, Univ. of
Arizona, had made the first discovery of planet formation in process and
the first identification of a flat disc-shaped luminous stellar object. The
object, MWC 349 in the constellation Cygnus, exhibited a surrounding
mass of intensely glowing gas with a diameter 20 times that of the central
body, emitting 10 times as much light; the luminous area would disap-
pear in about a century as disc material spun into the central body. The
find had been significant because it might show how planets had been
formed in earth’s solar system.
   Members of the team were Drs. Rodger Thompson and Peter
Strittmatter of the Steward Observatory, and Drs. Edwin Erickson, Fred
Witteborn, and D.W. Strecker, all of ARC. Infrared instruments could
view the object through dust shrouding the disc: the Kuiper telescope had
detected infrared spectra that could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere,
and the Steward telescope could offer higher resolution. (ARC Release
77-33; NASA Release 77-119; NYT, June 16/77, A21; W Post, June
16/77, B-11)

   NASA announced that the first manned test flights of the Shuttle or-
biter Enterprise would begin at DFRC about June 16. In these captive
flights (phase 2 of Shuttle approach and landing tests) all orbiter systems
would be ON to verify crew procedures and determine the best separa-
tion profile for upcoming manned free flights. In the initial phase that
ended Mar. 2, the orbiter fastened to its Boeing 747 carrier had made five
JUNE                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



captive inert (unma&ed) flights at DFRC to check out its systems; in
phase 2, the orbiter would make four flights still attached to the 747 but
with crew aboard to check flutter, steering, and other performance
items. (NASA Release 77-117)

   Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978-
0

the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope- had met with
strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY
Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agen-
cy; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C),
had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle
development.
   NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project,
which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House
and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of
Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded
the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which
he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by
many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its
funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which
would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations
Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote ac-
cordingly.

   NASA had concentrated &s Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropria-
tions subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime
critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL
officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate
funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982when Jupiter
would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until
1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scien-
tists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch
of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter
project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to
settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects,
or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted.
(NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)

June 11: A new estimate of the cost of building three more Shuttle or-
biters might run as high as $600 million apiece, Thomas O’Toole
reported in the W Post. NASA had told Congress 3mo ago that the re-
maining Shuttles would cost $550 million apiece; the increase had
resulted from the rising price-of aluminum and titanium, the two key
metals in Shuttle construction. NASA had bought the materials for two

108
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                    JUNE



vehicles 3yr ago when prices were lower but had held off buying for the
last three.
   Only one of the five Shuttles presently proposed had been completed,
at a cost of about $500 million. A second being assembled at the
Rockwell Intl. plant in Palmdale, Calif., would cost just over $500
million. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC (the Shuttle-,
management center), said that NASA expected “by the end of this month
a new proposal from Rockwell for the last three spacecraft. . . . I don’t
know how much Rockwel19sgoing to suggest but they’re for sure going to
cost more than the last estimate we got.”
   NASA had hoped Congress would approve starting construction of
the third Shuttle before the end of 1977. This vehicle was to be sent to
Vandenberg AFB in March 1982 for Pentagon use. The fate of the last
two Shuttles was not certain, since GAO had told Congress to delay fur-
ther action on them. NASA and the USAF had expressed concern that
delay would mean not only the shutdown around the country of con-
tractor and subcontractor work forces that would be both difficult and
costly to reestablish, but also further and more rapid escalation of prices:
OToole quoted a NASA estimate that a 2yr delay would boost to about
$1 billion the price of each Shuttle affected. (WPost, June 11/77, A-2)

   The NY Times reported that ERDA’s Sandia Laboratories in N.M.
had produced the first fusion neutrons in the U.S. by firing a high-energy
electron beam at pellets of heavy hydrogen. Use of electron beams was a
late development in the search for economical methods of fusion-energy
release. Existing atomic-energy plants had operated by fission, or the
splitting of large atoms; fusion would squeeze small atoms to make
heavier ones. Each reaction would convert a small amount of matter into
large amounts of energy. Whereas fission generally used uranium, a
relatively scarce material, fusion could use the heavy form of hydrogen
called deuterium abundant in sea water. The process used at Sandia had
differed from that used by researchers at Moscow’s Kurchatov Inst. who
last year reported success in releasing fusion energy. (NYT, June 11/77,
22; ERDA Release 77-99)

June Z: A new $1.6-million infrared telescope with a 92-in-dia. mirror
       2
(the world’s largest) to be installed soon in an observatory atop 9656-ft
Jelm Mt. in Wyo. would be sensitive enough to measure the heat of a
warm iron on the moon, according to Today newspaper. Professors
Robert Gehrz and John Hackwell of the Univ. of Wyo. had supervised
design of the telescope, which would incorporate a sensor also of their
design: a computerized device sensing heat energy collected by the large
mirror and converting it to an infrared contour chart depicting heat in-
tensity as a topographical contour map would depict terrain. Jelm Mt.

                                                                       109
JUNE                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



was considered the best site for the observatory because of the low water
vapor in the area, a requirement for good IR reception. The two d e n - ’
tists had persuaded the state legislature of Wyo. in 1975 to appropriate
$975 OOO for the project; remaining funds had come from the Natl.
Science Foundation. (Today, June 12/77, 12A)

June 13: NASA announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Airplane
Co., Seattle, Wash., a $1.7-million contract for work on control
technology for the Boeing 747 civil-transport aircraft, part of a program
to increase fuel efficiency of future aircraft by up to 50%. Work would
include design, wind-tunnel tests, and evaluation of modifications such
as winglets, wingtip extensions, and active controls for load maneuvers,
gust alleviation, and suppression of structural vibrations. LaRC would
manage the contract for work to be done within 2yr at the Boeing plant
in Seattle. (NASA Release 77-120; LaRC Release 77-25)

  INTELSAT announced that the Republic of Chad had become the
0

96th member of the organization, and the 23rd from Africa. The IN-
TELSAT operating agreement had been signed June 9 by the Societe de
Telecommunications Internationales du Chad. (INTELSAT Release
77-14-1)

   NOAA reported it had used two of its operational environmental
0

satellites with NASA’s Landsat 2 to obtain imagery that could give early
warning of river ice melts causing ice jams and flooding. David F.
McGinnis, Jr., and Stanley R. Schneider of NOAA’s Natl. Environmen-
tal Satellite Service (NESS) had studied the Ottawa River separating
Quebec and Ontario provinces and joining the St. Lawrence River below
Ottawa and Montreal over 12 days in April 1976 to find which sections
were covered with ice. By the end of the period, all but three of the 14
sections studied had been free of obstructing ice. Disappearance of ice
monitored by the team in the Chaudiere River of SW Quebec had
resulted from hydraulic transport rather than melting, which had oc-
curred in the Ottawa River because of the blocking effect of dams,
islands, and sharp bends in the river. (NOAA Release 77-145)

   The Energy Research and Development Administration reported that
its scientists had deveIoped a new way to reclaim used automotive oils,
removing solid and liquid impurities in a solvent-and-distillz@iontreat-
ment. After heating the used oil to drive off volatile hydrocarbons and
water, the process would add a solvent to make sludge of the con-
taminants; the remaining oil would go through normal processes of
distillation, improvement of color and odor, and reformulation with ad-

110
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1917                                     JUNE



ditives. Iowa State Univ. had run a vehicle-fleet test for more than lOmo
using the re-refined oils with no abnormal wear or performance; the
product had not generated polluting byproducts. Most commercial re-
refining had used an acid-based technology producing wastes more
polluting than the used oil itself. (ERDA Release 77-14)

   ERDA announced that the world’s largest aircraft would airlift one of
0

the heaviest loads ever transported by air June 19 when a USAF C-5
Galaxy carried a U.S.-built 40-ton magnet from Chicago to Moscow for
tests of an experimental magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) process for
generating electricity. The USSR’s U-25 facility near Moscow, operated
by the Soviet Institute for High Temperatures, was the largest MHD test
facility in the world. Dr. William D. Jackson, head of ERDA’s MHD
program, said that using the Soviet plant would speed commercialization
of the process in the U.S. at reduced cost to the American public. The
magnet would aid in tests conducted jointly for about 2yr under the
U.S.-USSR Energy Agreement of 1974. (ERDA Release 77-100)

   The new administration of President Carter would not initiate a work-
0

ing Landsat earth resources monitoring system until it found out how
much money Landsat data users would invest in such a system, A v Wk
reported. The president’s science adviser Frank Press, director of the
White House office of science and technology policy, would set up a
committee to study the user-cost question. Press had told the Senate sub-
committee on science, technology, and space that it would be “premature
to commit the federal government” to support of an operational system
because of many uncertainties about remote sensing; he said that
development of a sector to be served by Landsat data had not evolved “as
rapidly as some anticipated several years ago,” and that “no comprehen-
sive assessment” had been made “of the overall market structure for
Landsat data applications. . . .”

   The subcommittee was considering a bill cosponsored by Sen. Wendell
H. Ford (D-Ky) and former astronaut Sen. Harrison M. Schmitt (R-NM)
that would establish an operational Landsat system, the space segment to
be run by NASA and the ground data distribution by the Dept. of the In-
terior. Av Wk noted, however, that the Interior testimony had been
altered at the last minute to deny support of the bill. (AvWk, June 13/77,
91)

June 14: NASA annaunced that, because of recent flight and checkout
problems, it had revised the launch schedule of its Delta rockets: GOES-
B, June 16; GMS (Japan’s meteorological satellite), July 14; Sirio (Italian

                                                                        111
                                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
JUNE


comsat), Aug. 11; OTS/ESA (comsat), Sept. 8; ISEE-A/B, Oct. 13;
Meteosat (ESA metesat), Nov. 3; and CS (Japanese comsat), Dec. 12.
(NASA Release 77-123)

* NASA announced that LaRC had undertaken a program called
CLASS (cargo logistics airlift-systems study) to see whether tailoring an
advanced air freighter design to an integrated transportation system
could mean air-cargo growth and higher carrier profits. NASA had
negotiated twin study contracts with Lockheed-Georgia Co. and with
Douglas Aircraft Co. to survey air-cargo operations at major airports; to
estimate present and future air-cargo demand, based on shipper response
to reduced cost and improved service; and to study the need for improv-
ed efficiency in air-cargo operations, and for research and technology to
support the design of future cargo aircraft. The studies had begun June 1
and would continue for 1lmo. LaRC would exchange information in the
study with government and industry organizations including the Dept. of
Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Dept. of Defense, and
private companies such as airframe manufacturers, air shippers, com-
mercial airlines, and freight forwarders. (NASA Release 77-122; LaRC
Release 77-26)

June 16: Rockwell Intl.'s B-1 division announced it had made significant
savings in awarding a contract to Honeywell Inc.'s avionics division for
equipment to test electronic systems on the USAF B-1 strategic bomber.
B-1 division president Bastian Hello said the new equipment would use
large amounts of off-the-shelf items and would be able to test a wide
range of systems supplied by Rockwell, Boeing, and the AIL division of
Cutler Hammer. The contract would direct Boeing and AIL to get test
equipment from Honeywell under separate purchasing agreements.
Rockwell should receive first deliveries of the equipment in 1978. The
USAF would use the test equipment to maintain B-1 operations; Boeing
(offensive-avionics integrator) and AIL (defensive-avionics contractor)
would use the equipment in supplying electronic instruments to the pro-
gram. (Rockwell Release LA-6)

June 16-Aug. 18: NASA launched Goes2, second in a series of geosta-
tionary operational environmental satellites, from the Eastern Test
Range at 6:51am EDT June 16 on a Delta vehicle into a transfer orbit.
On second apogee the boost motor fired at 11:26pm EDT to put the
spacecraft in a nominal orbit where it would move to a position specified
by NOAA at 75"W, and be turned over to NOAA for operations in
about 30 days. Orbital elements were 36 859km apogee, 188.6km
perigee, 23.7" inclination, and 651.8-min period.
   NASA announced on Aug. 18 that it had turned Goes2 over to NOAA

112
                                                                      JUNE
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



for operational use on July 29 at 16002. NASA engineers had completed
a planned orbital checkout to ensure proper operation, having moved the
satellite to 66.5”W over the equator where most of the tests occurred. Of
the original 801b of hydrazine carried for stationkeeping, more than 671b
remained unused. The engineers had found minor problems in the data-
handling equipment used to reliiy signals from earth-based data-
collection platforms, and in the x-ray section of the solar-environment
monitor; the data-collection problem had resulted from interference by
VHF equipment that could be turned off for most of the mission, but the
x-ray problem arose from faulty cabling that might require more calibra-
tions. Goes 2 was officially certified as successful on Aug. 5-15, having
achieved its mission objectives. (MOR E-608-77-05 [postlaunch] June
20/77, [postlaunch] Aug 18/77)

June Z : NASA announced that preparations at KSC for launching the
        7
Space Shuttle had required only two new major constructions: an
orbiter-landing facility, one of the largest runways in the world (roughly
twice as long and twice as wide as an average commercial landing strip),
with a microwave scanning-beam landing system to assist the orbiter to
an automatic landing; and a large hangar called the “orbiter processing
facility” with two high bays for checking out and servicing the orbiters
immediately after landing.
  Existing facilities modified for Shuttle use were the Vehicle Assembly
Building, 2 of its 4 high bays being altered for Shuttle assembly, and the
launch-control center being equipped with an automated launch-
processing system developed for Shuttle checkout and launch, using a
tenth of the manpower for Shuttle that had been used for Apollo: 45 per-
sons, compared to more than 450. Final countdown for Shuttle launches
would take only 2.5hr compared to the 28hr needed in countdown for an
Apollo/Saturn V. Much of the work had been completed, NASA
reported, and the eventual cost of the modifications would be about $240
million, less than a fourth of the 1960s cost of building the Spaceport for
Apollo. (NASA Release 77-124)

   MSFC announced it had awarded to Contractors Cargo Co., South
Gate, Calif., a $227 120 fixed-price contract for moving the Space Shut-
tle orbiter Enterprise eight separate times during its testing at MSFC in
1978. Now in the midst of approach and landing tests (ALT) at DFRC,
Enterprise would fly on its Boeing 747 carrier to MSFC on March 17,
1978, to be mated with an external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters
and erected on a dynamic test stand for vertical ground-vibration testing.
The contract called for design, testing, and delivery to MSFC of an or-
biter ground-transporter to travel about 6 km between the airfield and

                                                                        113
                                       ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
JUNE!



the pretest-preparation building, a trip to be completed within 2hr on
March 18, 1978.
   The “prime mover,” a 480-hp tractor with 10 wheels, would be at-
tached to 2 rear dollies each having 32 wheels and a forward dolly with 16
wheels. The segments would be joined by a “strongback” construction,
and the entire rig would weigh about 24 OOOkg (52 9001b). Length of the
transporter would be nearly 50m (about 16Oft), the width of about 24m
would accommodate the orbiter’s wingspan, and the height from ground
to top of a vertical stabilizer would be about 16m (about 54ft). For an
operating demonstration before the arrival of the orbiter at MSFC, the
transporter would carry a weightload of nearly 100 Owkg (220 0001b),
half again the weight of the orbiter. Contractors Cargo was the same
firm that had moved Enterprise from the Rockwell plant at Palmdale,
Calif., to DFRC in Jan. 1977. (MSFC Release 77-106)

   Dr. Robert A. Frosch, awaiting confirmation as NASA’s fifth ad-
ministrator, probably had “more experience in research administration”
than any of his predecessors in that position, Science magazine said. The
article pointed out that Dr. Frosch-former assistant secretary of the
Navy for research and development, former assistant executive director
of the UN environmental program, former associate director of the
Woods Hole Facility, and director at age 28 of Columbia Univ.’s Hudson
Laboratories -had been stressing science in his initial public statements.
“I’d like to be remembered as the guy who was able to help NASA im-
agine new uses for space and aeronautics and who helped the agency do
good science,” Frosch told Science in an interview.

  The magazine noted, however, that the new administrator would take
office at a time when Congress was cutting NASA projects and taking
the agency “completely by surprise.” NASA had enjoyed good relations
with the chairman and ranking minority member of the Senate commit-
tee authorizing NASA programs, who were also ex officio members of
the appropriations committee; but the old authorizing committee had
been dismantled, and NASA had come under the jurisdiction of a sub-
committee of the Senate commerce committee headed by Sen. Adlai E.
Stevenson (D-Ill). Also, aside from his introduction to the president (“He
sure gives a tough job interview,” Frosch said), the new administrator
had not been dealing with the president or his immediate staff. Overall
administration attitude toward the space agency was a big unknown, the
magazine stated, and rumors had been circulating that NASA would be
taken over by the Commerce Dept. or the Dept. of Defense, although a
spokesman for Carter’s government reorganization chief had denied the
rumors. Although Dr. Frosch might preside over a stronger science pro-
gram for NASA, the article concluded, he might also preside over a

114
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                    JUNE



change in the agency to “some new, perhaps unrecognizable form.”
(Science, June 17/77, 1301)

   Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr.
Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space
Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in
space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by
him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer I, the western world‘s first
earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in
1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital.
   Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his
childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came
across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an arti-
cle by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the
von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s
book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in
his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ.
of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines.
   He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel
(Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed
the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Ver-
sailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department
after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the
success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team
at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces
rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s
associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to
demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group
went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic
rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik I went into orbit in 1957 and the
Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s
Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer I into orbit for the U.S.
in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first
U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy
called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of
creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the
moon’s surface in 1969.
   When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had
transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of
the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon
landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate
administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But
public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in
May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at

                                                                         115
JUNE                                    ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977




Dr. Wernhervon Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual
Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S.astronauts to the moon.
(MSFC 9-00841)



Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president
of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public under-
standing and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook
him, he remained chairman and was a c t N in formulating policy. He had
resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977.
   At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came
from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime
associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C.
Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that
described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s
after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life

116
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   JUNE


                                                                       .
should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . .
You can think of h m as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of
                  i
him as he apparently thought of himself -as a man indentured only to a
       ..
dream . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.”
(MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20;
WStar, June 17/77, A-1; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7;
June 23/77, C11, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today? June 18/77,
1A; June 23/77, 8A)

   FBIS carried an announcement by Tass that the USSR had launched
9

“this morning” the French satellite Signe 3, product of a 2yr collabora-
tion between the Toulouse Space Research Center and the USSR’s Space
Research Inst. of the Academy of Sciences. The spacecraft had carried
French-made instruments to observe ultraviolet emission from the sun;
objective of the mission was to continue study of “already discovered
sources of gamma radiation in galaxies and also to replenish the catalog
of stars.” The announcement said that originally the French were to
design the spacecraft and provide the equipment, while the USSR en-
sured launch; however, “the Soviet colleagues suggested so many design
           .
novelties . . that it is actually more correct to regard the Signe 3 as a
Soviet-French satellite,” according to French project director Antoine
Miosi. This launch had begun a second decade of USSR-French coopera-
tion in space exploration: Soviet spacecraft had carried French-made in-
struments, and the French Araks experiment had orbited a Soviet elec-
tron accelerator to study polar lights. (FBIS, Tass in English, June
17/77)

June 19: The moon landing effort was possible only because the U.S. had
laid the basic theoretical groundwork in the 1940s and 1950s, the WPost
reported, quoting Richard C. Atkinson, new head of the Natl. Science
Foundation. The man who “probably controls more basic research
spending than anyone else in the world” said that Americans should not
hope science would come up with an overnight solution to the energy
crisis that would preserve their current lifestyle -“Science just doesn’t
operate with those turnaround times,” he said. The fact that many people
expected such solutions indicated “a basic incomprehension of what
science is all about,” an ironic byproduct of the mind-boggling scientific
achievement in the past 2Oyr. “After Sputnik . , .there was a big rush to
catch up here . . . They put in a lot of high-powered curricula . .Now
we have a small core of students really well educated in science and a
huge group that just [drops out] . . . Those people never have any ex-
posure again. Even college graduates now are really poorly informed on
science matters.”
   Liberal education, Atkinson said, should include solid grounding in

                                                                       117
JUNE                                    ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



basic sciences so that citizens could understand issues like the fate of
nuclear reactors and the gene-manufacturing possibilities of recombinant
DNA. “I worry,” he said, “that the nation may turn to applied research
so strongly that it neglects basic research, and basic research remains our
fundamental commitment.” ( W Post, June 19/77, C-4)

June 19-20: Newspapers carried reports of the first manned flight of the
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise June 18, riding piggyback on its Boeing
747 transport during the 54-min trip over DFRC, and carried to a land-
ing. The orbiter, designed for reuse as many as 100 times, remained at-
tached to its carrier by 3 struts, two aft and one on the nose, for its in-
vestigation of structural flutter on the craft’s brakes and flaps. Flying
under the control of JSC in Houston, the two astronauts (Fred W. Haise,
the civilian commander, and rookie USAF Lt. Col. Charles Gordon
Fullerton) rode the piggyback craft to 15 0o0ft at 209mph for most of the
flight.
   Earlier unmanned tests of the piggyback orbiter in Feb. and March
had gone smoothly; since then, engineers had installed control systems,
guidance instruments, and power units whose repeated malfunctions had
delayed the manned tests originally scheduled to begin May 26. The June
18 test had been delayed for 24hr by problems with the entry hatch and
by the failure of guidance-system computers. The astronauts reported
trouble with a cabin-pressure valve and with radio communications, and
said they had experienced more airframe surface noise than expected.
NASA had scheduled a second “manned inert” test for June 28, with the
first free flight set for late July or early Aug. ( W Star, June 19/77, A-6;
C Trib, June 19/77, 1-3; NYT, June 19/77, 19; W Post, June 19/77,
A-18; June 20/77, A-6)

June 20: JSC announced it had signed a $40 million letter contract with
Rockwell Intl. Corp. Space Division for modifications to the first Space
Shuttle orbiter Enterprise and for starting design of a third orbiter.
Funded in part by the Economic Stimulus Bill, the contract had been
directed at generating more employment opportunities. (JSC Release
77-37)

 JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell
0

Intl. Corp. Space Division deleting two items from the Space Shuttle or-
biter contract: a neutral-buoyance trainer, and vibroacoustic tests on the
aft fuselage of the orbiter. This work had been scheduled for Rockwell’s
plant in Downey, Calif., with support from JSC and KSC field offices.
The decrease of $25 334 750 had lowered the value of the cost-plus-
award-fee contract with Rockwell to $3 013 971 603. (JSC Release
77-38)

118
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                     JUNE



*AvWk reported that the USSR and France had agreed on a joint mis-
sion to Venus in 1983 for which France would design a balloon 26 to 30ft
in diameter to float in the planet’s atmosphere for up to l 0 h r collecting
data, and the USSR would design an orbiter weighing more than 6 0 k g
(13221b). Jacques Blamont, chief scientist for the French space agency
CNES (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales), said a Soviet mission
planned for Venus next year would also carry French multiwavelength
ultraviolet spectrometers on at least two spacecraft scheduled for flybys.
(AvWk,June 201’77, 27)
June 21: JPL announced that NASA had followed its recommendation
and selected a 12-bladed spinning solar sail spacecraft as a candidate for
the automated interplanetary shuttle to be used within earth’s solar
system in the 1980s and beyond. Also known as a heliogyro, the set of ex-
tremely long blades or sails made of reflective aluminized plastic would
be deployed in two tiers of six each by centrifugal force after its
spacecraft had been launched from the Space Shuttle late in 1981. The
spacecraft and its scientific payload, mounted at the center of the
heliogyro, would be propelled by photon radiation from the sun to rotate
once every 3min. The spinning-sail concept had been chosen by program
engineers and designers for development as being more feasible than a
square-sail concept that would have used an 850sq.m (half-mile square)
sail configuration. NASA would choose in mid-Aug. between the
heliogyro and a proposed ion-drive (solar-electric propulsion) spacecraft
for a Halley’s Comet mission in 1986. JPL had been working with other
NASA centers and a dozen industrial and research groups on parallel ef-
forts to develop low-thrust long-life spacecraft for the 1980s. (JPL
Release 826)

June 22: MSFC announced it had received 26 proposals from researchers
in the U.S., the U.K.,and Italy for cloud-physics experiments to be per-
formed on Spacelab. Cloud-physics research would try to explain cloud
formation and release of precipitation. Preventing or limiting the effects
of adverse weather such as severe storms or floods would enable man to
avoid yearly losses of lives, property, and agricultural crops. MSFC
teams would evaluate the proposals from engineering, management,
cost, and scientific peer group standpoints; in July NASA would select
experiments that would fly in 1980 or 1981. (MSFC Release 77-114)

  MSFC announced it had successfully tested the recovery system for the
Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters June 15 at the Natl. Parachute Test
Range. Engineers had used an SRB simulator, a drop-test vehicle
weighing more than 21 773kg (48 0001b) released from beneath the wing
of a B-52 aircraft at a speed of about 85 meters per sec (190mph) and an

                                                                         119
JUNE                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



altitude of about 5500m (18 OOOft). Primary purpose of this test was to
measure the maximum load on the drogue chute that would open first to
stabilize the vehicle and pull out the other chutes. The measured load,
about 114 OOOkg (a quarter of a million lb), was about that expected. The
next test, scheduled for late July or early Aug., would measure loads on
the other parachutes. Each Shuttle launch would use two SRBs, jetti-
soned at about 43km (27mi) altitude to descend by parachute into the
ocean and be towed to shore for reuse. (MSFC Release 77-115)

June 23: The USAF launched the Navy's navigation technology satellite
Nts 2 from Vandenberg AFB on an Atlas F booster into a 12hr circular
orbit of 63" inclination at about 11 6OOmi altitude. First of a system to be
called NavStar, the Nts 2 carried two cesium-beam time standards
(atomic clocks) to produce precise time signals and 14 solar-cell ex-
periments for its builder, the Naval Research Laboratory. The joint-
service NavStar system upon completion would consist of 24 satellites (8
in each of 3 circular-orbit planes) to provide users with longitude,
latitude, and altitude information around the clock in any weather. It
would give a customer his location within 33ft, his speed within about
4in/sec, and the correct time. Uses of NavStar would include tactical-
missile navigation and precision delivery of weapons; aid to space, air,
land, and sea travel; grid mapping and geodetic surveys; aerial rendez-
vous and refueling; and search-and-rescue operations. The USAF had
announced plans to launch five of its own satellites later in 1977 and 1978
for NavStar testing. (D/SBD, June 20/77,279; June 27177,320; A v Wk,
Oct 11/76, 47; NRL Release 20-7-77C; A Q C Newsreview, Aug 77, 3)

June 24: ComSatCorp (Communications Satellite Corporation) an-
nounced that the U.S. Navy's navigation technology satellite launched
June 23 from Vandenberg AFB had been the first satellite to use a nickel-
hydrogen battery for energy storage. Nts 2 had carried two 7-cell storage
batteries said to be rechargeable, highly reliable, and longer-lived than
the nickel-cadmium batteries used by satellites, having three times the
amount of energy stored per unit of weight and five times the cyclic
lifetime of the nickel-cadmium type. The Naval Research Laboratory
had sponsored development of the new batteries by ComSatCorp
Laboratories in Clarksburg, Md. (ComSat Release 77-19)

   MSFC announced arrival June 24 at the Natl. Space Technology
0

Laboratories of a huge steel structure to simulate the Space Shuttle or-
biter in main propulsion-test article firings later in 1977. The article
would include the simulator with an aft fuselage, an external tank, and
three Shuttle main engines; first test would take place in Dec. The
simulator, about 29m (95ft) long and weighing about 110 OOOkg

120
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                     JUNE



(243 OOOlb), had moved from the Michoud assembly facility near New
Orleans to NSTL in Miss. on the barge Pearl River, having traveled from
Calif. to Michoud via the Panama Canal on the NASA barge Poseidon
[see May 101. (MSFC Release 77-118; NASA Release 77-132)

   NASA announced that Skylab 4 commander Gerald P. Carr would
0

leave JSC June 25 to join a Houston firm, Bovay Engineers, Inc. Carr,
one of 19 astronauts selected in Apr. 1966, had shared a spaceflight-
duration record of 2017hr (84 days) with Dr. Edward G. Gibson and
William R. Pogue, and had retired from the U.S. Marine Corps in Sept.
1975 to become a NASA civilian employee. His departure left 27
astronauts on the active list at JSC. (NASA Release 77-129)

June 25: MSFC officials had said the Space Shuttle main engine might
cost nearly twice the original estimate, Today reported. In 1972 when
Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division got the contract to build the engine and
deliver 24 units, the estimated cost was $500 million; latest estimate was
$450 million more. Project director James R. Thompson and his deputy
John Harlow said the increases had resulted not only from design prob-
lems and inflation but also from delays and changes ordered by NASA
and Congress. (Today, June 25/77, 6A)

June 27: NASA announced a new way to control the flight of its sound-
ing rockets and point their instruments more accurately in astronomical
and other scientific studies: a small TV camera in the nose cone would
allow an operator on the ground to remotely aim the onboard attitude-
control system precisely at the desired stellar object. In the first use of
“manned” rocket observation Apr. 15 at the White Sands Missile Range,
N.M., scientists from Johns Hopkins Univ. had made the first sighting
of a quasar in the ultraviolet spectrum. The quasar (quasi-stellar object,
a celestial source resembling a star but probably a galaxy) was 3 billion
light-yr from earth; it was the faintest and most remote object observed
from above earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Arthur Davidsen of JHU’s depart-
ment of physics had operated the rocket controls while watching the TV
screen; his colleagues were Professors William G. Fastie and George
Hartig. Observations in the ultraviolet range would let scientists compare
properties of relatively near and more distant quasars. (NASA Release
77-13 1)

* The U.S. superconducting magnet flown to a USSR magnetohydro-
dynamic facility near Moscow [see June 131 had been bolted into place
June 20, ERDA reported. The successful installation, said Dr. William
D. Jackson, head of ERDA’s MHD program, was comparable to the
1975 linking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecrafts. Final leg of the

                                                                        121
JUNE                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



magnet’s journey had been a 10-mile trip on a U.S. truck flown in with
the magnet on a USAF C-5 Galaxy aircraft, escorted to the facility by
Soviet police. Operation of the system would begin in Oct., and about 20
U.S. scientists and engineers would take part in the 2yr experiment.
(ERDA update, June 27/77)

   Interest expressed by the USSR in joint development with the U.S. of
0

spaceborne systems for navigation, air surveillance, and air-to-ground
communications had come at an awkward time for the US.,AvWk
reported. Congress earlier in 1977 had killed the Aerosat program to
launch two air-to-ground comsats sponsored jointly by the FAA and
ESA with Canadian participation; ESA might seek its own joint effort
with the USSR. Also, the Dept. of Defense’s NavStar system, designed
mainly for military navigation users through a secure signal system, had
offered a “clear” system for civilian use that the DOD had been trying to
sell to airlines and other potential civilian markets. Soviet officials (who
had told a visiting delegation from the U.S. radio-technical commission
for aeronautics that they had been keeping tabs on NavStar develop-
ment) were apparently more enthusiastic prospects for NavStar than
U.S. users. (AvWk, June 27/77, 17)

June 28: NASA announced that the second manned inert flight of the
Shuttle orbiter Enterprise atop its Boeing 747 carrier, with astronauts Joe
Engle and Richard Truly at the controls, was so successful that the agen-
cy had canceled a fourth test and would limit the captive flights to three.
The third flight would be put off until July 28 to allow replacement of
main landing-gear actuators and a leaky power unit, and installation of
l00gal hydraulic reservoir tanks. The orbiter would remain mated to the
747 during the work.
   The faulty auxiliary power unit had been activated on schedule about
16min into the flight; a small leak noticed before the captive-active tests
had not been thought serious enough to require replacement. After the
747 had taxied to a ramp area for shutdown, the leak appeared to have
increased.
   The June 28 test had included tasks originally scheduled for the second
and third manned tests: low- and high-speed flutter and speed-brake
evaluations; a separation-maneuver test; and a fly-through of the
microwave scanning-beam landing system that would guide the orbiter to
earth in its first free flight. The flutter test had begun about 3min after
takeoff, moving the control surfaces first of the orbiter, then of the car-
rier aircraft. The pilots deployed the orbiter’s speed brakes to 60,80,and
100% open positions, pausing between each setting for rudder-deflection
test and flight assessment. The high-speed flutter tests at an altitude of
about 20 OOOft and a speed of 270 knots, followed by speed-brake tests

122
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                     JUNE



between 20 OOO and 16 OOOft, were in the same sequence as the earlier
tests except that the brake settings were in 10% increments.
   Upon completion of these testsi(34min into the flight) the carrier
climbed to 20 600ft for a separation data run. “Pushover” occurred at
43min into the flight; the data run terminated with an “abort separation”
order at 14 OOOft. The carrier returned to 17 500ft for the automatic fly-
through, followed by landing after a total flight time of 63min.
   Early data from this test indicated that separation conditions would be
satisfactory for free flight; that the mated configuration was flutter-free
for the flight envelope; and that operating the speed brake would pro-
duce no significant buffeting. (Postflight rept, orbiter ALT #7, captive-
active flt #2, June 28/77; W Post, June 29/77, A-3; B Sun, June 29/77,
3; LA Times, June 29/77,2; W Star, June 29/77,2; Today, June 29/77,
10A; AvWk, July 4/77, 18)

June 29: NASA announced the E.S. (Todd) Groo, associate ad-
ministrator for center operations since 1974, would leave the agency July
23. Ray Kline would succeed him, remaining assistant administrator for
institutional management. Deputy NASA Administrator Alan W.
Lovelace said Groo had benefited the agency by clarifying the missions
of the field centers and instituting training for future managers. (NASA
Release 77-134; NASA anno June 29/77)

June 30: The NY Times reported that a team of two Soviet crewmen, ac-
companied for a time by a woman plant expert, had completed a 4mO
stay in an isolation chamber to test an artificial environment designed for
long interplanetary space missions. The team had breathed oxygen and
consumed water and food produced by miniature wheatfields and
vegetable gardens occupying about half the space of their 1260ft2 test
chamber called Bios 3. The plants, grown by hydroponics (mineralized
solutions rather than soils), had exuded enough moisture for drinking
and household needs and had provided a third of the proteins and fats
and half the carbohydrates in the crew diet, supplemented with
dehydrated rations of animal fats and proteins stored for the mission.
   The Times quoted an Izvestia story describing the experiment and
reporting “no significant changes in the physiologic, biochemical and
psychological functions of the subjects. Their weight has also remained
virtually the same.” Dr. G. Lisovsky, head of the Controlled Biosyn-
thesis Laboratory of the Krasnoyarsk Physics Inst. in Siberia, said that
earlier experiments in the series begun shortly after the Gagarin flight of
1961 had tried chlorellas (green single-cell algae) as a source of protein
and B-complex vitamins for long space trips. The algae had yielded suf-
ficient oxygen and water but did not provide a balanced diet; researchers
had then used early-maturing wheat and vegetables. Agronomist Mariya

                                                                        123
JUNE                                     ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



Shulenko had done the cooking while checking out the hydroponics;
after she left, Gennady Asinyarov and Nikolay Bugreyev had shared the
job. (NYT, June 30/77, 28)

During June: John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for space
flight, was one of 92 persons honored by election to membership in the
Natl. Academy of Engineering. His citation was for “contributions to
engineering theory and practice and leadership of organizations that
pioneered major space programs.” (NAS News Report, June/77, 7)

   Nature reported that a May 13 meeting of the Royal Astronomical
0

Society in London had discussed Mars’s moons Phobos and Deimos, the
100th anniversary of whose discovery would occur in Aug. Observations,
both ground-based and from satellites, had revealed oddities: Phobos,
the only satellite in earth’s solar system that circled its central body faster
than that body could spin on its axis, would appear to an observer on the
planet’s surface to rise in the west and set in the east, whereas its fellow
Deimos would appear to rise in the east and set in the west like earth’s
moon. Also, the orbit of Phobos was coming nearer to the surface of
Mars (a body approaching within 8700km would be pulled apart by dif-
ferential tidal forces, the article said). A Soviet astrophysicist, I.S.
Shklovsky, had claimed in the 1950s that the low density of Phobos in-
dicated it was a hollow artificial satellite produced by an advanced
civilization on Mars. Viking spacecraft images had shown that the moons
were blackish gray rather than the red of Mars, indicating different com-
position; astronomer Joe Veverka of Cornel1 Univ. concluded that the
moons had originated in the asteroid belt. Viking had found that the
10km-diameter Stickney crater on Phobos covered 40% of the maximum
diameter of Phobos itself. The two Mars moons had almost identical
shapes (triaxial ellipsoids) and both rotated synchronously with their or-
bital periods and their long axes pointing directly at Mars (Nature, June
30/77, 758)

   Reductions made by the House subcommittee on defense appropria-
0

tions in funding for the defense satellite communications system (DSCS)
and the USAF/Navy Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) pro-
gram would force the DOD to lease its communications channels from
commercial carriers, A v Wk charged. The subcommittee had eliminated
the DOD’s entire $60-million request for R&D funds to proceed with a
contract awarded in Feb. to General Electric for a qualification model
and two flight-demonstration DSCS-3 satellites. It also had denied
money for a fourth and fifth FltSatCom satellite to be built under a con-
tract awarded to TRW in 1972; the Navy had been leasing capacity since
March 1976 on the Marisat system managed by Comsat General. The

124
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  JUNE



subcommittee, headed by Rep. George Mahon (D-Tex), had advocated
continued leasing despite DOD testimony that leasing would be more ex-
pensive, and had refused the funds requested for two other DOD satellite
systems: it had rejected outright DOD’s international global-positioning
system to be built by Rockwell, and had reduced the $83.2 million re-
quested by the USAF for a Hughes-built satellite data system by more
than half, postponing procurement of a fifth spacecraft. (AvWk, June
6/77, 60)

   JPL officials were considering an 8mo extension of the Viking mission
through early 1979, instead of terminating it May 31, 1978, AvWk
reported. Viking mission director G. Calvin Broome had estimated he
would need a team of about 180 for a continuation mission; he currently
had about 300 people working on it, and had had as many as 700 at the
height of the mission.
   In the extended mission, the two landers would continue
photographing the sites at Chryse Planitia and Utopia Planitia and
transmitting data to earth; their biology instruments had been shut down
earlier [see June 11. The orbiters would also continue to photograph the
planet, as the flight team had conserved sufficient gas supplies for pro-
pulsion and attitude control. (AvWk, June 20/77, 79)




                                                                      125
July



Jury I : NASA announced it would conduct sounding-rocket tests with
the USSR Hydromet Service for 2wk in Aug. to compare U.S. and Soviet
measurements of upper-air temperatures and detect discrepancies in their
meteorological instruments. NASA would launch a series of rockets
from Wallops Flight Center and the Hydromet representatives would
launch rockets from the research ship Akademik Korolev off the U.S.
east coast. Under a 1971 agreement on space sciences and applications,
the two nations in 1972 had begun exchange of data that had shown the
temperature field in the eastern hemisphere to be consistently colder than
that of the western hemisphere. Both sides had evaluated their rocket
systems for sources of error; direct comparisons made in 1973 at
Kourou, French Guiana, had again shown discrepancies in temperature
and wind data. Improvements in instruments and techniques since 1973
had made further comparisons necessary, NASA said. (NASA Release
77-133)

* Kennedy Space Center announced it would host for the second con-
secutive yr a gathering of more than 85 meteorologists and atmospheric
physicists for TRIP 77 (Thunderstorm Research Intl. Program 1977), in-
cluding 21 principal investigators and their associates, continuing their
studies of lightning and thunderstorms and the hazards resulting from
them. The 1976 program had yielded much data on electrical charges
within and between clouds and from clouds to earth's surface. (KSC
Release 127-77)

  Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had resumed the at-
0

mospheric variability experiments (AVE) begun in 1964 to study proc-
esses associated with the onset and development of severe storms.
Originally conducted to aid in scheduling Saturn rocket firings at MSFC,
the experiments were designed to detect unusual weather conditions com-
mon to different localities before sever storms occurred, to improve
                                          E
short-term predictions based on data from weather balloons, weather
satellites, and ground-observation posts. Sixth of the AVE series recently
conducted over 24hr in an area including Texas, Alabama, Illinois, and
North Dakota had monitored severe storms with hail and tornadoes in
Missouri and western Tennessee, and a frontal system with low-pressure
disturbances in Alabama. (MSFC Release 77-122)
                                f$3T F6b'
                     ~~~~~~




                                                                       127
                               G6
                              U k .I2 . - - ~ ~ T € ~ ~ l 0 BLANKl ~
                                                            ~AL
JULY                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



  KSC announced it had awarded a $480 193 fiied-price contract to
0

Reynolds, Smith and Hills of Jacksonville, Fla., for modifications to
Complex 39B to adapt it for Shuttle launch operations as had been done
to Complex 39A. KSC had used 39B to launch Apollo 10; Skylabs 2, 3,
and 4; and the U.S. spacecraft of the Apollo-Soyuz mission. (KSC
Release 125-77)

July 5: NASA announced that its aviation safety reporting system begun
in 1976 for the Federal Aviation Administration had been a success, as
evaluated by a NASA Advisory Council subcommittee established in
Feb. 1977. During the system’s first year, pilots, air traffic controllers,
and others working in national aviation had voluntarily submitted about
5500 safety-problem reports that had been fed into a computer to note
trends and monitor corrections. Next evaluation would be in June 1979.
(NASA Release 77-137)

July 6: NASA announced publication of the first book of a series on the
Skylab mission, Skylab, Our First Space Station (NASA SP-400), a
general introduction to and overview of the mission’s problems and suc-
cesses. The 10 chapters tell how Skylab grew from existing technology;
how it nearly failed when its micrometeorite shield and one of its solar
panels were lost, and how it was saved; how 3 manned visits occurred,
one of them for a record 84-day occupation; and how it proved the
possibility of living and working for extended periods in a space environ-
ment. (NASA Release 77-135)

July 7: NASA announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Aircraft
Go. of Seattle a contract to design and ground-test composite structures
for the Boeing 727 aircraft. NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program
to decrease transport-aircraft fuel consumption by 50% had included
contracts with several manufacturers to reduce aircraft weights by using
composites (high-strength filaments in a polymer matrix, lighter than
metal structures). Boeing would build five shipsets of composite
elevators (five right- and five left-handed) using manufacturing techni-
ques that might become standard procedure. Costs would be shared,
$8 100 OOO contributed by the government and $890 OOO by the con-
tractor. Langley Research Center wouJ’ manage contractor effort over
3.5yr. (NASA Release 77-139; LaRC Release 77-27)

  MSFC reported that employees Whitt Brantley, Jr., and Robert W.
0

Rood had invented a solar energy device capable of 300 OOO Btu per hr,
enough to heat or air condition several buildings. It would offer a 5 to
                                                                     0
70% efficient solar energy option for uses requiring temperatures above

128
                                                                      JULY
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



200’F, costing as little as $5 per ft2 for units 25 to 50ft in diameter.
(MSFC Release 77-123)

   NASA announced that a team of astronomers at the Harvard-
0

Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics using data from NASA’s Uhum
satellite had discovered what seemed to be “superclusters” of galaxies
more than 150 million light-years in diameter, bounded by areas of ex-
tremely hot gas acting as x-ray sources. The mass of gas required to pro-
duce x-rays would be 5 to 10 times greater than all material seen at other
wavelengths, and would suffice to bind the galaxies into superclusters.
Primarily hydrogen and helium, the gas was thought to be “primordial
material” from an explosion that created the universe.
   In the debate over origins, “open universe” theorists supported the idea
of a big bang 20 billion yr ago expanding outward forever; “closed
universe” advocates said gravitational collapse would halt expansion and
the material would fall back on itself, perhaps to repeat the cycle. Tradi-
tional optical and radio techniques had not found enough material in
space to supply the gravity needed to “close” the universe; the new data
indicated the missing mass might exist as vast amounts of hot gas be-
tween galaxies.
   Uhum, first of a series of small astronomical satellites (SAS) for
studying cosmic x-rays, had been launched Dec. 12,1970, as Explorer 42.
The astronomers had noted the x-ray emissions while compiling the
fourth Uhum catalog from observations in the early 1970s. The project
was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA
Release 77-138)

Jufy 8 NASA announced it and ERDA had contracted with Boeing
      :
Engineering and Construction Co. to design and build on a utility com-
pany site chosen by ERDA the largest windmill in history, a 2500kw
generator with 300ft blades, to provide data on such systems coupled
with conventional power plants. Lewis Research Center would manage
the project for ERDA. (NASA Release 77-141)

July 10: Television programs beamed by satellite to the whole world were
unwelcome to some delegates at the Vienna meeting of the UN Commit-
tee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the W.Post reported. Its reprint of
a London Observer article said that the major technical problem remain-
ing for global TV transmission was overcrowded frequencies, but
political problems remained.
  A majority of UN members including the Soviet bloc had pressed for
regulation of TV transmission, claiming the right to intervene between
their citizens and the broadcasts they could receive. The Soviet group ob-

                                                                       129
JULY                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



jected to “propaganda” especially on its Eastern European borders where
“Western TV programs, soap operas and all, are often more welcome
than the home product.” Developing countries unable to afford their
own TV broadcasts claimed that unrestricted foreign TV from satellites
would result in “cultural imperialism.”
   The delegates seemed to want data from satellites scanning the earth to
be generally available, but differed over what should go to whom. A
U.S. satellite detecting a new Soviet oil field might have to ask per-
mission before reporting the find; discovery by any satellite-operating
nation of resources (uranium, for instance) in a developing country
might start a “gold rush” by major powers wanting to “help” that country
exploit those resources. The committee agreed to formulate guidelines
for UN General Assembly approval, but western European and North
American nations wanted to prevent anything resembling censorship.
Because of a Belgrade conference in session “only a few hundred miles
further east,” the Soviet bloc also was sensitive to any measures that
could be interpreted as infringing human rights or the free exchange of
information. ( W Post, July 10/77, A-14)

July ZZ: MSFC announced it had selected General Electric Co. of Valley
Forge, Pa., to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for a prototype
Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) to be flown on a
number of Spacelab missions carried by the Space Shuttle [see June 221.
The prototype with software and spares was due for delivery to MSFC by
Oct. 1, 1979, and to KSC for Shuttle launch by Jan. 1, 1980. (MSFC
Release 77-124)

July Z: KSC reported that an experimental homemade airplane built by
      2
John Murphy of the center’s Technology Utilization Ofc. had used a
NASA-developed winglet set to increase its efficiency by about 8%.
Murphy had begun work on the plane in Dec. 1976 from plans by a
California designer and had completed it on June 12. Except for the
engine and engine mount, the plane consisted entirely of fiberglass and
Styrofoam and weighed only 6301b. Its lOOhp Continental aircraft engine
could carry two passengers at 2OOmph, requiring lOOOft for takeoff and
about 2000ft for landing. Murphy, a graduate of Georgia Tech, had been
flying for 30yr and owned another aircraft that he had built himself. He
had completed 24 of the 50hr flying time needed for Federal Aviation
Administration approval, so that he could fly it to the annual meeting of
the Experimental Aircraft Assn. in Wisconsin later this summer and
show it off to the designer. (KSC Release 128-77)

  LaRC announced it would close its Technology Utilization House to
0

the public Aug. 1 to prepare for the arrival of the family that would live

130
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                     JULY



in the house €or a year to demonstrate the innovations built into it, many
of them deriving from NASA space-program technology. The family
consisted of a professor from Florida State Univ., his wife (a registered
nurse), and their teenage daughter and 12yr-old son. The new equipment
included solar energy collectors, special insulation, a water-recycling
system, automated heating and cooling, emergency lighting, an im-
proved fireplace, and a special security system. Materials in the contem-
porary style 3-bedroom house, chosen to save energy and water and thus
reduce costs, could save more than $20 000 over a 20yr period. (LaRC
Release 77-28)

   Political interference had delayed development of science and
0

technology in China, according to Chien Hsueh-shen, director of the
mechanics institute of the PRC Academy of Sciences. The W. Post
quoted his statement in the journal Red Flag that China would “catch up
with and surpass the world advanced levels.” Chien, now China’s “top
missile scientist” according to the Post, had been a colonel in the U.S.
Army Air Corps before returning to China in 1955. Meanwhile, pro-
vincial radio reports monitored in Hong Kong said that “political in-
fighting” at a PRC base for nuclear weapons and missiles had “crippled
defense construction” for months in 1976. ( W Post, July 12/77, A-15)

July Z4: NASA launched a 280kg (6201b) geostationary meteorological
satellite (GMS) for Japan from Cape Canaveral at 10:56 EDT on a Delta
vehicle into an elliptical orbit, to be boosted at third apogee into a geo-
synchronous orbit at about 35 500km altitude over the equator south of
Tokyo. Gms I , known as Himawari in Japan, was that country’s con-
tribution to GARP, the global atmospheric research project sponsored
by the Intl. Council of Scientific Unions and the World Meteorological
Organization. The cylindrical craft had carried a visible infrared spin-
scan radiometer (VISSR) and a space environment monitor to identify
and photograph weather patterns from Hawaii to Pakistan and detect
solar energy activity that might disrupt communications on earth. More
than half the world’s tropical storms had begun in the western Pacific
and eastern Indian Ocean, said Kazuo Watanabe, project manager for
Japan’s national space development agency; Gms I could provide de-
tailed weather photos and other data every 30min to give instant warning
of typhoons in the area. Watanabe noted that Japan had been depending
on data from a U.S. satellite in polar orbit that furnished images only
twice a day. (NASA Release 77-1 10; MOR M-492-101-77-01 [prelaunch]
July 12/77; Hughes Aircraft Co. release July 12/77; NYT, July 15/77,
A-8; W Post, July 15/77, A-22)

    NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced that President
0



                                                                        131
                                       ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
JULY


Carter had declared July 16-24 as a U.S. Space Observance, the dates
chosen by Congress to coincide with the anniversary of the Apollo ZZ
moon landing as well as Apollo-Soyuz and the Viking I landing on Mars.
Dr. Frosch said that the president’s recognition of NASA achievements
“should serve as inspiration and encouragement to all of us.” (NASA
anno July 14/77)

July IS: NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for
the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long
recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr
training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735
were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants
were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA
Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)

   LaRC announced it would dedicate on July 19 the site of a new wind
0

tunnel, the National Transonic Facility, scheduled for completion in
1980 at a cost of about $85 million. The only facility of its kind in the
world, the tunnel would use cryogenic nitrogen to test aircraft models in
a realistic flight environment; cooling the medium to - 300°F would per-
mit accurate simulation of Mach numbers and atmospheric-density
ratios. Although NASA and DOD would be principal users of the tunnel,
the schedule would be shared by other federal agencies, private industry,
and the scientific community. Speakers at the dedication would be Dr.
John J. Martin, assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and
development; Donald F. Hearth, LaRC director; and Oran W. Nicks,
LaRC deputy director. A display of aircraft developed from LaRC tran-
sonic research would include a B-747 freighter; a wide-bodied DC-10
passenger plane; USAF fighters F-14, F-15, and F-106; a Learjet business
aircraft; LaRC’s B-737 flying laboratory; a T-38 jet trainer; and a
UH-1H helicopter. (NASA Release 77-144; LaRC Release 77-29)

July Id: About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W.
Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo I I ,
the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a
Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3
astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. ( W Post, July
17/77, A-18)

July Z : MSFC announced that one of its orbiting satellites, Pegasus I ,
       8
silent since Jan. 13, 1968, had suddenly come to life; GSFC’s network
operations group had picked up signals from its beacon June 27 as in-
terference with data transmission by another satellite. Pegaus I had been
launched Feb. 16, 1965, to.acquire meteoroid data on its 2300ftz of in-

132
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 l l                                   JULY



strumented surface and transmit its findings to earth stations. After a
silence of nearly lOyr, its revival was a puzzle to NASA officials who
were checking circuit drawings still available. After notifying MSFC of
the occurrence, GSFC network operations had sent a command from
Australia’s Orroral station to turn off the satellite’s AM beacon, only to
find that the FM beacon was also working. The transmitters, operating
when the vehicle was in full sunlight, were sending strong signals; the net-
work group had recorded signal strengths of both transmitters before
commanding them off. (MSFC Release 77-130)

   MSFC reported it had fired for 2min the largest solid-fuel rocket
motor ever developed, at Thiokol Corp.3 installation 24mi from
Brigham City, Utah, and 2mi from the nearest occupied building. The
Thiokol motor, the propulsive part of the Space Shuttle booster, con-
tained 502 454kg (more than 1.1 million lb) of propellant, half again as
much as the next largest motor ever fied at the site. A composite fuel,
mixed and poured into the 4 segments of the SRM, had been cured for 4
days before the segments were joined horizontally at the test site by
special handling devices. The segments would go by rail to KSC for ver-
tical assembly. Each Shuttle launch would use two of the boosters,
designed for reuse up to 20 times. (MSFC Releases 77-125, 77-133;
NASA Release 77-142)

  NASA announced it had awarded a 12th grader from Calif. a prize in
0

addition to the grand prize for 1977 in a nationwide student science com-
petition. Jonathan Holman, who had worked with control mechanisms
in blood clotting, received his award from his older brother Jeffrey, top
winner in the 1976 competition and now a student at the Mass. Inst. of
Technology. Jonathan had chosen his experiment because his family had
a history of hemophilia, in which the blood fails to clot properly. The
competition was sponsored by the Natl. Consortium for Black Profes-
sional Development. NASA coordinator for the program w s Everett P.
                                                            a
Colman, EEO officer at LeRC, who said it was a part of NASA’s effort
to increase the number of people with scientific skills the agency would
need in future. (NASA Release 77-140)

  MSFC reported that NASA had issued a request for proposals to in-
@


tegrate mission payloads, in preparation for the first three Spacelab mis-
sions and the sixth Space Shuttle orbiter flight test. Integration would in-
clude combining a number of experiments into a compatible payload;
controlling the configuration during instrument development, testing,
and flight operations; and disassembly of the payload after the mission.
Proposals, due Aug. 15, would be reviewed by a source evaluation
board. (MSFC Release 77-131)

                                                                         133
JULY                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



July 19: The Natl. Science Foundation reported that research and
development spending in the U.S. would reach an estimated $40.8 billion
in 1977, 9% more than the 1976 level of $37.3 billion. The federal
government expected to increase its R&D outlay from $19.8 billion in
1976 to $21.8 billion in 1977, emphasizing defense, space, and energy.
(NSF Release PR77-73)

   The Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) an-
0

nounced it had completed the first phase of a project funded by the Natl.
Science Foundation to learn more about earth’s magnetic field and near-
space environment. The task consisted of placing special magnetometers,
devices to measure earth’s magnetic-field densities, at more than 25
strategic and remote sites in Alaska, Canada, Brazil, and several Pacific
islands. Two NOAA geostationary spacecraft of the GOES series (one
over the Pacific and the other over Colombia, South America) would
transmit data from the devices to Boulder, Colo., for immediate
distribution to earth, atmospheric, and space scientists.

  Using the network of magnetometers with instant relay of the data to
earth would permit continuous and precise monitoring of magnetic-field
changes over the western hemisphere. The information would aid
research on the possible connection between magnetic-field variations
and climate changes; on reducing magnetic interference with com-
munications and power systems; and on the use of magnetic fluctuations
as a tool in locating geothermal, mineral, and other natural resources.
(NOAA Release 77-195)

July 20: WFC announced it would receive this week the first of two
rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) for contractor flight tests. Sikor-
sky Aircraft, which would conduct the tests, had designed the RSRA (a
joint project of NASA and the U.S. Army) to fly as a regular helicopter,
as a compound helicopter (both rotors and wings), or as a conventional
fixed-wing aircraft. As the RSRA’s engines or wings were changeable,
NASA planned to use it as a “flying wind tunnel” for trying out various
rotor systems: articulated, hingeless, or gimbaled, or with variable
geometry, variable diameter, or controllable twist. (WFC Release 77-7;
NASA Release 77-149)

  NASA announced that LeRC, under the agency’s general aviation tur-
bine engine (GATE) program, had awarded study contracts totaling
$300 OOO to 4 different companies for using in small lightweight planes
with less than lO00hp the advanced turbine technology used in large com-
mercial aircraft. The companies were Teledyne Corp. ; Garrett
AiResearch; Detroit Diesel Allison; and Williams Research Corp.

134
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                     JULY


   LeRC spokesman Bill Strack said most engines in the light-aircraft
class (reciprocating engines of less than 4OOhp) dated from lOyr ago and
lacked the advantages of turbines: reduced vibration and noise, less
maintenance, lighter weight, and greater safety and reliability. The large
production base existing for piston engines might make it hard to pro-
duce small turbine engines cost-effectively, he said. (NASA Release
77-147)

   NASA announced it would conduct the third “manned inert” flight of
0

the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dryden Flight
Research Center. At the controls of the orbiter atop its Boeing 747 car-
rier would be astronauts Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton, mak-
ing their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first
captive flight June 18; the second, on June 28, had Joe Engle and
Richard Truly as pilots.
   In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out
the orbiter flight controls at low altitude and low speed. For the third
test, the 747 would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7895 meters
(25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter
and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation.
The flight would be a dress rehearsal for the first free flight of the or-
biter, scheduled on or about Aug. 12. (NASA Release 77-146; JSC
Release 77-41)

July 2 : INTELSAT announced that Paraguay had become the 97th
      Z
member of the organization on July 18, and the 22nd nation in the
western hemisphere to join. Paraguay’s ANTELCO (Administracion Na-
cional de Telecomunicaciones) had signed the operating agreement.
Created in 1964, INTELSAT claimed to provide more than half the
world’s transoceanic telecommunications and domestic communications
for 9 countries through its global satellite system. (INTELSAT Release
77-19-1)

   Today reported that Congress had approved June 20 the largest NASA
0

budget in nearly lOyr, including new starts on three major programs. In
conference committee, the House (which had cut $20.7 million requested
by NASA to begin work on an unmanned 1982 Jupiter probe) had agreed
with the Senate on $17.7 million for the project, which NASA said was
enough to start with. The budget also contained $36 million for the large
orbiting telescope, a frequently delayed major scientific project, and
$26.6 million for Landsat-D, fourth of a series of earth monitoring
satellites. The newspaper said the only real disagreement was over the
Jupiter mission, which Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) wanted to kill
[see June 101 because of its eventual cost, estimated to reach $435 million

                                                                        135
JULY                                   ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



by the time it was scheduled for launch in 1983. The House conferees had
finally accepted the Senate’s figure. Planned to take advantage of a
favorable alignment of the earth with Jupiter in 1982, the mission would
not only be the first to orbit Jupiter but would also drop a probe into the
planet’s atmosphere. During its 20mo in orbit, the mission would also
view Jupiter’s moons at close range. (Today, July 21/77, 20A)

July 25: NASA announced it had on July 21 and 24 adjudged the Ex-
plorer 52 and 55 (Atmosphere Explorer) missions successful. Launched
Qct. 6, 1975 (as AE-D) and Nov. 20, 1975 (as AE-E), the two spacecraft
had carried instruments to study energy transfer and chemical processes
in the atmosphere. AE-D had “performed properly” until Jan. 29, 1976,
when a power system failure ended control of the spacecraft, which
reentered earth’s atmosphere March 16. Its perigee had moved from
equatorial at launch, northward to the winter pole and southward to the
summer pole, producing “excellent measurements” at all latitudes. AE-E,
still in operation, “continues to acquire and contribute worthwhile data”
on the Atmosphere Explorers’ findings, which had resulted in 250 formal
presentations at scientific gatherings and 130 publications in technical
journals. (NASA MOR S-852-75-04/05)

   NASA announced it had selected Ball Bros. Research Corp., Boulder,
0

Colo., to negotiate a $13.8 million contract for the telescope system on
the infrared astronomy satellite ( I U S ) , a joint US.-Netherlands mis-
sion to survey the celestial sphere in the infrared spectrum. The U.S.
would provide a large cryogenically cooled instrument and the
Netherlands would provide the spacecraft and would supervise integra-
tion. NASA would launch I U S from WTR early in 1981 on a Delta for
its yr-long scientific mission. The Ball Bros. contract would cover design,
fabrication, test, and launch support for the telescope, plus spares, an
engineering model, and ground-support equipment. The Jet Propulsion
Laboratory would manage the project, and Ames Research Center would
be responsible for the telescope system (NASA Release 77-154)

   NASA announced it had selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.,
Sunnyvale, Calif., and Perkin-Elmer Corp., Danbury, Conn., to
negotiate contracts totaling more than $131 million for two major
elements of the Space Telescope. Lockheed would design, fabricate, and
integrate the telescope support-systems module, provide systems
engineering and analysis, and support NASA in ground and flight opera-
tions. Perkin-Elmer would design, manufacture, and deliver the optical
assembly and equipment, including systems engineering, support of the
launch, verification of the orbit, and plans for mission operations. The
8ft-diameter telescope, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in

136
                                                                     JULY
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



1983, would offer an astronomical capability beyond anything possible
from the earth’s surface or any telescopes launched so far because of its
improvements in resolution, power, light sensitivity, and wavelength
coverage. It would be refurbished periodically in orbit or could be
returned to earth on the Shuttle for repair or upgrading. The support
module would provide electric power, communications, data processing
and storage, attitude sensing and control, and environmental control to
the telescope assembly and up to 5 additional scientific instruments ac-
commodated by the telescope. MSFC, which had overall project
management responsibility, would manage the contracts for the support
module and the optical assembly; GSFC would manage scientific instru-
ment development. (NASA Release 77-153)

* ARC announced that its 1977 summer study under the leadership of
Dr. Gerard P. O’Neill on space settlements and industrialization using
nonterrestrial materials would offer a briefing Aug. 2 on the technical
areas covered: life-support systems, habitat design, materials transport
and processing, and space manufacturing. (ARC anno July 25/77)

July 26: NASA announced that the launch of HEAO-A (the high-energy
astronomy observatory) originally scheduled for April 1977 had been set
for Aug. 12. Problems with the spacecraft’s gyroscopes, required for at-
titude control, had caused the delay. Analysis and testing had produced
design changes to improve gyroscope reliability for the expected 6mo
mission lifetime. HEAO-A would be first of three astrophysical obser-
vatories orbited over the next 3yr to study radiation from stellar sources
throughout the universe. (NASA Release 77-156)

   NASA announced it would hold a briefing at Hq Aug. 4 on the scien-
tific studies to be conducted by the Voyager spacecraft scheduled for
launch later this year towihl the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, and
possibly Uranus. Participants in the briefing would be Dr. Noel W. Hin-
ners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science; Dr. Edward
Stone, Calif. Inst. of Technology, project scientist; John Casani of JPL,
project manager; Dr. Bradford A. Smith, Univ. of Ariz., leader of the
imaging science team for the Voyager project; and Dr. James W.
Warwick, Univ. of Colo., principal investigator for planetary
radioastronomy. (NASA Release 77-155)

J u b 2: NASA announced that the Soviet ship expected to participate in
       7
comparisons of atmosphere-measuring instruments [see July 11 would ar-
rive off the Virginia coast about Aug. 7 to serve as the platform for
USSR rocket launches. The tests would consist of paired launches of
about 22 U.S. Super Lokis and about 33 USSR M-lOOBs, plus 6 Super

                                                                       137
                                       ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
JULY


Loki sphere systems to be launched by Wallops; statistical evaluation
would require from 14 to 22 successful paired launches. (WFC Release
77-8; NASA Release 77-151)

   NASA announced that a disaster simulation in Texas using the com-
0

munications technology satellite -world’s most powerful comsat -had
turned into an actual emergency operation providing communications
between Red Cross headquarters in Washington, D.C., and flood-
stricken Johnstown, Pa. ComSatCorp and the Red Cross had set up an
experiment to demonstrate emergency use of satellites in natural
disasters; the Texas results had led Red Cross officials to ask for
assistance in the actual emergency at Johnstown.
   The Cts equipment transferred from Houston to Johnston July 23 and
set up at a vocational high school near the Univ. of Pittsburgh was a
portable station with a 4ft antenna to send and receive signals to and
from the synchronous satellite orbiting over the equator just west of
South America. During the emergency it had sent messages through the
Cts to ComSat offices in Clarksburg, Md., connected by land line to
Washington. The disaster-related communications included requests for
medical and physician services, supplies and administrative services, and
transmission of situation maps. Johnstown’s residents also could use the
Cts link to communicate with relatives around the U.S. when the Red
Cross was not using the lines. The emergency had preempted Canadian
and U.S. experiments scheduled for July 25-26. (NASA Release 77-157)

  WFC announced it had completed tests using rockets, balloons, and
0

supporting ground observations to obtain data on the natural state of
earth’s ozone layer and on stratosphere pollution, As part of the joint
WFC-GSFC applications sounding-rocket program (ASRP), the tests
July19-22 had measured daylong variations in the vertical distribution of
ozone to establish a model for studying the effects of pollutants. (WFC
Release 77-1 1)

  LaRC and WFC announced arrival of an LaRC airplane at Wallops
0

for tests of spin characteristics, using four different tail designs
developed at Langley as part of a larger program begun in 1972 to im-
prove safety in light airplanes by investigating spin and stall [see May
181. About 30% of fatalities in light planes resulted from spins or stalls.
The low-wing, single-engine test plane had been modified to make use of
the viyious tails and of a spin recovery parachute to counter the effects
of some of the configurations. Two high-wing lightweight planes would
share the tests. Besides full scale planes, the program would also use
spin-tunnel models and powered radio-controlled free-flight models in-
                                                                        JULY
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



strumented to give detailed information on each flight in real time.
(WRC Release 77-10; LaRC Release 77-33)

July 28: NASA announced plans to launch the first Italian experimental
comsat Sirio on or about Aug. 17 from ETR on a Delta vehicle. A large
segment of Italian industry interested in space technology had worked on
the spacecraft and would use the experience for future international
space programs. In synchronous orbit over the equator off the west coast
of Africa, the comsat would transmit voice, data, and TV in the super-
high frequency (SHF) range from Europe to North America; its ex-
perimenters would study propagation of SHF during adverse weather
conditions including rain, snow, and fog. Use of SHF had become
necessary because conventional frequencies were overcrowded.
  Italy’s research agency, Consiglio Nazionale della Richerche (CNR),
had contracted with NASA for launch and support services until the
craft reached its station 30 to 45 days after launch. The name Sirio was
an acronym for Satellite Italian0 Ricerca Industriale Orientata (in-
dustrial research-oriented Italian satellite). (NASA Release 77-152)

   KSC announced it had awarded a $7 325 OOO fixed-price contract to
Algernon Blair Industrial Contractors, Inc., of Norcross, Ga., for con-
verting a Saturn/Apollo mobile launcher to a mobile-launcher platform
for the Shuttle program. Work would include removal of a 400ft um-
bilical tower and crane and replacement of the single exhaust opening in
the original platform with three openings required by the Shuttle main
engines. One of KSC’s three mobile launchers had almost completed con-
version and the new contract would cover work on a second. The
reusable Shuttle had been scheduled for its first manned orbital mission
in the spring of 1979. (KSC Release 137-77)

   Comsat General Corp. announced that the U.S. Navy had agreed to
extend its use of three Marisat satellites for an additional 2.5yr, ending in
1981, at a cost of about $138 million [see During June]. The Navy had
begun using the Atlantic Marisat in March 1976, the Pacific satellite in
June 1976, and the Indian Ocean satellite in Jan. 1977. Each of the three
Marisats had a design life of 5yr and could operate in three frequencies:
UHF (ultrahigh frequency) for Navy service, and the L-band and Gband
for commercial maritime users. The Navy had leased all UHF capacity in
all three Marisats for communications between its own fixed and mobile
terminals. The Marisat system was owned and operated by four com-
panies under a joint-venture arrangement approved by the Federal Com-
munications Commission: Comsat General, which acted as system
manager, with nearly 87% ownership; RCA Global Communications;

                                                                          139
JULY                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



Western Union Intl.; and ITT World Communications. (Comsat General
Release CG 77-3; WSJ, July 29/77, 6)

July 29: NASA declared the launch of Japan's geostationary
meteorological satellite Gms I on July 14 successful, as of July 26-27.
The satellite was being maneuvered over the South Pacific to a station
about 140"E above the equator, due south of Tokyo. (MOR
M-492-101-77-01 [postlaunch] July 29/77)

   NASA announced that the first 20 of about 200 Shuttle astronaut ap-
0

plicants would report to JSC Aug. 2 for a week of individual interviews
and physical exams. Ten of the group were from the USAF, 7 U.S. Navy,
2 Marines, and 1 civilian. Although all the initial group had been pilot
applicants, NASA expected the number interviewed at JSC would divide
evenly between pilot and mission specialist applicants. NASA would
complete processing by mid-November and hoped to select as many as 20
astronaut candidates in each of the two categories in December. Can-
didates would report to JSC in 1978 for 2yr of training and evaluation;
final selection as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of
training. (JSC Release 77-42)

   ERDA announced that the longest space mission ever planned-a lOyr
trip by two Voyager spacecraft to the outer planets -would get power
from RTGs (radioisotope thermoelectric generators) developed by
ERDA as successors to nuclear systems that had powered earlier missions
to Mars and Jupiter.
   ERDA's predecessor, the Atomic Energy Commission, had begun the
research on nuclear power for space missions. ERDA plans included
developing high-efficiency thermoelectric materials and dynamic con-
verters for NASA missions such as a Jupiter orbiter in 1982 or a Mars
rover in 1984, and DOD satellites in the 1980s. (ERDA Release
NF-77-20)

  ERDA reported that the U.S. atomic energy detection system had
recorded seismic signals, presumably from a Soviet underground nuclear
explosion, at lpm EDT on July 26. The signals had originated in central
Siberia, north of the Arctic circle. (ERDA Release 77-129)

During July: NASA reported that researchers at LaRC had devised a
nuclear pumped laser output 100 times more powerful than that available
from noble or inert gases, 3 . 5 ~ a volume of only 1 cubic centimeter. A
                                 in
major step in laser technology, the experiment had converted kinetic
energy from the splitting of atoms directly into photons (light energy, in

140
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                       JULY


the form of laser beams) without the energy-wasting intermediate step of
converting heat to electricity.
   The aim of the research had been to produce and transmit large quan-
tities of power in space, using high-power laser beams as highly efficient
energy conductors with transmitters and receivers measured in meters
rather than in kilometers for similar microwave equipment. Laser beams
could connect central power plants in space with settlements, materials
processing centers, or scientific operations in earth orbit; laser powered
vehicles could transport payloads to geosynchronous orbit from lower
altitudes. (NASA Release 77-143)

* An idea tried 61yr ago had come of age, NASA reported, with the
piggyback flights of the orbiter Enterprise on its Boeing 747 carrier. In
1916, to put a Bristol Scout airplane at an altitude where it could attack
Zeppelin bombers over England, the British had loaded it on a three-
engine Felixstowe flying boat for a single flight May 17 of that year. Both
aircraft had landed safely, but the experiment had not been repeated.
(NASA Release 77-148)

   NASA noted that Landsat I , first satellite to focus specifically on
earth and its natural resources, had completed its 5th yr in orbit. Launched
July 23, 1972, with a life expectancy of only lyr, Landsat had monitored
air and water pollution, geological resources, agricultural production,
and potential water supply. Dr. Wernher von Braun had predicted that
this program alone could give the U.S. “a return exceeding its total space
program investment,” (NASA Release 77-150)

* In a  W. Post column, science writer Daniel S. Greenberg commented
on the “leaky embargo system that is supposed to deny the Soviets
western technology of strategic value.” The principal feature of a new
DOD plan drawn up for State and Commerce Dept. approval before
presentation next spring to the Coordinating Committee of Nations
(‘?VAT0 minus Iceland, plus Japan”) on restricting strategic export to
Communist bloc nations was that “it isn’t confined to hardware,”
Greenberg noted. The new embargo scheme, he said, was aimdd at
technological know-how; its enforcement would admittedly encompass
“the entire span of advanced American technology. . . . Hardware can
be stopped at the loading dock, but know-how, being intangible or con-
fined to paper, calls for different barricades.”
   The truth about the embargo, Greenberg charged, was that “virtually
no one is interested in it except certain military and industrial elements in
the U Furthermore, most of what we won’t sell is easily available from
     .S.
sales hungry producers elsewhere. And, finally, there is ample evidence

                                                                          141
JULY                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


that . . . the Soviets, despite their many technological shortcomings, can
home produce whatever they deem necessary.” The proposed embargo,
Greenberg concluded, might retard the Soviets a bit, but the presence of
DOD “gumshoes in the American scientific and technological enterprise
is a stiff price to pay” for that delay. ( W Post, July 12/77, A19)

* JPL reported that Donald Lynn and Jean Lorre of its image process-
ing laboratory had shared in a scientific investigation of the Shroud of
Turin, preserved in Italy since 1578. At the request of groups in N.Y. and
N.M., Lynn and Lorre had used advanced NASA techniques
(mathematical and contrast enhancement) to obtain a noticeably clearer
image from negatives and color slides taken at a 1973 display of the cloth
and the image appearing on it. (JPL Universe, July 1/77, 1; Natl Inq,
July 19/77, 4)




142
August



August 1: NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the
Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center.
Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program
manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC
astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems
operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron
Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems.
(NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)

   NASA announced it would put on each of the Voyagers to be launched
0

in Aug. a phonograph record, “Sounds of Earth,” containing natural
noises of surf, wind, and thunder, and of birds, whales, and other
animals. The 12in disk would include greetings from earth in a number
of languages [see June 31 and samples of music from different cultures
and eras. The disk contained electronic data convertible by an advanced
technological civilization into diagrams, pictures, and printed instruc-
tions designed to give beings that intercepted the craft an idea of 20th
century earth and its inhabitants. “The spacecraft will be encountered
and the record played only if there are advanced spacefaring civilizations
in interstellar space,” said Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornel1 Univ., originator of
the message sent into space on Pioneers 10 and 11. The copper disk in its
aluminum jacket could survive as long as a billion yr; the Voyagers might
take 40 OOOyr to approach another star, and other predictable ap-
proaches would occur in 147 OOO and 525 OOOyr. (NASA Release 77-159)

  Langley Research Center announced that 21 area high school students
0

had completed a 4wk hands-on career exploration program at the center,
applying classroom concepts to actual situations. Each student had been
assigned to a sponsor in science, computers, engineering, or mathematics
to supervise the unpaid 8hr workdays. (LaRC Release 77-34)

  Despite U.S. revulsion at Soviet domestic oppression of scientists and
the resulting condemnation of such practices, the U.S. and the USSR had
found “enough common ground” in the sciences to renew cooperation
for another 5yr, the Christian Science Monitor noted. Renewal of the
1972 accord signed by President Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev was

                                                                        143
AUGUST                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




Technicians attach “Sounds o Earth” recording to Voyager 2 spacecraft before
                              f
encapsulating it for launch, scheduled later in August. (NASA 77-H-509)


“neither casual nor automatic,” CSM said. In view of charges that the
agreement mainly benefited the USSR, a committee of the U.S. Natl.
Academy of Sciences had reviewed scientific detente and had told
presidential science adviser Frank Press that “positive benefits” for the
U.S. made continued cooperation valuable. Subsequent negotiations,
CSMnoted, went on without mention of human rights. “. . .There is on-
ly so much one nation can do in holding up a moral standard for
another,” the article concluded, adding that “. . .Two powerful nations
holding seemingly irreconcilable political views should . . . continue to
seek ways to live peacefully together on the same small planet.” (CSM,
Aug 1/77, 11)

August 2 JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due
        :
for screening. Center Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that the
quality of the-applicants would make it “difficult to narrow the fieId . . .
paring that number will be a real challenge.” (NASA Release 77-161)

    NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam, IV, deputy direc-
0



144
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 AUGUST



 tor of DFRC, succeeding Gerald D. Griffin, recently appointed deputy
 director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla. Gillam, who had directed Shut-
 tle operations at Dryden in the current approach and landing tests, had
 joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch
Jcrew commander, and ROTC instructor. After receiving a B.A. from
 Howard Univ., he had done graduate work at Tenn. State Univ. and had
 been assistant professor of air science there. NASA had appointed him
 assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in
 1968. In 1973, he became program manager for small launch vehicles,
 and had gone to DFRC in 1976. He had received NASA’s distinguished
 service medal for his work with launch vehicles. (DFRC Release 27-77;
 NASA Release 77-164; NASA anno Aug 4/77)

August 4: NASA announced it had scheduled launch of two Voyager
spacecraft toward the outer planets, one on Aug. 20 and the other about
12 days later. The Voyager 2 would go first and the Voyager 1, flying a
faster trajectory, would go later; it would reach Jupiter 4mo ahead of
Voyager 2, probably in March 1979. By the time it reached Saturn,
Voyager 1 would be 9mo ahead of the other craft. NASA planned to use
the gravitational field of Jupiter to send the Voyagers on to Saturn by
means of a “slingshot” technique; Voyager 1 would reach Saturn in 1980,
3.2yr after launch, on a trip that would take 6.lyr without the gravity
assist. Estimated cost of the Voyager project (not counting launch
vehicles, tracking and data acquisition, or flight support) would be $320
million. (NASA Release 77-136)

 * NASA announced that IBM Corp., under contract to LaRC, had
developed the most efficient solar cell for space use reported to date. The
new solar cells, derived from compound semiconductors gallium
aluminum arsenide and gallium arsenide, had an efficiency of 18% in-
stead of 13 to 14% for commercially available silicon-derived cells. High-
efficiency cells could fill a power requirement with fewer numbers,
meaning less weight to be launched and maneuvered as well as reduction
in mission cost. The new cells had a “window layer” of gallium aluminum
arsenide on the surface of the gallium arsenide cell. Absorption of
sunlight in an ultra thin layer just below the surface of a solar cell had
meant loss of some of the energy at the surface, accounting for the low
efficiencies of previous cells; presence of the window layer had reduced
this loss. (NASA Release 77-163)

 * JSC announced that a summer workshop at the Univ. of Calif., San
Diego, would discuss scientific and technological exploitation of lunar
and asteroid materials. Participants selected for the workshop were geo-
scientists and geoengineers from government, private industry, and the

                                                                       145
AUGUST                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



university community. Univ. of Calif. professor and lunar researcher Dr.
&James Arnold, chairman of the workshop committee, would present to
NASA’s Office of Space Science the group’s recommendations on
research to be attempted and on the exploitation possible at present levels
of understanding. (JSC Release 77-43)

August 5: NASA announced that Bradford Johnston, associate ad-
ministrator for the Office of Applications since June 1976, would resign
effective Sept. 30. Dr. Robert Frosch, NASA administrator, said that
Johnston’s contributions to useful applications of space techniques had
made the program more responsive to national needs. (NASA anno Aug
5/77; NASA Release 77-166)

  The W. Post reported that London’s Intl. Assn. Against Painful Ex-
0

periments on Animals had protested Soviet government use of white rats
in space research, following USSR launch of a spacecraft carrying
several white rats for an international study on weightlessness. ( W Post,
Aug 5/77, A-13)

August 8: NASA reported a first-time continuous operation by NASA-
funded Univ. of Fla. researchers of a nuclear pumped gas laser reported
earlier by LaRC scientists [see During July]. Confirming the results of
the Georgia Tech experiment, the Fla. group had transmitted laser
energy for 15min and reported that longer transmission was possible.
Earlier nuclear pumped lasers had produced only short bursts of energy.
(NASA Release 77-165)

* NASA announced it had patented a way to control cell division that
might mean a new treatment for cancer or replacement of lost cells in the
brain or other parts of the human nervous system. Studying at LaRC the
effects of space radiation on living cells, Dr. Clarence D. Cone, Jr.,
former head of LaRC’s molecular biophysics lab, now chief of the near-
by VA molecular biology laboratory, had changed electrical potential
across hamster cell membranes. Studies had shown cell division could be
either blocked or stimulated by various agents, most of which could not
produce both effects. Cone’s method of surrounding the cells with
various concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride ions, pat-
terned after ionic mechanisms used by the body to control cell division,
could either turn on or turn off the process.
   Cone’s successful attempts to stimulate cells to divide or proliferate, or
prevent dividing and proliferating, had not damaged the cells, and
showed that the processes were reversible. Manipulating the ionic levels
in human body cells might permit reversal or inhibition of uncontrolled
proliferation, such as that of cancer cells. (NASA Release 77-162)

146
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               AUGUST



August 9 JSC announced it had awarded Lockheed Electronics Co. of
         :
Houston a 2yr cost-plus-award-fee contract estimated at $4 004 715 for
technical support services at the Slidell Computer Complex’s earth
resources facility in La. Lockheed would furnish about 80 persons to
operate and maintain the data acquisition laboratory, data systems
laboratory, data processing laboratory, and data preparation laboratory.
(JSC Release 77-45)

   NASA announced that Dr. Hans Mark, former director of Ames
0

Research Center, had been sworn in at the Pentagon, Washington, D.C.,
Aug. 9, as Undersecretary of the Air Force by Defense Secretary Harold
Brown. Dr. Mark, ARC director from Feb. 1969 to July 1977, had
taught nuclear engineering at the Univ. of Calif. at Berkeley and
engineering at Stanford Univ.; he had also taught at Boston Univ. and
the Mass. Inst. of Technology.
  Born in Germany in 1929, he had become a U.S. citizen in 1945 and
had been a consultant to the Institute for Defense Analysis (1958-1961),
the USAF Scientific Advisory Board (1969-1976), and other defense-
related and scientific organizations. C.A. Syvertson would be acting
director of ARC until a successor was named. (ARC Release 77-38;
NASA anno Aug 15/77)

  NASA announced that Dr. Bruce T. Lundin would retire as director of
0

Lewis Research Center Aug. 26 after 34yr with NASA and its
predecessor, NACA. LeRC deputy director Dr. Bernard Lubarsky would
be acting director until a successor was named. In 1943, Dr. Lundin had
begun working at the NACA Lewis Research Center on improvement of
World War I1 aircraft engines.
  When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. Lundin became assistant
director of LeRC; in 1961 he became associate director for development,
working on space propulsion and power generation. In May 1968 he was
deputy associate administrator at NASA Hq, then acting associate ad-
ministrator for advanced research and technology. He became director
of LeRC as of Nov. 1, 1969, and had led the center’s research on solving
the nation’s energy problems. He had not announced his future plans.
(NASA Release 77-167; NASA anno Aug 9/77)

   LaRC announced that the NASA/ASEE engineering systems design
team would give a final presentation Aug. 12 on the role of aerospace
technology in agriculture. The team of faculty from local colleges and
universities would discuss agricultural aircraft, remote sensing, and im-
pact on the social and physical environment. The Old Dominion Univ.
would distribute the team’s written report later in 1977. (LaRC Release
77-36)

                                                                      147
AUGUST                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



August Z : NASA announced it had selected Hughes Aircraft Co.3
         Z
Space and Communications Group for negotiation of a $33 million con-
tract to build, test, and deliver three geostationary operational en-
vironmental satellites, GOES-D, -E, and -F, as follow-ons in the syn-
chronous meteorological satellite (SMS) series providing near continuous
high quality observation of the earth and its environment. The GOES
spacecraft would carry a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer at-
mospheric sounder (VAS) to obtain day or night cloud cover photos of
the portion of the earth viewed from geostationary orbit, with
temperature readings at various levels of the atmosphere; the $33 million
contract did not include the three VAS instruments being produced
under contract by Santa Barbara Research Center. They would also carry
a space environment monitoring system of three separate sensors to
monitor solar emissions.
   Goddard Space Flight Center would be project manager for the GOES
systems developed and procured by NASA on a reimbursable basis for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which would
operate the spacecraft after launch and checkout by NASA. (NASA
Release 77-170)

   JSC announced that the second group of 20 Shuttle astronaut ap-
plicants would report Aug. 15 for individual interviews and physical ex-
aminations. Like the first group, all those in the second group had ap-
plied for pilot positions. The second group included 11 USAF applicants,
7 Navy, 1 Marine, and 1 civilian. (NASA Release 77-171;     JSC Release
77-44)

   LaRC announced that the Charles W. Swain family of Tallahassee,
a
Fla., would move into the Tech House Aug. 15 for a yr-long demonstra-
tion of NASA designed systems in and around the house to save energy
and water and make the home more secure. They would pay a prorated
rent and all utilities during their stay. Dr. Swain, a humanities professor
at Fla. State Univ., would work with LaRC personnel in career counsel-
ing and employee relations. Mrs. Swain, a registered nurse, hoped to
continue in her profession while living at LaRC. Their two children
would attend local high schools. LaRC had chosen the Swains from a list
provided by the American Council on Education, a nonprofit organiza-
tion sponsoring university professors for lyr assignments to the federal
government. (LaRC Release 77-37)

   Calif. Gov. Edmund G. Brown, Jr., hailed the advent of the space age
at a Space Day gala in Los Angeles sponsored by 1 1 aerospace companies
and the United Bank of Calif. More than a thousand persons attended
the exhibit, prelude to the Shuttle orbiter free flight Aug. 12 over the Mo-

148
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  AUGUST



jave desert. The program included two space movies, as well as speeches
by Carl Sagan on planetary exploration, Gerard K. O'Neill on space col-
onies, and Jacques Yves Cousteau on spaceflight and the oceans of the
world. (WPost, Aug 12/77, A-9)

August 12: NASA launched the first high-energy astronomy obser-
vatory, HEAO-A, from ETR on an Atlas Centaur at 2:29am EDT into a
near circular orbit with 456.3km apogee, 431.4km perigee, 93.5min
period, and 22.75" inclination.
   Heao I, nearly 19ft long and nearly 9ft in diameter, weighting 56261b
at liftoff (including 29601b of experiments and an 8311b separation
system), had a 6mo design lifetime but would carry enough consumables
and orbit at an altitude to allow extension of its mission up to lyr. It
would operate in 2 modes, pointing and scanning: its batteries would
point continuously at the sun as the vehicle moved l"/day in the ecliptic
longitude, and its detectors would scan in wide circles perpendicular to
the plane of the ecliptic. TRW had built the spacecraft equipment
module (SEW containing all the subsystems used by all the experiments
for operation and control, and a mission unique experiment module
(EM) filling the requirements of each payload segment. Dr. Fred Speer,
HEAO manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the spacecraft,
rotating end over end, would survey the entire sky within its 6mo
lifetime.
   This launch was the first in a three mission program to study x-rays,
gamma rays, and cosmic rays emitted by stellar sources, the other
launches to be in 1978 and 1979. The HEAOs would carry large and
heavy scientific instruments needed for observations at the high-energy
and low-flux levels of these phenomena. Estimated cost of the 3 obser-
vatories was $237 million.
   The original plan in 1968 had been to launch a 4Oft vehicle weighing
22 0001b; budget problems had reduced the size of the undertaking.
However, the x-ray detector built by NRL as 1 of 4 experiments carried
by Heao I was the largest instrument ever flown on an unmanned
satellite, weighing almost 1OOOlb. The NRL package, called the large area
x-ray survey, was a 7-module array 20 times as large as any of its
predecessors that would map the sky by recording incident x-ray fluxes
and would determine the spectrum, time, and intensity variations of new-
found x-ray sources. NRL's Dr. Herbert Friedman noted that known
x-ray sources now numbered about 200; Heao 1 might increase the list to
several thousand. Celestial sources of x-ray emission included white
dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes, products of stellar catastrophe,
as well as quasars and radio galaxies; also, a class of ministars almost too
small for detection by the biggest optical telescopes might emit radiation
10 OOO times as great as all the radiant energy of earth's sun.

                                                                        149
AUGUST                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   The other experiments on Heuo I were a scanning-modulation col-
limator to make parallel observations, using instruments designed by
Harvard and MIT, to pinpoint locations of sources and determine their
structure; a cosmic x-ray experiment designed by NASA and CalTech, to
look for diffuse x-rays or cosmic rays; and another experiment from
MIT and the Univ. of Calif. San Diego, to look for hard x-rays and low-
energy gamma rays. NASA planned a guest observer program for this
mission, participants to be selected from responses to a “Dear Colleague”
letter issued by the Office of Space Sciences.
   A malfunctioning rate gyro had delayed the planned June 30 launch;
the Bendix-built instrument had been removed and returned to the
manufacturer March 31, but further similar delays occurred [see July
261. Early data from orbit showed spacecraft systems and experiments
were operating normally. (NASA Releases 77-45, 77-56, 77-71, 77-83,
77-87; OSS rept 5-832-77-01 [prelaunch] May 16/77, July 29/77; MOR
5-832-77-01 [postlaunch] Aug 12/77, Apr 3/78; MSFC Releases 77-32,
77-64,77-107,77-142; KSC Releases 85-77,140-77; Spacewarn SPX-284;
NYT, Apr 10/77, 23; Aug 13/77, 33; NRL Release 23-8-77s)

   The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air
Force Base in Calif. with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave
desert 53min Slsec after taking off at 8am local time (llam EDT) and
Smin 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise,
Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran
test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the
Boeing 747.
   Spectators, estimated to number about 70 OOO, had begun arriving the
previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am
local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had
separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had
slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton
Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 O0Oft (81OOm) before it
started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, re-
leased at 22 lOOft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747
another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following
the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were
clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the
craft separated.
   Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-
engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which
could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the
Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747.
   Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots
reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in un-

150
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separatesfrom its Boeing 747 carrier in first free
flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552)

powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot
like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as
a “very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had
pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing
characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter
had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers,
without affecting the flight.
   The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its bat-
tery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed
in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11O angle, more
than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed
of 338kph (2lOmph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph.
The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point,
because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another
2mi before stoppping.
   For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft
rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove
the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon
returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving
measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no air-
breathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed
by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a land-
ing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into
orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by
the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail.

                                                                                151
AUGUST                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic
airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-
guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to
land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle
the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine
in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160;
NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al;
WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77,7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1;
Time,Aug 22/77, 64)
* MSFC announced that a young student assistant under the first NASA
research grant awarded Alabama A&M Univ. 12yr ago, now a nationally
known organic mass spectrometrist, had become a NASA researcher
again, representing Meharry Medical College and the Natl. Inst. of
Health as a summer faculty fellow. Dr. Stanley L. Evans, one of 23
researchers selected for the Aeronautics and Space Research Faculty Pro-
gram sponsored by NASA and the Am. Society of Engineering Educa-
tion, would study separation and preserving of cells in zero gravity.
(MSFC Release 77-144)

August 23: The W. Post reported that the U.S. Naval Observatory had
honored the memory of its astronomer Asaph Hall with a 2:30am party
attended by Hall’s descendants (“a fine crop of teen-agers and young
adults”) on the 100th anniversary of his discovery of the moon of Mars,
which he had named Deimos (flight) and Phobos (fear) after the horses
that drew the war god‘s chariot. “It now turns out,” the Post added, that
the little moons would crash into Mars within the next 70 million yr [see
During June]. Other Naval Observatory observances honoring Hall in-
cluded a reception, a group of technical meetings, a dinner, and a 100th
anniversary memorial entry in the logbook of the observatory’s 26in
refracting telescope. (W Post, Aug 13/77, B1)

August 15: LaRC reported it had held a luncheon Aug. 11 to recognize
the contributions of 26 inventors on the center staff to NASA’s patent
program. Director Donald P. Hearth and Patent Counsel Howard J.
Osborn presented awards, including one to Richard T. Whitcomb as
1976 coinventor of the yr for his patent “Airfoil Shape for Flight at Sub-
sonic Speeds,” shared with Robert T. Jones of ARC. (LaRC Release
77-38)

August 26: NASA announced it had chosen, from more than lo00
respondents to invitations, 59 scientists (47 from the United States and 12
from the United Kingdom) to participate in the second flight of Spacelab
scheduled for launch in 1981. The Solar Terrestrial Division in NASA’s

152
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                    AUGUST



Office of Space Sciences, responsible for managing Spacelab 2’s payload,
would choose experiments to provide new data on very high energy
cosmic rays; x-ray emissions in galactic clusters; diffuse cool objects in
earth’s galaxy; and relationships between solar activity and magnetic
fields. (NASA Release 77-172; MSFC Release 77-148)

  NASA announced that Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, assistant manager of
0

the orbiter project at JSC, would begin an assignment in Paris Aug. 28 as
deputy associate administrator for spaceflight (European operations)
acting as senior NASA adviser to ESA on Spacelab. (NASA anno Aug
16/77)

August 17: MSFC announced it had begun the first of a series of tests on
the external propellant tank of the Shuttle to verify its ability to stand the
structural stresses of launch. The proportions of the tank required con-
duct of the test in phases; the first tests would check out the intertank
structure joining the two main segments of the external tank and contain-
ing the forward attach points for the two solid-fuel rocket boosters car-
ried by the Shuttle. The heaviest loading would occur at these points,
both while the Shuttle was on its pad and while the boosters were
thrusting during flight.
   The tests would apply upward loads as great as 4.35 million lb to the
intertank cylinder subjected to opposing downward forces. The loads
would come from computer-actuated hydraulic jacks, 28 on the forward
end of the test article and as many as 10 in the center section. Chuck
Verschoore, MSFC test engineer, said the forces exerted by the jacks
could simulate bending and twisting effects as well as straight up-and-
down loading, and could go as high as 140% of the tank’s design limits.
Test engineers would receive data from as many as 2800 measurement
channels. Follow-on tests would check the external tank segments con-
taining the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen propellants. (MSFC
Release 77-149)

   The NY Times reported an announcement by Hughes Aircraft Com-
0

pany that Telesat Canada had chosen it to negotiate a contract for a new
generation of Anik comsats operating.at frequencies of 12 and 14 billion
cycles per second, to replace in the 1980s the 4- and 6-billion-cps now the
standard fot national and international communications systems. The
higher frequencies would ease radiocommunications crowding in 22 300
mile altitude equatorial orbits, and would expand the number of satellite-
communications channels to approach the number available on ter-
restrial microwave and cable links.
  Telesat Canada, which had operated that country’s domestic comsat
system since 1972, said that two rival companies-RCA’s Astroelec-

                                                                           153
AUGUST                                ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1971



tronics Div. and GE’s Space Division-remained in the running with
Hughes for award of the contract, which could go as high as $50 million.
RCA had built the Satcoms used by the U.S., and GE had built a direct-
broadcast comsat for Japan. The NYT said the electronics industry had
been watching the competition closely because the same three companies
had been vying to build 3 data-transmission satellites for Satellite
Business Systems in the U.S. (NYT, Aug 17/77, 49)

   INTELSAT reported that the Peoples Republic of China on Aug. 16
had become the 98th member of the organization. Peking’s Administra-
tion of Long Distance Telecommunications had signed the operating
agreement, making the PRC the 28th Asian nation to join INTELSAT.
China, which had used INTELSAT since 1972, currently had 3 ground
stations, 2 near Peking and 1 near Shanghai. It currently operated 23
full-time satellite circuits on the INTELSAT system and was using TV
capacity on an as-needed basis. (INTELSAT Release 77-20-1)

   The Natl. Space Club announced that the guest speaker at its Aug.
0

luncheon would be Col. W.J. Mellors, head of the Washington, D.C. of-
fice of the European Space Agency (ESA) since 1973. Col. Mellors had
begun his career with the British army in 1942 and had become com-
mander of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in the Middle
East by 1965. After joining ESA in 1970, he worked until 1973 with
ESTEC, the technology center in the Netherlands. ESA had united the
programs of its predecessor organizations, the European Space Research
Organization (ESRO) and the European Organization for Development
and Construction of Space-Vehicle Launchers (ELDO); its members na-
tions were Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
(NSC bulletin Aug 17/77)

August 18: MSFC reported that a new pattern of painting Shuttle solid-
fuel rocket boosters for orbital flight tests in 1979 and 1980 could save
the agency an estimated $300 000. The center’s system dynamics
laboratory had changed the 6 black stripes running the length of the giant
motors to 4 large rectangles in a spiral pattern that would let engineers
measure roll and pitch rates of the boosters on reentry. (MSFC Release
77-150)

August 20: Today newspaper reported that two USAF fighter planes had
dropped about 20 bombs July 8 across a lake bed runway used by aircraft
from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which operates for NASA the deep-
space network antennas at Goldstone. NASA and the Department of

154
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   AUGUST



Defense had been at odds over the Mojave desert airspace, and “the
military is winning,” the paper said.
  Twice in the past 6mo a B-1 bomber had narrowly missed the
multimillion-dollar tracking antennas, and over the past yr USAF planes
with electronic devices had been jamming space signals to and from
Goldstone. In the July 8 incident, all bombs from the USAF planes had
fallen no more than half a mile from the 5 big-dish antennas serving as
the sole links to satellites in orbit around the earth, the sun, and the
planet Mars and to one spacecraft headed for the planet Saturn.
  The commandant of the Marine base at El Toro, where the planes
came from, had grounded the pilots for 2wk, blaming the incident on
“navigation error” and misreading of the target. However, on July 22,
the B-1 bomber that had previously buzzed the Goldstone station flew
with its chase plane low over the heads of station technicians to check the
sky for radio interference from other military craft. According to JPL
      -
officials, the B-1 was “far off the course it normally flies on a test run.”
  Fighter planes from the Georgia air force base had interfered “no
fewer than 60 times” with Goldstone radio links to its space vehicles. Last
O t a fighter pilot had “accidentally” turned on an electronic device and
 c.
disrupted contact with the Viking orbiter at Mars for more than an hour.
Had the spacecraft been in a maneuver or an emergency, the mission
would have been lost, the Viking scientists said. (Today, Aug 20/77, 1A)

August 20-29: Two yr to the day after launching the Viking mission to
Mars, NASA launched Voyager2 at 10:29am EDT from ETR on a Titan
IIIE-Centaur. Countdown was smooth except for a brief hold to check
the status of a valve. Minutes after launch, problems began to appear: a
suspected gyro failure, incomplete data transmission, and failure of the
boom holding the science platform to deploy.
   NASA later reported the gyro was working and data transmission was
satisfactory. The boom, which was supposed to deploy 53min into the
flight, had not extended and locked. To determine its position, con-
trollers 12hr after launch had activated a plasma instrument on the scan
platform and combined its readings relative to a known axis and the
direction of the solar wind (data supplied by GSFC) to show that the
boom had extended to within 2” of full deployment.
   JPL reported Aug. 22 that the spacecraft had been stable since 3pm
EDT Aug. 20, except for a pitch and yaw disturbance at 5am Aug. 21;
flight controllers were investigating. It reported Aug. 25 that the craft
had undergone another disturbance like that of Aug. 21; controllers had
ruled out the propulsion module’s having bumped the spacecraft. On the
morning of Aug. 29, JPL calibrated the sun sensors and removed the
dust cover on the infrared interferometer spectrometer. It had tried Aug.

                                                                        155
AUGUST                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917



26 to move the science boom to the locked position, but the computer
system had aborted the command, showing that a problem existed. Con-
trollers tried jettisoning the dust cover while reorienting the spacecraft,
to jolt the assembly enough to open the boom hinge and lock it into posi-
tion, but this was unsuccessful. JPL had decided to put Voyager 2 on
hold to allow controllers to concentrate on the launch of the other
Voyager Sept. 5. (Voyager mission status bulletins 3 through 6)

August 23: MSFC announced that all systems aboard the Heao I obser-
vatory launched Aug. 12 had been turned on and were operating as
planned. Dr. Fred Speer, project manager for HEAO, said the obser-
vatory was already acquiring x-ray sources. Experimenters using Heao I
reported they were pleased with the early performance of their in-
struments. (MSFC Release 77-153)

August 23-26: The NY Times reported JSC had announced it could no
longer afford to monitor instruments left on the moon by Apollo
astronauts. “I sure hate to see them go, but NASA headquarters has
notified us there will be no funds for operations beyond Sept. 30,” said
Wilbert F. Eichman, chief of JSC’s payload requirements and operations
branch.

   Longest-lived lunar instruments were seismometers recording moon-
quakes and hits on the lunar surface by outer space objects; four
seismometers were still operating, and scientists said some could send
data for up to 4yr more. Data from other instruments, monitored in a
small control room at JSC, had included measurements of the moon’s
field of gravity, heat inside the lunar surface, and solar wind and lunar
ionosphere samples. Roy Kelly, a senior engineer for Bendix (manufac-
turer of the instrument packages), said the transmitters would be left on
with no operational support available.
   An Aug. 26 NYT editorial said NASA’s decision to abandon monitor-
ing was unfortunate because, if it continued the program “for just
another year, there will be that much more data on lunar seismography
and structure.” Apollo had cost the nation close to $30 billion; shutting
down to save a few hundred thousand dollars seemed to be “a repudia-
tion of one of the finest chapters in American exploration,” the paper
said (NYT, Aug 23/77, 16; Aug 26/77, A-20)

August 25: NASA launched Italy’s first experimental domestic comsat
SIR10 from ETR at 7:50pm EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with
37 670km apogee, 229.7km perigee, and 23” inclination. At 1057am
EDT on Aug. 27, its apogee boost motor fired it into a near-circular orbit
where it would drift by Sept. 8 to a station on the equator above the west

156
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  AUGUST



coast of Africa at about 15”W. NASA would transfer operation to the
Telespazio VHF/SHF control center at Fucino, Italy, about 45 days after
launch. Italy’s National Research Council (CNR) would reimburse
NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle and support services, estimated
at $15.7 million, as agreed in March 1975.
   The Satellite Italian0 Richerche Industriale Orientata (industrial
research-oriented Italian satellite), 2m (6.5ft) high and 1.4m (4.6ft) in
diameter, weighing 398kg (8781b) at liftoff, would transmit TV and voice
data at superhigh frequencies (SHF) from Europe to North America in
adverse weather conditions. The project had begun in 1969 as part of an
ELDO program, specifically to carry out a communications experiment
in the 12 and 18GHz bands proposed by Prof. Francesco Carassa of
Milan Polytechnic Inst. The idea of using higher frequency ranges (30 to
60GHz) because of overcrowding on conventional frequencies had of-
fered the advantages of greatly increased traffic in communications, less
interference with present ground and satellite communications, and the
use of small ground terminals. The Compagnia Industriale Aerospaziale
(CIA) had designed and developed the spacecraft and was responsible for
system management and orbit operations.
  Defense/Space Daily said the original Aug. 17 launch date had slipped
because of possible interference between the SIRIO antenna and the
third-stage system that might hinder separation. The N Y Times said that
“adverse wind conditions” Aug. 16 that delayed a test launch of the
Navy’s Trident missile had automatically postponed the SIRIO launch.
AvWk said that the SIRIO launch was important to Italy not only
technically but also politically: it said NASA officials believed major
changes would have occurred in the Italian government if the spacecraft
had failed. (NASA Release 77-152; KSC Release 140-77; MOR
492-209-77-01 [prelaunch] Aug 9/77, [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; D/SD,
Aug 22/77, 275; NYT, Aug 17/77, A-11; A VWk, Sept 5/77, 23)

  NASA announced that a third group of 20 astronaut applicants, all in
0

the mission specialist category, would report to JSC Aug. 29 for a week
of individual interviews and physical examinations. Eight of this group
were women; all 20 had Ph.D. or medical degrees, or both, and one had
a degree in veterinary medicine. (NASA Release 77-176)

  MSFC announced plans for a 3-day meeting beginning Aug. 31 for the
0

59 investigators selected earlier this mo [see Aug. 161 to collaborate on 11
experiments for the second Spacelab mission. Dr. Eugene W. Urban of
MSFC’s space sciences laboratory, mission scientist for Spacelab 2,
would chair the meeting of the Investigators Working Group to brief the
participants on engineering and management requirements. (MSFC
Release 77-155)

                                                                        157
AUGUST                                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971



August 2 : LaRC announced selection of RCA Service Company,
          6
Camden, N.J., to negotiate a $3.5 million contract for electronics
fabrication services to the center. Work on the contract, covering a 2-yr
period with options for three 1-yr extensions, would begin in Jan. 1978.
(LaRC Release 77-40)

   The NY Times reported that “observers in the U.S. and abroad” were
0

puzzling over a Soviet space vehicle called Cosmos 929 that had been or-
biting for a mo and was large enough to be manned, but apparently car-
ried no passengers. Orbital and radio telemetry characteristics of the
vehicle were like those usually related to a manned mission; speculation
was that the vehicle might be the first unit of a large space station to be
assembled in orbit.
   Reports from Europe that the USSR would launch a space vehicle dur-
ing the summer had assumed that the mission would be another Salyut,
five of which had previously been orbited, the first early in 1971. Cosmos
929, launched July 17, had drawn attention because of its size and its
unusual telemetry, apparently two distinct systems, as though it were two
objects joined together. On Aug. 18, after a major change in orbit, one
of the two radio transmissions had also changed “significantly,” and part
of the vehicle might have been detached at that time. Members of the
Kettering Group, an international group of nongovernment space watch-
ers, had confirmed that the vehicle was as large as a Salyut and that its
5 1.6” orbital inclination had usually, though not exclusively, been used
for manned flights as had its telemetry signals. Cosmos 929 had pro-
duced no voices, however, and the group was “virtually certain” that no
crew was aboard. (NYT, Aug 26/77, A10)

August 28: The W. Post reported that the leader of a USSR expedition
on the first surface ship to reach the North Pole had told a news con-
ference that his major problem was deciding when the ship had reached
its destination. Soviet Minister of Merchant Marine Timofey B.
Guzhenko said that, as the ship neared the pole Aug. 17, fog had made
sun readings impossible; the polar daylight obscured the stars; and
magnetic compasses were worthless when they “began to jump at the
pole.”
   The vessel’s officers had to spend several hr determining whether they
had reached the pole. They finally relied on a satellite navigation system
accurate within about 800yd, and made two passes through the ice floes
to make sure they had reached their goal. The crew of the 13-day 3582mi
expedition on the nuclear-powered icebreaker Arktika had planted a
Soviet flag and capsule containing a copy of the USSR constitution to
mark their accomplishment. ( W Post, Aug 28/77, A24)

158
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 AUGUST



August 29: NASA announced it had tentatively chosen 114 scientists to
participate in the Jupiter-orbiter probe mission scheduled for 1981-1982.
More than 500 scientists had submitted proposals for research in
response to a 1976 invitation from NASA. Thirteen selectees would have
interdisciplinary jobs, helping with mission plans and coordinating
research and instrumentation to ensure best results from the mission.
NASA would assign the others to 17 individual-experiment areas; prin-
cipal investigators for 3 of those areas would be from nations other than
the U.S. JPL would manage the Jupiter-orbiter project, and ARC would
manage the probe system. (NASA Release 77-177)

   NASA reported that LeRC had been operating a power generator for
0

30,OOOhr without a break and was aiming for 50 O O r of continuous
                                                      Oh
operation, hoping to use the system in deep space missions. The Brayton
space power generator, a closed-cycle gas turbine, had been running for
more than 3yr under rigorous space environment conditions of
temperature, pressure, and speed.
   For the test, ordinary electric lab heaters had provided energy to the
generator; in space, the generator would draw energy from the sun or
from a nuclear source. The Brayton engine had dispelled the “myth that
only static nonrotating systems have the endurance potential for long
space voyages,” said Jack A. Heller, LeRC engineer in charge of the ad-
vanced engine work. The system, he said, “not only is showing reliability
but it is performing at a high energy-efficiency level of 25% or better
without any signs of degradation.” (NASA Release 77-178)

   The WPost reported conflict between the USAF and NASA not only
0

over use of the Mojave desert area [see Aug. 201 but also over use of
radio frequencies that NASA considered the key to contacting alien in-
telligences, and that the Air Force wanted for a satellite global-
navigation system. The USAF wanted to use a band scientists called the
“waterhole,” in which hydrogen and oxygen radiate natural radio signals
into space (the combination of the two into water had given the band the
name), thought to be the area in which alien civilizations might conduct a
dialogue in space. The USAF had selected these frequencies for naviga-
tion signals as carrying less interference. Should the USAF have a
navigation-satellite network in place by 1984, its signals would drown out
any other signals on those frequencies. (WPost, Aug 29/77, Al)

August 30: ARC announced that 7 U.S. biological experiments launched
Aug. 3 on the USSR’s Cosmos 936 had landed by parachute in Siberia
Aug. 22. The Soviet satellite also carried experiments from France,
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and East

                                                                       159
AUGUST                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



Germany. Five of the U.S. experiments had followed up those on the
first cooperative U.S.-USSR biological satellite Cosmos 782 launched in
Nov. 1975; 4 of them had Soviet coinvestigators, and all of them used
some Soviet scientific or technical assistance. The last U.S. biosat was
Biosatellite 3, launched in 1969; without the Soviet flight opportunity,
the U.S.biology experiments would have to wait for Shuttle flights in the
1980s. (ARC Release 77-37; NASA Release 77-169)

   MSFC reported that astronaut Paul Weitz had arrived on center to
0

check out a procedure developed for jettisoning a jammed-open outer
door of the Shuttle scientific airlock while on a space mission. Weitz
would wear a pressurized space suit for the task, to be carried out in
MSFC’s neutral buoyancy simulator. The 75ft-diameter tank filled with
water 4Oft deep would duplicate movement of people or hardware almost
as if weightless in space. Engineers and technicians could design in-
struments and procedures to handle almost any foreseeable problems
before actual spaceflight, and unforeseen problems (such as solar array
failure on Skylab) could be solved during a space mission.
   Center workers had been devising a way to remove the outer door of
the airlock in case it could not be closed at the end of a mission, using a
full-scale mockup of the Shuttle cargo bay in the simulator. Underwater
TV cameras would record the astronaut’s movements on control room
monitors, and both video and voice communications would be recorded
for later study. Scuba divers in the simulator would help as needed.
(MSFC Release 77-158, 77-166)

   NASA announced that the largest Space Shuttle component - its exter-
0

nal propellant tank-would roll off the assembly line in New Orleans
Sept. 9. The huge tank would then go by barge to the Natl. Space
Technology Laboratories in Miss. for the first static firing of the Shuttle
main engines.
   The external tank consisted of 2 propellant tanks and an intertank
structural connector; the forward tank would contain liquid oxygen, the
larger aft tank liquid hydrogen. It would be the main structural member
carrying the orbiter and the two solid-fuel rocket boosters. At launch,
the tank would feed cryogenic propellants to the three main engines on
the orbiter; the solid-fuel rocket boosters on each side of the external
tank would use their own fuel and would separate about 2min into flight
for later recovery. The mated orbiter and external tank would thrust for
another 6min, separating just before the Shuttle reached orbital velocity.
The complete external tank was 47m (154ft) long; the Shuttle orbiter it
would carry was 37.2m (122)ft long. (NASA Release 77-179)

A a g w 3 : NASA reported it would join NOAA in a 5mo test to detect
         1

160
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1917                                   AUGUST



turbulence in the flight paths of 2 planes in the skies over Colorado, “a
built-in turbulence laboratory,” according to Dr. Peter M. Kuhn. An
earlier study by Dr. Kuhn and others from NOM’S atmospheric physics
laboratory had used infrared radiometers to detect fluctuations in at-
mospheric water vapor, indicating turbulent areas ahead of a plane with
81070 reliability [see A&A 76, Nov 111. Successful tests could produce an
inexpensive turbulence-warning instrument for a plane’s control panel.
(NASA Release 77- 180)

   GSFC announced “a comprehensive programmatic and institutional
review” of its FY 1978-1979 program to define the skills it needed to do
its job “within its allotted resources.” The review would result in fewer
Civil Service employees, the announcement said, and a work force ad-
justment would require a center-wide review and validation of position
descriptions to match program redirection and “changes in manpower
levels.” GSFC Director Robert S . Cooper called on all center employees
to cooperate fully “in the updating of our position descriptions.” (GSFC
anno Aug 31/77)

   The NY Times reported that the Voyager spacecraft being launched
0

toward Jupiter and Saturn would use a little-known power source that
had made possible much of the dramatic space activity of the last decade:
a capsule of plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In
localities far from the sun, or on planetary bodies with drastic
temperature swings between day and night, the plutonium capsule had
proved far superior to solar cells.
   Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9
and 10 that surveyed Mars, Venus, and Mercury; and communications,
weather, and navigation satellites had all used solar cells. But in 1959
President Eisenhower had revealed the possibility of nuclear power for
spacecraft, and in June 1961 a grapefruit-sized 2.7watt generator had
gone into orbit on the Navy’s Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger
system called SNAP 19 on Nimbus 3. Later models powered the still-
active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in 1972 and 1973 that reached Jupiter
in 1973 and 1974, as well as the Viking landers that touched down on
Mars in July and Sept. 1976 to search for evidence of present or past life.
   Another model called SNAP 27 had powered the still-active stations
left on the moon by Apollo missions between 1969 and 1972; the Apollo
12 station had lasted nearly 8yr, the length of time the late version
nuclear capsule on the Voyagers would have to last to permit observing
Uranus in 1985. The long-lived moon stations had attracted notice
recently [see Aug. 23-26] when NASA announced it would stop monitor-
ing them in order to save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article
said.

                                                                         161
AUGUST                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



  The plutonium power sources, known as SNAP (system for nuclear
auxiliary power) or RTG (radioisotope thermoelectric generator), had
been a byproduct of U.S. production of power for nuclear weapons. The
Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA), destined to
be part of a new federal Department of Energy, had undertaken a
$30-million-per-yr development of even larger nuclear power systems for
space, including selenide thermoelectric units with plutonium 238 heat
sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in
1982, and a system generating between lo00 and 2000 watts being
developed for DOD. (NYT, Aug 31/77, 45)

During August: NASA announced it had detailed astronaut Russell L.
(Rusty) Schweikart to the state of Calif. effective Sept. 1 as assistant for
science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for lyr
under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act.
   Schweikart, one of the third group of astronauts, had come to NASA
in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had
been backup commander for the first Skylab mission in 1973. In May
1974 he had joined the NASA Hq office of applications, and in Sept.
1976 became assistant for payload operations to the Assistant
Administrator for Planning and Program Integration, working on
policies and plans for payloads in the Shuttle era. In the new postion,
Schweikart would coordinate the application of emerging technology to
the state’s needs and become informed about the problems and
challenges facing state governments. (NASA anno Aug 24/77)

   The Natl. Aeronautic Association announced that 127 planes had
finished in the last Powder Puff Derby on the 30th anniversary of the
transcontinental air race for women. Pilots represented 36 of the United
States as well as Australia, West Germany, and the Bahamas; 3 were fly-
ing their 24th Powder Puff Derby. NAA had decided in 1976 to make
this run the last because of shortages of fuel and financing. The 30th
flight was not a race but a “sentimental journey,” the NAA said (NAA
newsletter, Aug/77, 1)

  NASA announced it had established a fare structure for Space Shuttle
0

payloads on flights scheduled to begin in 1980. Depending on the weight
and volume of cargo, the price would run from less than $10 000 to more
than $21 million. Other factors would be the optional services desired
and whether the payload would go on a reserved basis or as a standby.
  Costing $10 000 or less would be the “getaway special” (GAS), a small
research package weighing less than 2001b, self-contained, with a volume
of less than 5ft3, flying on a space-available basis. The $21-million fare
would be for a payload using the full capacity of the Shuttle on a reserva-

162
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                  AUGUST



tion basis by non-U.S. government customers. Lesser charges would ap-
ply to customers sharing flights with other customers; those willing to fly
on a standby basis; and those having made a substantial investment in
Space Transportation System development (e.g., The European Space
Agency, its member nations, and Canada).
   Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA had set the prices
to encourage Shuttle use by making costs attractive but still recovering
operating expenses. Commercial and foreign users would pay fees cover-
ing depreciation of facilities and equipment, and amortization of or-
biters. The pricing plan would undergo review in 3yr to make any
necessary adjustments, Lee said; it contained provisions for cost in-
creases due to inflation. NASA prices would include space in the Shuttle,
with standard services such as design review, safety review, flight plans,
transmission of payload data, and services of a 3-man crew. Optional
services, costing more, would include special training, upper stages and
services, special mission kits, revisit or retrieval of satellites, or any
special equipment. (NASA Release 77-173)

   NASA announced it had identified about 40 payloads to be carried on
9

11 Space Shuttle flights in its first yr of operation, beginning in 1980.
Three civilian firms had deposited “earnest money” with NASA for
payloads on 8 flights; NASA had plans for 5 payloads, and DOD had
plans for one.
   Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA also had forecast
12 non-NASA civilian payloads, 10 NASA payloads, and 4 DOD
payloads for launch during 1980 and 1981. Allocating the payloads to
specific flights would not be firm until about a yr before launch, he
noted. A working model for Shuttle traffic in the first 12yr, totaling 560
Shuttle flights, would show NASA flying about half the missions on its
own; 20% would be DOD missions; 6%, other U.S. government agen-
cies; 12070, commercial firms; and 12070, foreign customers. (NASA
Release 77-175)

   NASA announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. a
0

contract to demonstrate advanced technology for fabricating composite
horizontal stabilizers to be used on B-737 transport aircraft. Managed by
LaRC, work under the contract would be done over a 4yr period on a
cost-sharing basis, NASA contributing about $11.7 million and Boeing
contributing about $1.3 million. Boeing would devise advanced
manufacturing methods suitable for producing composite-material struc-
tures, and would carry out all analysis and testing needed to meet FAA
requirements. Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. had previously received
a similar contract to fabricate and devise techniques for using composite

                                                                        163
AUGUST                                  ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



materials in elevator shipsets for B-727 aircraft [see July 7 . (NASA
                                                             1
Release 77-174)

* Researchers from the Soviet ship Akademik Korolev, anchored off the
coast of Virginia near Wallops Flight Center for joint U.S.-USSR rocket
launches, had discovered the charms of the Eastern Shore and were en-
joying their contacts with the natives, according to reports in the
 Washington Star and Washington Post. The meteorological soundings
had been completed by the last week of August, the newspapers said, and
the 134 Russians waiting on the ship for results to be correlated had time
to visit the mainland on trips planned by local officials in cooperation
with NASA.
    Coming ashore in groups of about 50, the visitors (mostly young) had
 seen Pocomoke City, Md., a small U.S.city; the village of Chincoteague,
 Va.; the Assateague wildlife refuge; and a tour of Accomack county that
 included a visit to a private home, a farm, and a chicken-processing
 plant. Through NASA interpreters, the visitors asked scores of questions
 on topics from labor relations at the plant to the history of local
 buildings. They had joined in a Frisbee game with local youngsters, eaten
 largely of the local seafood, and bought out the entire beer supply of a
 local general store.
    Capt. Oleg Rostovsev, commanding officer of the 409ft research ship,
 said he had found the visit “a very interesting experience.” His assistant
 for scientific affairs, Evgeny Nelepov, said that many of the researchers
 had visited U.S. cities before, but that major cities everywhere had
 become more and more alike, “losing the individual characteristics and
 cultural tradition . . . To find these national characteristics one must go
 to the small villages and rural areas where traditions and local culture en-
 dures. That is why this visit here has meant so much to us.” The Russians
 had held a press tour and reception on the Akademik Korolev as a thank
 you before the ship departed for Baltimore. ( W Star, Aug 28/77,D-1; W
 Post, Sept 1/77,A-1)




164
September


September 1: The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the
Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4
since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The
newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the
blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of
Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking -and riding - on the
surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84
days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had
changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press,
gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educa-
tional system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about
humanity itself and about its future.
   Predictions of things to come in the next 2Oyr of the Space Age in-
cluded weather modification, energy transmission from space, and per-
manent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to
monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents,
predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and
make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib,
Sept 1/77, 1-7)

  The Washington Post said NASA was looking for “someplace else to
land the space shuttle.” Its second free flight had been postponed when
Hurricane Doreen turned the planned landing strip (a dry lakebed at Ed-
wards AFB) into a “mud puddle.” A NASA source said officials had in-
vestigated other sites for the flight, tentatively rescheduled to Sept. 7. ( W
Post, Sept 1/77, A-27)

   Johnson Space Center confirmed that NASA would turn off science
instruments on the lunar surface and would dismantle the JSC control
center for Apollo lunar-surface experiment packages (ALSEP) as of
Sept. 30. The five stations still operating were put there by Apollo mis-
sions 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17. In July 1969 the original moonwalkers of
Apollo 1 had left behind a prototype station with a design life of only 14
         Z
days; it had smvived for 45 days and quit when its power supply failed.
Specifications for rhe remaining five had included a lyr design life for 4,
and 2yr for the Apollo 17 station; the Apollo 12 station was “well into its


                                                                           165
SEPTEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971



   Built to record and transmit long-term lunar-surface data, the stations
with their long life had provided researchers with a real bonus: instead of
data from only one seismometer at a time, for instance, the group had
operated as a sensor network, greatly enhancing available information
on the moon’s internal temperature and magnetic field, charged particles
in its environment, and especially moonquakes and meteoroid impacts.
Although the experiments would be terminated, the transmitters would
continue to operate, serving earth as an astronomy reference point. The
Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use the signals in deep space work such
as astrometrics and spacecraft navigation or monitoring the motion of
the lunar orbit against a background of extragalactic stars to test gravity
theories.
   The lunar stations had had problems: The Apollo 14 ALSEP ran for
4yr, quit for 2 days in March 1975, started up again, and had repeated
this 6 times since. Understanding the trouble (temperature fluctuations
resulting from the sun’s position had caused short circuits) would help in
designing future science stations. (JSC Release 77-47; NASA Release
77-203)

September 2: Ames Research Center announced that NASA had chosen
29 experimenters for the atmosphere probe portion of the Jupiter mis-
sion [see Aug. 291. The probe would carry 6 experiments into Jupiter’s at-
mosphere; 5 of the experimenters would be interdisciplinary scientists,
and 24 would be assigned to the 6 experiments: helium interferometer,
Dr. Ulf von Zahn, Federal Republic of Germany, principal investigator;
mass spectrometer, Dr. H.B. Niemann, Goddard Space Flight Center;
atmospheric structure, Dr. Alvin Sieff, ARC; nephelometer, Dr. Boris
Ragent, ARC; net-flux radiometer, Dr. R.W. Boese, ARC; sferics
receiver, Dr. L. J. Lanzerotti, Bell Laboratories.

  The probe would separate from the orbiter about 55 days away from
the planet, continuing on a separate flight path for about 30min of high-
speed descent while relaying information to earth through the orbiter.
After the entry probe concluded its work, the orbiter would fly close to
Jupiter’s moon Ganymede and near the large moons Io, Europa, and
Callisto.
  ARC’S Dr. Lawrence Colin would be project scientist for the Jupiter
probe; JPL would manage the Jupiter orbitedprobe project. (ARC
Release 77-40)

   ESA announced selection of 53 candidates from 12 European coun-
0

tries for the single ESA opening on the first Spacelab mission scheduled
for late 1980. By the end of 1977, ESA would pick 6 from the 49 can-
didates chosen by their respective countries and the 4 from ESA’s staff,

166
    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               SEPTEMBER



    to undergo further tests and evaluation by NASA between Jan. and April
    1978. By mid-1978,3 candidates would be appointed as European experi-
    ment specialists; several months before the mission, one would be the
    first West European scheduled to travel and work in earth orbit, the
    other two serving as backup. (ESA release Sept 2/77)

    September 4: FBIS reported a Tass announcement that the USSR had in-
    stalled its first cameras designed to photograph bolides (celestial bodies
    invading the earth's atmosphere) in a 30-unit network in the Ukraine,
    The cameras would permit astronomers to calculate the trajectory and
    place of fall of the bolides, the release said. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept
    2/77)
      FBIS carried the official report by L.A. Aleksandrov, chairman of the
    0

    USSR-U.S. group on space meteorology, that the joint rocket launches
    over the Atlantic to compare instrument results [see July 11 had been a
    success. (FBIS, Krasnaya Zvezda in Russian, Sept 4/77)

  September 5-7: NASA launched the 18201b Voyuger I from Cape
  Canaveral on a Titadcentaur vehicle at 8:56am EDT Sept. 5 in a firing
' described as flawless by project manager John Casani. A second burn of
  the Centaur at 9:49am boosted the spacecraft out of earth orbit; firing
  and jettison of the onboard propulsion module sent Voyager I on a tra-
  jectory toward Jupiter, where it should arrive 4mO before its sister ship
  launched Aug. 20. JPL reported Sept. 6 that Voyager 1 was proceeding
  "without any of the problems that plagued Voyager 2." NASA had
  postponed the Voyager I launch to permit installation of extra springs to
  lock the second spacecraft's science boom in place. The Voyager I launch
  would be the last time NASA would use the Titadcentaur, although the
  USAF would continue to use its Titan for future missions, most of them
  secret. (Voyager mission status bulletin 6; W Star, Sept 6/77, A-2; Sept
  7/77, A-14; NYT, Sept 6/77, 1, 22; Sept 7/77, A-18; C Trib, Sept 6/77,
  1-1, 1-24; W Post, Sept 6/77, A-2; P Ing, Sept 6/77; LA Times, Sept
  6/77; Today, Sept 6/77, 1A; D/SD, Sept 7/77, 8)
    September 7: NASA reported that Kenneth Souza of ARC and Dr.
    Eugene Benton of the Univ. of San Francisco had returned to the U.S.
    from Moscow Sept. 2 with the biological samples carried on the USSR
    biosat Cosmos 936 [see Aug. 301. This mission was the first to subject
    laboratory rats to artificial gravity in the'weightlessness of space. NASA
    would send the samples (tissue from the rats and live fruit flies, processed
    and packed in dry ice at the mobile landing site in Siberia) with radiation
'

    records to U.S. laboratories at the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley; Univ. of
    Wash., Seattle; Univ. of San Francisco; Univ. of Southern Calif.; and
    ARC, for analysis. (NASA Release 77-182)

                                                                             167
SEPTEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



* NASA announced that JSC’s space and life sciences directorate
payload to be managed by the Hq Office of Applications on the second
flight of Shuttle orbiter 102 (sister ship to the Enterprise used in recent
approach-and-landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center) in 1979
would investigate earth resources, environmental quality, and severe
storms. The instrumentation and other hardware carried on the second
flight would be reusable, to permit adjusting or modifying it for later
flights at relatively low cost. The first orbital flight would mainly record
performance and monitor space immediately around the orbiter for con-
tamination; the monitor would fly on all 6 orbital flight tests in 1979 and
1980. NASA had estimated the cost of payload hardware, science and
technical integration, and mission support at about $10 million. The 6
orbital test launches from Kennedy Space Center would aim at preparing
the Shuttle for regular operations by May 1980. (NASA Release 77-181;
JSC Release 77-48)

* ESA announced that NASA would launch the orbital test satellite
OTS, ESA’s first comsat, from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13 or 14 on a
Delta. The European launcher Ariane would launch the operational
European comsat system to follow OTS between 1981 and 1990, carrying
domestic telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic besides relaying Eurovi-
sion TV. OTS would operate in the 11- and 14-GHz bands, an advantage
over the European 4- and 6-GHz links subject to radio interference in
regional service. OTS’s original June launch date had slipped because a
motor prematurely separated from the vehicle sitting on a launch stand
in May. NASA had redesigned the bolt that failed, and had replaced the
damaged motor and vehicle booster. (ESA Release Sept 7/77; MOR
M-492-210-77-01 [prelaunch] Sept 8/77; NASA Release 77-168)

September 8: NASA announced that GSFC and Marshall Space Flight
Center would join the USAF in solving a yrs old problem of comsat
makers and users: flying in a synchronous orbit at about 34 500km
(22 OOOmi) altitude, the comsats routinely encountered electrically
charged particles from the magnetosphere that built up static electricity
on the spacecraft surface, causing arcing that could d              ower
cells and thermal insulation, interfere with signal                  and
switch spacecraft functions erroneously. The joint project called
SCATHA (satellite charging at high altitudes) wou        in specific data
on the phenomenon. The USAF planned to launch
to study electrostatics at geostationary orbit. MSFC would
light ion-mass spectrometers to measure speed, temper
of low-energy ions and detect their points of origin. GS
two instruments, one to measure space electric fields, the other to

168
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  SEPTEMBER



measure space magnetic fields. (NASA Release 77-183; MSFC Release
77- 164)

* NASA announced plans to develop a prosthetic urinary sphincter for
patients losing control of bladder functions because of injury or disease.
Patients now used external collection devices, implanted catheters, or
prosthetics difficult to operate. John Richardson of MSFC’s technology
utilization office said NASA’s biomedical applications office had recom-
mended MSFC for this job because of its expertise in design, manufac-
ture, assembly, and operation of miniature valving. MSFC would have a
contractor design and test the device and prepare documents for Food
and Drug Administration approval, as well as manufacture the device
commercially. A successful device would permit safe and quick emptying
of the bladder and avoid infection, the prime source of fatal kidney
failure among those without bladder control. (NASA Release 77-184;
MSFC Release 77-163)

* NASA announced that the Office of Management and Budget had
called for an agency ceiling of 23 237 permanent positions by the end of
FY 1978, 500 fewer than current. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy ad-
ministrator, said work force adjustments to meet the goal would include
greater use of contractor R&D; consolidation of applications work at
ARC, GSFC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories; reduction
of support manpower at JSC, KSC, and MSFC; consolidation of GSFC
data management; transfer of helicopter research from Langley Research
center to ARC; and reductions in support office and facility staff agency-
wide. MSFC would lose 150; Lewis Research Center, 108; JSC, 90;KSC,
80; LaRC, 77; GSFC, 74. DFRC, Hq, and Wallops Flight Center would
lose 30, 20, and 5, respectively. The shift in programs would add 45 to
ARC and 6 to NSTL. (NASA Release 77-185)

September 9: The quality of information from the Voyagers would great-
ly surpass that of earlier missions, said Philip Abelson in Science
magazine. “A decade ago the level of knowledge concerning the planets
and their satellites was such that almost any arm-waving explanation
would fit the facts. This is no longer true.” Citing the potential of 5 of the
11 instruments, Abelson noted the Voyager cameras could “achieve a
resolution and observing time at Jupiter better by a factor of 40 than
                                     ...
those of the Pioneer spacecraft.          The radio infrared, visible, and
ultraviolet instruments can all participate in a mutually reinforcing
fashion.” (Science, Sept 9/77, 1858)

* ComSatCorp said the Federal Communications Commission had

                                                                          169
SEPTEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


asked for a status report on the escrow account the FCC ordered set up in
1976 to cover possible rate refunds to its customers. ComSatCorp said it
had “meticulously complied” with the FCC order, but would respond in
detail to the inquiry. (ComSatCorp Release 77-22)

September IO: The Washington Star reported that the first Space Shuttle
fuel tank emerged from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans
on its way to tests at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Miss.
NASA contractor Martin Marietta had built the 520 OOOgal tank, half as
long as a football field, at a cost of about $2.5 million. If successful, as
many as 500 similar tanks would be built during the next 15 to 20yr. The
153ft-long tank, almost 30ft in diameter, was built of aluminum alloy
and was disposable, designed to fall away and disintegrate in the at-
mosphere just before the Shuttle reached orbit. Shuttle flights would cost
about $10 million each, as compared to $150 million each for earlier
launches. (W Star, Sept 10/77, A-3)

September 12: NASA announced it had scheduled the second free flight
of the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about Sept. 13 at DFRC
with astronauts Joe Engle and Richard Truly as pilots. The free-flight
test series called for 3 more flights before the orbiter would go to MSFC
for vibration tests early in 1978. (NASA Release 77-186)

   MSFC announced that Roy Gibson, director general of the European
0

Space Agency, had visited the center for the first time to discuss the
NASA/ESA Spacelab and other NASA programs with MSFC director
Dr. William R. Lucas and his staff. Thomas J. Lee, manager of MSFC’s
Spacelab program office, said the visit would familiarize the ESA official
with NASA capabilities and programs “in which the Europeans might be
interested as potential areas for future cooperative ventures.” (MSFC
Release 77-167)

  JPL announced that NASA had selected an ion-drive propulsion
system rather than the solar sail [see June 211 for use by automated in-
terplanetary shuttles in earth’s solar system toward the end of this cen-
tury. NASA scientists had studied the concepts for a yr before making
the choice on the basis of lower risk and greater potential for growth.
LeRC had orbited ion rockets, forerunners of the ion-drive spacecraft, in
1969 as part of SERT (space electric rocket tests). Those rockets were still
operating in space. An ion-drive ship would carry a cluster of mercury-
ion engines and generate power from solar-cell arrays converting sunlight
to electricity. First use of the ion-drive system might be a Halley’s Comet
rendezvous in 1986 by a spacecraft launched from the Shuttle in 1981 or

170
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                SEPTEMBER



early 1982. (JPL release Sept 12/77; NASA Release 77-187; WStar, Sept
13/77, A-6)

   The Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported a new
0

device to supply near-instantaneous information on hurricane growth
and movement in the Caribbean and North Atlantic. The device, an air-
borne data collection platform on a weather research aircraft, would
relay information on pressures, wind speeds, temperatures, and other
hurricane data within 15sec from NOAA’s Goes 2 orbiting at 35 400km
(22 OOOmi) to the Natl. Hurricane Center in Miami. Conventional
transmission of voice radio from aircraft to a ground station would take
5 to 15min. Quick transit of information as hurricanes approached
populated centers would allow time for alerts. As no Atlantic hurricanes
had occurred this yr until the end of Aug., NOAA had tested the device
in actual flight over a tropical depression and would install it in 2 other
planes next yr. (NOAA Release 77-240)

September 13: The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its second free flight
at Edwards AFB in Calif., a 5min unpowered glide from about 24 OOOft
altitude, during which it reached a speed of more than 330mph and per-
formed several maneuvers to test its handling before air brakes slowed it
to a landing at 250mph. Separation from the Boeing 747 carrier was
delayed 3min because a power failure at DFRC made mission control in
Houston iose radio contact; the delay caused no problems. For about
50min before separation, pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly took turns
at the controls and the computer to monitor the orbiter’s behavior at
various speeds. Pilots of the 747 were Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and
Thomas C. McMurtry. The flight had been postponed from Aug. 30
because of a tropical storm [see Sept. 11; a third test was set for late Sept.
(Postflight rpt, free flt 2, SpSh orbiter ALT; WPost, Sept 14/77, A6)

September 13-November 9: NASA announced that the Delta vehicle on
which it had launched ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS at 7:21pm Sept. 13
from ETR had exploded 54sec after liftoff. The booster and 5 strap-on
motors [see Sept. 71 had performed properly before the explosion. On
Sept. 14 John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for
spaceflight, had appointed a failure review board whose investigation
concluded from flight data analysis, photo records, and “substantial”
vehicle debris recovered near the launch site that the no. 1 strap-on
motor had failed from causes unknown. NASA had scheduled an OTS
backup launch for April 1978. (MOR M-492-210-77-01 [postlaunch] Nov
9/77; NASA newsrm rept Sept 14/77; W Post, Sept 14/77, A9; NASA
Release 77-193)

                                                                           171
SEPTEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



September 14: NASA reported that its Nimbus 6 had helped rescue from
the Atlantic off Iceland a 2-man balloon crew attempting a transatlantic
flight. The balloonists-Maxie Anderson, 44, and Ben A b r m o , 47-
were unharmed after an after-sunset pickup Sept. 12 by a USAF
helicopter. They had lifted off Sept. 9 near Bedford, M s . carrying a
                                                          as,
compact satellite-tracking unit giving out signals received by the satellite
and relayed to GSFC, which plotted the balloon's location and for-
warded it to the control center at Bedford. The balloon ran into a
snowstorm that blew it off course and broke radio contact; it splashed
down 1930km (12OOmi) short of its target in France. The crew owned the
balloon, gondola, and tracking equipment, the latter purchased from a
commercial firm. GSFC had cooperated earlier in search-and-rescue tests
of the tracking unit. (NASA Release 77-190)

   The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. announced it would present the Wright
Brothers Memorial Trophy for 1977 to Lt. Gen. (ret.) Ira C. Eaker,
former chief of air staff and a central figure in U.S. military and civilian
aviation. He would receive the trophy-a miniature silver replica of the
original plane flown Dec. 7, 1903-at the annual dinner Dec. 9 spon-
sored by the Aero Club of Washington.
   Gen. Eaker had been commissioned lieutenant in the U.S. Army in
1917 and received pilot rating at the age of 21. After World War I, he
and other Army flyers set world flying records including the first
transcontinental flight using refueling, and a transcontinental blind
flight on instruments in 1936. In 1942 he had led the first attack by Army
bombers in Europe. He had retired from the USAF in 1947; since then,
he had been an executive for Hughes Tool Co., Douglas Aircraft, and
the U.S. Strategic Institute, and had set up a program to hire physically
handicapped persons in the aircraft industry. (NAA newsletter Sept
14/77)

September 15: LaRC announced it would open a major educational ex-
hibit on energy Sept. 22 through 29. Assembled by the Energy Research
and Development Administration, the exhibit in two 50-ft trailers would
include films, animated sections, and visitor-operated consoles describ-
ing al types of energy now in use and possible future energy sources.
     l
Operating the displays for ERDA on the U.S. energy situation and what
could be done about it would be Oak Ridge Associated Universities, a
nonprofit educational and research organization of 45 colleges and
universities in the southeast. (LaRCRelease 77-41)

September 16: NASA announced that a fourth group of 20 Shuttle
astronaut applicants would report to JSC Sept. 19 for a week of physical
examinations and individual interviews. All of this group were pilot ap-

172
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                             SEPTEMBER



plicants, one a civilian. Of the others, 12 were USAF;4, U.S Navy; 3,
U.S Marine Corps. A final group would report to JSC in mid-Nov.
(NASA Release 77-192)

   NASA announced that ARC had awarded two San Francisco Bay area
firms a $2.5 million contract for managing construction of a major
modification to the largest wind tunnel facility in the western world.
Turner Construction Co. and Lord Electric Co. would modify the ARC
40-by 80-ft wind tunnel built in 1944 by adding a new 80- by 120-ft (24 by
36m) test section and increasing drive power from 36 OOOhp to
135 Ooohp. The modifications should enable ARC to handle new types of
aircraft, especially large helicopters and vertical- and short-takeoff and
landing aircraft. (NASA Release 77-191)

  Two balloonists attempting a transatlantic crossing from Bar Harbor,
0

Maine, on or about Sept. 19 would carry a lightweight satellite-tracking
beacon like the one that helped save Maxie Anderson and Ben Abruzzo
when their balloon ditched near Iceland on Sept. 12. The FAA had re-
quired Charles E. Reinhard and Charles A. Stephenson to carry the
device as an air traffic control aid and in case of a need for search and
rescue. This type of beacon had previously gone around the world on a
polar flight, and another rode a 33ft sailboat on a 6OOmi trip through the
Bermuda Triangle east of Fla., both successfully tracked by a Nimbus
satellite. The balloonists would cover the cost of the beacon; NASA
would take no part except for use of the satellite link and ground
systems, which would operate 24hr anyway. (NASA Release 77-194)

   NASA announced it had awarded to McDonnell Douglas Aeronautics
0

Co. a contract to build spinning solid upper stages for the Space
Transportation System. The contract, amounting to about $9 million,
had resulted from previous NASA agreements with Boeing Co. and
McDonnell Douglas that the firms could design, test, and market the
stages independently. Bids had been limited to those two firms because
                      velop the stages with private funds. The contract
                       Dec. 1979 of the first SSUS with all hardware,




                                                                       173
SEPTEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



tersputnik to use satellites and ground stations for international com-
munications were Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic,
Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia.
(FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)

* FBIS reported a Tass interview with Boris Petrov, chairman of the
Intercosmos council, on the high points of the program, including
cooperation with capitalist countries in exploration of space. France 1lyr
ago was the first capitalist country to cooperate; India’s satellite
Aryabhata had orbited on a Soviet booster 2yr ago; Soviet-Swedish
cooperation was developing; and the U.S. and USSR would work
together on space biology, medicine, meteorology, environment, and the
moon and planets. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)

September 17: X-ray sensors on the U.K.’s Ariel satellite had detected an
explosion of “catastrophic dimensions” in the constellation Ophiuchus
[the Serpent-Bearer], the N Y Times reported. Similar sensors on Heao 1,
the U.S. high-energy astronomy observatory launched Aug. 12, had
made the same observation. Dr. Daniel A. Schwartz of the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics said intensity of x-rays from that
area increased a thousandfold in the past 2wk, making it the second
strongest source in the sky (that in the constellation Scorpius, a con-
tinuous source of x-rays, was the strongest). No star of comparable
brilliance appeared in previous photographs of the region. Ariel had first
detected the x-rays Aug. 31; Heao 1 began recording the source Sept. 7.
An observatory in Australia that had received data on the explosion had
also recorded it in visible light; Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval
Research Laboratory said that a nova was rarely observed at widely
separated wavelengths such as those of visible light and x-rays. (NYT,
Sept 17/77, B8)

September 19: MSFC announced it would sponsor a data-management
symposium Oct. 18-19 jointly with the Univ. of Ala. in Huntsville
(UAH) to discuss use of space-acquired or remotely sensed data in the
1980s. MSFC deputy director Richard G. Smith would chair the session;
Daniel J. Fink of General Electric’s Space Division would deliver the
keynote addkess. Representatives of NASA and other government
agencies, industry, and universities would deliver 31 papers during the
meeting. Leonard B. Jaffe, NASA deputy associate administrator for
applications, would speak at a banquet Oct. 18. (MSFC Release 77-172)

* ESA announced that the U.S. delegation to an Aerosat Council
meeting in Washington, D.C., Sept. 15-16, had notified it that lack of
funds would prevent the Federal Aviation Administration from pro-

174
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                            SEPTEMBER


ceeding with the program as contemplated. The Aerosat memorandum
of understanding had provided that ESA, the government of Canada,
and a U.S. company (ComSatCorp was selected in 1974) would proceed
with development, production, launch, and operation of the satellite,
with ESA and the FAA (leasing from the U.S. firm) using the comsat
capability in equal portions. (ESA Release Sept 19/77)

September 20: NASA announced it would sign a $5.6 million contract
with General Electric Co. to build an atmospheric cloud physics
laboratory for launch on the Shuttle in the early 1980s [see July 111.
NASA had already selected 8 of 26 experiments for the ACPL on early
Spacelab missions. (NASA Release 77-197; MSFC Release 77-173)

* NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, the agency ad-
ministrator, had approved awards totaling $39 800 to 7 NASA and 2
contractor employees for their contributions to the agency’s program.
The awards covered 5 major efforts: a central timing system for tracking
stations using microwave signals bounced off the moon; a new silica
insulation material to protect the Shuttle during reentry into the at-
mosphere; a temperature-resistant coating to cover the Shuttle insula-
tion; an economical and durable black-chrome coating for commercial-
type solar collectors; and a new optical glass surface to improve Landsat
images. Largest single award, $10 OOO, went to Mahlon F. Easterling of
JPL for development of the timing system. (NASA Release 77-195)

   NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Anthony Calio as Hq associate
administrator for applications as of Oct. 1. Dr. Calio had served as
deputy associate administrator for space science since Nov. 1975. He had
begun working for NASA in 1963 at the electronics research center in
Cambridge, Mass., then at NASA Hq. In 1968 he transferred to JSC and
in 1969 became its director for science and applications. He had
previously been a nuclear physicist with Westinghouse and the American
Machine and Foundry Co., and was in the U.S. Army Chemical Corps
from 1954 to 1956. Among his honors were NASA medals for excep-
tional service, 1969; exceptional scientific achievement, 197 1; dis-
tinguished service, 1973. (NASA anno Sept 20/77; NASA Release
77-200)

September 2: DFRC announced that employees John G. McTigue and
            Z
Stanley Markey would share a $5000 award for working out a way to
truck the Shuttle orbiter overland from the Rockwell plant in Palmdale,
Calif., to DFRC rather than use the Boeing 747 carrier, eliminating the
need for a mate/demate device costing $2.53 million and saving the Shut-
tle program nearly $800 OOO. The two men used their knowledge of local
SEPTEMBER                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



terrain, geography, and manpower to set up a ground route with relative-
ly minor problems. (DFRC Release 30/77)

  NOAA reported that airline passengers between Miami and Latin
0

America could enjoy smoother flights because of satellite weather
images. Lineas Aereos Nicaragua (LANICA) and 8 other carriers were
sharing Goes 2 weather photos of the area from the southeastern U.S.
into South America, including all of the Gulf of Mexico and the Carib-
bean Sea. A LANICA official said that, until now, the airlines had little
idea of the location of storms; now they could avoid them, or use the
windflow to save time and fuel. (NOAA Release 77-247)

  ERDA announced it had selected Windworks, Inc., of Mukwonago,
0

Wisc., to negotiate a contract for design and production of advanced
small windmills for farms, rural homes, and other uses. The $388 OOO
contract covered designing a machine to produce 8kw of electric power
from 29ft-diameter blades in a 20mph wind, and delivering it for testing
by prime contractor Rockwell Intl. at ERDA’s test facility in Colo.
(ERDA Release 77-168)

September 22: NASA announced that Thomas C. Duxbury, a guest in-
vestigator at JPL, would use the shadow of Martian moon Phobos on
Sept. 20,24, and 28 to pinpoint the exact location of the Viking I lander
on the planet’s surface.
   JPL explained that the spacecraft had landed within a known area but
was too small for detection by orbiter cameras, which had been unable to
tie in photographs of the site to the lander’s position. Duxbury had pro-
grammed both the lander and the orbiter to take a picture as the shadow
of Phobos passed over the landing site; the time of the photograph and
the exact position of the shadow on 3 occasions would permit calculation
of the lander’s position.
   Duxbury was one of 20 chosen to participate in the Viking guest in-
vestigator program set up by NASA to offer experimenter opportunities
beyond those originally planned for the mission. (NASA Release 77-199)

   The USSR announced it had launched a 910kg Prognoz 6 to continue
0

study of galactic energetic particles and of solar activity impact on the
magnetosphere and the interplanetary medium. (FB
Russian, Sept 22/77),

                              keroflot’s IL-62 jet passenger flagship had
                              by a crew of 6 women, the IL-62 set a world
distance record along a closed route of 10 388km d a world record for

176
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                             SEPTEMBER



average speed along a closed 10 O O m route of 804kmph. (FBIS, Tass in
                                 Ok
English, Sept 22/77)

September 23: The W Post said that the U.S. had “quietly decided” to
build a device for destroying enemy satellites in space: a small (ft-long,
8in-dia) heat-sensing vehicle “resembling a tomato can” without ex-
plosives but relying on collision at thousands of mph to accomplish its
purpose. The Post said the USAF had “carefully camouflaged” this step
in a Sept. 8 release announcing award to Vought Corp. of a $58.7 million
contract “for development and test of hardware in support of the Space
Defense Technology Program.”

   A 1967 treaty between the U.S and USSR had prohibited both nations
from orbiting any object “carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds
of weapons of mass destruction. . .”;both sides had apparently decided
this did not outlaw shooting at their own target satellites. U.S. military
officials deduced that certain USSR launches were tests of hunter-killer
satellites with non-nuclear charges to blow up on approach to a target.
William J. Perry, DOD research chief, told the Post that the U.S. could
either build antisatellite weapons also, or provide more protection for
U.S. satellites. The DOD had begun on defensive measures such as mak-
ing satellite wiring less vulnerable, but had also decided on offensive
measures as shown in the Vought contract.
   The small highly maneuverable U.S. device would have sensors allow-
ing it to home in on slight temperature variations between a target
spacecraft and its surroundings; it would be so light that a single launch
vehicle could carry several into effective orbit. (WPost, Sept 23/77, Al)

  NASA announced it had joined with Rockwell Intl. Corp. in granting
0

funds for a new solid-state electronics facility at Howard Univ.,
Washington, D.C., dedicated Sept. 20 at ceremonies with NASA Ad-
ministrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch as speaker, attended by more than 200
persons from NASA, Rockwell, Cornel1 Univ., ERDA, Bell Lab-
oratories, and other public and private groups. Cornel1 Univ., a leading
school in electronics research, had helped set up the Howard project at
the request of Rockwell. (NASA Release 77-201)

   LaRC announced NASA had awarded Lockheed Aircraft Corp. a con-
0

tract to produce advanced-composite ailerons to decrease weight of the
L-1011 transport aircraft. Lockheed, working with Avco Corp. in
Nashville, Tenn., would demonstrate techniques of designing and
fabricating 10 shipsets of composite ailerons for FAA approval. Costs of
the 4yr contract, like those with other firms in NASA ’s aircraft energy-
efficiency program (ACEE) to reduce fuel needs of civil-transport air-

                                                                       177
SEPTEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971



craft by 50% [see May 5 , July 71, would be shared, $5.85 million to be
contributed by NASA and $650 @ by Lockheed. LaRC would manage
the contract. (LaRC Release 77-43; NASA Release 77-204)

   WFC announced it would officially open a new management educa-
0

tion center Sept. 30 with Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator,
presiding. A unit of the Hq office of professional development, the
center would offer short-term residential programs (3-day seminars to
2-wk courses) designed to train future agency leaders. (WFC Release
77-12; NASA Release 77-202)

   MSFC announced it was developing a coal mining machine using
0

technology borrowed from the lunar rover to make mining safer, more
productive, and more economical. The Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Mines
had asked NASA to automate the mechanics of mining and eliminate the
need for human operators in the unsafe and unhealthy environment of
the cutting operation.
  The longwall-shearing machine in current use would gr:nd coal from
the face of a seam in a linear direction, sending the coal out on a con-
veyor and advancing with its roof supports as it went deeper in the seam.
Operators could not mine coal to the edge of a seam at roof or floor
without breaking into surrounding shale, so that much coal was left un-
mined. An operator would find guidance difficult and progress slow
because of poor visibility from dust.
  An automated guidance and control system would allow removal of
nearly all the coal at a much faster rate, recovering more of the coal left
by other methods, in a purer state with less rock and other matter. The
system would also reduce wear on the longwall machine’s cutters and
minimize downtime. The contractor to be selected would work with
results of a 2yr MSFC study of a system using sensors such as gamma
rays, radar, impact devices, and reflected light to guide a shear’s cutting
drums. (MSFC Release 77-175)

  FBIS reported that the USSR had opened a television station in Duki,
town of Khabarov Krai on the Pacific coast of Siberia near Bering Strait
and the Sea of Okhotsk, permitting reception of both central and local
programs in all villages of the area. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian,
Sept 23/77)

September 24: The press reported that the third free flight of the Shuttle
orbiter Enterprise over Edwards AFB had successfully tested the
microwave scanning-beam landing system originally developed for the
Navy to land planes on ships at sea. Pilots Fred W. Haise, Jr., and USAF
Lt.Co1. Charles Gordon Fullerton turned over orbiter control to the

178
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                             SEPTEMBER



system for part of its steep glide down, and ground transmitters kept the
craft in line with the runway during the 5min 34sec free flight. Installed
at Edwards earlier in 1977, the system would also be installed at KSC to
handle Shuttle landings there.
   Despite radio-transmission problems between the orbiter and
Houston, the launch went off on schedule. At 24 OOOft in a shallow dive
at 287mph the orbiter separated from its Boeing 747 carrier and reached
a maximum speed of more than 333mph during its landing approach.
(NYT, Sept 24/77, 24; W Star, Sept 24/77, A-5; W Post, Sept 26, A-4)

September 26: JSC reported that another 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants
would report for individual interviews and physical examinations; the
group included 17 pilot and 3 mission specialist applicants. Eight of the
applicants were from the USAF; 6, Navy; 2, Marines; 4, civilians. Of the
more than 8000 applicants, about 200 would go to JSC for screening, the
final group due in mid-Nov. and selections in Dec. (JSC Release 77-54;
NASA Release 77-205)

  MSFC announced that solar energy would provide heat for some of
the center this winter. A system already completed would supply 50% of
the heat for one office building; solar cplilectors being installed on
another would supply hot water. A flat-plate solar collector on the
10-story center headquarters building would be supplying hot water by
July 1978. (MSFC Release 77-178)

September 27: MSFC reported on the dedication of the world’s largest
solar-energy cooling system at a hotel on St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin
Islands. The hotel, surrounded by the ocean on three sides, had used
diesel fuel for energy. The $554 OOO system, part of ERDA’s solar-energy
demonstration program, used 13 OOOft2 of solar collectors to air condi-
tion the 300-rm hotel, saving an estimated $100 OOO per yr over the cost
of diesel fuel.
   MSFC engineer Bob Middleton, design and installation manager, ex-
plained that the system was unique in not storing energy: it provided air
conditioning during the day only, and the oil-fired system took over at
night, as the most economical arrangement available. MSFC had worked
on installations at a total of 59 sites under ERDA’s demonstration pro-
gram; ERDA had shared costs of this system with the hotel owners.
(MSFC Release 77-179; NASA Release 77-207)

  INTELSAT announced that the People’s Republic of Angola had
0

become the 99th member of the organization on Sept. 23, and the 25th
African nation to join. Angola’s Empresa Publica de Telecomunicacoes

                                                                       179
SEPTEMBER                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


(EPTEL) had signed the operating agreement. (INTELSAT Release
77-25-1)

September 28: NASA reported that LeRC research under the Aircraft
Energy Efficiency Program (ACEE) might bring back the use of pro-
pellers, once considered obsolete, in fast commercial aircraft service.
Advances in composite-material technology had led to design of small-
diameter 8-blade propellers that might save 20 to 40% in fuel over cur-
rent turbofan engines. (MSFC Release 77-206)

September 29: NASA launched Intelsat IVA F-5 from Cape Canaveral
on an Atlas Centaur that exploded less than a minute after launch, drop-
ping the 33321b spacecraft into the Atlantic Ocean. This Intelsat and an
identical craft scheduled for launch in Nov. were to replace two Intelsat
IVs now in orbit over the Indian Ocean and provide 6OOO telephone chan-
nels and 2 television channels for use by 40 countries, compared to 4OOO
telephone and 2 TV channels offered by the Intelsat IV spacecraft.

  At 60sec into the flight a range safety officer destroyed the secondary
Centaur stage which had separated prematurely from the Atlas. Failure
of the $49.4 mission was similar to the Sept. 13 explosion of a Delta
rocket carrying a $42 million orbital test satellite (OTS) NASA was
launching for ESA. (NASA Release 77-214; W Post, Sept 30/77, A-3)
  An investigation concluded that a leak in the high-pressure gas
generator system had ignited combustibles in the Atlas 35sec after
launch, damaging engine components and terminating the flight. (MOR
E-491-633-77-04 [postlaunch] Jan 5/78)

   FBIS reported that the USSR had launched space station Sabut 6 into
an orbit with 275km apogee, 219km perigee, 89.lmin period, 51.6” in-
clination. A control center near Moscow would process information
from the station aided by tracking stations on Soviet territory and on
Soviet Academy of Sciences ships in the Atlantic. Onboard systems were
functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 29/77)

   Rockwell Intl. reported that George W. Jeffs, its president for space
operations, had told the House subcommittee on space science and ap-
plications that the U.S. needed “bolder and more imaginative steps”
toward space industrialization, and called on the federal government to
demonstrate an aggressive “make it happen” program with a theme of
Power from Space.
   Space industrialization funding in the 1980 budget, Jeffs said, should
approach $500 million for building-block phases leading to manufactur-
ing, communications, or space power centers operational by the yr 2000.

180
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                              SEPTEMBER



Such funding would speed up the goal by at least 5yr and would en-
courage increased private investment. “As dramatic and technically
rewarding as our space missions have been,” he concluded, “they were
more significant for creating enormously promising opportunity.”
(Rockwell Release SP-5)
                                             -


September 30: MSFC announced that NASA had selected Martin
Marietta Corp. and Ball Brothers Research Corp. for negotiations of
flxed-price contracts for parallel $290 OOO definition studies of a Shuttle
tethered satellite system [see May 271. MSFC would manage the studies
for the NASA Hq Office of Space Flight. (MSFC Release 77-181)

* The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. announced that the Federation
Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) wodd present the gold space medal,
given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former
astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum,
at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total
contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot
during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The
U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the
world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set
records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records.
Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of
2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed cir-
cuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in
horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine air-
craft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.)
   Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a
world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting
107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich. for being the only person to win
the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA
Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of
honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin
Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its
environment.
  The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation
records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77)

During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Air-
craft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify
traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high
reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT
comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)

                                                                        181
SEPTEMBER                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   ESA announced it had received a delegation of 9 telecommunications
0

experts from the PRC’s Electronics Society visiting Europe Sept. 12-Oct.
20 to see the principal national space facilities and industrial firms of
ESA member nations. The visitors, headed by Lei Hung of the Elec-
tronics Society council, would discuss all aspects of communications-
satellite programs and would give ESA and European industrialists their
first opportunity to meet with people from PRC in the space business.
(ESA Release Sept 13/77)

   The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. reported Dr. Paul MacCready, U.S.
0

aeronautical engineer famous for his manpowered Gossamer flying
machines, had claimed the Kremer Competition prize offered through
the Royal Aeronautical Society of 50 000 British pounds (about $86 OOO
U S ) for having completed on Aug. 23 the required course of clearing a
start/finish line loft high, flying a figure 8 around 2 pylons a half-mile
apart, and completing the flight over the same loft-high finish line.
   The Gossamer Condor, a craft made of corrugated cardboard, balsa
wood, aluminum, piano wire, Styrofoam, transparent tape, and
cellophane, with a 96ft wingspan but weighing only 771b, was powered
by Bryan Allen, an experienced hang glider and bicycle racer, who
transferred energy through bicycle pedals to a propeller. The Kremer
prize was the largest ever offered for a single aeronautical achievement.
Dr. McCready’s claim was subject to RAS approval upon submission of
flight documentation. Although the NAA, as RAS contact in the U.S.,
had distributed numerous copies of the Kremer rules, only 2 other
vehicles had been constructed and actually flown in the U.S., one a solo
manpowered craft like the Gossamer Condor, the other a multi-
manpowered triplane built by engineering students at MIT. (NAA
newsletter Sept 77)

  The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. reported that Pan American Airways
would mark the 50th anniversary of its first flight Oct. 28 by attempting
a world-record round-the-world, over-the-poles flight in less than 48hr
with a Boeing 747 jumbo jet. Carrying an official observer to certify
record performance, the 747 would leave San Francisco, fly over the
North Pole to London, then to Cape Town, South Africa, over the South
Pole to Auckland, New Zealand, and back to San Francisco, a distance
of 26 642 statute mi. A Boeing 707 had flown the polar route in 1965 in a
record 62hr 27min 35sec. In May 1976 Pan Am’s 747 had set an east-west
record, a bicentennial flight covering 23,137mi over a New York-Delhi-
Tokyo-New York route in 46hr 50sec. That flight had carried 98
passengers, many of whom would be aboard the polar flight in Oct. Pan
Am’s first flight had taken place O t 28, 1927, when a Fokker F-7
                                      c.

182
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               SEPTEMBER



trimotor lifted off a dirt runway at Key West, Fla., for an hr-long flight
over 90 miles of ocean to Havana, Cuba. (NAA newsletter Sept 77)

* NASA announced its yrs-old promise that scientists would operate
their own equipment in earth orbit would become a reality, with selection
of payload specialists for the first Spacelab mission in 1980 not by NASA
but by scientists participating in the mission. One of the two payload
specialists would be a representative of the European Space Agency
(ESA), developer of Spacelab. A special panel from an international In-
vestigators Working Group had interviewed 19 U S . candidates at MSFC
and would soon interview candidates in Europe. The entire working
group would select four trainees for a two-yr program at MSFC; one pair
would fly on Spacelab 1. (NASA Release 77-189)

* NASA Activities reported on international cooperation in space. Dr.
Alan M. Lovelace last year had signed an agreement with the USSR
Academy of Sciences, effective May 11 when signed by academy presi-
dent A.P. Aleksandrov, to study joint operation of Shuttle and Soyuz-
Salyut spacecraft in scientific and applications “objectives of merit,” and
the potential uses of a space platform and developing such a platform
bilaterally or multilaterally. By the end of 1978, within a yr of beginning
work on space-platform proposals, two study groups would bring in
recommendations. The publication cited US-USSR cooperation in
rocket instrument tests during Aug., the U.S. biological experiments car-
ried on a Soviet launch, and the arrangement for delivery to NASA of 7
lunar soil samples from the Soviet Luna 24 mission.

   NASA’s mandate called for “cooperation by the United States with
other nations and groups of nations . . . and in the peaceful application
of the results of that cooperation.” Best known current example would
be Spacelab, funded by 10 member nations of ESA, and the concurrent
development by Canada of the Shuttle’s remote manipulator system.
NASA’s Landsat program had made data available to 130 countries, 7 of
which had agreed to set up ground stations for direct reception of
Landsat information. A joint NASA-AID project based on Ats 6 broad-
casts of instructional TV to some 5000 remote villages in India had sent
special films and live discussions to 27 countries in Asia, Africa, the
Middle East, and Latin America. Other joint efforts included solar-
terrestrial studies, solar probes, infrared astronomy, the Space
Telescope, and a satellite-assisted global search-and-rescue project. A
major benefit to the U.S from such cooperation would be a favorable
balance of payments resulting from foreign purchases of data from re-
imbursable launches. (NASA Activities, Sept 77, 14)

                                                                        183
SEPTEMBER                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   The Naval Research Reviews reported on satellite use in the oceanic
biology program of the Office of Naval Research, covering biodeteriora-
tion (growth of fouling and boring organisms), sound in the ocean
(marine mammals), dangerous marine organisms, and special projects.
Sound in the sea, second major research area in the program, had
centered on whales and seals, especially sounds produced by whales.
Navy scientists had implanted radio transmitters in large whales such as
blues, fins, and grays, to track them by boat, plane, or satellite.
Knowledge of whale behavior and movements would be valuable to
designers and operators of naval equipment. (NR Rev, Sept 77, 6)

  FBIS reported on the 28th congress of the Intl. Astronautical
0

Federation in Prague, celebrating the 20th anniversary of the launch of
Sputnik I. Chairman Marcel Barrere of France reviewed at a press con-
ference the "tempestuous impact of space exploration on the planet's in-
dustry," mentioning the joint U.S.-USSR approach to a manned flight
project using the Shuttle and the Salyut orbital station. Presentations at
the congress had included papers on the search for extraterrestrial
civilizations, the U.S. scientists reporting on the Voyager mission, and
the USSR on remote probes of planetary atmospheres for signs of gas ex-
change between soil and atmosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 24/77,
Sept 28/77)




184
October


October I : The new federal Dept. of Energy opened its doors with
Secretary James R. Schlesinger promising “to resolve our energy prob-
lems. . . through the effective work of all the people of this
department.” Proposed by President Carter March 1, the department
had become a reality Aug. 4 upon signing of its organization act and
Schlesinger’s confirmation as secretary the following day. The depart-
ment inherited nearly 20 OOO employees and had a first-yr budget of
about $10.4 billion. Programs it would administer included conserva-
tion, resource development and production, research and development,
data management, environment, and regulation. (DOE Release
R-77-001)

   Reporting on the end of the Intl. Aeronautical Federation’s 28th con-
ference in Prague, FBIS quoted “American scientist O’Neal” [Gerard K.
O’Neill] on whether “his project of big settlements on near-terrestrial or-
bits was not too remote from reality”: “Mankind will never give up the
idea of settlements in space . . . The question is only how fast will space
industry and rocket technology reach the necessary level to enable people
of the earth to start building the first cities in orbit.”

  The congress discussed for the first time the efficiency of space
research, concluding that spacecraft created in different countries would
inevitably have a uniform appearance, depending on their use. The idea
of merging engineering ideas was “a dominant one.” Marcel Barrere of
France was reelected president of the organization. (FBIS, Tass in
English, Oct 1/77)

October 3: Johnson Space Center aMounced that a sixth group of 20
Shuttle astronaut applicants would report this week for individual inter-
views and physical examinations. This group, all mission specialist ap-
plicants, included one woman. (JSC Release 77-56; NASA Release
77-215)

  Kennedy Space Center announced award to Intl. Business Machines
Corp. of a $3 203 666 contract for a system to test Shuttle cargoes for
compatibility with the orbiter before loading into the payload bay. The
system, called CITE (cargo integration test equipment), would simulate

                                                                        185
OCTOBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



the orbiter’s electrical and electronic environment, stimulate the
payloads, monitor their response, and record the results. Keeping up
with the fast turnaround time planned for Shuttle missions required
payloads ready to plug into the orbiters without extensive onboard
testing. The CITE would be mobile for use either in the assembly
building to check out cargoes in vertical positions or in the operations
building to check out horizontal payloads. (KSC Release 156-77)

October 4: Postlaunch reports on the Voyagers said both were function-
ing as expected. The one launched first, called Voyager 2 because it
would arrive second at Jupiter and Saturn, had had difficulty with at-
titude control as well as with its science-platform boom; its data showed
that the craft was merely obeying faulty software, which ground control
had corrected. The boom was stable enough to capture satisfactory star-
field images. Voyager I, launched later, had not achieved the proper
velocity during two trajectory corrections; Jet Propulsion Laboratory
engineers said rocket exhaust was apparently pushing against the craft,
and had changed the procedure accordingly. (NASA Release 77-209;
MOR S-802-77-01/02 [postlaunch] Oct 6/77)

   NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A. Frosch, and
Chairman A.B. Wolff of the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace Pro-
grams had signed a memorandum of understanding on the Infrared
Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) project, a cooperative undertaking in
which the United Kingdom would also share under a separate agreement.
An earth-orbiting observatory built by the Netherlands and scheduled
for launch in 1981 would carry a cryogenically cooled IR telescope
furnished by the U.S. and a package furnished by the U.K. for com-
mand, control, and data acquisition. Nearly 500 scientists, engineers,
and technicians from the participating nations would join in the first
survey of the entire sky at infrared wavelengths undetectable by earth-
based telescopes obscured by the atmosphere. The mission would have a
lyr lifetime. Ames Research Center would manage the telescope, built by
Ball Bros. Research Corp.; JPL would have U.S. project management
responsibility. (NASA Release 77-210)

    Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Intl. Business
0

,Machines of a $1 344 950 contract for 134 site data-acquisition sub-
 systems to monitor performance of ERDA’s solar heating and cooling
 demonstration program at sites throughout the U.S. The IBM machines
 would provide data on solar energy at each site, amounts used for
 heating, cooling, and hot water, and other areas of performance,
 efficiency, and fuel saving. Each site would feed data to a central com-
 puter in Huntsville, Ala., for compilation of reports to business, in-

186
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  OCTOBER



dustry, and the general public on the most economical and practical
systems tested. (MSFC Release 77-184)

  The Washington Post reported on Sputnik 1’s 20th anniversary as
9

observed in the Soviet Union. Sputnik had set off a “search for
nationhood in the United States even as it seemed to confirm it in the
Soviet Union . . . Ask any Soviet citizen above the age of 24 and each
can tell you exactly where they were and what they were doing when they
heard . . . a Soviet satellite was in orbit.”

   The U.S. search ended “in a symbolic and real sense” with the moon
landing 8.5yr ago. However, the certainty of power that Sputnik gave the
USSR “has never quite materialized out of the void of space.” The A-2,
early main launch vehicle for the USSR “civilian” program, was still that
today. U.S. experts in the joint Apollo-Soyuz project had been
“dismayed by the crudeness of Soviet space hardware”: one compared
the Soyuz craft to a “hot water radiator . . . it works, but that’s about all
you can say for it.” An aviation weekly, interviewing the experts, said
they rated the Soyuz with the Mercury capsule, first U S . manned
spacecraft. “Their scientists are every bit as good as ours,” said one U.S.
physicist, “but the technical gap is still huge.”
   The article noted that -the U.S. had dropped its space medicine pro-
gram in the early 1970s but the USSR had kept on with its, and had main-
tained large space stations in orbit since 1971 manned with crews up to 63
days at a time. The Soviet space program had had less trouble than the
U.S. program “because of the closed nature of the system. . . no
citizens groups or congressional critics to question the need for a manned
space program.” Competition for limited resources was the same in both
countries, but “lack of public debate allowed managers luxuries of con-
tinuity not available to their counterparts in a democracy.” (W Post, Oct
4/77, A-1)

October 6: NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert A.
Frosch, and Hans Matthoefer, minister for research and technology for
the Federal Republic of Germany, had signed a memorandum of
understanding for participation in a Jupiter orbitedprobe mission to be
launched by the Space Shuttle in 1982.
  The mission would send an orbiter and a probe on the most detailed in-
vestigation to date of the environment and moons of Jupiter, the first op-
portunity for 114 investigators to measure Jupiter directly as well as
remotely from various orbital positions over a long period of time. The
orbiter, carrying 10 instruments, would circle Jupiter for at least 20mo;
the probe, carrying 6, would plunge into the atmosphere. West Germany
wodd provide a retropropulsion module to inject the orbiter into its path

                                                                          187
                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
OCTOBER


around Jupiter, as well as ,the scientific instruments and the services of 14
German investigators in preparing the two spacecraft and analyzing their
data. JPL would manage the U.S. project, ARC the probe, JSC the
Space Shuttle. An office in West Germany would manage FRG’s share.
(NASA Release 77-211)

   MSFC reported that a highly sensitive gamma ray telescope carried to
0

40km (25mi) altitude by a giant helium-filled balloon on a 40-hr flight
had studied an unusual binary-star system (AM Herculis in the
constellation Hercules) in which material from the larger star was falling
onto the dwarf companion.
   Dr. Thomas A. Parnell of MSFC’s space sciences laboratory said the
flight was seeking discrete gamma-ray emissions from particular celestial
bodies to identify the chemical elements and isotopes existing there; AM
Herculis was one of 6 unusual objects sought by the 0.75m-diameter
(2.5ft) telescope loaned by Rice Institute to MSFC in a joint astronomy
project. The balloon instrumentation was similar to part of the payload
on Heuo I , launched Aug. 12 to make high-energy astronomy surveys.
Detection of gamma rays in objects by Heuo I would be confirmed by
the balloon flights, the two sets of information being complementary.
Dr. Parnell noted that balloons had carried models of HEAO in-
struments in preliminary tests; another MSFC balloon launched last
week had carried a cosmic-ray detector like one to be flown on HEAO-C
in 1979. (MSFC Release 77-186)

   ARC reported that the city of Genoa, Italy, had awarded it the
Columbus gold medal for the multibillion-mile flights of two Pioneers to
Jupiter. The medal, presented annually during Columbus Day celebra-
tions in the explorer’s birthplace, would be accepted Oct. 12 by acting
ARC director Clarence A. Syvertson, who would be in Europe at the
time. (ARC Release 77-42)

   Langley Research Center announced it would dedicate Oct. 11 the site
of Project RECOUP (refuse-consuming utility plant), first jointly fund-
ed federal and municipal project of its kind, to generate steam from
burning refuse [see Jan. 191. Construction would begin in 1978 and be
completed in 1980; NASA would share the $8.4 million cost of the plant
with the US Air Force and the city of Hampton, Va. The plant would
burn more than 80% of the refuse from Hampton, LaRC, the Langley
Air Force Base, the Army’s Fort Monroe, and the Veterans Administra-
tion hospital; in a 24-hroperation, it would burn about 200 tons a day,
doubling the capacity of Hampton’s landfill. LaRC would use the steam
generated by the plant to augment its present heating system, saving
about 2.4 million gallons of oil per yr. (LaRC Release 77-46)

188
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                   OCTOBER



October 7: ESA announced that NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A.
Frosch and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, had signed at a
meeting in ESA headquarters a memorandum of understanding on
cooperation in NASA’s space telescope program.
   The European contribution would include a faint-object camera for
high-resolution imagery in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared por-
tions of the spectrum, with associated photon-counting detector, to be
left in orbit as long as considered scientifically useful; the solar array to
power the scope; and support of a scientific operations center to be
established by NASA for managing the observatory. ESA would get 15%
of the observing time for the duration of the program in return for its
participation, and would share data with astronomers in its member
states and the international community.
   NASA would develop and integrate the telescope, launch it into orbit
on the Shuttle, supply tracking and data-acquisition services, and main-
tain the telescope throughout the program. MSFC would manage the
space telescope, Goddard Space Flight Center would manage instrument
development and observatory operation, and the European Space
Technology Center (ESTEC) would manage the ESA effort. (ESA
Release Oct 7/77; NASA Release 77-212)

   LaRC announced that Sir Robert Mark, former director of New
0

Scotland Yard (his official title was Commissioner of Police of the
Metropolis), would be guest speaker at a center colloquium on terrorism
and law enforcement as part of the public lecture series, “Our Future in
the Cosmos.” The lecture would contrast philosophy and methodology
of British and U S criminal justice systems, including the areas of
                  ..
capital punishment, terrorism, and political influence on police matters,
reflecting the speaker’s feeling that a free society is governed by consent
rather than by force. (LaRC Release 77-45)

October 9-12: Newspapers reported the launch Oct. 9 of Soyuz 25 carry-
ing two rookie cosmonauts -Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery
Ryumin-toward a linkup with new space station Salyut 6 launched
Sept. 29. Western observers said Soyuz 25-first manned Soviet mission
since Feb., when Col. Viktor Gorbatko and Lt.Co1. Yuri Glazkov had
spent 18 days aboard Salyut 5 - was probably connected with the Sputnik
1anniversary and the upcoming 60th anniversary celebration Nov. 7 of
the Russian revolution. The observance might include either an attempt
at a new record of more than 63 days in orbit or the launch of another
space station to link with Salyut 6 and form a huge orbiting laboratory.
  Officials had canceled Soyuz 25 only 26hr into the mission because of
unspecified trouble, although the craft had come within 13Oyd of the
Salyut 6. The Moscow domestic service in Russian said only that the

                                                                         189
OCTOBER                                  ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



linkup was called off “due to deviations from the planned procedure for
docking.” The word that the flight was canceled came after 24hr of
silence, which had caused fears for the safety of the crew. Tass said Oct.
12 that the capsule had returned safely, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:25am
local time Oct. 11.
   U.S.officials speculated that, like Soyuz 15 in Aug. 1974and Soyuz23
in Oct. 1976, this mission failed because the cosmonauts had overshot
the docking point and could not make another attempt because their bat-
tery power allowed insufficient time to correct the navigational error.
When a crew last overshot its Salyut, 4mo elapsed before another crew
made a docking attempt. (W Star, Oct 10/77, A-1; O t 11/77, A-6; W
                                                        c
Post, Oct 11/77, A-1; Oct 12/77, A-21; FBIS, T s in English, Oct 9/77,
                                                 as
Oct 10/77, Oct 11/77)

October 11: ARC announced that a tegm of its scientists had made a
“major breakthrough” in explaining the origin of life. ARC’S Dr. James
Lawless, team leader, presented a report on the work to the Pacific
Conference on Chemistry meeting in Anaheim, Calif. Chemical evolu-
tion experiments in the past several yrs had applied electrical discharges
to ammonia., methane, and water to produce basic life molecules, in-
cludiog amino acids and nucleotides, but with no indication how the
molecules formed organic building blocks in ever more complex groups
&til a group appeared that could replicate itself.
   The new experiments had used metal clays normally present on
primordial earth and ocean shores. Mixing amino acid solutions with
everyday metal clays showed that the clays attracted the thousand vary-
ing aminos out of solution. One nickel-containing clay preferentially
attracted the 20 amino acids making up protein, main ingredient of living
cells; of 8 clays tried, only the nickel clay did this. The other metal clays
destroyed nonprotein-forming amino acids faster than protein acids, in-
dicating how the life-forming acids were selected and concentrated. Ex-
periments simulating tidal action on the clays produced chains of amino
acids, as many as 8 so far; time would eventually produce the far longer
chains found in life. A zinc clay, only one of 9 metal clays tried, had a
similar effect on DNA building blocks; the presence of metals in life
systems today had resulted from prebiological chemistry, Dr. Lawless
said. (ARC Release 77-43; NASA Release 77-220)

  JPL announced appointment of Dr. Rochus E. Vogt, professor of
physics at CalTech and principal investigator for the cosmic ray ex-
periments on Voyagers I and 2, as chief scientist. (JPL anno Oct 11/77)

October 12: NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise successfully went
through its fourth free flight with its streamlined 57001b tailcone off, in-

190
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911                               OCTOBER



creasing drag and reducing the altitude achievable by its 747 carrier (to
about 18 0oOft) as well as the distance it could glide after separation.
Three previous free flights, tailcone on, had lasted about 5.5min each;
this time the Enterprise, fitted with 16 O Ob of dummy engines with
                                             Ol
nozzles 8ft in diameter, wide enough for a man to stand upright in,
would have a glide time of only about 3 min.
   Pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly, alternating at the controls of the
orbiter, brought it to a stop on a runway at Edwards AFB after recording
a touchdown speed of 212mph and 5000ft of landing roll. NASA’s goal
had been no more than 9OOOft of landing roll, showing that the orbiter
could land at any major airport in the world. Fitzhugh L. Fulton, pilot of
the 747 carrier plane, said the aerodynamic resistance created by the
dummy engines had caused “heavy shaking” on both the orbiter and the
747 during the hr-long ascent to launch altitude. Tom McMurtry, copilot
of the 747, said the turbulence resembled “what you might get in a com-
mercial airliner . . . only we couldn’t change altitudes to get away from
it as an airline pilot does.”
   NASA officials said the last free flight, scheduled for Oct. 26, would
end with the microwave landing system controlling the touchdown.
(DFRC Release 31-77; postflt rept, free flt 4, SpSh orbiter ALT; NYT,
Oct 13/77, A18; WPost, Oct 13/77, C-11; LA Times, Oct 13/77, 1; JSC
Roundup, Oct 14/77, 1; WStar, Oct 13/77, A-10; C Trib, Oct 13/77,
1-13)

   JSC announced that another set of 20 Shuttle astronaut candidates
would report to the center Oct. 17 for physical examinations and in-
dividual interviews. All of this group would be mission specialist ap-
plicants, 8 of them women. Applicants screened at JSC so far had totaled
140, 77 of them pilots and 63 mission specialists; the 17 women were all
mission specialist applicants. (JSC Release 77-59; NASA Release 77-218)

   NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight
Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a
firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director
Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was
selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been
deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, hav-
ing flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of
Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to
visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been
technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special
assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct
12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)

                                                                       191
OCTOBER                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



October 13: LaRC announced that NASA had awarded Boeing Commer-
cial Aircraft Co. a $1.5 million contract to develop advanced
aerodynamic and active-control concepts for civil transport aircraft. The
contract included 6 tasks that would apply studies of aircraft systems to
initial design processers. LaRC would manage the contract. (LaRC
Release 77-48; NASA Release 77-219)

October 14: NASA announced plans for Noise-Con 77, third in a series
of national conferences on noise control, to be held at LaRC Oct. 17-19.
Sponsored jointly by the Institute of Noise Control Engineering and
LaRC, the conference would center on transportation noise. Some 40
technical papers would discuss control of noise from railways, aircraft,
motor vehicles, and highways, as well as community impact of transpor-
tation noise, standards and measurements, and federal programs for
noise control. (NASA Release 77-221)

October 17: NASA announced it had selected 5 materials-processing ex-
periments to be flown on an early orbital-test flight of the Space Shuttle
beginning in 1979. The Materials Experiment Assembly (MEA) would
offer scientists an interim opportunity to conduct studies before
Spacelab missions began; it would be automated and unattended, con-
taining its own power source and a minicomputer to collect data. Prin-
cipal investigators and their experiments were Dr. J. Bruce Wagner, Jr.,
Ariz. State Univ. -solid electrolytes containing dispersed particles;
Ralph A. Happe, Rockwell Intl. -containerless preparation of advanced
optical glass; Dr. Herbert Wiedemeier, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Inst. -vapor growth of alloy-type semiconductor crystals; Dr. John W.
Vanderhoff, Sinclair Laboratories, Lehigh Univ. -large-particle-size
monodisperse latexes; Dr. S.H. Gelles, Gelles Associates, Columbus,
0.-liquid miscibility gap materials. (NASA Release 77-222)

   Wallops Flight Center announced its annual Woman’s Day observance
0

Nov. 2 would stress the need for equal opportunity for women to con-
tribute to all phases of national life. Speakers would be Lillian Levy of
NASA Hq and Jill Barbon of the Salisbury, Md., chamber of commerce.
(WFC Release 77-13)

  The Dept. of Transportation announced it had awarded contracts to
0

Perkin Elmer Gorp, and United Technologies Inc. for devices to measure
the effect of jet-engine emissions on the stratosphere. The first contract,
valued at $385 OOO, would be for a system to measure nitrogen oxides in
the stratosphere between 50 OOO and 115 OOOft altitude and predict jet-
emission effects. The second contract, funded jointly at $458 OOO by
FAA, NASA, EPA, USAF, and the U.S. Navy, would document and ex-
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                 OCTOBER



plain the differences in reported measurements of nitrogen oxides in jet-
engine exhausts, comparing optical measurements with the sampling
technique. (DOT Release 98-77)

October 18: NASA announced it had reached an agreement with the
Navajo Tribal Council in Ark. for a 2-yr project to use Landsat data for
an automated resource inventory of the 16-million-acre reservation in the
southwest U S
            ..
  The tribe had asked NASA whether satellite and aerial remote sensing
could help solve inventory and multiple-use management problems in-
cluding range rehabilitation, timber, agriculture, harvest prediction, and
wildlife counts. Phase one of the project would demonstrate how Land-
sat data could apply to specific tribal needs and changes in resources;
phase two would include training of tribal personnel and setting up an
operational system at Navajo headquarters. The Navajo would assist
other tribes to realize the benefits of satellite information systems.
(NASA Release 77-223)

  DFRC announced that the final free flight of the Shuttle orbiter,
0

scheduled for Oct. 26, would have Fred Haise and Gordon Fullerton as
pilots, and that Prince Charles, Britain’s Prince of Wales, would attend.
(DFRC Release 35-77)

* The Dept. of Transportation reported it had asked for suggestions on
solving the problem of ozone irritation encountered on high-altitude
flights. Ozone, a colorless atmospheric gas found in increasingly higher
concentration at higher altitudes, had been identified earlier in 1977 as
the cause of eye, nose, and throat irritation in airline passengers and crew
on high-altitude long-range flights. Higher concentrations were found
closer to earth in late winter and early spring months, increasing the
number of aircraft exposed.
   The FAA had issued an advisory on avoiding encounters with ozone,
but was now seeking a permanent solution and soliciting views of
manufacturers, crew organizations, health groups, high-altitude re-
searchers, and airline customers, to be submitted by Dec. 6. (FAA
Release 100-77)

October 19: ESA announced that the tandem launch of a single Delta of
the U.S. ISEE-A and the European ISEE-B, originally scheduled for
Oct. 19 and postponed to Oct. 21, had been postponed again. NASA was
making additional checks of the Delta launch vehicle. (ESA Release Oct
19/77)

* The Dept. of Commerce announced that          2 oceanographic research

                                                                        13
                                                                         9
OCTOBER                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



ships and 4 aircraft had scanned the Gulf of Mexico during Oct. to
demonstrate measurement of ocean properties using satellite-borne in-
strumentation.
   Dr. Warren Hovis, director of NOM’S satellite experiment
laboratory, said the program was a preliminary to launch in 1978 of the
Nimbus-G with a coastal-zone color scanner. The joint NASA-NOM
tests had used aircraft equipped with models of the scanner to record
data that could be confirmed by surface measurements taken on the
ships. ( N O M Release 77-265)

   The Natl. Science Foundation reported that federal funding for
research and development had risen significantly between fiscal yrs 1974
and 1978, having shown only slight growth in the 1%9-1974 period.
Total federal W D funding for FY 1978 was about $26.3 billion, $8.9
billion more than for FY 1974. For the 1974-1978 period, 6 functional
areas accounted for nearly all the increase in federal support: defense,
44%; energy, 25%; space and health, 7% each; environment, 5%;
science and technology base, 4%. (NSF Release PR77-93)

October 20: JSC reported the 8th group of Shuttle astronaut applicants
would report to the center Oct. 25 for physical examinations and inter-
views. The 20 mission specialist applicants in this group were all military
except for one civilian; they represented the USAF (13), the Army (3),
the Navy (2), and the Marines (1). The group included one woman,
USAF Capt. Jane L. Holley. Of the 160 applicants screened at JSC, 77
wanted to be pilots and 83 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-66;
NASA Release 77-225)

October 21: LaRC announced it would hold the 33rd annual completion
exercises Oct. 28 for 34 engineering technicians trained at the center.
James P. Mitchell, deputy administrator of the Dept. of Labor’s Bureau
of Apprenticeship and Training, would be keynote speaker. LaRC Direc-
tor Donald P. Hearth would preside at the ceremony and give special
recognition to honor graduates. Woodrow W. Midgette, Jr., top honor
graduate, would be speaker for the class of 1977, consisting of 7 elec-
trical engineering technicians; 7 electronics technicians; 2 engineering
draftsmen; and 18 engineering technicians in the areas of aerospace
models, facility operations, materials processing, mechanical develop-
ment, and systems environments. (LaRC Release 77-5 1)

  NASA announced it had named Dr. James J. Kramer associate ad-
ministrator for aeronautics and space technology, effective Oct. 23. He
had been acting in that capacity since Dec. 1976. Starting at Lewis
Research Center in 1951, Dr. Kramer had come to NASA Hq in 1971 as

194
                                                                   OCTOBER
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



chief of OASTs noise and pollution reduction branch. (NASA anno Oct
21/77; NASA Release 77-227)

  The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level
0

nominees to the new Dept. of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale
D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as
undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North
American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had
been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell.
(WPOSt, OCt 21/77, B-5)

October 22: NASA launched two international satellites, the U.S. ISEE-
A and ESA’s ISEE-B, on a single Delta rocket at 953am EDT (1353hr
GMT) from ETR at Cape Canaveral into a highly elliptical orbit ranging
from about 138,OOOkm apogee to 280km perigee, 28.7” inclination, and
2.4-day period. The ISEEs had separated an hr after launch, the A craft
(Isee 1) spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic and the B spacecraft (Isee
2 ) spin axis parallel to the ecliptic to permit magnetometer calibration
and boom extension. The satellites would measure earth’s environment,
assisted by a third spacecraft ISEE-C scheduled for launch in 1978.
(NASA Release 77-123; ESA Release Oct. 24/77; MOR S-862-77-01/02
[prelaunch] Oct 11/77, [postlaunch] Oct 25/77; WPost, Oct 23/77, A13;
W Star, Oct 23/77, A-2)

October 23: The NY Times reported that Capt. Edgar D. Mitchell,
astronaut on the Apollo 14 mission, had taken 55 special stamp covers on
his flight and had just sold the first for $4200. The San Francisco firm
that auctioned the stamp earlier in Oct. said the buyer was a major stamp
dealer in Italy.
   In 1972 NASA had reprimanded the Apollo 15 astronauts for smug-
gling 400 first-day covers to the moon and selling 100; the 300 covers not
sold were turned over to the U.S. for “safe storage in the archives.” The
Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 silver medals on the 1971 moon flight,
keeping 150 for “private use,” but had not been reprimanded because
none of the medals had been sold. The Calif. dealer said Mitchell, now a
civilian living in Fla., had brought in the covers for appraisal and was ad-
vised to find the market value by selling one. NASA said it knew Mitchell
had taken the covers in his “personal preference kit”; when it asked about
them, he replied “It’s.none of your business,” and a few days later had
announced his retirement. Official NASA comment on the sale: “Unfor-
tunate.” (NYT, Oct 23/77, 45)

October 24: FBIS said the USSR in 1978 would install a second genera-
tion of laser long-distance satellite rangefinders usable in daylight, in-

                                                                         195
OCTOBER                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



creasing the range to 40,Wkm with an accuracy of k1Ocm. USSR
engineers were working in Czechoslovakia on the new rangefinder. The
report said Intercosmos engineers from Hungary, East Germany,
Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR had built a rangefinder measur-
ing distances up to 3000km accurate up to f 5 m ; however, it could
operate only at night. Ground stations in Poland, Egypt, Bolivia, India,
and Cuba had used the device. (FBIS, Intl Serv in Russian, Oct 24/77)

October 25: NASA announced it had agreed with the St. Regis Paper Co.
in N.Y. to use the Landsat for monitoring from 9OOkm (56Omi) commer-
cial timberlands owned by the company over a 5-state area in Fla., Ga.,
Ala., Miss., and La. St. Regis would use the satellite data to manage its
timberland. JSC would manage development of an automatic system for
classifying forested areas, to identify kinds of trees, estimate timber
volume, and detect changes in health or growth of the forests, combining
the new system with existing data from aerial photography and ground
surveys. Software and techniques from this first major undertaking be-
tween NASA and a private company would be in the public domain, to
benefit other forest-resource managers. Past cooperative uses of Landsat
had been between NASA and other U.S. or foreign government agencies.
(NASA Release 77-226; JSC Release 77-73)

October 26: NASA reported that the fifth and final free flight of the
Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, testing its braking on a concrete runway, had
successfully made a landing on concrete at Edwards AFB-although it
had a bumpy finale when the orbiter touched down and bounced twice
before stopping.
   At a postflight press conference, pilots Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon
Fullerton said the craft had reached speeds higher than expected after
separating from its Boeing 747 carrier. Shortly after 8am local time the
747 had taken off with the orbiter attached to the top of its fuselage,
climbing during the next 50 minutes to about 20 000ft altitude, where it
nosed over and began to dive. At about 17 000ft the orbiter separated
and came straight down without the turns made in previous flights; the
dive angle was 25-22” compared with a commercial jetliner’s descent
slope of about 3”. Touchdown, which came lmin 55sec after separation,
overshot the 5000ft mark on the concrete runway by about 1000ft. The
rear landing gear had touched, but the craft hopped back into the air,
bounced, and tipped slightly before the pilots steadied it and stopped it
with 2000ft of runway remaining. Approach speed had reached 330mph
on the indicators, and the pilots described “oddities in the way the speed
dropped” during the descent.
   Donald K. Slayton, in charge o the landing tests, said engineers this
                                   f
week would check out the airspeed indicators and the vehicle’s calculated

1%
                                                                 OCTOBER
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



energy profile, but further tests were not probable. Plans for future or-
biter landings would change on the basis of data from the fifth test,
modifying the aim point to allow for higher lift/drag coefficients with
the tailcone off and the slower bleed-off of airspeed. (NASA Release
77-224; postflt rept free flight 5 , SpSh orbiter ALT NYT, Oct 27/77,
A-18; LA Times, Oct 27/77, 2; W Post, Oct 27/77, A10, B-3; JSC
Roundup, Oct 28/77, 1; AvWk, Oct 31/77, 16)

   NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch announced reorganization
0

of the agency effective Nov. 8 "to strengthen NASA organization and
                            ...
improve our effectiveness      we will reduce the number of staff offices
reporting directly to the Administrator." Headquarters operations would
consist of 3 functions: the office of the Administrator, for general
management; the chief scientist, chief engineer, and 5 program offices
for program planning, management, and review; and 8 staff offices to
give program, staff, and functional support. Each of the 5 program of-
fices would have an associate administrator to manage aeronautics and
space technology; space sciences; space and terrestrial applications
(formerly applications); space transportation systems (formerly space
flight); and space tracking and data systems (formerly tracking and data
acquisition). (NASA Release 77-228)

October 27: NASA launched the Navy's Transat spacecraft at 9:52pm
PDT from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle into an orbit with
600.7nmi apogee, 572.6nmi perigee, 89.9" inclination, and 106.9min
period. The spacecraft, a modified Transit navigation satellite, would
join 5 others in a system being used by U.S. Navy and other ships for
global navigation, as the first to carry 2 modified transponders with a
capability called Satrack to support Trident (fleet ballistic missile)
development.
   Built by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Transat
would receive, translate, and relay NavStar global-positioning signals
simulating a Trident missile in flight, to evaluate Satrack procedures
before using them in Trident test flights and to check out Satrack proc-
essing at JHU/APL. NASA had agreed with DOD in Jan. 1970to launch
Scouts, carrying 15 Transit satellites and 3 Transit Improvement Pro-
gram (TIP) satellites so far, the Navy to reimburse NASA for the launch
vehicles, launch services, and mission support. The Transit system nor-
mally operated 5 satellites, with 2 on standby. (Langley Researcher, Nov
28/77, 2; MOR M-490-601-77-03 [prelaunch] Sept 30/77)
  NASA's launch participation was judged successful as of Nov. 8-10.
(MOR M-490-601-7743 [postlaunch] Nov 15/77)

    F'BIS reported that the USSR had completed a series of rocket launches
0



                                                                       197
OCTOBER                                ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



in cooperation with France to compare procedures and instruments used
by the two countries in high-altitude atmosphere sounding. The rockets
were launched simultaneously from the French space center at Kourou,
French Guiana, and offshore from the Soviet research vessel Akademik
Korolev recently at work with the U S off the Atantic coast. (FBIS, Tass
                                   ..
in English, Oct 27/77)

* INTELSAT announced that the People’s Republic of the Congo had
become the 100th member of the organization Oct. 26, and the 26th
African nation to join. Created in 1964 with an initial membership of 11
nations, INTELSAT was providing communications service through 152
stations in 86 countries. (INTELSAT Release 77-27-1)
      A


October 28: MSFC announced plans for a teleoperator retrieval system
(a retrievable reusable low-thrust stage for maneuvering payloads in low
earth orbit) to fly on the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s, its first use
probably a Skylab-orbit adjustment to permit revisiting or control its
reentry over an open ocean area. Riding into orbit on the Shuttle, the
TRS would be deployed and remotely operated by an astronaut aided by
a television image from a camera mounted on the TRS. It could also
maneuver to higher orbit and return, using its own guidance and com-
puter systems, to be remotely controlled again for retrieval into the Shut-
tle when it came within range of the TV signal. MSFC would manage
development of the TRS, and Martin Marietta would be responsible for
vehicle integration. (MSFC Release 77-201)

  INTELSAT announced that Upper Volta had become the lOlst
0

member of the organization Oct. 27, and the 27th African nation to join.
The Office des Postes et Telecommunications de Haute Volta had signed
the operating agreement for Upper Volta. (INTELSAT Release 77-28-1)

October 30: The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save
the Skylab space station ‘’which is moving closer to earth and may fall in
bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch
a ”remotecontrolled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit,
where it would be available for future astronaut visits.
   The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every
1.5hr at a uxhni altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as
long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still
the world‘s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77,
A-10)

October 3 : The Washington Star reported that U.S. and European
           2
scientists were planning a two-spacecraft mission to an unexplored area

198
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                OCTOBER



of space to get a fiist look at the sun and its solar system from a new
perspective. No spacecraft had as yet ventured off the so-called plane of
the ecliptic (the solar equatorial plane) by more than 15” latitude relative
to the sun. Using two spacecraft, one below the plane of the ecliptic and
the other in the usual latitude relative to the sun, scientists could learn
more about solar physics and conditions responsible for variations in
earth’s climate.
  The mission would use two unmanned spacecraft weighing 650 to
8001b each, launched by a Space Shuttle. The report said NASA would
request funds for the “solar polar” (or out-of-ecliptic, OOE) project in its
next budget, giving engineers time to meet a favorable 10-day launch
period in Feb. 1983. ESA, whose members included most western Euro-
pean nations, was said to be ready to share in the mission; it would build
one of the vehicles, the U.S.the other. JPL would manage NASA’s part
of the mission, estimated to cost about $141 million. ( WStur, Oct 31/77,
A-6)

During October: The USAF reported that the fiist two-seater F-16
airplane, a fighter-trainer version known as F-16B, had made a suc-
cessful first flight at General Dynamics Corp.’s Ft. Worth, Tex. facility.
The test flights were to evaluate the handling of this version, weighing
6OOlb less than the standard single-seat F-16 when fueled, and to use rear-
cockpit controls to put it through takeoff and landing, formation flying,
and roll and pitch.
  The one- and two-seat versions of the F-16 were almost identical in size
and appearance, each 48ft long with a 300ftz wing area, but the F-16B
had a larger canopy to cover the second pilot and would carry 1100 fewer
gallons of fuel. Development of the new plane, fiist fighter designed to
withstand forces up to 9g, was managed by the Aeronautical Systems
Division at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct
77, 1)

* ERDA announced it had signed a contract with the Ford Motor Co.,
to be managed by JdeRC, for developing the Stirlingpassenger-car engine
to the point of deciding in 8yr whether or not to produce it commercially.
A Stirling engine would be at least 30070 more fuel efficient than those of
comparable size and performance in current cars. It differed from the
conventional internal combustion engine in being powered by heat from
an external source: a burner using any of a variety of fuels wwld heat
hydrogen gas inside the engine whose expansion and contraction would
move pistons to generate power.
  Invented in the 1800s, the Stirling predated the internal-combustion
engine and had been used to pump water for mines and quarries. By the
1930s the availability of gasoline-powered cars had overshadowed other

                                                                       199
                                       ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
OCTOBER



development. N. V. Philips of the Netherlands and United Stirling of
Sweden had pioneered and continued work on the Stirling engine and
had licensed Ford to work on it i 1971. ERDA and Ford had become in-
                                 n
terested because of the engine’s high fuel efficiency, flexibility in choice
of fuels, low noise and pollution, and good driving characteristics. Cost
of the 8-yreffort would be about $160 million, $110 million contributed
by ERDA and $50 million by Ford; if the Stirling should go into produc-
tion, Ford’s investment might eventually amount to more than $500
million. (ERDA Release 77-179)
November



November2: Marshall Space Flight Center director William R. Lucas an-
nounced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA
to the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy
manager of the Space Shuttle main engine project since 1976 and served
previously as assistant manager in the Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC
Release 77-206)

November 3: NASA announced that biologists working for it and the
Natl. Science Foundation had identified a “new” form of life that might
date back to earth’s first billion yr: a methane-producing organism
representing what might be the oldest form of life as well as a line of
evolution totally separate from the two traditionally recognized lines of
bacteria, and animals and plants. A research team headed by Dr. Carl
Woese of the Univ. of 111.-Urbana, described as a world expert on the
genetic code, said the organisms were a distinct class no more related to
typical bacteria than to higher forms. Biologists working with a group of
methane-producing organisms had assumed they were ordinary bacteria;
however, analysis of ribosomal RNA had shown the genealogy of the
new form to be distinct from those of both bacteria and the animals or
plants. Dr. Woese said the study might shed light on a missing stage of
evolution, the chemical stage that immediately preceded identifiable life
on earth. (NASA Release 77-229)

November 4: Johnson Space Center announced that the ninth group of
Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov. 7 for physicals and inter-
views. The group, 21 mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants,
included 12 civilians; 2 were women, bringing the number of female ap-
plicants interviewed to 20. Of the military applicants, 5 were Navy; 4,
USAF; and 1 each from the Army and Marines. NASA had screened 183
applicants so far, 79 seeking to be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC
Release 77-70; NASA Release 77-232)

   JSC announced it had selected ILC Industries, Inc., of Fredrica, Md.,
0

to negotiate a $1.2-million contract for Shuttle crew equipment and
stowage provisions. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract running from Jan.
1978 to the end of Sept. 1980 would cover items such as crew clothing, an

                                                                         201
                                           ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
    NOVEMBER


    orbiter survival kit, and personal hygiene kits, as well as replacement,
    servicing, and maintenance, with special studies of the crew equipment.
    (JSC Release 77-71)

    November 5: Today newspaper reported that two launch failures in Sept.
    at Cape Canaveral (explosions of an Altas Centaur and a Delta rocket)
    had altered the schedule to include launch of a Meteosat Nov. 17 on a
    Delta; an Intelsat Dec. 8 on an Altas Centaur; and the Japanese comsat
    (originally scheduled for launch Dec. 8) Dec. 14 on another Delta. ESA’s
    Meteosat, originally scheduled to go on Nov. 15, had been put off 2 days
    for further checkout of the Delta; the Intelsat was put off from Nov. 10
    to Dec. 8 for further checkout of the Atlas Centaur. The 15 missions
    scheduled for launch from the Cape next yr had risen to 17: a FltSatCom
    launch for the Navy originally scheduled for Dec. 15 had been pushed
    forward to 1978, and a launch of ESA’s OTS backup had been added to
    replace the one that failed. (Today, Nov 5/77, 1A)

    November 7: Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had scheduled
    four ferry-test flights of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise mated to its Boe-
    ing 747 carrier for Nov. 14, 15, 17, and 18 to prepare for the orbiter’s
    cross-country ferry flight in March 1978 from DFRC to MSFC for
    ground-vibration testing. Later flights would ferry orbiters from
    Rockwell Intl.3 facility in Calif. to Kennedy Space Center in Fla. for
    launch.
      Besides determining the best speeds and altitudes for the ferry flights,
    the test would measure holding-pattern and engine-out performance in
    cruise and landinghikeoff. The 747 crew would be Fitzhugh Fulton,
    commander, and Tom McMurtry, pilot, with Victor Horton and Skip
    Guidry as flight engineers; the 4 had flown the 747 in recent approach
    and landing tests. (DFRC Release 37-77; NASA Release 77-233; JSC
    Release 77-74)

       MSFC reported its engineers had prepared electronic simulations as
    dress rehearsals of Shuttle orbital missions set for 1978, with computers
    in the roles of major hardware. The simulations, carried out at JSC,
    would check out Shuttle avionics (electrical and electronic systems con-
    trolling the Shuttle during flight and sending signals to pilots and ground
    controllers monitoring the mission). MSFC’s engineers would deliver to
    JSC in Jan. 1978 the Marshall mated-elements system (MMES)
    simulating items for which MSFC was responsible: main engines, solid-
    fuel rocket boosters, and external tank. JSC would provide an orbiter
    simulator and a computer to simulate Shuttle dynamics, a system called
~




    SAIL (Shuttle avionics integration laboratory) able to simulate a Shuttle
    flight beginning 20min before launch under normal or abnormal condi-

    202
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               NOVEMBER



tions. The MMES could simulate failure of almost any MSFC element to
see how the systems would react with one main engine out or if high
temperatures or pressures should occur in vital areas. (MSFC Release
77-208)

  NASA announced changes in organizations or titles for operational
0

purposes during the transition period of its reorganization (Nov. 8 to
Dec. 4) in the Office of Management Operations and the Office of Exter-
nal Relations, as well as establishment of the position of special assistant
to the Administrator to direct implementation of the reorganization.
(NASA anno Nov 7/77)

   The Natl. Geographic Society announced that Gen. William J. Evans
0

would be recipient for 1976 of the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy
given annually since 1961 to the USAF member, military or civilian, con-
tributing most significantly to U.S. aerospace progress. Gen. Evans,
commander of the Air Force Systems Command at Andrews AFB from
Sept. 1975 to Dec. 1976, had played a key role in developing defense
space systems. (NGS Release Nov 7/77)

November 8: Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Edgar M.
Cortright, who had been director of the center 1968-1975 and was now a
vice president of Owens-Illinois, Inc., would speak at the center colo-
quium Nov. 14 on recent developments in solar energy.
   Dr. Cortright, in charge of overall technical direction at the large
multinational corporation now interested in uses of solar energy, would
discuss technical, economic, and legislative aspects of the newly develop-
ing industry that would depend for wide application upon being price-
competitive with other energy sources in spite of being inexhaustible and
nonpolluting. The next few years would see its first domestic applications
in areas such as space heating and air conditioning. (LaRC Release
77-54)

  NASA Hq notified its employees of changes in operational control
0

during the reorganization, including requests for communications serv-
ices, travel services, parking permits and other transportation support,
assignment and scheduling of senior duty officers, library services, and
other administrative functions. Changes would be effective immediately.
(NASA anno Nov 8/77)

November 9: The Washington Post reported that Charles Kowal of the
Calif. Inst. of Technology had discovered “something out there in space
that orbits the sun roughly 2 million miles out once every 115 yr or so,”
but had not “the slightest idea” what it was. “You might say it’s a mini-

                                                                        203
NOVEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



planet,” far too small to be a conventional planet but as big as some
asteroids, about 100 to 4oOmi in diameter; “It really doesn’t resemble
anything else. It is definitely not a satellite of any planet or a
         .
comet. . .”
   Kowal, a veteran at discovering new objects in the solar system, had
detected the 13th moon of Jupiter and another object that might be the
14th; he had located the latest unusual body while working with the 48in
telescope at Mt. Palomar Oct. 18-19 and had been trying to establish its
orbit so that other astronomers could check it out. Researchers would
need 2 or 3wk to determine the orbit, lying beyond Saturn and possibly
both inside and outside the orbit of Uranus, “maybe going out as far as
Neptune,” between 1.3 million and 2.7 million miles from the sun. If the
object should be defined as a planet, Kowal by tradition would have the
privilege of naming it. Final decision on whether or not it was a planet
would be made by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cam-
bridge, M s . (WPost, Nov 9/77, A-17)
         as

November IO: The Chicago Tribune reported that astronaut Walt Cun-
ningham had written “the first kiss-and-tell treatise about the space pro-
gram,” a book called The All-American Boys, intended as a “candid,
close-up, even critical look” at NASA, the space program, and his fellow
“partynauts,” none of whom had dared to be as critical as Cunningham
in his first “but probably not last” book. The review said the book was
“about people -imperfect mortal men -and what happens when they
suddenly find themselves cast as superheroes in a world that literally
knows no bounds.” (C Trib, Nov 10/77, 1-17)

November 11: Lewis Research Center’s 2-yr program of sampling air
around the world to detect substances detrimental to the environment
had been unable to cover the polar regions, the Lewis News said, until
last month when its air monitors rode the polar route on Pan American’s
50th anniversary flight.
   Known as GASP (global air sampling program), the LeRC effort had
used instruments designed at the center to detect and measure small par-
ticles and pollution-related gases, as well as carbon monoxide, water
vapor, ozone, and various other oxides, operating automatically and
recording data on magnetic tape for analysis at NASA labs and distribu-
tion to scientists and engineers anywhere for air-quality evaluation.
Sampling the upper-air over the poles would show “what clean air is ac-
tually like,” said GASP director Porter J. Perkins. “What kind and
amount of manmade pollutants are up there, if any? Especially are wejn-
terested in fluorocarbons from aerosol cans . . .What we may find . . .
may conceivably alter presumptions we’ve made about global distribu-
tion of certain airborne contaminants.” (Lewis News, Nov 11/77, 3)
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917                             NOVEMBER



   KSC’s Spaceport News reported on Center efforts to recover launch-
0

vehicle and payload wreckage from the “unprecedented” back-to-back
explosions of a Delta and an Atlas Centaur carrying an OTS and an In-
telsat spacecraft.
   In “the most comprehensive and painstaking recovery in the Space
Center’s history,” land, sea, and air crews searched every foot of the
50miz impact area. Two Patrick AFB helicopters and a private chopper
worked to spot scattered wreckage from the air; the USAF crew made 19
flights in 2wk, with a total of 88hr in the air, covering a 12miz area and
locating about 95% of the wreckage recovered. Ground crews in ar-
mored personnel carriers and sea crews in Navy and private craft then
took over to retrieve and identify each piece, check it for live ordnance,
and catalog its recovery location. USAF ordnance disposal personnel
often had to penetrate thick, snake-infested vegetation to reach Delta
and Atlas Centaur fragments. Personnel from Port Everglades and the
Navy’s harbor-clearance unit using an Air Force landing craft-utility
(LCU) boat retrieved the Delta’s solid-fuel motor #1 from the water as
prime suspect in the OTS launch failure.

  The teams worked from early morning to dusk, even over weekends,
and recovery work for the Delta was still under way. Hundreds of per-
sons helped on the recovery, from directors to office clerks. Personnel
from KSC had the aid of representatives from McDonnell Douglas,
General Dynamics, Patrick AFB, and Pan American Airways operations
in the extensive ground search. To reward the combined efforts, KSC
would present a group achievement award to the Delta 134/Atlas Cen-
taur 43 recovery team at an awards ceremony Nov. 22. (SpaceportNews,
Nov 11/77, 4)

   MSFC reported successful completion of structural tests on the Space
0

Shuttle external tank’s intertank section, carrying the attach points for
the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters and subject to heavy loading
both on the launch pad and during flight while the boosters were
thrusting.
  MSFC engineers would now proceed with vibration tests on the for-
ward portion of the external tank, the liquid-oxygen container, attached
to the intertank. Structural tests would follow later in 1978. (MSFC
Release 77-212)

   JSC announced that the loth group of Shuttle astronaut applications
0

would report to the center Nov. 14 for physical examinations and inter-
views. This group consisted of 24 mission specialist applicants and one
pilot applicant; 17 were civilians, 1 a woman, and 8 were from the
military- 3 each from the USAF and Navy, 1 each from the Marines and

                                                                       205
NOVEMBER                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



Coast Guard. T i group would bring the total to 80 pilot applicants and
               hs
128 mission specialist (21 women) applicants screened at JSC. In Dec.,
NASA hoped to name as many as 20 in each category for 2 yrs’ further
training before final selection as astronauts. (JSC Release 77-75; NASA
Release 77-236)

   JSC announced that NASA and the Soviet Academy of Science would
send representatives to a meeting Nov. 14-17 in Moscow to discuss a
joint program for the 1980s using the flexible delivery and large capacity
of the Space Shuttle and the Salyut’s longer stay time in orbit. Dr. Noel
W. Hinners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, would
head the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Boris Petrov, chairman of the
academy’s Intercosmos council, would head the Soviet delegation. (JSC
Release 77-78; NASA Release 77-234; FBIS, Moscow Dom Sv in Rusn,
Nov 18/77)

   NASA announced that Wallops Flight Center would host the 8th an-
nual meeting of the NASA-Soviet Space Biology and Medicine working
group Nov. 19-25, preceded by a workshop Nov. 16-18 on simulated
weightlessness, as part of a continuing program under a 1971 agreement
between NASA and the USSR Academy of Sciences. Meeting par-
ticipants would discuss biomedical results of the Cosmos 936 mission
carrying U.S. experiments, the Sulyut 5/SOyUZ 19 mission, and a JSC test
demonstrating Spacelab missions, as well as research on space motion
sickness and health in weightlessness. Dr. David Winter, NASA’s direc-
tor for life sciences, would head the U.S. delegation, and Dr. Rufus
Hessberg, director of space medicine, would head U.S. workshop par-
ticipants. Soviet leader at both meetings would be Dr. Nikolai Gurovsky
of the Soviet Ministry of Health. (JSC Release 77-78; NASA Release
77-234; WFC Release 77-15)

   Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced it
would buy back 1.5 million shares of its common stock for $37 cash per
share until Dec. 6. The organization had decided on the repurchase as a
preliminary step in possible future acquisitions, and a restructuring of its
accounts to show a substantial debt, as the FCC had indicated its rate
making would be based on such a debt in the organization’s capital struc-
ture. ComSatCorp emphasized that it was currently debt free. (ComSat-
Corp Release 77-28)

November 14: Despite NASA’s failure to win FY 1979 funding for a new
Mars mission, such a mission remained the major planning element in
the agency’s planetary programs office, Aviation Week reported. A Mars
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                              NOVEMBER



rovedorbiter mission had strong support from the Natl. Academy of
Sciences, to lay the groundwork for a sample-return mission using either
Martian- bit rendezvous or direct ascent from earth to Mars. At a KSC
         T
briefing, . Thomas Young, NASA’s director of planetary programs,
said the highest priority missions NASA might implement “in the near
term” would include the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR), a lunar-
polar orbiter, a Saturn orbiter probe, and a rendezvous with comet
Halley or Encke, or both, or possibly with an asteroid.
  “As we go through the budgetary process, on one side I wish Mars
would go away,” Young said. “But when you stop and think about rivers,
volcanoes, enormous Mars icecaps, the chemistry potential for life, and
the atmosphere, you realize that understanding Mars is so important
toward understanding where earth has been and is going that you’ve got
to treat it in a responsible manner.” He said NASA planning should
benefit from the 2.4m-diameter space telescope, aimed primarily at
bodies outside the solar system but sure to provide significant data on
objects nearer earth. (AvWk, Nov 14/77, 55)

    Av Wk reported the Intl. Telecommunications Union’s frequency
0

board had distributed to its 100-plusmember nations the technical details
of a USSR plan to launch 7 geostationary Volna satellites for global
maritime and air communications service. Members questioning possible
interference with existing or projected systems had until Jan. 9 to re-
spond. The 7 spacecraft would work in separate systems: numbers 2, 4,
and 6 would each operate in 4 frequency bands, 2 allocated exclusively
for mobile maritime service and 2 for mobile aeronautical service.
Numbers 1, 3, 5 , and 7 would also use these bands, plus a 240-4OOmc
band now used by the US Navy for its maritime service which the Volnas
would use for land-mobile service. The Volna proposal did not include
fixed shore terminals, although USSR officials had said the system
would be a national rather than international system. (AvWk, Nov
14/77, 20)

November 15: JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement
with Rockwell Intl. Corp. for engineering-change orders on the Space
Shuttle orbiter. The supplement, valued at about $226 million, would
bring the value of the Rockwell contract to about $3.2 billion. The sup-
plement would cover changes such as addition of lightning protection,
payload and systems integration, avionics changes, provision of spares,
and support of the carrier aircraft during ALT. (JSC Release 77-76)
  JSC announced it had signed a contract modification with Ford
Aerospace covering hardware and software systems engineering, plus
maintenance and operation of JSC’s mission control center and other
NOVEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS. 1977


ground-based data systems. The modification, valued at more than $1.4
million, would bring the value of the Ford contract to about $51.3
billion. (JSC Release 77-77)

November 16: NASA announced it would join with Canada in a 3-day
meeting Nov. 29-Dec. 1 to assess performance of Cts, world’s most
powerful comsat, now in orbit for nearly 2yr. The meeting would hear
experimenters discuss their results and the social, technical, and
economic aspects of CTS-type comsats. Canada and the U.S. had shared
time on Cts, which p e d a LeRC-developed transmitter tube to operate in
a new frequency band at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than those of
other comsats, making it possible to use smaller and less expensive
ground receivers. Cts had permitted 2-way TV and voice contact ex-
periments for health, education, business, and similar purposes. Besides
managing all U.S. experiments on Cts. LeRC had also used a portable
earth terminal in an over-the-road van resembling a TV studio to connect
the satellite with local events to be broadcast. (NASA Release 77-237)

   MSFC reported that DOD had lent NASA a crew of Navy divers for 2
yrs to support tests in the neutral buoyancy simulator studying
weightlessness. All 5 had been fleet-salvagedivers for the Navy with 5 to
17 yrs experience in scuba, hard hat, mixed-gas, and other types of diving
apparatus. Selected for their ability to use special tools to assemble or
dismantle structures or equipment underwater, the crew would help test
hardware, instruments, and tools to be used in space and would work
underwater in full-scale Shuttle or Spacelab mockups to aid engineers in
planning contingency procedures, equipment operation, space construc-
tion, and other manned-mission activities.
   Each trainee working underwater in a space suit would have 2 Navy
divers responsible for his safety, with others assigned to prepare hard-
ware and ensure the necessary tools were in place before the test started.
During the test, divers would stand by to retrieve dropped tools or reset
apparatus for repeat testing; between tests, the divers would dismantle,
remove, or rearrange hardware under water or install new hardware,
Chief P t y Officer Richard Wiebe, a veteran diver with 17 yrs in the
        et
Navy, said the crew had found work on the Shuttle program challenging.
(Marshall Star, Nov 16/77, 4)

November 17: NASA reported that a team of researchers using ultrasen-
sitive radio equipment aboard an Ames Research Center U-2 jet aircraft
to measure the background microwave radiation in the cosmos had con-
cluded that the event initiating the universe had begun not with a violent
and uncontrolled “big bang” but with “an extremely smooth process,” in
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                NOVEMBER



which matter and energy were uniformly distributed and kept expanding
at an equal rate in all directions.
   Drs. kchard Muller and George Smoot, with graduate student Marc
Gorenstein, of the Lawrence Laboratory and the Univ. of Calif. at
Berkeley, had designed and operated the radio equipment for the project
funded by NASA and the Dept. of Energy. The plane had flown at
65,000ft altitude above 90% of earth’s atmosphere to make the sensitive
experiments indicating that the Milky Way galaxy (including earth and
its solar system) was flying through space toward the constellation Hydra
at a uniform speed of more than 1 million mph-so uniform that “it pro-
vides a universal reference for measuring this motion,” said Gorenstein.
The large-scale regularity found in the expansion of the universe made
the speed of the local motion discovered for the earth “all the more sur-
prising,” said Dr. Muller. Furthermore, the measurements “seem to show
that there is no rotation of the universe,” Dr. Smoot said, which was sur-
prising because “we can see that everything within the universe is
rotating-planets, stars, and galaxies. If there is rotation it has to be less
than one hundred millionth of a rotation in the last billion
years. . . Either conditions before the beginning were very regular, or
processes we don’t yet know about worked to make the universe extreme-
ly uniform.” The uniformity was greater than 1part in 1000 for matter, 1
in 3000 for energy, and 1 in 10 000 for expansion. (NASA Release
77-235; ARC Release 77-45)

  NASA announced it had appointed Raymond A. Kline as associate ad-
ministrator for management operations, effective Nov. 20. Coming to
NASA Hq in 1968, he had been acting associate administrator for center
operations from July of this year. Previously he had served for 6yr on
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s executive staff at MSFC. (NASA anno Nov
17/77)

November 21: NASA announced that the next launch of an Atlas Cen-
taur rocket from KSC would be no earlier than Jan. 6,1978, carrying an
Intelsat IVA commercial comsat. Originally scheduled for launch in
Nov., the mission was f i s t delayed for investigation of a previous Atlas
Centaur launch that failed Sept. 2 . That investigation was almost com-
                                    9
plete; the associate administrator for transportation systems, John
Yardley, was to receive a report in early Dec. The postponement to Jan.
was not caused by the investigation, NASA said, but by discovery of
faulty feedback transducers in the Atlas engine-control actuators during
routine testing. The new date would allow removal and replacement of
components from that manufacturing batch and revalidation of the
engine systems. (NASA Release 77-241)

                                                                         209
NOVEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



*  NASA announced tentative selection of 18 scientists to participate in
the Space Telescope project. The 10-ton spacecraft scheduled for Shuttle
launch in 1983 to orbit at 500km (310mi) altitude would make observa-
tions deeper into space, and with more detail, than heretofore possible,
covering about 350 times the volume of space now visible from earth-
based telescopes. It had been designed for remote operation from the
ground, including maintenance or retrieval by a space-suited astronaut
for return to earth to be overhauled and relaunched. The telescope could
accommodate 5 different instruments at its focal plane: both the faint-
object camera (ESA) and the wide-field camera could cover ultraviolet
and blue spectra, the latter the red and near-infrared regions as well; the
two spectrographs would offer a range of resolution impossible with a
single instrument; and the photometer could calibrate the other instru-
ment and image the galactic background. (NASA Release 77-239)

* NASA announced that on Nov. 29 it would present first results of the
scientific experiments on high-energy astronomy observatory Heao I
launched Aug. 12. Dr. Noel Hinners, associate administrator for space
science; Dr. Frank B. McDonald of Goddard Space Flight Center, proj-
ect scientist; and principal investigators for the experiments would report
findings on pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Scien-
tific instruments on the observatory offered highly sensitive detection
and resolution of x-rays emitted by stellar sources throughout the
universe; the spacecraft, rotating end over end, could survey the entire
sky within 6mo. (NASA Release 77-242)

November 22: NASA launched the ESA Meteosat at 8:35pm EST from
the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle into a synchronous transfer or-
bit with 37 OOlkm apogee, 147km perigee, and 27.5" inclination. The
apogee boost motor fired at 1:19 pm EST Nov. 23 to begin maneuvering
it to a position on the Greenwich meridian at 0" longitude above the
equator, where it would provide long-range forecasting coverage to
Europe, the Near East, and Africa for at least 3yr.
   The cylindrical craft 3.2m long and 2.lm in diameter weighed 697kg at
launch and 300kg in orbit; its payload was a telescope radiometer to
observe earth and cloud formations, providing relay and transmission of
meteorological data. The World Meteorological Organization had set up
a chain of 5 such satellites, 1 European, 1 Soviet, 1 Japanese, and 2 U.S.
Besides transmitting to user stations the data from a center at Darmstadt,
West Germany, Meteosat would relay Atlantic Ocean images from the
U.S. Goes. (NASA Release 77-230; MOR M-492-102-77-01 [prelaunch]
Nov 16/77, [postlaunch] Feb 28/78; KSC Spaceport News Nov 11177,l;
ESA releases Nov 3/77, Nov 16/77, Nov 23/77)

210
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               NOVEMBER



November 22: MSFC announced it had awarded to Martin Marietta
Corp. a $1.735 million contract for analysis and design activities needed
for a preliminary design review in March 1978 of the teleoperator
retrieval system(TRS).
   MSFC had been managing development of the TRS to adjust the orbit
of Skylab [see Nov. 21, based on in-house NASA studies and earlier work
by Martin Marietta on the astronaut-maneuvering unit and a free-flying
teleoperator system. The contractor would make wide use of already
qualified hardware in preparing for TRS assembly, test, and integration.
(MSFC Release 77-220)

November 23: The Marshall Star reported that, before the real Shuttle
orbiter arrived in Ala. next year, a homemade orbiter constructed of
scrap rocket parts and steel beams would stand in for it during practice
lifts into the tower where the real thing would be tested. The stand-in
would first make use of the device that would remove the Enterprise
from its 747 carrier, then follow the route to be taken by the real orbiter,
in order to check clearances on the sides. Its major tryout would come
when MSFC engineers put it into the 430ft (131m) test stand to see what
effect the wind would have on installation.
   The simulator, basically a motor casing from a Titan solid-fuel rocket
loft (3.04m) in diameter and 80ft (24.39m) long with added framing, col-
lars, nose and tail structures, and wings plus aluminum sheeting for the
outer skin, would closely match the Enterprise in size, shape, weight, and
center of gravity. After its performance at MSFC, it would go by barge
to KSC to take part in launch-procedure checkouts, and from there to
Vandenberg AFB for DOD use in preparing Shuttle launch facilities.
(Marshall Star, Nov 23/77, 4)

  MSFC announced it would conduct on Dec. 1 at the Natl. Parachute
Test Range in Calif. the third airdrop test of a parachute system designed
to recover the Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters. Royce
Mitchell of MSFC said the test article, a 48 OOOlb (21 773kg) dummy
boostercarried-under the wing of a B-52 aircraft, would encounter 30%
more dynamic pressure than the system should experience during a real
deployment.
  To test the durability of the drogue chute that would open first to pull
out the main chutes, fins added to the test article would increase its speed
and reduce drag. The drogue would deploy at a speed of about 42Omph
(676kph) 20sec after the plane released the dummy booster at an
estimated speed of 230mph (370kph) and an altitude of about 19 4OOft
(5913m). The 2 boosters to be used on each Shuttle launch would
separate after burnout at an altitude of about 27mi (43.5km), descending

                                                                         211
                                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
NOVEMBER



slowly by parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse. (MSFC
Release 77-221)

   LaRC announced that NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch would
0

speak at the center’s annual awards ceremony Nov. 29, presenting
awards for outstanding leadership, exceptional service, group achieve-
ment, and 45-yr service. LaRC Director Donald Hearth would present 4
awards for 40-yr service and 83 for 3 5 9 service. An award for outstand-
ing volunteer service would go to 4 employees, and 3 would receive the
center’s highest honor, the H.J.E. Reid Award, named for the man who
had headed the center for 35yr, starting as engineer-in-charge in 1926 and
retiring as director in 1961. The center would also make an award for
technology utilization for the first time. (LaRC Release 77-55)

November 28: The Dept. of Transportation reported that the Federal
Aviation Administration would demonstrate an advanced all-weather
microwave landing system Dec. 5-9 at JFK International Airport using a
NASA Boeing 737 to fly a series of curved approaches and automatic
landings like those recently flown at other locations, most recently
Buenos Aires. The Intl. Civil Aviation Organization had recently tested
the equipment as a replacement for 40-yr-old instrument-landing
systems. Beginning Feb. 22, the British government would demonstrate a
different MLS on the same runway to obtain comparative data on the
two systems; similar comparisons would proceed at other locations
abroad. In March 1977 the ICAO all-weather operations panel had en-
dorsed the MLS design proposed by the U.S.and Australia, to be con-
sidered by the full membership of ICAO meeting in 1978. (DOT Release
FAA-1 18-77)

November 29: NASA held a press briefing on results from Heao 1 ,
launched 3.5mo ago, described by the project manager Dr. Frank
McDonald of GSFC as “probably the largest scientific satellite” flown by
the U.S. On hand for the briefing were Dr. Noel Hinners, associate ad-
ministrator for space sciences; Dr. McDonald and Dr. Elihu Boldt from
GSFC; Dr. Herbert Friedman of NRL, principal investigator on the large
x-ray survey;. Dr. Gordon Garmire of CalTech, who with Dr. Boldt had
worked on the cosmic ray experiment; Dr. Hale Bradt of MIT, principal
investigator for the scanning-modulation collimator; and Dr. Hale Peter-
son of the Univ. of Calif. San Diego, principal investigator for the low-
energy gamma-ray experiment. The scientists gave the press brief
statements of their results and responded to questions. (Text, Nov 29/77)

November 30: LaRC reported it had selected Klate Holt Co. of H a m p
ton, Va., to negotiate a $13 million contract for on-center support serv-

212
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                              NOVEMBER


ices for 3yr starting in March 1978, with two 1-yr extension options. The
contract would cover refrigeration and air conditioning, electric systems
(compressors, large valves, and pumps), building-trades services such as
carpentry, painting, masonry work, roofing, and street repairs, plus
engineering services including drawings and specifications. (LaRC
Release 77-56)

  The Marshall Star reported that the Nov. 22 launch of Meteosat for
9

ESA had encountered a delay because of a “weak but spurious” radio
signal that had reached the command destruct system. Although officials
considered the signal too weak to affect the launch, they delayed it
anyway to trace its origin. They ran tests to try and pick up the signal
again, tracing it finally to the advanced range-instrumentation ship
Redstone, which had not sent the signal but had leaked it from onboard
computer testing. Upon identifying the source, officials allowed the
launch to proceed. (Marshall Star, Nov 30/77, 3)

   ComSatCorp announced that the FCC had decided to make it pay ex-
tra sums into an escrow account ordered by the agency pending court
review of an FCC rate order in 1975. Since then ComSatCorp had con-
tinued to charge the rates in effect at the time of the order, putting in
escrow the difference between the amount.collected and the lower rates
ordered by the commission. ComSatCorp said the FCC’s new order
would require it to put about $25 million more in escrow, and it would
petition for reconsideration of the order. (ComSatCorp Release 77-30)

* The Natl. Aeronautic Assn. reported on a nationwide poll of its
members asking what three problems aviation faced today: the govern-
ment rated first, then fuel costs and air traffic control, including the
quality of weather information at airports. Inconsistent policies and the
need for regulatory reform were the main complaints. U.S. efforts to
control business arrangements for foreign military sales displeased 71 Yo,
who said the effort harmed U.S. aircraft manufacturers. Members
wanted the U.S. to build an SST and open its airports to the Concorde
(by an 84% vote); on subcontracting construction of some aircraft to
European nations, to standardize and render interchangeable NATO’s
military equipment, the members split 52 to 48% in favor of keeping the
business at home. (NAA newsletter Nov 30/77)

During November: The USAF reported completion of 4Omo of tests in a
joint U.S.-Canadian project using an XC-8A Buffalo military cargo
plane from Canada with a huge a r f l e rubber doughnut for landing
                                   i-ild
gear, to prove the feasibility of an a r cushion landing system for large
                                      i
transport aircraft.

                                                                       213
NOVEMBER                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



   Tests mostly at Wright Patterson AFB consisted of 84 flights, 34 of
them air cushion takeoffs and 39 landings on grass, snow, and hard sur-
faces, with 25mi of taxiing over the same surfaces and over obstacles.
Wallace Buzzard, program manager for the USAF flight-dynamics
laboratory, said that besides being able to operate on difficult surfaces
the air-cushioned plane “also taxied smoothly over a 3Oft-long ramp with
a 9in dropoff, crafters 6ft in diameter, and ditches 2ft wide. An aircraft
with a conventional landing gear simply can’t do those things; it would be
seriously damaged if not wrecked.”
   The tests included numerous inflight inflations and deflations of the
air cushion, and tests of flying quality: the pilot found he could control
the aircraft in crosswinds as high as 2Omph, letting the pressure assist
him in moving it to a particular point although taxiing sideways.
Whereas most planes would descend for a soft landing at about 3ft per
sec, the air cushion plane could soft-land at a rate of 8ft per sec with a 6”
nose angle.
   The XC-8A weighed 33,0001b during the tests without cargo; Buzzard
said it could have tested the same fully loaded, probably becoming more
efficient with increased weight, “Outfitting an aircraft weighing more
than a million lb with conventional landing gear will be extremely dif-
ficult,” he said. “An ACLS could handle aircraft as heavy as 3 million Ib
and be competitive in weight with conventional landing systems.” (AFSC
Newsreview, Nov 77, 1)
* NASA reported that JSC had produced a compact medical kit contain-
ing most of the instrumentation of a well-equipped physician’s office, us-
ing techniques and tools developed to monitor astronauts’ vital signs dur-
ing spaceflight. The NASA “black bag,” weighing less than 14kg and fit-
ting into a case 18cm by 56cm by 36cm, would contain electronic equip-
ment, drugs, bandages, and instruments needed to diagnose and treat
many kinds of illnesses or accidents; electronic tools included an elec-
trocardiograph and electroencephalograph, plus either a strip-chart
recorder or a cassette tape recorder, with a coupler built in to transmit
data over a standard telephone line. The package would improve the
treatment possible on emergency or house calls and provide more com-
plete data before hospital admission. (NASA Actv, Nov 77, 24)
   MSFC reported that the new manpower level required at the center
0

would mean dropping some 70 employees in 1978 by “involuntary
separation.” In Sept., NASA Hq had announced that MSFC would
probably lose about 150 positions, but had not said whether the loss
would come through attrition or reduction in force. Although resigna-
tion, retirement, and other causes had produced some vacancies, MSFC
director Dr. William R. Lucas had notified all employees that a reduc-
tion in force would take place by April 1978, and that NASA would ask

214
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                              NOVEMBER



the Civil Service Commission for “early-out” authority to let employees
with certain combinations of age plus yrs of service retire early on re-
duced annuity, granted in some reductions in force. (Marshall Star, Nov
77, 4)

   GSFC reported that it and the Univ. of Maryland had designed an ex-
periment called GUMPS (Goddard/Univ. of Md. particle study) for
detecting cosmic ray proton energies up to IOTev, 2 times greater than
                                                      0
available from manmade accelerators, to clarify the interaction between
particles accelerated from active supernova-explosion remnants and the
magnetic field in Milky Way interstellar space. Comparing intensities at
the top of and deep inside the atmosphere would reveal much about the
fundamental properties of matter.
   Borne in a giant spherical aluminum gondola, the instrumentation
would include a calorimeter of large iron plates to interact with incoming
cosmic rays, producing a cascade of particles in numbers proportional to
the energy of the incoming particle; 8 sensitive detectors would measure
the energies. A multiwire proportional-counter hodoscope produced by
the Univ. of Md. would determine the trajectory of the mass of
originating atoms. The experiment would fly on a balloon at 80 OOOft
altitude before its Shuttle launch. (Goddard News, Nov 77, 2)

* KSC reported that the 10th anniversary of the maiden flight of Saturn
V, world‘s most powerful rocket, had passed without fanfare. Apollo 4
had lifted off Nov. 9, 1967, from KSC’s Complex 39A in a successful
demonstration of Saturn V’s flightworthinessand the Apollo spacecraft’s
ability to withstand the intense heat of reentry. (KSC Spaceport News,
Nov 11/77, 2)

   MSFC announced selection of William A. Brooksbank, Jr., as
0

manager of the solar heating and cooling project in the center’s special
projects office. MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas said that
Brooksbank, most recently deputy manager of the Spacelab program of-
fice, was well qualified for the position by his background in engineering
and management. Brooksbank had come to the Redstone Arsenal at
Huntsville in 1958 as atomic energy project engineer for the Army’s
ballistic missile agency; he had worked at MSFC since its establishment
in 1960. (MSFC Release 77-218)

   JSC announced selection of John C. Stonesifer as head of the center’s
0

new life sciences experiments program office, which would manage plan-
ning, development, and operation activities at JSC, ARC, and KSC for
all such experiments to be carried on the Space Shuttle and other mis-
sions in the future. Stonesifer would continue to act as chief of JSC’s

                                                                       215
NOVEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



bioengineering systems division until designation of a replacement. He
had joined NASA at LaRC in 1957 and transferred in 1962 during the
Mercury project to the space task group; he had been chief of JSC’s
recovery branch before becoming head of bioengineering systems. (JSC
Release 77-72)

   NASA reported that Dr. Lo I. Yin, x-ray researcher at GSFC, had in-
0

vented a hand-held device producing an instant x-ray image from a small
source of radioactive material. The lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging
scope) had resulted from research on space energy sources that converted
their x-rays to visible images; Dr. Yin said the idea had not been feasible
until the Army declassified an image intensifier produced at its Ft.
Belvoir night vision laboratory. Cost of the unit, not yet on the market,
might be less than $5000. Using no new technology, it contained off-the-
shelf items such as the radioactive source and an x-ray phosphor screen
besides the intensifier.
   Pulling a trigger unshielded the source, sending through the object
being examined a low x-ray dose which the phosphor screen converted to
visible light. The unit’s high intensification would allow use of a small
radiation source of 1 to 20 millicuries resembling a pen-size battery; an
                       0
attached camera could produce instant x-ray pictures with exposure 1000
times weaker than that of a conventional x-ray machine. Dr. Yin said a
device invented for x-ray astronomy “where there is a scarcity of x-rays
should [be] of obvious value in medical fluoroscopy where there are
many x-rays.’’
   Cooperating in evaluating the device would be the National Institute
of Dental Research, Howard Univ.3 College of Dentistry, Howard’s
cancer research center, and the Duke Univ. Medical Center at Durham,
N.C. NIDR researchers had already worked up a configuration of the
lixiscope for use in dentistry, and the cancer research center would com-
pare it with existing techniques for detecting soft-tissue tumors or foreign
bodies and for looking at bone fractures. Prime advantage of the unit
would be for emergency and other field use requiring quick fluoroscopy
(NASA Release 77-238)

   Calspan Corp. of Buffalo, N.Y., reported it was continuing technical
0

work on the XV-15tilt-rotor research aircraft from Bell Helicopter Tex-
tron that made its maiden flight earlier in 1977 at the Bell facility in
Arlington, Tex. Bell had awarded the company a $678 OOO contract to
design and fabricate the automatic flight-control system for the XV-15,
and a $62 OOO contract to support ground and flight checkout of the
system. NASA’s ARC had awarded Calspan a $ 1 OOO contract to study
                                               17
modifications of future XV-15sto adapt the craft for research into its
handling qualities. (Calspan News, Nov 77, 3)

216
December




December I : The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp)
reported it would proceed with its plan to buy back its common stock
[see Nov. 111, noting that the FCC had authorized it to borrow $25
million to finance part of the cost of the repurchase. A letter to
stockholders said the corporation would contest FCC’s attempt to make
it put more money in an escrow fund for possible repayments to
customers, because it said the FCC’s action was “neither lawful nor ap-
propriate.” (ComSatCorp Releases 77-31, 77-32)

December 2: The WashingtonPost reported that NASA had asked Con-
gress to let it use $100 million of Space Shuttle production funds to pay
for higher costs and delays in developing the first two Shuttles. Dr.
Robert A. Frosch, NASA Administrator, told the appropriations sub-
committee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that $65 million
would bring production up to schedule and the other $35 million would
go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million;
they were “down near zero right now,” Frosch said. Associate Ad-
ministrator John@. Yardley said the rocket to put the Shuttle into orbit
was 5mO behind schedule; also running behind were computer controls
and fuselage parts. Asked why NASA requested a fund shift that might
cause problems in the future, instead of a supplemental appropriation,
Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemen-
tal budget increases, it had had to wait until the next fiscal year for ap-
proval. ( W Post, Dec 2/77, A-2)

                                                               Sawyer of
   Dryden Flight Research Center reported that Ralph “BUZZ”
its flight systems laboratory had made a “paper airplane” to test a theory
of reducing elevator flutter and had come up with a new type of aircraft
its builder named Skyjacker. Sawyer, working on radio-controlled

                                                                        217
DECEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



models, decided to change their airfoils into booms but wanted to test the
idea without risking the $60radio systems. He made a foot-long card-
board model and “heaved [it] off the roof” of DFRC’s heat facility; the
“paper plane” had demonstrated amazing stability. Sawyer obtained a
patent on the design and built a demonstrator 18ft long with an 18ft
wingspan that he flew for the first time in Jan. 1975. With a 2OOhp fuel-
injected engine and a 3-blade constant-speed propeller, the Skyjacker
had “very good low-speed” handling, was easy to fly and land, and (ac-
cording to the designer) would not stall or spin. The craft had “lift
panels” 6ft wide instead of actual wings, but derived lift from its con-
figuration just as DFRC lifting bodies did; the design had no compound
curves, and its flat surfaces would make it inexpensive to produce. Possi-
ble applications would include crop dusting and firefighting. (NASA
X-Press, Dec 2/77,4)

   DFRC reported it had made further study of the effect of insects stick-
0

ing to the leading edges of aircraft wings [see A&A 76, Nov. 231 by flying
a small jet transport from four airports (Los Angeles, San Francisco,
Sacramento, and San Diego) to study actual environments from which
long-range commercial flights would be made. The program, conducted
jointly with Langley Research Center, was part of NASA’s aircraft
energy-efficiency program to achieve 20 to 40% fuel savings in a 1985
long-range transport aircraft. Such a craft would probably use laminar
flow-control technology, depending on smooth airflow over the leading
edge of the wings; insects adhering to the wings had made the airflow tur-
bulent, canceling the fuel savings achieved with the laminar flow.
   NASA had equipped the wings of the test aircraft with a modified
leading edge consisting of 5 panels of different materials, to demonstrate
changes in the airflow caused by insects adhering to the different sur-
faces; it had also added a water cleaning system to study its ability to
either wash off or keep off the insects encountered during takeoff and
climb. It had then flown the plane over alfalfa fields and sewage ponds,
and at Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, to encounter as
many different quantities, kinds, and sizes of bugs as possible. Bob
Baron, DFRC project manager, said results indicated a need for some
sort of washing system to reduce effects of insect impacts on the laminar-
flow surface. (DFRC Release 40-77)

December 4: The Dallas Morning News applauded “NASA official Dave
Williamson” [assistant administrator in the Office of Special Projects]
for rejecting a White House proposal to resume UFO investigations: he
had termed it “not wise to do research on something that is not a
measurable phenomenon.” The paper said there was no reason to reopen
the matter, except that President Carter had mentioned it in his cam-

218
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971                                DECEMBER



paign and that interest in flying saucers was up again. Such “detached
reserve” should apply to any multimillion-dollar government proposal,
the paper said. (MnNews, Dec 4/77, 15)

December 5: NASA announced that the Jet Propulsion Laboratory had
negotiated contracts with 5 firms for enough silicon (photovoltaic) solar
cells to supply a combined total of 190kw of power for use by the federal
government. JPL would manage the contract for the Dept. of Energy
(DOE), sponsor of the program to reduce the price of the cells below 50C
per peak watt by the end of 1986, while raising production capability to
500,000kw annually. The DOE program, besides reducing costs, would
study the use of solar-cell materials potentially less expensive than silicon
crystals and of alternatives such as optical concentrators.
  Firms receiving contracts were ARCO, 20kw, $321 950; Motorola,
50kw, $676 614; Sensor Technology, Nkw, $643 907; Solarex, 30kw,
$559 454; and Solar Power, 50kw, $757 665. Panels of solar cells
previously purchased under the program were powering an irrigation
system in Nebr., a test system for residential use at MIT’s Lincoln
Laboratory in Mass., a dust-storm warning system in Ariz. [see May 231,
automatic weather-reporting systems in 6 states, and other remote uses.
(NASA Release 77-246)

* NASA reported it had certified as fully operational the general avia-
tion airfoil design and analysis center at Ohio State Univ. airport near
Columbus. The center, established under a 3-yr LaRC contract with the
university’s aeronautical and astronautical research laboratory, would
provide directly to aircraft designers and manufacturers, on a fee basis,
services such as analysis and design of two-dimensional airfoil shapes,
high-lift devices and aerodynamic controls, and technical assistance and
consultation on airfoil wind tunnel and flight testing. (NASA Release
77-247)

   NASA announced retirement effective Dec. 31 of Gerald M. Truszyn-
0

ski, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, after
33yr of service to NASA and its predecessor, NACA. In 1944, he had
begun working at NACA’s Langley aeronautical laboratory as an
engineer in instrument research and development, and had transferred
3yr later to the NACA station at Edwards, Calif., an instrument project
engineer on the rocket-powered X-1 ,first airplane to surpass the speed of
sound. In 1954 he had become chief of the instrumentation division at
Edwards, heading development and operation of systems for NACA’s
jet- and rocket-powered craft (X-1, X-2, D-558, and X-15) that
pioneered supersonic and hypersonic flight.
   At NASA Hq after 1960, Truszynski occupied his present position in

                                                                         219
DECEMBER                              ASTRONAUTICSANb AERONAUTICS, 1971



1968, succeeding from the post of deputy that he had held since its crea-
tion in 1961. He had been responsible for planning, development, and
operation of global tracking systems, networks, and facilities for com-
munications and for data acquisition and processing in all NASA’s
spaceflight programs. In 1969 he had received NASA’s highest award
(the distinguished service medal) twice, for support of Apollo manned
flights to lunar orbit and of the first moon landing. Upon his departure,
Norman Pozinski would be acting associate administrator. (NASA anno
Nov 5/77; NASA Release 77-248)

  The Natl. Space Club announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, appointed
0

NASA chief scientist Nov. 8, would speak at its Dec. meeting and present
awards to Washington-area high school students in American Univ.’s
19th summer research program. Dr. Naugle had been NASA associate
administrator since 1975 in charge of much of the agency’s R&D work.
(NSC newsletter Dec 77)

December 6: NASA announced appointment of Andrew J. Stofan as
deputy associate administrator for the Office of Space Sciences, effective
Jan. 8, 1978, succeeding Dr. Anthony J. Cali0 who had become associate
administrator for the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications.
Stofan had been director of launch vehicles at Lewis Research Center
since July 1974; he had begun there in 1958 as a research engineer,
assigned in 1962 to the Centaur project and becoming project manager of
the Titan-Centaur vehicle in 1970. (NASA Release 77-245)

December 7: NASA announced it had negotiated 12-mo contracts worth
about $4 million with 9 firms, 3 of them small businesses, for developing
low-cost automated solar-cell fabrication processes that could be
adapted to automated assembly and mass production of the cells. The
firms were Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $213 163; M.B.
Associates, $230 OOO; Motorola, Inc., $433 870; RCA, $846 900; Sensor
Technology, $395 000; Solarex Corp., $392 OOO; Spectrolab, $706 OOO;
Texas Instruments, $537 460; and Westinghouse, $426 000. The small
businesses were M.B. Associates, Sensor Technology, and Solarex. The
contracts were part of DOE’S low-cost silicon solar-array project man-
aged by JPL. (NASA Release 77-249)

December 8: FAA predicted the number of passengers on U S scheduled
                                                            ..
airlines over the next 12yr would increase from the current 232.1 million
to 418.4 million in 1989. Commuter airlines (carrying fewer than 30
passengers in at least 5 scheduled flights per wk) would double opera-
tions, triple fare miles, and fly 14.5 million passengers compared to the

220
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                               DECEMBER


current 6.5 million. Size of the general (non-airline) fleet would increase
65%. (FAA Release 121-77)

December 9 KSC announced it had selected 2 companies to negotiate
           :
a contract for a 10-yr administrative teIephone system at the center,
including switching equipment, telephones, cabinets, switchboards
and consoles, interior wire and cable, and other equipment needed for
proper operation. The contract would contain an option to purchase.
Companies remaining in competition were GTE Automatic Electric and
Northern Telecom, Inc. ;other firms submitting proposals were Southern
Bell Telephone and Telegraph, and Independent Business Telephone Co.
(KSC Release 207-77)

  LeRC announced it had awarded a $2 895 750 contract to Teledyne In-
dustries, Inc., of Northridge, Calif., for management, engineering, and
repair services to Centaur digital computers and remote multiplexers.
The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract would run for lyr beginning Nov. 1. The
digital computer would work with the Centaur inertial guidance system
to compute and adjust flight without ground command, permitting the
Centaur to deliver its payload to a preselected orbit; the remote
multiplexer would work with the digital computer to supply inflight data
during launch. Centaur, first U.S. liquid hydrogedliquid oxygen high-
energy rocket, had been a second stage on both Atlas and Titan 111.
Recently it had assisted the launch of the Voyagers, and was scheduled
during the coming yr to launch several commercial comsats and the
Pioneer mission to Venus. LeRC would manage the Atlas-Centaur and
Titan-Centaur through all phases of manufacturing, testing, and launch.
Teledyne wouId perform its job as contractor both at Northridge and at
KSC in Fla. (LewisNews, Dec 9/77, 2)

   JPL reported it had assisted DFRC with an engine problem on a possi-
0

ble Mars reconnaissance plane, a small remotely powered vehicle (RPV)
called the Mini Sniffer developed by DFRC’s Dale Reed for environmen-
tal research at 100 OOOft above earth’s surface. The 13ft aircraft with a
22ft wingspan, powered by an airless 30hp engine running on hydrazine,
was the first propeller-driven plane designed to operate above 50 000ft.
JPL had taken a hand when asked by DFRC to help with an engine-
catalyst problem; Dr. Jose Chirivella, who solved the problem, saw the
possibilities of using the miniplane on Mars.

   Deployment of 16 mini RPVs, 8 from each of 2 carrier spacecraft, over
Mars so that each could make 5 or more separate takeoffs and landings
in different locations, could achieve a total of 80 possible missions. The

                                                                       22 1
DECEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



carriers, orbiting about Mars, would serve as comsats to collect data
from the mini RPVs for relay to earth.
  The Martian RPVs would be instrumented to collect seismographic,
meteorological, and geochemical data; they would conduct aerial
magnetic and gravity surveys, take high-resolution photos, look for sub-
surface water, and study the speed and direction of winds and the
pressure and density of the atmosphere. They might also collect surface
samples from widely separated areas, storing them at a central location
for return to earth by later missions. The small craft could be folded into
3m-long canisters protected by coverings that would fall away when
parachutes unfolded to support the vehicles as they opened out to flight
configuration for descent and cruise through the lower Martian at-
mosphere, landing like helicopters under power from variable-thrust
retrorockets. (JPL Universe, Dec 9/77, 1)

   LaRC reported on a recent visit to Buenos Aires, Argentina, by its
0

Boeing 737 research aircraft outfitted with a new microwave landing
system being demonstrated for FAA by a NASA team. The trip was
scheduled during an Inter-American Telecommunications Conference
sponsored by the Organization of American States that had invited the
FAA to demonstrate the landing system.
   Part of the LaRC team flew to Buenos Aires on a C-5i4 packed with
support equipment for the 737, including their own power supply; the
rest of the team flew on the 737 with stops in Puerto Rico, Belem, and
Rio de Janeiro. The 44-member team operated from 2 airports during its
visit: the demonstration flights went from Ezeiza airport 21mi outside
the city to the Aeroparque George Newbery in mid-town near the Rio de
la Plata. The LaRC plane made 68 landings with the system, 56 of them
automatic, and demonstrated it to more than 100 persons including of-
ficials from Argentina and other countries, and the press. Jack Reeder,
chief of the terminal configured vehicle (TCV) program, said the team
made the first automatic landing at the Buenos Aires airport and the first
automatic landing by a commercial plane. (Langley Researcher, Dec
9/77, 3)

   JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for
0

which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The
evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery,
etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology,
otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the
treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry
examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1)

December I&31: The USSR launched Soyuz 26 from Baykonur at

222
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                  DECEMBER


4: 19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “joint-
ly with the Sabut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2
cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight
engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km
perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6” inclination. Tass reported that the
crew would rest for 12 to 21hr while the spacecraft w s beyond radio
                                                            a
contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels
would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite.
   The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok
and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Sabut 6,although it had come
within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned
safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was
never explained.
   T s reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with
    as
&&ut 6 at 6:02am Moscow t h e . The news agency noted that Salyut 6
had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment
of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2
spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its un-
successful approach from the transfercompartment side, but Soyuz 26
had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking
units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and
possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows
two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews,
for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equip-
ment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had
crossed into the space station.
   Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on
TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement
than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an im-
portant recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the
previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniver-
sary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be
to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press
reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the dock-
ing of a second Spacecraft.
   On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working
clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport”
S o y a 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space
station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to
that of MOSCOW.” emphasized the added comfort of being able to
                     Tass
communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make
contact while over ,their home territory, besides being more convenient
for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.”
The cosmonauts were the fiist to call “ready” for the first communica-

                                                                          223
DECEMBER                                ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



tions session with the control center Dee. 12. The next day was a rest
period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few
days.
   Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in
both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems
of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and
better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for
astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of
previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another
docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the
ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter
with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection.
Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and
return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He
also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on
Sat’yut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes
an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of
weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately
spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.”
   Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous
system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit
without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic
instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected
“micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observa-
tion.
   On Dee. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits
and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its
docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the
special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera
that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage
was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order.
Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and
repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the
possibility of further visits.
    Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The
 new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a
 small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back.
 In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy
 training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-
 buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their ex-
 travehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying
 laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in con-
 ditions of weightlessness.

224
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1911                                  DECEMBER



   Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research,
earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on
the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties
of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched
out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born
on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by
“swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the
newborns were swimming in spirals.
   For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that
each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking
forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite
flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny
scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any
of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape
recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in
checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketch-
book near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New
Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star
Town together with toys.”
   At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were
working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of
research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on
Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Sdyut 6 flight trajectory.
(WPost, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; W Star,
Dec 10177, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13,
20,21,23,24,28/77; Tass Intl Sv in RUSS, 11/77; Moscow in Engl to
                                            Dec
Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)

December 13: ESA announced that the Societe Europeenne de Propul-
sion (SEP) had successfully conducted the first test of the complete first
stage of its M a n e launcher at the Vernon test center north of Paris. The
stage was in its flight configuration for this test, and consisted of the pro-
pulsion bay (containing 4 Viking I1 engines), the flight-standard tanks,
the forward skirt, and the intertank skirt. The stage functioned during
the test for lllsec. The purpose of the test was to verify first-stage
behavior, especially with regard to the hot-gas pressurization system;
thermal environment of the engine bay, tanks, and skirts; and the
dynamic aspect.
   This test was a follow-up to previous tests of the propulsion bay that
had accumulated 404.5sec of successful operation, making it possible to
include flight-configuration tanks in this series of first-stage tests. ESA
had planned 2 more development tests before May 1978, followed by 3
qualification tests of the first stage before final qualification. (ESA anno
Dec 13/77)

                                                                          225
DECEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911



December Z4: In its final launch of 1977, NASA sent Japan’s domestic
comsat Cs (Sakura) into a synchronous transfer orbit from the Eastern
Test Range on a Delta at 7:47pm EST. Transfer-orbit elements were:
35 936km apogee, 166km perigee, 28.82’ inclination. The apogee boost
motor fired at 10:27pm EST Dec. 15 to begin maneuvering the Cs over
the South Pacific to a station at about 135’E above New Guinea on the
equator south of Japan.
   The 677kg hatbox-shaped spacecraft (including apogee motor) was
3.48m long and 2.18m in diameter, covered with solar cells, and would
weigh 340kg in orbit. It would be the first comsat to carry both C-band (6
to 4GHz) and K-band (30 to 20GHz) frequency ranges: K-band coverage
would be for the main islands, C-band for the remote islands. An anten-
na horn reflector extending 128.8cm above the solar array would provide
33db K-band coverage to the main islands and 25db to the remote
islands. Ford Aerospace had built the spacecraft under contract from
Mitsubishi Electric Co. of Nagoya, which had prime contract respon-
sibility under Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency (NASDA). Cs,
designed for both telephone and television communications technology
experiments, relaying signals between fixed and mobile stations, would
provide coverage to the Japanese islands for at least 3yr.
   NASDA would reimburse NASA for providing launch support for this
mission, at an estimated cost of $16 million. The NASA portion of the
mission was adjudged successful on Feb. 23-24, 1978. (NASA Release
77-244; mission summary M-492-211-77-01 [prelaunch] Dec 14/77, MOR
M-492-211-77-01 [postlaunch] Feb 28/78)

   NASA announced that Pioneer ZZ would fly just outside the rings of
Saturn during its first encounter with the giant planet in 1979. The
spacecraft would pass 30 OOOkm (18 OOOmi) from the edge of the outer-
most ring and would swing in under the plane of the rings to a distance of
25 O O m (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Dr. Noel W. Hinners,
     Ok
NASA associate administrator for space science, and A. Thomas Young,
director of planetary programs, had made the decision to fly the Pioneer
outside rather than inside the rings mainly because NASA wanted to use
it as a pathfinder for the two Voyager spacecraft headed for Saturn en-
counter in 1980-81. The Pioneer would cross the ring plane at about the
same distance as the trajectory that would use Saturn’s gravity to propel
Voyager 2 toward Uranus.
   The uncertainties regarding a ring crossing even at 30OOOkm
(18 OOOmi) from the outer edge of the rings called for NASA “to do
everything we reasonably can to ensure Voyager’s success,” said Young.
Should the Pioneer not survive the rings, NASA would have to revise its
plan of sending Voyager 2 on to Uranus; however, a successful pass by
Pioneer IZ would increase confidence in committing Voyager 2 to the

226
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 7                             DECEMBER



Uranus option even if Voyager Z had not achieved al its objectives at
                                                       l
Saturn. An outside pass offered much better odds for success than an in-
ner one, which would bring the spacecraft as close as 6000km (3700mi) to
Saturn’s surface. The 1979 flyby by Pioneer ZZ would be the first close
encounter with Saturn; until the rings of Uranus were discovered, Saturn
was considered the only ringed planet in earth’s solar system. The origin
of the rings remained unknown, but their composition was defined by
astronomers in 1970 as ordinary water ice, and radar readings in 1973
detected snowball-size chunks of solid material. (NASA Release 77-250)

   LaRC announced that Dr. J.H. WiIkinson of the U.K.’s National
0

Physical Laboratory, author of textbooks on algebraic processes, would
speak at the Dec. 19 colloquium. Wilkinson, who broke ground in
floating-point and backward error analysis and in eigenvalue solutions,
would describe the early days of electronic computer development, his
experiences using one of the first working computers, and the beginnings
of numerical analysis on an automatic digital computer. (LaRC Release
77-58)
   LaRC announced that Ed Yost, who made the world’s longest manned
balloon flight, would speak at the center Dee. 20 on his attempt to cross
the Atlantic that failed just short of the coast of Portugal but broke 8
world records, “most successful failure in ballooning history.” (LaRC
Release 77-59)

   Marshall Space Flight Center reported it had coped with the threat of a
serious power shortage when maintenance and emergency shutdowns
dropped the Tennessee Valley Authority’s generating capacity by a third
at the same time that severe cold weather moved into the area. On Fri-
day, Dec. 9, TVA had asked NASA and the U.S. Army to reduce power
use by half, as it expected the shortage to continue for some time. C.
Horton Webb, director of MSFC’s facilities office, said the plant
maintenance division had worked around the clock turning heat on and
off to keep buildings from freezing, and had asked employees to help in
minimizing use of electrical equipment. Security guards helped by closing
blinds and turning off lights and equipment wherever possible. Webb
said the combined effort had reduced power use by 50% on Saturday and
65% by Sunday morning. (Marshall Star, Dec 14/77, 1)

December 15: NASA announced that Voyager I , launched Sept. 5 , had
overtaken its sister ship VoyagerZ,launched Aug. 20, about 77.5 million
miles from earth on its way to encounters with Jupiter and Saturn.
Voyager Z would arrive at Jupiter in 1979 in the lead by 4m0, and at
Saturn in 1980 ahead by 9mo. If all went well by the time Voyager 2
reached Saturn in Aug. 1981, NASA might send it on toward Uranus

                                                                       227
DECEMBER                              ASTRONAUTfCS AND AERONAUTICS. 1977



where it should arrive by Jan. 1986. Both spacecraft would eventually
escape earth’s solar system. (NASA Release 77-252)

  JSC reported it had modified its mission control center to use solar
0

power for dehumidifying the building. Solar panels installed on the roof
would provide heat 60% of the time, according to weather calculations
for the Houston area, and would save about 1 5 million ft3 of natural gas
                                            .
per yr at a construction cost of about $240 OOO. The modification was
part of a joint NASA/DOE solar-energy demonstration project. (JSC
Release 77-86)

December 19: MSFC reported on the first meeting of a science working
group for a proposed earth-orbiting system called Advanced X-Ray
Astrophysics Facility (AXAF),to study stellar structure and evolution,
large-scale galactic phenomena, active galaxies and galactic clusters, and
cosmology. Chaired by Prof. R. Giacconi of Harvard Univ. and repre-
senting universities and government laboratories working on x-ray
astronomy in the U.S. and Europe, the group would define the scientific
requirements. The 12.8m (42ft) craft weighing about 9oookg (20 OOOlb)
would be designed for Space Shuttle launch and repair or retrieval in or-
bit. (MSFC Release 77-227)

   NASA reported that its announcement on selection of Shuttle
0

astronauts, set for December, would not be forthcoming until January.
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, agency administrator, had met Dec. 12 with of-
ficials of the selection program but, because of current NASA budget ac-
tivity, had not reviewed the data presented. On Dec. 1 Dr. Frosch had
                                                         6
notified JSC director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, who had supervised the
selection program, that the review would proceed after the end of the
year. (NASA Release 77-254)

* ComSatCorp reported its shareholders had tendered 5 827 678 shares
in response to its recent offer of repurchase at $37 per share [see Nov.
1I]. Those holding 10 or fewer shares would be reimbursed first; the re-
maining owners would be included in the repurchase on a prorated basis
at about 34% for a total buy-back of 2 million shares. (ComSatCorp
Release 77-36)

December 20: NASA reported KSC was preparing its facilities for next
yr’s Space Shuttle arrival and prelaunch work, more than 3yr after it last
launched a Saturn rocket from Complex 39. In Oct. 1978,Shuttle orbiter
102 would fly in from Calif. on its Boeing 747 carrier, with the main
engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters due in Nov. and
Dec. for assembly and test before launch March 1979. KSC’s orbiter

228
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                              DECEMBER



landing strip had been completed in Aug.; support facilities to be com-
pleted by April 1978 would include a device to unload the orbiter, plus a
microwave landing system to guide it to an automatic landing. An
orbiter-processing facility to store fuels and handle payloads was the
only new construction except the landing strip, the rest being modifica-
tions of Apollo facilities. (NASA Release 77-253)

December 21: NASA reported it had scheduled 25 launches in 1978, 11
on Deltas and 8 on Atlas Centaurs. It would provide support for 3 Atlas-
F launches from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. KSC would launch 10 of the
Deltas and all the Atlas Centaurs; one Delta would go from the Western
Test Range at VAB. Paying customers would subsidize 15 launches:
ESA, ComSatCorp, the U S Navy, Japan, NOAA, the U.K., and
                             ..
Canada.
   Whereas most of its 1977 launches were in the area of applications
(communications, environmental, navigation, meteorological, earth
resources, or geodetic), its 1978 mission would divide between applica-
tions and scientific missions almost equally. Scheduled in Jan. would be
Intelsat IV-A F-3 for ComSatCorp, FltSatCom-A for the Navy, and its
own IUE; the Intelsat IV-A F-6would follow in Feb. March would see
launch of NASA’s Landsat-C and Japan’s experimental broadcast
satellite BSE. In April NASA would launch its own heat-capacity map-
ping mission (HCMM) and Comstar-C, as well as the backup OTS for
ESA. May would see 4 launches: GOES-C, and NASA’s TIROS-N,
Pioneer Venus-A, and SeaSat-A. Scheduled in June would be GEOS-B
for ESA and a backup satellite for Japan. In July NASA would launch
from Wallops on a Scout the UK-6 to measure radiation particles, and
from KSC its own ISEE-C. August would see launch of NASA’s
Nimbus4 and Pioneer Venus-B. In Sept. NASA would launch NOAA-
A; a navsat for the Navy; and comsat NATO-IIIC. NASA would launch
its own HEAO-B in Oct. Two launches set for Nov. would be Canada’s
Telesat-D and FltSatCom-B for the Navy. George F. Page, KSC’s direc-
tor for expendable vehicles, noted that the center’s workload would be
heavy with a schedule calling for 3 launches in Jan. and 2 each in some
other months. (NASA Release 77-256; KSC Release 21 1-77)

   MSFC reported that Mack Vinson of its personnel office had been one
0

of only 25 people, and the only one from Alabama, selected for a 2-wk
study tour in March 1978 of the Peoples Republic of China. The group, a
delegation from the American Society for Public Administration, would
view firsthand the ways in which PRC officials solved public policy and
administrative issues. Other objectives would be to set up a 2-way inter-
change of administrative ideas and techniques, obtain information for
use in university courses, and broaden understanding of China and its

                                                                     229
DECEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



people. Vinson said the tour was a matter of personal interest and would
be made at his own expense. He had been a member of ASPA since 1965
and was president of its northern Alabama section in 1975-76. (Marshall
Star, Dec 21/77,2)

December 22: NASA and ESA announced that 6 U.S. and 4 European
candidates were finalists in the competition for 2 payload specialist posi-
tions, 1 U S and 1 European, on the first flight of ESA’s Spacelab
           ..
scheduled to go on the Space Shuttle in 1980. For the U.S., Byron
Lichtenberg of Natick, Mass., Ph.D. candidate at MIT, and MSFC’s
Ann Whitaker, M.S. at the Univ. of Ala., were the only non-Calif.
finalists. The others were Craig L. Fischer, M.D., of Indian Wells;
Michael L. Lampton, Ph.D., of Berkeley; and Robert T. Menzies and
Richard J. Terrile, both Ph.D.s from CalTech (Terrile employed there
and Menzies at JPL) and both from Pasadena. ESA’s 4 were electronics
engineer Franc0 Malerba of Italy; physicist Ulf Merbold of West Ger-
many; and 2 from the Netherlands, astronomer Claude Nicollier and
physicist Wubbo Ockels. (NASA Release 77-255; MSFC Release 77-229;
ESA Release Dec 22/77)

    FBIS reported a Tass claim that Soviet physicists at the USSR’s joint
0

institute for nuclear research at Dubna near Moscow had synthesized the
106th element with a mass number of 259, by bombarding a lead target
with ions of chromium (accelerated heavy particles). Academician
Georgy Flerov said his group had been working for yrs to synthesize
trans-uranium elements (those with atomic nuclei heavier than uranium)
and had already obtained the 102nd through 105th elements on the
periodic table. The U.S. and the USSR (both countries having “suffi-
ciently powerful heavy-ion accelerators”) had begun work on the 106th
element about the same time. After the group at Dubna reported success,
the U.S. scientists said they had found another isotope of the 106th ele-
ment, with mass number 263. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 22/77)

December 23: MSFC reported that its homemade Shuttle orbiter [see
Nov. 231 had made its practice run through the center and had played
stand-in during practice hoists into the 430ft (131m) test stand where the
Enterprise would be mated to the other Shuttle components for the first
time. Werner H. Rubel, supervisor in MSFC’s product planning branch,
said the idea and design for the stand-in orbiter had originated in his
group, where Jerry B. Bennich and John L. Ransburgh had done the
engineering work; the mockup and prototype assembly branch had per-
formed final assembly. (MSFC Release 77-232)
   MSFC announced successful completion of the first loading test of the


230
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                DECEMBER



Space Shuttle external tank to ensure that tne test article, test facility,
and hardware could handle the super cooled propellants (liquid hydrogen
and liquid oxygen) to be used by the Shuttle main engine. (MSFC Release
77-234)

   KSC reported successful conclusion of the first open-sea tests on Shut-
0

tle retrieval equipment staged Dec. 5-16 from Port Everglades, in strong
winds and seas from 3 to 6ft that had hampered operations both wks.
Test manager Bob Everette said the hugh waves created conditions vital
to the test although “it was hard even to stand up on the boat” and the aft
section of the 158-ft offshore-support vessel was often under a ft of
water.
   The first group of tests simulated parachute recovery; retrieval of the 6
main parachutes and 2 drogues would use 2 support vessels, each respon-
sible for recovering 3 main chutes and a drogue. The second series of
tests was to verify performance of the nozzle plug in open waters. The
plug was designed to “swim out” from the ship to a booster casing
floating vertically, dive to the bottom of the casing, secure itself to the
aft portion and pump out the water. The booster, rotating to a horizon-
tal position, would be ready for tow to the Spaceport for refurbishing.
The tests were also to confirm the deck layout of the support vessels and
how they kept position while the plug was docking with the booster.
Everette said retrieval gear would be modified according to the test
results.
   More ocean tests would follow about lmo before the first launch of
the Shuttle, pre-mission exercises to train personnel who would work on
the recovery. Everette praised the teamwork of the support agencies tak-
ing part in the test: staff from KSC and MSFC; Tracor Marine, operator
of the support vessel; Everglades Towing Co.; the Naval Ocean Systems
Center; U.S. Booster, Inc.; Battelle Memorial Institute; Pioneer
Parachute Co.; the U.S. Navy supervisor of salvage; and Martin Mariet-
ta. (Spaceport News, Dec 23/77, 4)

   In its year-end issue, the Lewis News described the relationship be-
0

tween U.S.Army and NASA activities at the center. Civilian employees
of the Army Propulsion Laboratory had been working among LeRC
employees since 1970, as 1 of 3 Army air-mobility research and
technology labs working jointly with NASA centers: Ames Research
Center housed the aeromechanics laboratory and the research and
technology lab headquarters, and LaRC included the Army’s structures
laboratory. The only AMRT lab complex not on a NASA installation
was the applied technology lab at Ft. Eustis, Va.
  LeRC and the Army pursued R&D activities under a unique agree-


                                                                        231
DECEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977



ment, with the Army providing funds for programs of mutual interest
and adding about 40 persons (mostly engineers, scientists, and techni-
cians) to the LeRC staff, all of them supervised by Lewis personnel. Ar-
my interests included the joint aeronautical research group, working on
compressors, turbines, bearings, seals, and gears, with special attention
to Army needs in small-engine technology; the technical support group
of scientists and skilled technicians, set up to help with the inhouse
workload created by Army activities at the center; and a small staff of
engineers called the Army aeronautical research group, using LeRC
facilities to pursue investigations of interest to the Army specifically. An
instance was the engine test cell in Bldg. 14 recently activated and
primarily operated by the Army, with help from LeRC experts and
resources, said Propulsion Laboratory director John Acurio.
  Aiding Acurio in lab operations and efforts to improve aircraft pro-
pulsion were Curtis L. Walker, chief of the Army aeronautical research
group, and administrative officer Gus Gold. (LewisNews, Dec 23/77,4)

* JPL reported that Dr. M. Kudret Selcuk of its energy-conversion
systems section had developed a fixed solar collector using a vee-trough
concentrator and vacuum-tube receivers to produce temperatures above
350°F for generating steam or organic vapor, or electricity to drive tur-
bines. The system, on which NASA had obtained a patent, had proved
“far superior to flat-plate systems,” Dr. Selcuk said.
  The new system had no moving parts, which made it unique. Located
on the roof of JPL’s Bldg. 248, its torpedo-like glass tubes and piping
would remain on a tilted rack, and the sheet-metal troughs in an asym-
metrical V shape could be reversed at the spring and autumn equinoxes
to take best advantage of the sun’s rays. Heat collected could be used
directly for shaft power to drive conventional air conditioning systems,
for space heating, or for other uses such as supplying process heat. (JPL
Universe, Dec 23/77, 2)

   JSC reported that NASA administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had ap-
proved development of a teleoperator retrieval system to be flown no
later than Feb. 1980 as a Skylab-revisit mission. JSC would be responsi-
ble for integrating the TRS into the Shuttle and for planning and opera-
tions. Harold E. Gartrell, assistant manager of the Shuttle payload in-
tegration and development office at JSC, would manage JSC activities
for the Skylab revisit and would work with the Shuttle program office on
integrating that mission with the Shuttle orbital-flight test planners. His
office would be responsible for interfaces outside JSC in preparing and
conducting the mission. (JSC Roundup, Dee 23/77, 1)

    MSFC reported that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y., had begun
0



232
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                DECEMBER



work on a huge primary mirror blank for NASA’s Space Telescope,
designed to give astronomers a view to the edge of the universe. Corning
would work under a $1.74 million subcontract from Perkin-Elmer
Corp., which would be responsible for assembling the optical telescope.
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the spacecraft and support
system and integrate the telescope into it.
   Scientists expected the space telescope to detect light from objects 14
billion light-years from earth; it might, therefore, be able to provide
views of the first galaxies at the time they were formed. The Hale
telescope at the Mt. Palomar observatory in Calif. could penetrate only
about 2 billion light-years because of the optical degradation from
earth’s atmosphere. The space telescope would be carried by the Shuttle
to an orbit more than 3OOmi above earth to avoid that interference.
   Corning would deliver the first of two 8ft discs to Perkin-Elmer within
a yr and the spare by April 1979, for the process of grinding the blanks to
an optical curvature, The blank would be l f t thick with a 2ft-diameter
center hole, and would consist of solid inch-thick top and bottom plates
separated by a weight-saving structure of open cells loin long and 4in
square. It would carry a thin metal film constituting the mirror or reflec-
tive surface; glass had long served as best mirror material because its
shape would change only slightly with changes in temperature, so that it
maintained image quality. More than 4Oyr ago Corning had made the
200in blank for the Hale telescope out of borosilicate glass, having an ex-
pansion of 32.5 on a scale used by physicists; the material it would use
for the space telescope blank would have an expansion of zero. Corning
had chosen the new material, a titanium silicate called ULE (ultra-low
expansion) first formulated in 1967, for ease of handling and ultrasonic
testing. (MSFC Release 77-233)

   LaRC reported that its plans for a trash-burning steam plant called
0

Project RECOUP [see Oct. 61 had hit a snag when the center opened con-
struction bids Dec. 7. Al four bids were higher than expected, the lowest
                        l
being about $1.4 million more than the government’s estimate, which
was about $8 million. Funds available to the center for the plant, in-
cluding contingencies, totaled no more than $8.4 million. Leo Daspit,
LaRC project manager, said he would have to meet with his counterparts
in the city of Hampton and at Langley AFB to “explore our options.”
(Langley Researcher, Dec 23/77, 3)

* LaRC announced it had selected a firm called Mercury, of Tustin,
Calif., to negotiate a 3yr $2.4-million contract for support services to the
center’s steam and air-compression facilities. The contract, beginning
Jan. 1,1978, would have two lyr unpriced options for extension. (LaRC
Release 77-60)

                                                                         233
DECEMBER                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



  A year-end summary of NASA activities included 16 launch efforts
and completion of two series of manned Shuttle orbiter tests. Three of
the 16 launches had failed, 2 destroying launcher and spacecraft im-
mediately after liftoff; the third resulted from upper-stage failure and
did not put the spacecraft into proper orbit. (NASA Release 77-257; KSC
Release 212-77)

December 27: NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro-Electronics
Division of Princeton, N.J., a $10.5 million fixed-price contract for a
closed-circuit television system to support the Space Shuttle program.
The contract, running from Jan. 1978 through June 1982, would cover
design, development, production, qualification, and delivery of CCTV
systems for training, certification, and flight. It would include hardware
for the first orbital test vehicle design, with options for TV equipment on
additional orbiters and for Canada-built remote manipulator systems.
Cameras and monitors would fly in the crew compartment and the
payload bay, and on the arm of the remote manipulator. JSC would pro-
vide technical direction. (NASA Release 77-259)

* FBIS reported that “the world’s northernmost New Year’s tree” had
been lighted 500km from the geographical North Pole, carried there by
members of the USSR’s high-latitude North 29 air expedition with “New
Year gifts and mail” for the drifting station North Pole 23. Tass said the
arctic “Fathers Frost” then visited an icebound island, base of the North
Pole 22 scientific station, near the Canadian Arctic archipelago in the
part of the Arctic Ocean most remote from the Soviet Union. (FBIS,
Tass in English, Dec 27/77)

December 29: KSC announced that the Thunderstorm Research Interna-
tional Program (TRIP) combining efforts of atmospheric physicists and
lightning researchers from the US., Europe, and Africa would continue
in 1978 as they had for the past 2 summers. At the recent meeting of the
American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, KSC had invited the
researchers to continue their studies of electrical properties, origins, and
effects of thunderstorms.
   The KSC Spaceport would benefit from the studies by applying the
findings in Shuttle launch and landing operations; to have many in-
vestigators in the same area studying the same storms and exchanging
data would offer .more chances of gaining new knowledge than might
come from isolated studies. The researchers had funded their own pro-
grams, KSC providing meteorological instrumentation, use of the local
National Weather Service office, and normal support services such as
power, communications, and file processing.
   KSC, hosting the program for a third consecutive yr, had unique

234
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                DECEMBER



meteorological facilities accumulated during the Apollo and Skylab pro-
grams, plus a large number of summer thunderstorms occurring normal-
ly in the area. Although KSC would not host the group after next yr, the
1979 study site for continuations of TRIP would be the Langmuir
Laboratories at Socorro, N.M., for studies of mountain storms of the
southwest. (KSC Release 217-77)

   ARC reported that the Galileo memorial scholarship program
0

established in 1973 by the San Francisco section of the American In-
stitute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and ARC would award a $750
scholarship and other prizes. The program was open to high school
seniors planning a career in physical or natural sciences, engineering, or
mathematics, residents of the area or children of employees or retirees at
ARC or of Galileo crewmembers. The program was a memorial to the
men who died April 12, 1973, in an accident involving the Galileo I (a
modified Convair operated by ARC as a flying laboratory for research in
aeronautics, astronautics, astronomy, and earth observation). (ARC
Astrogram, Dec 29/77, 4)

During December: NASA reported that Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., civilian
test pilot for DFRC since 1966 and a 23-yr veteran of the USAF, had
received from the Society of Experimental Test Pilots the Iven C. Kin-
cheloe award as test pilot of the year for his work in the Space Shuttle
approach-and-landing test program in which he piloted the orbiter on 13
test flights beginning in Feb. and ending in mid-Nov. 1977. Fulton was
also flying the “triplesonic” YF-12 aircraft for NASA; in the past, he had
flown the XB-70 and was launch pilot for the X-15 and other research
vehicles.
   This award was the second top-level honor for Fulton, who won the
Harmon Trophy in 1962 as an Air Force pilot in the B-58 Hustler test
program at Edwards AFB that set an international altitude record. In his
work for the Air Force Fulton had received 3 Distinguished Flying
Crosses, plus another DFC and 5 air medals for 55 missions in Korea and
scores of humanitarian missions during the Berlin Airlift of 1948-49.
(NASA Actv Dec 77, 8)

  The USAF announced it had issued contracts to Martin Marietta
0

Aerospace at Denver and General Dynamics Corp.3 Convair Divison at
San Diego for design of a large space structure to be carried into orbit on
the Space Shuttle and erected and deployed in space. The contracts, each
for $750,000, called for conceptual design of a flight-demonstration
model of an antenna-like structure to be assembled and deployed in a
form exceeding the size of the orbiter cargo bay (6Oft long by 15ft in
diameter). Plans called for automated assembly in space with manned

                                                                        235
DECEMBER                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS. 1977



supervision. The flight article would also serve to verify the Shuttle’s
ability to deploy other DOD craft that might require assembly in orbit.
(AFSC Newsreview, Dec 77,4)




236
Appendix A
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE
FLIGHTS, 1977




   World space activity in 1977 approached the level of previous years:
124 recorded launches, compared with 128 in 1976 and 125 in 1975. Of
the total, the U.S. had 26 launches, 24 of them successful, as described in
Appendix B. The USSR had 98 launches with 11 1 possible payloads, in-
cluding a single eightfold comsat launch like those of earlier years, plus
two probes: a Vertikal rocket launched to a height of about 500km on
Aug. 30, 1977, and another launched to a height of about 150km on
Oct. 25. The 79 launches (accounting €or 86 payloads) in the Cosmos
series, besides the usual photo-reconnaissance, radar-calibration, com-
munications, electronic-intelligence, navigation, and test vehicles, in-
cluded 4 antisatellite spacecraft and 3 targets; the ASATs (Cosmos910,
918, 961, and 970)either plunged into the Pacific Ocean or exploded in
orbit. The ocean-surveillance satellite Cosmos 954 exhibited difficulties
with its control system 2mo after launch and finally crashed in Canada’s
Northwest Territory in January 1978 with its nuclear reactor aboard. The
USSR also launched 6 spacecraft in the Molniya series; 4 in the Meteor
series; 3 manned Soyuz vehicles; and one each in the Raduga, Ekran,
Prognoz, Intercosmos, and Salyut series. The remaining launch was the
cooperative French-Soviet spacecraft Signe 3 equipped for gamma-ray
studies.
   Two other launches during 1977 were Japan’s test vehicles, Tansei 3
launched Feb. 19 from the Uchinoura Space Center, and Kiku 2
launched Feb. 23 from the Tanegashima Space Center.
   Sources of the data in the accompanying table include the United Na-
tions Registry of Space Flights; the Satellite Situation Report compiled
by Goddard Space Flight Center; and press releases of NASA, the
Department of Defense, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra-
tion, and other government agencies, as well as the Communications
Satellite Corporation. Soviet data derive from statements in the Soviet
press, international news service reports, and announcements and brief-
ings by Soviet officials. Data on satellites of other nations come from an-
nouncements of their governments and international news services.

                                                                       237
APPENDIX A                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




                       8
                  cc
             9

             1    1    1
                  c,   c,
             -I
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1971   APPENDIX A




         W        I-
N


         2
2                 d
                  k

                                           239
APPENDIX A   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




                                  n
                                  m




240
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977   APPENDIX A




                                           241
APPENDIX A   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




242
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1917                APPENDIX A




                          s                 v;
                                        z   m
                                            f




                                        z
                          w                 n
                                            ea
                                            10
                                            n
                                            m




                                                   !a




                                        R
                          r;
         2                          E
v1



P                         P         P
         P                              P
                                                        243
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917
APPENDIX A




                        m
                        0         w
             8
         n
         N                                   n
                                  m
                                             8
                                  P
                        9
         P   P                               c)
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977           APPENDIX A




                            n
                            m



                            3            3
                                     2
                                     n
                            m
                            W




                                                    245
                                                  \
                                                  '

                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX A




                        9
             n!
                       GJ
             8


                        3
             x
             P         I-




             n
                        Q
             z
             2

             I
             -
                        3
             B
             a          cn
                       m




246
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977        APPENDIX A




                                    .B
                                    B




                                                247
             ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977        APPENDIX A




         w
09
         0
3


         z
2                                    Y
                                     m
                                     m
         m
         f

                                     n
m
         $                           7
m
00

         m
         n



         a
5                                    (0

                                     3
         4




                                                 249
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917
APPENDIX A




  m
  Y


  d
  P
  -
  2
  a




 250
     ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977       APPENDIX A




            2                            8
                               9
                               f
            P




            N
            2

-
f                              2
In
                               f




                                                  25 1
APPENDIX A   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




                                           *
                                 R         A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




                                     6;
                                      .
                                     PC




                                          253
                 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX A




             B      3                     m
                               f          n
                                          m
                                         APPENDIX A
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971




                                     f




                                               255
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX A




 256
ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                  APPENDIX A




                             cr      cr   cr
9        9         9
                   z
         P                   Q       Q    Q
9




s
m
                             2
         n                                     n
         t-
                                               m
                   3                           N
         m         n




                                               E!
2         d        d                           d
z                  n                           n
         111


                                                           257
APPENDIX A                     ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977




                                           -
                                           .
             R                             0
             W



                                                            m
             Y
                                                            8
             52

                                           m
                                           s
                                           n
                                           m



             R


                  +-       u




   m
   u

   d
   am
   mx
   a




                       -                   -
                                           n
                       m
                                                            2
             r!                   f
             d                                               d
                       d          d        d                n
                                           n
                                  n
                       n
             0
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977              APPENDIX A




                                      oc
                    4        o!
                             B        D
                    s:




                                  J
                         Y                 Y




        -          m
                             R
        N          N


                   A
hi      d
                             8
!a      c
        l

                                                      259
    Appendix B
    MAJOR NASA LAUNCHES, 1977




       The following table of major NASA launches includes payloads car-
    ried by all rocket vehicles larger than sounding rockets launched in 1977
    by NASA or under NASA direction.
       During 1977, the U.S. had 26 launches, of which 24 were successful.
    Of these, 10 were launches by DOD. Of the remaining 14, 3% were
    launches by NASA for its own programs: Heao I, the two Voyager
    spacecraft launched in August and September, and Isee I (part of a twin
    payload). Launches for others included 2% for ESA (Geos, Meteosat,
    and Isee 2); 2 for Japan (Himawari and Sabra);Nato IIIB for NATO,
    Palapa 2 for Indonesia, Intelsat IVA F-4 for ComSatCorp, Goes 2 for
    N O M , Sirio for Italy, and a Transat payload for the U.S. Navy. The
    unsuccessful attempts, both in September, were OTS,a comsat for ESA
    destroyed shortly after launch, and an Intelsat IVA launched for Com-
    SatCorp that exploded 1 minute into its flight.
       The table includes vehicle and payload performance under categories S
    for successful, P for partially successful, and U for unsuccessful. A
    fourth category, Unk, indicates payloads that did not operate because of
    vehicle failure. These unofficial categories do not take into account that
    U missions may produce valuable information, or that payloads with a
    long-life design may fail to meet design requirements and become of-
    ficially unsuccessful at a later date. Further information on these
    launches appears in Appendix A and in the indexed entries in the text.
I
             ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1911
APPENDIX B




262
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977   APPENDIX B




                                            263
Appendix C
MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1977




   Manned spaceflight in 1977 was limited to 3 Soviet launches, Soyuz 24
(to dock with Salyut 5) and Soyuz 25 and 26 to dock with Salyut 6,
launched Sept. 29, 1977.
   The space station Sulyut 5, which had been launched June 22, 1976,
decayed from orbit Aug. 8, 1977 after being used for docking by Soyuz
flights 21,22, and 23. The first attempt at docking with Salyut 6 was un-
successful, but the crew of Soyuz 26 occupied the station without dif-
ficulty and let their visitors in Soyuz 27 take their vehicle home the
following January; the men from Soyuz 26 remained in orbit, returning
in Soyuz 27 the following March.
   At .the end of 1977, the U.S. had made 3i manned spaceflights: 2
suborbital, 20 in earth orbit, 3 in lunar orbit, and 6 lunar landings, using
43 different crewmen. The USSR had made 30 manned flights, all in
earth orbit, with 38 cosmonauts. Total hours of manned flight were, for
the US.,7681hr 10min; for the USSR, 6997hr 18min. Total cumulative
man-hours in space were, for the U S , 22 503hr 39min; for the USSR,
13 519hr 18min.
APPENDIX C   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
Appendix D
NASA SOUNDING ROCKET LAUNCHES, 1977




  The following table lists the 53 sounding rockets of the Arcas class and
above launched by NASA in 1977. The launches took place in Australia,
Canada, Norway, and Sweden, as well as in the United States. Payloads
were carried for the Naval Research Laboratory, the Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory, the Uppsala Ionospheric Observatory,
NOAA, and 3 NASA centers; 14 universities; 1 domestic institute,
M.I.T.; and 3 foreign, the Univ. of Adelaide, the Univ. of Bern, and the
Max-Planck Institut. Onboard experiments included 18 physics; 12
astronomy; 10 aeronomy; 9 astrophysics; 3 vehicle-system tests; and 1
space-processing test.
  Information in the table came from Goddard Space Flight Center’s
Quick-Look Sounding Rocket Data sheets, issued after launches, with
additional information from some of the experimenters concerned.
Launch dates in the table are local time, with the date by Greenwich
Mean Time (2) if different.




                                                                      267
APPENDIX D   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911
                                     APPENDIX D
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977




            .g
.P          3
 R
ca
4
1
a     .5




      c
c                 c




                                             269
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX D
ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977   APPENDIX D




                                           27 1
             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX D




272
Appendix E
ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES
        Listed here are the abbreviations used f o r citing sources in the
   text. Not all the sources are listed, only those that are abbreviated.




                        American Association for the Advancement of
AAAS Bull
                          Science’s AAAS Bulletin
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
A&A
                          nautics’ magazine, Astronautics & Aero-
                          nautics
                        NASA’s Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1977:
A&A I977
                          A Chronology (this publication)
                        American Broadcasting Company
ABC
                        Atomic Energy Commission news release
AEC Release
                        Aerospace Daily newsletter
Aero Daily
                        Aerospace Medicine magazine
Aero Med
                        Air Force Association’s Air Force Magazine
AF Mag
                        Air Force Historical Foundation Newsletter
AFHF Newsletter
                        Armed Forces Journal magazine
AFJ
                        Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview
AFSC Newsreview
                        Air Force Systems Command news release
AFSC Release
                        Aerospace Industries Association of America
AIA Release
                          news release
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
AIAA Facts
                          nautics’ Facts
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
AIAA Release
                          nautics news release
                        American Institute of Physics Newsletter
AIP Newsletter
                        Associated Press news service
AP
                        NASA Ames Research Center’s Astrogram
ARC Astrogram
                        American Astronomical Society’s Astrophysi-
Astro Journ
                          cal Journal
                        Atlanta Journal Constitution newspaper
Atlanta JC
                        Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine
A v Wk
                        Birmingham News newspaper
B News

                                                                       213
                                 ASTRONAUTICSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX E



B Sun                Baltimore Sun newspaper
Bull Atom Sci        Education Foundation for Nuclear Science’s
                       Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
Bus Wk               Business Week magazine
C Daily News         Chicago Daily News newspaper
C Trib               Chicago Tribune newspaper
Can Press            Canadian Press news service
                     Columbia Broadcasting System
CBS
                     Chemical & Engineering News magazine
C&E News
C1 PD                Cleveland Plain Dealer newspaper
GI Press             Cleveland Press newspaper
Columbia J Rev       Columbia Journalism Review magazine
                     Communications Satellite Corporation news re-
ComSatCorp Release
                       lease
                     Congressional Quarterly
CQ
                     Congressional Record
CR
                     Christian Science Monitor newspaper
CSM
                     Chicago Tribune News Service
CTNS
D News               Detroit News newspaper
                     Denver Post newspaper
D Post
                     Defense Atomic Support Agency news release
DASA Release
                     See FRC.
DFRC
                     Dow Jones news service
DJ
                     Department of Commerce Public Information
DOC P I 0
                       Office
                     Department of Defense news release
DOD Release
                     Department of Transportation news release
DOT Release
                     Executive Office of the President news release
EOP Release
                     European Space Agency news release, use dated
ESA Release
                       (not numbered)
                     Federal Aviation Administration news release
FAA Release
FBIS -SOV            Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet
                       number
                     Facts on File
FonF
                     Flight Research Center news release, after
FRC Release
                       8 Jan. 1976, became Dryden Flight Research
                       Center (DFRC) news release
                     NASA Flight Research Center’s X-Press
FRC X-Pre~s
                     General Electric Forum magazine
GE Forum
                     NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard
Goddard News
                       News
                     NASA Goddard Space Flight Center news re-
3SFC Release
                       lease -


274
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                       APPENDIX E



                        NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite
GSFC SSR
                          Situation Report
                        General Telephone & Electronics news release
GT&E Release
                        Houston Chronicle newspaper
H Chron
                        Houston Post newspaper
H Post
                        Intl. Telecommunications Satellite Org. news
INTELSAT Release
                          release
                        Journal of Aircraft magazine
JA
                        Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory
JPL Lab-Oratory
                        Jet Propulsion Laboratory news release
JPL Release
                        Department of Commerce Joint Publications
JPRS
                          Research Service
                        NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center
JSC Release
                          (Manned Spacecraft Center until 17 Feb.
                          1973) news release
                        NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center’s
JSC Roundup
                          Space News Roundup
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astro-
JSR
                          nautics’ Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets
                          magazine
                        Kansas City Star newspaper
KC Star
                        Kansas City Times newspaper
KC Times
                        NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center news re-
KSC Release
                          lease
                        Los Angeles Herald-Examiner newspaper
LA Her-Exam
                        Los Angeles Times newspaper
LA Times
                        NASA Langley Research Center’s Langley
Langley Researcher
                          Researcher
                        NASA Langley Research Center news release
LaRC Release
                        Los Angeles Times News Service
LATNS
                        NASA Lewis Research Center news release
LeRC Release
                        NASA Lewis Research Center’s Lewis News
Lewis News
                        Miami Herald newspaper
M HER
M News                   Miami News newspaper
M Trib                  Minneapolis Tribune newspaper
Marshall Star            NASA George 6. Marshall Space Flight Cen-
                           ter’s Marshall Star
MJ                      Milwaukee Journal newspaper
                         NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center
MSFC Release
                           news release
                         New Haven Register newspaper
N Hav Reg
N News                   Newark News newspaper
N Va Sun                Northern Virginia Sun newspaper


                                                                 275
                               ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,~ w i
APPENDIX E



NAA News           National Aeronautic Association News
NAA Record Book    National Aeronautic Association’s World
                    and U.S.A. National World Aviation -
                    Space Records
NAC Release        National Aviation Club news release
NAE Release        National Academy of Engineering news release
                   North American Newspaper Alliance
NANA
NAS Release        National Academy of Sciences news release
                   National Academy of Sciences-National Re-
NAS -NRC Release
                     search Council news release
                   National Academy of Sciences-National Re-
NAS-NRC-NAE
                     search Council -National Academy of
 News Rpt
                    Engineering News Report
                   NASA Activities
NASA Actv
NASA anno          NASA announcement
                   NASA Headquarters “General Management
NASA GMR
                     Review Report”
NASA HHR-39        NASA Historical Report No. 39
                   NASA History Office
NASA Hist Off
NASA Hq WB         NASA Headquarters Week& Bulletin
NASA Int Aff       NASA Office of International Affairs
                   NASA Legislative Activities Report, Vol. XIII,
NASA LAR, XIIIA
                    No. 8
                   NASA Office of Legislative Affairs
NASA Leg Off
                   NASA Headquarters Mission Operations Re-
NASA MOR
                    port, preliminary prelaunch and postlaunch
                    report series (information may be revised and
                    refined before publication)
                   NASA program office (for the program re-
NASA prog off
                    ported)
                   NASA project office (for the project re-
NASA proj off
                     ported)
                   NASA Headquarters news release
NASA Release
                   NASA report of sounding rocket launching
NASA Rpt SRL
NASA SP-4019       NASA Special Publication No. 4019
                   National Observer magazine
Natl Obs
Nature             Nature Physical Science magazine
                   National Broadcasting Company
NBC
                   National Geographic Society news release
NGS Release
NMI                NASA Management Instruction
NN                 NASA Notice
                   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
NOAA Release
                    tration news release


276
                                                           APPENDIX E
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977



                        Naval Research Laboratory news release
NRL Release
                        National Space Club news release
NSC Release
                        National Space Club News
NSC News
                        National Space Club Letter
NSC Letter
                        National Science Foundation’s Science Re-
NSF Highlights
                         sources Studies Highlights
                        National Science Foundation news release
NSF Release
                        NASA National Space Technology Labora-
NSTL Release
                          tories news release
                        New York Daily News newspaper
N Y News
                        New York Times newspaper
NYT
                        New York Times News Service
NYTNS
                        Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper
0 Sen Star
                        Oakland Tribune newspaper
Oakland Trib
                        Omaha World-Herald newspaper
Omaha W-H
                        Navy’s Office of Naval Research Reviews
ONR Rev
                        Philadelphia Evening and Sunday Bulletin
P Bull
                          newspaper
                        Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper
P Znq
                        Public Affairs Office
PA0
                        National Archives and Records Service’s Week-
PD
                          ly Compilation of Presidential Documents
                        Public Information Office
PI0
                        USN Pacific Missile Range’s Missile
PMR Missile
                        USN Pacific Missile Range news release
PMR Release
                        Aeronautics and Space Report of the President:
Pres Rpt 74
                          1974 Activities
                        Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory news
SA0 Release
                          release
                        Defense/Space Business Daily newspaper
SBD
                        Scientific American magazine
Sci Amer
                        Science & Government Report, independent
Sci & Govt Rpt
                           bulletin of science policy
                        Science Service News service
SciServ
                        Space Digest magazine
SD
                        San Diego Union newspaper
SD Union
                        Scientific Manpower Commission’s Scientvic,
SET Manpower
                          Engineering, Technical Manpower Com-
  Comments
                           ments
                        British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight
SF
                           magazine
                        San Francisco Chronicle newspaper
SF Chron
                        San Francis0 Examiner newspaper
SF Exam


                                                                   271
                             ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977
APPENDIX E



                 Soviet Aerospace newsletter
Sov Aero
                 Center for Foreign Technology’s Soviet Report
Sov Rpt
                   (translations)
                 Space Propulsion newsletter
SP
                 NASA John F Kennedy Space Center’s Space-
Spaceport News
                   port News
                 IUWDS World Data Center A for Rockets and
Spacewarn
                   Satellites’ Spacewarn Bulletin
                 NASA compendium of sounding rocket
SR list
                   launches
                 Soviet Sciences in the News, publication o f
SSN
                   Electro-Optical Systems, Inc.
St Louis G-D     St. Louis Globe-Democrat newspaper
                 St. Louis Post-Dispatch newspaper
St Louis P-D
                 New Orleans Times-Picayune newspaper
T-Picayune
                 Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Tech-
Tech Rev
                   nology Review
                 Today newspaper
Today
                 Congressional testimony, prepared statement
testimony
                 Prepared report or speech text
text
                 Official transcript of news conference or con-
transcript
                   gressional hearing
                 United Nations Public Registry of Space Flight
UN Reg
                 United Press International news service
UP1
                 U.S. Geological Survey news release
USGS Release
                 U.S. Postal Service news release
USPS Release
w Post            Washington Post newspaper
                  Washington Star-News newspaper
W Star-News
                 NASA Wallops Flight Center news release
WFC Release
                 White House news release
WH Release
WJT               World Journal Tribune newspaper
                  Wall Street Journal newspaper
WSJ




 278
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS. 1977                                          INDEX


Index                                      Aeronautics and Space Research Faculty
                                             Program, 152
A-2, 187                                   aeronautical and space technology
                                             (AST).See NASA.
'4-10, 105
AAAS. See Am. Assn. for the Advance-       Aeronutronic Ford Corp. See Ford
  ment of Science.                           Aerospace & CommunicationsCorp.
abort, 123, 155-156, 189, 190              Aeroparque George Newbery. Buenos
Abruzzo, Ben, 172, 173                       Aires, 222
absorption, 145                            Aerosat (ESA project), 16, 122. 174-175
Academy of Sciences, PRC. See China,       aerosols. See atmosphere pollution.
  Peoples Republic of.                     Aerospace Corp., 48
Academy of Sciences, USSR. See Soviet      aerospace environment. See environ-
  Academy of Sciences.                       ment.
acceleration, accelerator; accelerometer   aerospace industry, 62, 107, 112. 134,
  117, 151,215,230                           148, 172, 182, 193, 213, 219
accessibility, 224                         aerospace technology. See technology
accidents, 19, 94, 105, 154-155, 224,        applications.
  235                                      Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 72
accuracy, 4, 9, 30, 55, 58, 79, 96, 121,   affirmative action. See equal employ-
  158, 1%                                    ment opportunity.
acoustics, 32, 61, 71, 105-106, 118        Africa, 10, 110, 139, 157, 179, 198,
ACPL. See atmospheric cloud physics          210,225, 234
  laboratory.                              Afro-American Historical & Cultural
Acurio, John. 232                             Museum, 35
Adams, Brock, 62                           age, 39, 214-215
additives, 1                               agricultural production; agriculture.
Adelaide, Univ. of, 37                        See crops.
Administracion National de Telecomun-      agro-environmental programs, 5, 106-
  icaciones. Paraguay, 135                    107, 119, 147
Administration of Long Distance Tele-      AIL (division of Cutler Hammer), 112
  communications, PRC, 154                 ailerons. 177
advanced civilizations, 143                aiming. 121, 149-150, 150-152
advanced research and technology, 147,     air cargo. See air freight.
  159                                      air carriers. See airlines.
Advanced Research Projects Agency          Air Force, U.S., 8, 13, 15, 36, 72,
  (ARPA), 5 , 8,71                            73, 105, 109. 111, 124-125, 132, 140
Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics Facility         145, 147. 148, 154-155, 159, 167,
                                             169. 172, 173, 177, 179, 181, 188,
  (AXAF), 228
AEC. Atomic Energy Commission. See           194, 201, 203, 205, 235
                                             -contractors, 7, 8, 18, 22, 73, 112,
  Energy Research and Development
  Administration.                              192, 235
AE-D, AE-E. See Atmosphere Ex-               -Flight Dynamics Laboratory,
                                               U.S., 214
  plorers.
AERE Hartwell Co., 2                         -Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL),
aerial survey. See monitoring; sur-             18. 93
  veillance.                                 -Global Weather Center, 58
Aero Club of Washington, 172                 -Satellite Communications System
Aerobee (sounding rocket), 37                  (AFSATCOM), 22
                                             -Scientific Advisory Board, 147
aerodynamics, 16, 28, 108, 118, 122-123,
                                             -Systems Command (AFSC) 2, 18,
  150-152, 154, 217-218,219
                                                203, 214
Aeroflot (USSR passenger plane serv-
                                           air freight, 112
  ice), 29, 176-177
aeronautical, 28, 61, 182, 195, 207,       air pollution. See atmosphere pollution.
  231-232, 235                             air sampling. See GASP.
                                                                                279
INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


air show. See Paris, France.                  Alaska, 47, 134
                                              Alberta, Canada, 38
air traffic, 43, 128, 173,213
                                              Aldebaran (star), 3
airborne monitoring, 55, 72, 204
                                              Aleksandrov, Anatoly P., 89, 183
airborne warning and control system
                                              Aleksandrov, L.A., 167
   (AWACS), 53-54
                                              alert. See safety devices.
airconditioning, 29, 128, 179, 203, 213.
  232                                         Alexander, Dr. Carter, 85
aircraft                                      algae, 123
                                              algebra. See mathematics.
   -civilian, 25,,60,   107, 130, 134, 192,
                                              Algernon Blair Industrial Contrac-
      222
  -communications, 13                            tors Inc., 139
  -design. See design.                        alien. See extraterrestrial.
  -energy      efficiency (ACEE)              “All-American Boys” (book), 204
    program, 79, 110, 128, 177, 180, 218      Allen, Bryan, 182
                                              Allen, H.Julian, 16
  -guidance, 7
                                              alloys, 106, 170, 192
  -industry. See aerospace industry.
                                              Alpha Centauri (star), 37
  -manufacturers. See aerospace in-
                                              alterations. See modifications.
    dustry.
                                              altitude (altimeter), 12, 58, 61, 63, 67,
  -military, 73, 74, 107, 147.
      154-155, 199                              76,93,98, 135, 141,149. 150, 181,191,
                                                192, 193, 1%, 198, 202, 209, 211, 215,
  -power systems, 7
  -safety. See safety.                          221,235
                                              aluminum, 45, 108, 119, 143, 170, 211,
  -targets, 71
                                                215
  -testing, 61, 217-218
  -transport, 25,35,64,71,79, 128.218         American Airlines, 45
  -use in research, 58, 60, 61, 84,           American Assn. for the Advancement of
                                               Science (AAAS),39, 49
      96, 134. 138-139. 161, 171, 180,
                                              American Bar Assn., 13
      192, 193-194, 199, 204, 208-209,
                                              American Council on Education, 148
      216, 218. 221-222, 235
                                              American Geophysical Union, 22, 102,
aircushion (landing system). See landing.
airdrop. See drop.                              106,234
AiResearch Mfg. Co., 7                        American Inst. of Aeronautics and
                                               Astronautics (AIAA), 19, 235
airflow. See aerodynamics.
                                              American Machine & Foundry Co., 175
airfoils. See design, aircraft.
                                              American Meteorological Society, 22
airlift, 111
                                              American Physical Society, 75
airlines, 62. 122, 176, 177. 180, 190-191,
                                              American Society for Public Adminis-
  193, 218, 220-221
                                               tration, 229, 230
airlock
                                              American Society of Engineering Ed-
   Dec 10-31 (Soyuz 26 launch), 224
                                               ucation. 107, 152
airplanes. See aircraft.
                                              American Society of Mechanical En-
airports, 62, 66, 112, 152, 191, 213,
                                               gineers (ASME). 24
   218, 222
                                              American Univ., 220
airspace, 155
airworthiness. See handling.                  Ames laboratory (NACA), 16
Akademik Korolev (USSR ship),                 Ames Research Center (ARC)
  127, 164, 198                                -contracts, 173, 216
Alabama, 127, 1%. 211                           -missions, 103, 159
Ahbama A&M Univ., 152                          -people, 16, 85. 107, 147, 152, 166,
Alabama Society of Professional                   167, 169, 190
  Engineers, 71                                 -programs, 15-16, 44, 47, 57.61, 68,
Alabama Space & Rocket Center, 6, 71              72, 84, 85, 92, 107, 136, 137, 159,
Alabama, Univ. of, 74. 230                        166, 167, 186, 188. 190, 208, 215,
alarm. See safety devices.                        231,235

280
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                             INDEX


                                              applications technology satellite. See Ats
amino acids. See organic.
                                                1.
ammonia. See organic.
ammunition. See weapons systems; ex-          Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hop-
  plosions.                                     kins Univ. (JHU/APL), 197
amplitude modulation (AM), 133                applied research, 118
Ams 2 ( U S A F metesat), 244                 approach and landing tests (ALT). See
                                                also Space Shuttle, testing, 143, 145,
analog. See computers.
                                                212,235
analysis, 70, 167, 201, 211, 227
                                              appropriations. See Congress; NASA
Anderson, Donald, 6
Anderson, Jack, 73                              budget.
Anderson, Maxie, 172, 173                     Arab nations. (See also Middle East), 14,
Anderson, Robert, 73                            103
                                              Araks (French experiment), 117
Andover, Maine, 10
                                              Arava (Israeli transport aircraft), 71
Andrews AFB, Md., 203
                                              archives, 195
Angola, Peoples Republic of, 179
Anik (Canadian comsat series). See Tele-      arcing. See insulation.
  sat Canada.                                 ARC0 Inc., 219
                                              Arctic, 140, 234
animals, 68, 143, 146, 167, 201
                                              Argentina, 222
animation (equipment, exhibits, etc.),
                                              Ariane @SA launch vehicle), 16, 168,225
  172
                                              Ariel (U.K.  satellite), 174
anniversaries. See observances.
anomaly. See failure; malfunction;            Arizona, 47, 48, 80, 94, 193, 219
  problem.                                    Arizona State Univ., 192
Antarctic, 31, 39, 66                         Arizona, Univ. of, 21, 107, 137
antennas, 33, 235                             Arkalyk, USSR, 27
                                              Arktika (USSR ship), 158
   -airborne, spaceborne, 55, 235
   -ground-based, 4, 154-155                  Armed Forces Radio and TV Service, 10
antisatellite measures. See interceptor sa-   Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,
  tellite.                                      31
Antonov, O.K.,29                              Army, U.S.See also Defense, U.S. Dept.
Apollo, 28, 31, 44, 52, 63, 72, 75, 101,        of, 115, 134, 172, 194, 201, 216, 227,
  113, 115, 156, 191, 195,220,229, 235          23 1-232
Apollo 4, 2 15                                  -Air Corps, US., 131
Apollo 7, 24                                    -Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA),
Apollo 9, 162, 191                                215
Apollo IO, 128                                   -Chemical Corps, 175
Apollo 11, 3, 132, 165, 181                      -(Corps of) Engineers, 33
Apollo 12, 101, 161, 165                         -Propulsion Laboratory, LeRC, 23 1
Apollo 13, 101                                Arnold, Dr. James, 146
Apollo 14, 165, 195                           artifacts, 124
Apollo IS, 5, 101, 165, 191, 195              artificial environment. See environment,
Apollo 16, 165                                Aryubhatu (India domestic comsat), 174
Apollo 17, 51, 101, 165                       Ascension Island, 8
Apollo lunar-surface experiment pack-         Asia, 10, 154
  ages (ALSEP), 156, 161, 165                 Asimov, Isaac, 57
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), 11,         Asinyarov, Gennady, 124
  23, 52, 89-90, 121, 128, 132, 187           Assateague (Wildlife Refuge; Coast
applications, 56, 59, 176, 162, 168, 169,       Guard sta.), Va., 69, 164
  175,203                                     assembling; assembiy, 45, 50, 64, 106.
Applications, NASA Office of (OA). See          113, 133, 158, 160, 192, 208, 211, 220,
  NASA.                                         228, 230, 233,235
applications sounding-rocket program          ASSESS (airborne science/Spacelab ex-
  (ARSP), 138                                  periment-system simulation), 72, 84

                                                                                    28 1
INDEX                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


                                               Austria, 32, 1 3
                                                             0
ass,essment. See evaluation.
                                               automated systems, 45, 47, 74, 76, 106,
asteroids, 157, 1 6 1 4 145, 207
                   0, 2,
                                                 109-110,113, 1 9 1 1 151-152, 1 3
                                                                  1, 3,               5,
Astrain, Santiago, 65
                                                 170, 178, 1 2 193, 196, 198,216,219,
                                                             9,
astrometrics, 1 56
                                                 220,221-222,224, 225,229,235
astronauts (See also individual names.),
                                               automobiles. See vehicles.
   5, 6, 1 , 11, 1 , 84, 8 . 121, 132, 1 0
           0       8      5             4,
                                               autopilot, 96
   1 4 157, 162, 172, 179, 181, 185, 191,
     4,
                                               Avco Corp., 177
   1 8 201, 204, 205-206,210, 211, 214,
     9,
                                               Avery, Robert M., 2  5
   222,228
astronomers, 9, 1 ,18,25,31,32.47,48,
                    0                          aviation industry. See aerospace industry;
   5 , 63, 66, 69, 72, 84, 108, 121, 137,
     6                                           airlines.
    1 2 165, 167, 189,204, 206-207,210,
     5.                                        aviation research, 60,213
   216,227,233,235                             aviation safety reporting system (ASRS),
astrophysics, 1 7 224, 228
                 3,                              43, 128
Atchafalaya River, 33                          avionics, 61, 112,202,207
Atkinson, Richard C., 117-118                  Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet, 1 7 0
Atlantic Ocean, 8, 10, 27, 30, 127, 139,       awards, 11, 19,20,44,49,71,87,93,101,
    167, 171, 172, 1 0 198,210, 227
                     8,                           124, 133, 145, 152, 175, 181, 182, 188,
Atlas (NASA launch vehicle), 229                  203, 205,212,220,235
Atlas Centaur, 11.37, 149,180,202,205,         Azores Islands, 181
    209,221, 229
 atmosphere                                    B-1 (bomber), 7, 112, 155
    -interference, 1 , 186,233                 B-52(U.S.aircraft), 119,2 1
                      0                                                  1
    -ionosphere, 58, 85                        B-58,235
    -magnetosphere, 34, 102, 168-169,          B-70 (planned U.S.bomber), 13
                                               B-707.See Boeing 707.
       167
    -planetary, 39, 49,55, 59-60, 66,68,       B-727.See Boeing 727.
                                               B-737 (LaRC flying laboratory). See
       69, 92-93, 102, 119, 121, 136, 156,
                                                 Boeing 737.
        161, 166, 184, 187,207,221-222
    -pollution, 72, 84, 138, 141, 165,204      B-747.See Boeing 747.
    -research, 21-22, 54, 56, 59, 66,68,       background, 208-209,210
        127, 131, 137-138, 148, 166, 175,      backup. See schedule; support systems.
        197-198,234                            bacteria, 63,201
     -stratosphere, 138, 192                   Bahamas, 162
     -upper atmosphere, 1 , 54, 193,208-       Bahcall, Dr. John, 1
                            9                                      0
                                               Baker, James L., 64
        209
                                               Ball, George W., 40
 Atmosphere Explorer (AE) missions, 136
                                               Ball Brothers Research Corp., 136, 181,
 atmospheric cloud physics laboratory
                                                 168
    (ACPL), NOAA, 25, 130, 1 5   7
                                               ballistic missile. See weapons systems.
 atmospheric physics laboratory. See at-
                                               balloons, 76, 93,98, 119, 127, 138, 172,
     mospheric cloud physics laboratory.
                                                 173, 181, 188,215,227
  atmospheric variability experiments
                                               Baltimore, Md., 1 , 164
                                                                   2
     (AVE), 127
                                               Banana River, 28-29,57
  atomic energy. See power sources,
                                               Bane, Don, 1 1 0
     nuclear.
                                               Barbon, Jill, 192
  Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). See
                                               Barents Sea, 57
     Energy Research and Development Ad-
                                               barge, 160,211
     ministration (ERDA).
                                               barium, 36
  Ats I, 64
                                               Baron, Bob, 218
  attitude control (See control systems.),
                                               Barrere, Marcel, 184, 1 58
      182
                                               basic research, 117-118
  auroras, 38, 40, 85
                                               Battelle Institute, Columbus div., 43
  Australia, 10,37,48,69,81-82,     103,133,
                                               Battelle Memorial Institute, 17,231
      162, 174,212
 282
                                                                             INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


batteries, 15, 84, 94, 120, 149, 216        Boeing Services Intl., 102
battery power. See power sources.           Boeing 707,66, 182
Baykonur, USSR, 222                         Boeing 727, 128, 162
beacons, 6, 132-133, 172, 173               Boeing 737, 132, 163, 212, 222
beam fabrication. See space construction.   Boeing 747, 27, 45, 55, 64,67, 107-108,
Bedford. M s . 172
            as,                               110, 113, 118, 122, 132, 135, 141,
Belem, Brazil, 222                            150-151, 171, 175. 179, 182, 191. 196,
Belenko. Lt. Viktor, 26                      202,201,211,228
Belgium, 32, 103, 154                       Boese, D .R.W., 166
                                                    r
Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 130                   Boland. Rep. Edward P., 108, 135
Bell Helicopter Textron Co., 216            Boldt, Dr.Elihu, 212
Bell Laboratories, 62, 166, 177             bolides. See meteorites.
Belton, Dr. Michael J.S., 38-39             Bolivia, 196
Bendix Corp., 11, 63, 74, 150, 156          bombs. See explosives.
                                            Bond, Langhorne M..62
"bends." See hyperbaric research.
                                            bones. See medical research.
Bennich, Jerry D., 230
Benton, Dr. Eugene, 167                     Bonn Institute for Radio Astronomy, 10
Bering Strait, 178                          Bonneville Power Administration, U.S.,
Berlin, Germany, 235                          80
Berlin, Univ. of, 115                       book. See publications.
Bermuda Triangle, 64,173                    boom (aircraft; spacecraft), 75, 155-156,
beryllium, 30                                 167, 186, 195, 218
Betelgeuse (star), 104                      boosters. See rockets.
bicentennial, U.S.,182                      borosilicates, 233
big-bang theory. See theory.                Boston Univ., 147
Big Bird (USAF reconsat), 22                botany, 32, 201
Bilfiu, David S., 72, 84                    Bovay Engineers, Inc., 121
                                            Bradt, D .Hale, 212
                                                     r
binary stars. See stars.
biochemistry, 123, 190                      brain, 146
bioengineering. See biology.                brakes; braking, 122-123, 150-152, 171,
biology, 4, 32, 62, 65, 68, 71, 85, 101,      1%
                                            Brantley, Whitt Jr., 128
  125, 159-160, 161, 167, 174, 184, 190,
                                            Braufman, Adam I., 4
  201, 206, 215-216
biomedical applications office, MSFC.       Brayton engine, 159
  See medical research.                     Brazil, 134, 222
biophysics, 146                             breeder reactor. See power sources,
Bios 3 (Soviet experiment). 123               nuclear.
BiosateIIite 3 (US. mission), 160           Brezhnev, Leonid, 76, 143
biosats. 159-160, 167                       briefing. See media.
black history, 18, 35                       Brigham City, Utah, 133
black holes, 37, 149, 210                   Bristol Scout (WWI U.K. plane), 141
blackout (communications), 4                Britain. See United Kingdom.
blades, propeller. See propellers.          British Isles (See also United Kingdom.),
Blamont, Jacques, 119                         40
Bledsoe, Maj. Adolphus H., 181              British Royal Society. See Royal.
Bleyle, Wilhelm, KG, 70                     broadcasting. See frequencies, broadcast;
blood, 133                                    media.
boats. See ships.                           Brooksbank, William A. Jr., 215
Boeing Commercial Airplane Co., 110,        Broome, C. Calvin, 125
                                            Brown, Gov. Edmund G., Jr., 148
  128, 163. 192
Boeing Company, 8, 22, 42, 53, 112, 173     Brown, Harold, 74, 147
Boeing Engineering and Construction         Brussels, Belgium, 63
  Co., 129                                  Bryson Construction Co., 64

                                                                               . 283
INDEX                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


BSE, 229                                          Canadian Department of Communi-
budget                                              cations, 19, 47
   -federal, 35-36                                Canberra, Australia, 4, 82
   -military, 22, 52, 54                          cancer, 146, 216
                                                  capacity, 206
   -NASA. See NASA, budget.
Buenos Ares, Argentina, 212,222                   Cape Canaveral, Fla., 8,52,62. 102, 103,
Buffalo, 213                                        132, 167, 168, 195, 202
Bugreyev, Nikolai, 124                            Cape Town, South Africa, 182
buildings; building trades (see also con-         capital punishment. See law enforcement;
  struction of facilities.), 213                    public policy.
                                                  captive flight, 17, 103, 107-108, 118,
Bulgaria, 20, 159, 174
buoy, 63,79                                         122-123, 135
buoyancy, 118                                    Carassa, Prof. Francesco, 157
Bureau of Land Management, DOI, 47               carbon 14 dating, 39-40
burn; burner; burnout, 188, 199,211,233          carbon compounds, 206
business. See aerospace industry; com-           careers, 41
                                                 cargo-integrationtest equipment (CITE),
  mercial applications; industrializa-
  tion.                                             185-186
Buzzard, WalIace, 214                            cargo logistics airlift-systems study
                                                   (CLASS), 112
C-5 galaxy, 111, 122, 222                        cargo transfer (see also payloads), 98
c-47, 12                                         cargoes (See also air freight; payloads;
                                                   shipping.), 162, 214
C-band communications, 139
cabling, 98, 113                                 Caribbean Sea, IO, 171, 176
calculations; calculators. See computa-          Carr, Gerald A., 121
  tions.                                         carrier aircraft. See Boeing 747.
calibration, 37, 42, 85, 113, 155, 195,          Carruthers, Dr. John R., 62
  210                                            cars. See vehicles.
                                                 Carter, President Jimmy, 1, 10, 23, 30,
California, 36, 40, 47, 80, 81, 105, 148,
  162, 202. 228                                    38, 48, 52, 56, 62, 64, 65, 67, 71,
California Institute of Technology                 72, 93, 102, 111, 114, 131-132, 185,
 (CalTech), 44, 137, 150, 190, 203,                218
                                                 Caruso, Andrea, 65
  230
California, University of                        Casani, John, 137, 167
                                                 castings, 106
   -Berkeley, 147, 167, 209, 230
  -San Diego, 145-146, 150, 212                  Cataldo, Charles E., 11
Calio, Dr. Anthony J., 175, 220                  catalog, 44, 117, 129, 205
Callisto, 166                                    catalyst, 221
calorimeter. See instrumentation.                catastrophe, 149
Calspan Gorp., 216                               celebrations. See observances.
                                                 celestial, 69, 188
CalTech. See California Institute of
  Technology.                                    celestial sphere. See galaxy.
CAMAC (electronic assembly system), 50           cells, 146, 152
Cambridge, Mass., 40                             censorship, 130
cameras (See also photography; imaging),         Centaur, 180, 220, 221
  216                                            centers, NASA. See individual center
  -earth-based, 167                                listings.
  -satellite, 37, 176, 189, 210                  Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales
  -television, 12, 33, 104, 121, 160, 198,         (France), 66, 119
    224, 234                                     centrifugal force, 57, 119
camouflage, 177                                  Cerenkov radiation, 31
                                                 certification, 182
Canada, 11, 19, 32, 38, 56, 103, 110.
  122, 134, 138, 153, 163, 175, 208,             Chad, Republic of, 110
  213, 229                                       changes. See modifications.
284
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                               INDEX


channels (communications). See Fre-           Colin, Dr, Lawrence, 166
  quencies, broadcast.                        College of William and Mary, 18
Chapman, blaj. Gen. Kenneth R., 53            Colli. Jean-Claude, 14
Chappell, br. C.R., 67                        collimator. See instrumentation.
charge-coupled devices, 22, 71                Collins, Michael, 116, 181
charged particles. See energetic particles.   collision (See also crash; accident.), 155,
Charyk, Dr. Joseph V., 72                       156, 177
Chase PIWS (See also T-38.), 155              colloquium. See meetings.
Chaudiere River, 110                          Colman, Everett R.. 133
checkout, 11,211,223-225                      Cologne. W.Germany, 84
chemicals, 18, 73, 85, 101, 136, 146,         Colombia, 134
  161-162, 188, 201, 230                      color, 142, 165, 194
chemistry, 17,207,222                         Colorado, 80, 161, 176
Chesapeake Bay, 63                            Colorado, University of, 137
Chicago, Ill., 111                            Columbia University, 37, 93, 114
Chicago, University of, 102                   Columbus, Ohio, 17
Chien. Hsueh-shen, 131                        Columbus medal, 188
Chile, 103                                    Coma cluster (stars), 37
China, People’s Republic of, 131, 154.        comets. 204, 207
  182,229                                     commands, 133, 186
Chincoteague, Va., 6 ,164
                       9                      commemoration. See observances.
Chirivella, Dr. Jose, 221                     Commerce, U.S. Dept. of (See also
Chiron, 204                                     NOM.), 67, 114, 141, 193
chlorella, 123                                commercial airlines. See airlines.
chlorine compounds, 146                       commercial applications (See also indus-
Christmas Islands, 41                           trialization.), 59, 139, 163-164, 169,
chrome; chromium, 175, 230                      195, 199-200
Chryse Planitia (region of Mars), 70. 125     commercialization. See industrialization.
Chrysler Corporation, 11                      committees, congressional. See Congress.
cinema. See films.                            communications
circuits, 133, 154                              -global Systems, 38, 124-125. 198,220
city-federal cooperation, 8, 188                -lightwave, 62
civil aviation, 60, 110, 122, 178, 192          -problems, 118, 131, 134, 157
Civil Service Commission, US. (See also         -radio, 19, 74, 139
   employment; NASA management.),               -relay. See relay.
   104, 161, 215                                -satellites. See comsats.
civilians, 21, 25, 121, 140, 148, 163. 173.     -spacecraft, 55, 136-137, 226
   179, 195, 201, 205, 231, 235                 -systems, 74, 118, 122, 180
Clark, Ray, 24                                Communications Satellite Corporation
Clarksburg, Md., 138                            (ComSatCorp), 10, 65, 72, 120, 138,
clay, 190                                       169-170, 175, 206, 213, 217, 228,
cleaning, 218                                   229
Cleveland, Ohio, 12                           Communications Technology Satellite
clocks, 51                                      (Crs),Canada, 13, 47, 138,208
closed universe. See theory.                  communist bloc. See Soviet bloc.
clothing, 59, 201                             community relations (See also public
clouds (cloudcover), 18.25,36-37,39,85,         relations.) 3, 74. 192
   119, 127, 130, 210                         Compagnia lndustriale Aerospaziale, 157
coal (see also fuel.), 65, 73, 178            comparisons, 13,26, 121,212
Coast Guard, U S , 79, 206
                 ..                           compass. See instrumentation.
coastal zone color scanner, 194               compatibility, 185
Cohen, Aaron, 143                             competition (See also contest.), 71
cold, 227                                       -economic, 8. 62, 153-154, 187, 203

                                                                                     285
INDEX                                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


  -national Science, 133                       Consiglio Nazionale della Richerche
Complex 39B, KSC. 128                            (CNR), Italy. See Natl. Research
components. See instrumentation.                 Council.
composite.                                     console, medicai communications, 74
  -fuels, 133                                  constellations, 104
  -materials, 45, 76, 79, 128, 163-164,        Constitution, US., 62
      177, 180                                 construction o facilities, 53, 62, 63, 64,
                                                             f
computations (See also measurements.),           65, 70, 72, 80, 113, 131, 132, 139, 188,
  27, 142, 227                                   208.228-229.233
computers, 70, 143, 227                        consumables. See supplies.
  -airborne, 26                                containerless processing (See also new
  -assembly, 50                                  techniques.), 30. 105, 192
  -enhancement. See data processing.           contamination (See also pollution.) 30,
  -maintenance, 74, 221                           110-111, 168, 204
  -programs, 21, 128, 202-203                  contest, 162, 182
  -software, 38                                Continental (aircraft engine), 130
  -spacecraft, 33-34, 55, 66, 150-152,         contingency. See emergencies.
      155-156, 192, 217                        contour mapping. See topography.
  -systems, 118, 155-156, 198, 213             Contractors Cargo Co., 113-1 14
computerization. See automated systems.        control; control centers, 14. 15, 101,
                                                 155-156, 171,207, 228
ComSatCorp. See CommunicationsSatel-
                                                 -Systems, 23, 30, 55, 63, 74, %, 110,
  lite Corporation.
                                                 118, 121, 125, 133, 134, 135, 136-137,
Comsat General (subsidiary of ComSat-
                                                 146, 149-150, 150-152, 157. 160,
  Corp). 72, 124, 139
                                                 161, 178-179, 186, 192, 199, 202-203,
comsats (See also names of individual
                                                 207, 216, 221, 223-225
  communications satellites.), 4, 6,
                                               control, weather. See meteorology.
  7-14, 22, 32, 36, 38, 51-52, 54,
                                               Controlled Biosynthesis Laboratory,
  72, 122, 135, 153-154, 156-157, 161,
                                                 USSR, 123
  168, 173, 175, 181, 182, 202, 207,
                                               controllers. See controls.
  208, 209, 221, 226, 229
                                               controversy, 40-41
Comstar system (domestic comsats). 72
                                               Convair Division. See General Dynamics.
Comstar-C, 229
                                               Convair 990.See Galileo.
Comstock, Bruce, 181
                                               conventional. 8, % 129, 134. 199-200,
                                                                   ,
Conant. William W., 79                           213-214, 216
concept, 98                                    conversion, energy/power. See power
Concorde, 53, 66, 151.213                        sources, conversion; solar conversion
concrete, 1%                                     devices.
condensation. 9                                cooking, 124
conduction, 141                                cooling (See also cryogenics.). 132, 153,
Cone, Dr. Clarence D.. Jr., 146                  213, 231
conferences. See meetings.                     Cooper, Henry S F , 49
                                                                ..
configuration, 17, 133, 134, 138,216,218       Cooper, Robert S , 161
                                                                .
  222,225                                      cooperation (See also city-federal;
confirmation, 188, 1%                            industry-government; international; in-
Congo, Peoples Republic of the, 198              terservice; NASA research; state-
Congress, U.S., 108, 121, 132                    federal.), 59
  -conference committee, 108, 135              Coordinating Committee of Nations, 141
  -House of Representatives, 38,60,64,         coordination, 33.61, 84, 159, 162
    108, 124-125, 180                          copper, 143
  -Senate, 56, 62, 111, 114, 195, 217          Cornell University, 48, 59, 69, 124, 143,
conjunction period (astronomical), 15            177
conservation. 11-12, 185                       Corning Glass Works, 232-233

286
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,1977                                               INDEX


corrosion, 11                                 Cosmos 930, 248
Cortright, Dr. Edgar M., 203                  Cosmos 931,248
Cosmic Background Explorer, 50                Cosmos 932, 248
cosmic radiation, rays, 31-32, 39-40,         Cosmos 933, 249
  149-150, 153, 188, 190, 208, 212, 215       cosmos 934,249
Cosmic Research Institute, USSR, 66           Cosmos 935, 249
cosmology, 56, 228                            Cosmos 936, 159, 167, 206, 249
cosmonauts (See also the names of in-         Cosmos 937, 250
  dividuals.), 10, 20, 23, 26-27, 189-190,    Cosmos 938.250
  223-225                                     Cosmos 939,250
Cosmos 782, 159-160                           Cosmos 940,250
Cosmos 888,238                                Cosmos 941, 250
Cosmos 889,238                                Cosmos 942, 251
Cosmos 890,238                                Cosmos 943,251
Cosmos 891,239                                Cosmos 9 4 251
                                                        4,
Cosmos 892, 239                               Cosmos 945, 251
Cosmos 893, 239                               Cosmos 946, 25 1
Cosmos 894,240                                Cosmos 947, 252
Cosmos 895, 240                               Cosmos 948,252
Cosmos 896,240                                Cosmos 949, 252
Cosmos 897, 240                               Cosmos 950, 252
Cosmos 898,241                                Cosmos 951, 253
Cosmos 899, 241                               Cosmos 952. 253
Cosmos 900,241                                Cosmos 953, 253
Cosmos 901, 241                               Cosmos 954, 253
Cosmos 902, 241                               Cosmos 955,253
Cosmos 903, 242                               Cosmos 956, 254
Cosmos 904.242                                Cosmos 957, 254
Cosmos 905, 242                               Cosmos 958, 255
Cosmos 906,242                                Cosmos 959,255
Cosmos 907, 243                              Cosmos 960, 255
Cosmos 908. 243                               Cosmos 961, 256
Cosmos 909,243                               Cosmos 962, 256
Cosmos 910, 243                              Cosmos 963, 257
Cosmos 91I , 244                             Cosmos 964, 257
Cosmos 912, 244                              Cosmos 965, 257
Cosmos 913, 244                              Cosmos % , 258
                                                       6
Cosmos 914, 244                              Cosmos %7, 258
Cosmos 915, 245                              Cosmos 968. 258
Cosmos 916, 245                              Cosmos 969, 259
Cosmos 917, 245                              Cosmos 970, 259
Cosmos 918, 245                              Cosmos 971, 259
Cosmos 919, 246                              Cosmos 972, 259
Cosmos 920, 246                              Cosmos 973, 259
Cosmos 921, 246                              cost reduction, 12, 15, 35, 47, 50, 55, 57,
Cosmos 922,247                                 58,61,65,66,73,80,94, 104, 108-109,
Cosmos 923, 247                                111, 118. 131, 145, 156, 161, 162-163,
Cosmos 924, 247                                175, 178, 179, 188, 208, 218, 219,
Cosmos 925, 247                                220, 228
Cosmos 926, 247                              cotton, 59
Cosmos 927, 247                              counseling, 148
Cosmos 928, 248                              countdown. See launch control.
Cosmos 929, 158,248                          counting. 189, 193

                                                                                   287
 INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


court trials. See judicial proceedings.        daylight; daytime, 158, 1 5
                                                                         9
Cousteau, Jacques-Yves, 149                     DC-10, 67, 79, 132
crash, 1 5
         0                                     death, 1 . 1 ,29, 74, 105, 115, 235
                                                        69
craters, 76, 124                               debris, 98
Craven Point, N.J., 63                         decompression sickness (“the bends”). See
creation of universe. See theory.                 hyperbaric research.
                                               deep space network, 154,165-166
Creole, 1 3
          0
crew (See also astronauts; cosmonauts;         defectors. 13, 26
   Space Shuttle, crew; pilots; payload or     defects. See malfunctions; problems.
   mission specialists; manned flight; in-     Defense CommunicationsAgency, 65
                                               Defense, U S Dept. of (DOD) (See also
                                                          ..
   dividual names.), 193, 198, 223-225
criminal justice. See law enforcement;           Advanced Research Projects Agency;
                                                 Air Force, U.S.;Army, U.S.;Marine
   judicial proceedings.
                                                 Corps, U.S.; Navy, U S ) 6, 7 3 .
                                                                         ..,        ,8
Criswell, Dr. David, 157
                                                 52, 5 , 54, 59, 65, 74, 105, 109, 112,
                                                       3
criticism, 58-59,105, 187,204
                                                  114, 122, 132, 140, 141-142,154-155,
crops, 5, 25, 59, 119, 141, 147, 165, 193,
                                                  1 2 1 3 177, 197, 203,211, 236
                                                   6, 6,
   218
                                                  -contractors, 7, 8 22, 1 9
                                                                     ,      0
cross-country Shuttle flights. See Space
                                                  -unidentified spacecraft, 83, 177,197,
   Shuttle testing.
                                                    239,241,243.246,254,258
crowding. See frequencies, broadcast.
                                               defense satellite-communications system
cruise missiles. See weapons systems.
                                                 (DSCS), 83-84, 124,243
cryogenics (See also cooling.), 50,58.132,
                                               defense spending, 134, 194
   1 6 1 0 186
    3. 6 ,
                                               defense systems. See weapons systems.
crystal growth, 62, 192
                                               dehumidifying, 1  6
C (Sakura, Japan cornsat), 112,226,258,
 s
                                               Deimos (moon of Mars), 124, 152
   261,263
                                               delay (See also problems.), 103, 131, 137,
Cuba, 20, 174, 183, 1 69
                                                 149-150, 157, 168, 1 1 1 3 209,
                                                                          7. 9.
cultural affairs, 130, 1 1 143, 164
                        3,
                                                 217
Cunningham, Walt, 204
                                               delivery, 206. 2 1
                                                               2
Cygnus (constellation), 107
                                               Delta (NASA launch vehicle), 1 , 37,52,
                                                                               4
Czechoslovakia, 20, 159, 174, 1%                 73, 106, 111, 112, 145, 1 6 168, 171,
                                                                            5,
                                                 180, 193, 195,202,205, 210, 229
damage, 66, 80, 119, 146, 154-155, 168,        demonstration (See also exhibits.), 45,
  180,213-214                                    113-114, 130-131, 148, 1 3 179,
                                                                               7.
danger (See also safety.), 98, 127, 1 0
                                      6.         186, 1%. 206, 212, 217-218, 222,
  184                                            228,235
Darmstadt, W.Germany, 74,210                   Denmark, 1, 154
Daspit, Leo, 233                               density. 93,98,124, 132, 1 8 222
                                                                           6,
data                                           Denver, Colorado, 13
  -acquisition, 4, 5, 1 , 15. 62,63, 72-
                       4                       deployment, 75, 93, 155, 198, 211, 221,
     73, 112-113, 1 5 147, 171, 186, 1 9
                   4,                 8,         235-236
     192, 1 4 207,219-220
           9.                                  depreciation, 1 3
                                                              6
  -analysis. 1 , 171
               5                               Desert Research Institute. 25
  -collection. See data acquisition.           deserts, 150
  -distribution, 111, 134, 186-187,189         design
  -management, 1 9 1 4 1 5
                    6, 7, 8                      -aircraft,28,29,61,71,110.112,130,
  -processing, 7 56, 71, 136-137,142,
                 ,                                  138, 151, 152, 180, 192, 199, 217-
     1 3 147, 234
      4,                                            218, 219
  -relay. See relay.                             -engineering, 2 . 3 . 107, 147, 153,
                                                                  44
  -transmission, 63, 1 5 132-133. 139,
                       2,                           154, 160, 169, 1 3 207
                                                                    7,
     1 4 155. 157, l 8 1 3 171, 214
      5,             S, 6,                       -instrumentation, 42, 4 . 64, 68, 69,
                                                                          7
  -users, 58, 111, 143, 186-187,210                 7 . 135, 165, 208-209, 211
                                                     1
Davidsen, Dr. Arthur, 1 1
                        2                        -ships, 2
288
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                            INDEX


  -spacecraft, 43, 48-49, 117, 121, 137,    drop, 93, 101, 119-120, 211
     156-157, 160, 162-163, 235-236         drought, 39-40, 80-81
destruction; destruct system (See also      drugs. See pharmaceuticals.
  interceptor satellites.), 177, 213, 234   Dryden Flight Research Center
detection; detectors, 22,31-32,58,63,71,      -contracts, 45
  80, 101, 127, 140, 149, 160-161, 176,       -people, 74, 101, 144-145, 169, 175,
  188, 189, 196, 204, 210, 215, 216, 233        191, 217-218, 221, 235
detente, 144                                  -programs, 15.23-24,42, 55,61,69,
Detroit Diesel Allison, 134                     96, 101, 103, 107-108, 113-114, 118,
deuterium, 109                                  135, 143, 168, 170, 171, 193, 202,
developing nations, 130                         218, 221-222
deviations (See also malfunctions.), 96,    Dscs 11-7, 11-8. See defense satellite-com-
  190,223                                     munications system.
devices. See equipment; instrumentation.    Dubna, USSR, 230
diagnosis. See medical research.            Duke, Dr. Michael G., 28
diesel, 179                                 Duke University, 216
diet. See food.                             Duki, USSR, 178
difficulty. See problems.                   dummy. See simulations.
digital. See computers.                     durability, 34, 71, 143, 159, 175, 211
dimensions. See size.                       duration, 71, 98, 121, 145, 189, 198, 206
diplomacy. See international relations.     Durham, N.C., 216
direct broadcast, 129-130, 154              dust, 94, 107, 178, 219
direct readout. See real-time monitoring.   Dutch. See Netherlands.
direction. See aiming; orientation; man-    Duxbury, Thomas C., 176
  agement.                                  dwarf stars. See stars.
disaster. See emergencies.                  dynamic, 55, 203,211
discoveries (See also new products; new
  techniques.), 48, 59-60, 69, 124, 129,    Eaker, Gen. Ira C., 172
                                            early-warning
  130, 152, 158, 201, 203-204, 208-209
                                               -satellites, 22
Discovery, 33
                                               -aircraft, 43
disease. See medical research.
                                            earth, 103, 143, 183, 209, 235
dispersion, 192, 209
                                               -resources monitoring, 47, 48, 54, 63,
display. See exhibits.
disposable, 160, 170                            84, 108, 111, 130, 134, 141, 147,148,
                                                168, 225, 229
distance, 10, 33-34, 57, 76, 176-177,
                                            earth station; earth terminal. See ground
  182-183, 195-196, 226-227, 233
                                              station.
distortion, 25-26
                                            earthquakes. See seismology; seismom-
divers; diving, 160, 208
                                              eter.
DNA. See genetics.
                                            East Germany. See German Democratic
docking, 26-27,89-90,189-190,223-224,
                                              Republic (GDR).
  23 1
                                            Easterling, Mahlon F., 175
documentation, 89, 169, 182, 192-193
                                            Eastern Europe. See Soviet bloc.
domestic comsats. See comsats; names of
                                            Eastern Shore, 164
  individual satellites.
                                            Eastern Test Range (ETR) (See also Cape
                                              Canaveral; KSC Spaceport.), 2, 52,
                                              73, 102, 112, 155, 210, 226
                                            Eberhart, Jonathan, 49


                                            economic policy, 2, 3, 75, 76, 208


                                            education, 115, 117, 157, 165, 177, 208
                                                                                   289
INDEX                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


Edwards Air Force Base (AFB), Calif.,             energetic particles (See also ions; elec-
  17, 150. 171, 178, 179, 191, 1%. 219,             trons; neutrons; protons; radiation.),
                                                    19, 25, 31-32, 75, 85, 109, 166, 176,
  235
Effelsberg radiotelescope (Max Planck               215
   Inst.), 9                                      energy
efficiency, 13.79, 112, 145, 159,200,214            -conservation, 12, 14, 28-29, 35-36.
Efik, 103                                             6 , 61, 73, 79, 94, 117, 128, 130,
                                                       0
Egypt, 103, 196                                        147, 148, 159, 162. 177-178, 180,
EIC Corp.. 2                                           185, 186-187, 188, 199-200, 218
Eichman, Wilbert F., 156                            -conversion. See power sources, con-
Einstein theory of relativity, 4, 51                  version; solar conversion devices.
Eisele, Donn F , 2
                .4                                  -crisis. See energy conservation.
Eisenhower, President Dwight D., 161                -efficiency. See energy conservation.
Ekran 2, 253                                        -heating and cooling, 28-29, 128-129,
elasticity. See design, aircraft.                     179, 186, 188, 203. 215
ELDO, (former) European launch-vehicle              -levels, 208
   development organization; see ESA.               -research, 53, 117-118, 134, 185, 194
electric power. See power sources.                  -shortage. See energy conservation.
electrical systems; electricity, 21, 71, 75,        -sources. See power sources.
  94, 111, 127, 168, 170, 190, 194, 202,            -storage, 80, 120, 179
  213, 227, 234                                     -technology, 22, 71, 80, 145
electrocardiograms; electrocardiograph              -transfer (transmission) (See also
  (EKG), 74, 214                                      power sources, conversion.), 61, 98,
electrochemicals, 63                                  136, 141, 146, 165
electroencephalograph,214                         Energy Agreement of 1974, US.-USSR,
electrolytes, 192                                   111
electromagnetism,23, 63, 72, 102, 106             Energy Research and Development Ad-
electronics, 26, 50, 71, 74, 112, 153, 155,         ministration (ERDA), U.S., 5, 29,
  158, 177, 194, 202, 214                           36, 53, 70, 94, 109, 110, 111, 121,   129,
Electronics Research Center, Mass., 175             140, 162, 172, 176, 177, 179,         186,
Electronics Society, PRC, 182                       199-200
electrons (See also energetic particles.),        Energy, U S Dept of (DOE), 162,
                                                            ..                            185,
   75, 85, 102, 109, 117                            195, 209, 219, 220, 228
electrostatics. See insulation.                   engineering, 7 . 71, 80, 124, 136,      143,
                                                                 0
elevators; elevons, 128, 164                        151, 182, 196, 199, 213, 219,         230,
Elliot, Dr. James L., 48, 59-60, 69-70              231, 235
elliptical orbit. See orbit, planetary; orbit,    engines. See power sources.
   spacecraft.
                                                  England. See United Kingdom.
El Toro, Calif., 155
                                                  Engle, Joe, 122, 135, 170, 171, 191
embargo, 141-142
                                                  English, 103
embolism. See medical research.
                                                  Enterprise, 17, 23-24, 27, 107, 113, 118,
emergencies, 36, 50, 74, 138, 155, 160,
                                                    122, 135, 141, 150, 151, 168, 170,
  208, 214, 216, 217, 227
                                                    171, 178, 190-191, 196, 202, 211, 230
emissions. See radiation.
                                                  entry (atmosphere). See reentry.
employment (See alsb Civil Service Com-
                                                  environment, 8,21-22,32,63,64,68,71,
  mission, U.S.; NASA management.),
                                                    73, 93, 123, 132, 137, 147, 159, 167,
  35, 41-42, 61, 75, 104, 107, 109, 113,
                                                    168, 174, 181, 187, 194, 218, 222, 225
  118, 125, 161, 169, 175, 214-215
                                                  environmental monitoring, 5, 55, 62, 63,
Empresa Publica de Telecomunicacoes
                                                    110, 148, 194, 229
  (EPTEL), 179
                                                  Environmental Protection Agency
Encke, comet, 207
                                                     (EPA), U.S., 63, 192
encounter. See impact; trajectories.
                                                  epitaxial growth, 30
endangered species, 57
endurance. See duration; lifetimes.               q u a i opportunity, 2, 21, 192
290
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                             INDEX


                                            experiments,
equator, 18, 67, 113, 136, 138, 153, 156,
                                              -biology, 4, 65, 101
  210
                                              -communications, 5, 138, 208
equipment (See also instrumentation.),
                                              -materials research, 59, 130
   54, 58, 59, 63, 80, 84, 106, 112, 113,
   149, 163, 208. 212, 214,223,224, 231       -scientific, 65,67, 75, 156, 157, 159,
                                                 210
equivalency principle, 51
Erickson, Dr. Edwin, 107                      -systems, 72, 75, 84, 133. 149, 150,
                                                 159, 165, 175, 224, 225
ERN0 (RaumfahrttechnikGmbH. VFW-
                                            exploitation, 130, 145-146
  Fokker subsidiary), 48
                                            exploration (planetary; terrestrial), 6, 49,
error, 127, 155, 190
                                              52, 70, 106, 149, 156, 158, 161, 162,
Esperanto, 103
                                              169, 198-199,207,221-222
ESRO, (former) European Space Re-
  search Organization. See ESA.             Explorer 1, 115
estimates, 1%                               Explorer 42. See Uhuru.
Etam, W.Va., 10                             Explorer 54, 55. See Atmosphere Ex-
Ets N (Japan engineering test satellite.      plorer (AE) missions.
  Kiku 2). 41
                                            Explorers Club, 70
Europa. 166
                                            explosives, 36
Europe, 19, 107, 157, 188, 210, 228, 234
                                            external tank. See Space Shuttle.
European Broadcasting Union (EBU), 10
                                            extraterrestrial, 9-10
European Space Agency (ESA), 16, 25,
                                            extravehicular activity (EVA), 18. 51
  32, 53, 56, 65, 67-68, 72, 73, 74-75,
                                            extravehicular mobility unit (EMU), 45
  85, 112, 122, 153, 154, 163, 166, 168,
                                            Exxon Corp., 73
  170, 171, 174-175. 180, 182, 183,
                                            eyesight. See vision.
  189, 193, 199, 202, 210, 213. 225,
  229, 230
                                            F-8, 55
European Space Operations Center
                                            fabrication (See also construction.), 25,
  (ESOC). 75
                                              42, 45, 47, 49, 56, 59, 128, 136, 158,
European Space Technology Center
                                              163, 177, 211, 216, 220
  (ESTEC), 189
                                            facilities, 61, 65. 113, 132, 161-162, 163,
Eurovision, 168
                                               169. 173, 177, 194, 211, 228-229. 231
EVA. See extravehicular activity (space-
                                            facilities support. See support services.
  walk).
                                            failures (See also malfunctions.). 58, 70,
evaluation, 138, 197
                                              80, 102, 118, 136, 151, 160, 165-166,
Evans, Ronald E., 51
                                              168, 171, 180. 189-190, 202, 203, 205.
Evans, D .Stanley, L.,152
         r
                                              209, 223, 224, 227, 234
Evans, Gen. William J.. 203
                                            Fairbank, Dr. William, 75
Everette, Bob, 231
                                            Fairchild Industries, 105, 116
Everglades Towing Co., 231
                                            fares. see fees.
evolution, 201
                                            farming. See crops.
exercises. See practice.
                                            Fastie, Prof. William G.,121
exhaust, 186, 192-193
                                            fatality. See death.
exhibits, 24-25. 61, 69,71, 132, 148, 172
                                            fear, 40
exobiology. See biology.
                                            feasibility, 64,81, 213, 216
expansion (See also theory.), 199, 209,
                                            Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
  233
                                              43,62,72, 112, 122, 128,130, 163, 173,
expendable, 65, 104, 105, 229,
                                              174-175, 192, 193, 212, 220, 222
expense, 105, 145, 162-163, 168, 170. 173
experiment specialists. See mission spe-    Federal Aviation Agency. See Federal
  cialists.                                   Aviation Administration.
Experimental Aircraft Association, 130      Federal Communications Commission
Experimental Test Pilots, Society of. See     (FCC), 139, 169-170,206. 213. 217
  Society.                                  federal employees. See employment.


                                                                                    29 1
INDEX                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


federal funding. See funding, govern-      flightworthiness. See handling.
                                           flooding, 1, 33, 110, 119, 138
  ment.
                                           Florida, 75, 105, 128, 196, 202
Federal Republic of Germany (West
  Germany), 1, 4, 33, 48, 70, 74-75, 84,   Florida State University, 131, 148
  154, 162, 166, 187-188                   Florida, University of, 146
Federation Aeronautique Internationale     flotation, 231
   (FAI). See Intl. Aeronautical Federa-   FltSatCom, 1, 124, 202, 229
                                           fluorocarbons. See atmosphere pollution.
   tion.
                                           fluoroscopy. See x-rays.
fees, 65, 105, 143, 162-163
Fein, Juergen, 84                          flutter. See aerodynamics.
Felixstowe (WWI U.K. flying boat), 141     flux, 166
females. See women.                        flyby, 119,226-227
Feoktistov, Dr. Konstantin, 224            fly-by-wire controls. See control systems.
                                           flying laboratory. See Galileo 11.
ferry test flights. See Space Shuttle,
                                           flying quality. See handling.
   testing.
Feuerbacher, Dr. Bernt, 67                 “flying wind tunnel”, 134
                                           FM. See frequency modulation.
fiberglass, 130
Field Museum, Chicago, 39                  fog, 158
fighter planes. See aircraft, military.    Fokker F-7, 182
                                           food, 1, 123-124, 224
films, 61, 64, 87, 149, 172
                                           Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
financing. See funding.
Finch, Dr. William A., 14                     169
                                            force (See also pressure.), 153, 189
Fink, Daniel, 174
                                            Ford, President Gerald M., 1, 23, 35, 59,
Finland, 1
FIRES (firefighters’ integrated response      72
                                            Ford, Sen. Wendell H. (D-Ky), 111
   equipment system), 59
                                            Ford Aerospace Co., 7, 15, 207-208, 226
Fischer, Craig L., M.D., 230
fish, 165                                   Ford Motor Co., 199-200
                                            forecasting. See future plans; meteorol-
Fish and Wildlife Service, 57
                                              ogy; predictions.
fission. See power sources, nuclear.
Five Towns, 66                              foreign, 62, 213
                                            forests, 193, 196
fixed-wing aircraft, 134
                                            Fort Belvoir, Va., 216
flare. See maneuvering.
                                            Fort Eustis, Va., 231
fleet satellite-communications system.
                                            Fort Hood, Tex., 70
   See FltSatCom.
                                            Fort Monroe, Va., 8, 188
Fleet Weather Facility, USN, 66
Flemish, 103                                Fort Worth, Tex., 199
Flemming, Arthur S., award, 93              Foxbat. See MiG-25.
                                            France, 1, 13, 32, 53, 66, 103, 107, 117,
Flerov. Georgy, 230
                                              119, 154, 159, 172, 174, 184, 185, 198
Fletcher, Dr. James C., 44, 49, 52, 93,
                                            Freden, Dr. Stanley C ,14
                                                                  .
  105, 116
                                            free flight. See aircraft, use in research;
flight, 182
   -control. See control.                      Space Shuttle testing.
   -dynamics laboratory. See Air Force,     freedom of inquiry, 40
      us.                                   freight. See air freight; cargo; shipping.
   -operations, 8                           French Guiana, 127
                                            frequencies, broadcast, 129-130, 139,
   -path, 96
                                              153, 157, 159, 168, 207, 208
   -quality. See handling.
   -test                                    frequency modulation (FM), 133
                                            Fri, Robert, 70
     aircraft. See aircraft testing.
     instruments, 96                        friction, 151
                                            Friedman, Dr. Herbert, 149, 174, 212
     missiles, 8
                                            Friendship 7, 27
Flight Medicine Center, JSC, 222

292
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                               INDEX


Frosch. Dr. Robert A., 93, 106, 114,          Gehrz, Robert, 109
   131-132, 146, 175, 177, 178, 186, 187,     Gelles, Dr. S.H.; Gelles Associates, 192
                                              Gemini program, 101, 191
   189, 212, 217, 228, 232
fruit flies, 167                              General Accounting Office (GAO), 104-
Fucino, Italy, 157                              105, 109
fuel (See also power sources.), 14,25, 36,    General Assembly, UN. See United Na-
                                                tions.
  58, 60, 61, 65, 110, 113, 128, 133, 146,
   159, 160, 176, 199-200, 213, 231           General Aviation Design & Analysis, 28
  -conservation. See energy conserva-         general-aviation turbine engine (GATE),
    tion.                                       134
  -shortage. See energy conservation.         General Dynamics Corp., 8, 75, 199, 205,
  -storage, 106                                 235
Fullerton, Lt.Col. Charles Gordon, 63,        General Electric Co., 68, 106, 124, 130,
                                                154, 174, 175
   118, 135, 150, 151, 178, 193, 1%
Fulton, Fitzhugh L., Jr., 36, 150, 171,       generators. See power sources.
                                              genetics, 40, 68, 118, 201
   191, 202, 235
funding, government, 58-59, 64, 65, 67,       Genoa, Italy, 188
  68, 72, 108-109, 111, 117, 124-125,         geochemistry. See chemistry.
                                              geodesy, 82, 229
   134, 141, 156, 174, 180-181, 188, 194,
  199, 206-207, 217                           geography, 14, 176
fuselage, 118, 120, 217                       Geological Survey, 80
                                              geological resources. See earth-resources
fusion. See power sources, nuclear.
                                                monitoring.
future plans, 40-41,50,58,60,64-65,72,
                                              geology, 14, 39, 82
  89-90, 115, 167, 188, 189, 197, 198,
                                              geophysics, 31, 82, 145
  206-207, 229, 233, 235-236
                                              George AFB, Calif., 155
                                              Georgia, 7, 196
g forces. See gravity.
                                              Georgia Institute of Technology. See
Gagarin, Yuri A., 29, 67, 123
                                                Georgia Tech.
Gagarin award (USSR), 11
                                              Georgia Power Co., 70
galactic energy. See power sources.
galaxies, 9, 10, 37, 54, 76, 117, 121, 129,   Georgia Tech (Georgia Institute of Tech-
                                                nology), 7, 57, 130, 146
  136, 149, 153, 176, 210, 228, 233
                                              Geos I, 73, 74-75, 242, 245, 261, 262
Galaxy. See C-5.
                                              GEOS-B, 229
Galileo I, 235
                                              geostationary meteorological satellite.
Galileo 11, 25, 72, 84
Galileo scholarships, 235                       See GMS.
gallium compounds, 145                        geostationary operational environmental
gamma radiation, 48, 117, 149-150, 178,         satellite(GOES),33, 111, 112-113.134,
  188, 212                                      148, 157, 171, 176, 210, 229
                                              geostationary satellites, 4, 10, 33, 168
Garmire, Dr. Gordon, 212
                                              geosynchronous satellites, 73, 74-75
Gartrell. Harold E., 232
Garrett AiResearch, 134                       geothermal sources. See power sources.
gas; gasoline. See fuel.                      German, 103
gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer,          German Democratic Republic (East Ger-
                                                many), 20, 159-160, 174, 196
  55
                                              Germany, World War I, 115
gas-exchange experiment, 70-7 1
                                              Germany, Federal Republic of; West Ger-
gaseous bodies, 34, 39
gases, 15, 54,65, 107, 129, 140, 146, 204,      many. See Federal Republic of Ger-
                                                many.
  228
                                              getaway specials (GAS), Shuttle payloads,
gasoline. See fuels.
GASP (global air-sampling program), 204         4, 162
                                              Giacconi, Prof. R., 228
Gates Learjet. See Learjet.
                                              Gibson, Dr. Edward G., 48, 121
geese, 11-12

                                                                                     293
INDEX                                    ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


Gibson. Roy, 170, 189                           -stations (Seealso individual locations
Gillam, Isacc T. IV, 144-145, 191                 and systems.), 1, 10, 55, 56. 154,
Ginter, R.D., 11                                   157, 174, 207, 210
glass, 62, 175, 192, 232-233                    -testing, 80,103, 178. 202
Glazkov. Lt.Col. Yuri, 26, 27, 189              -transporter. See vehicles.
Glenn, Sen. John H. (D-Ohio), 27-28           growth, 192
glider, 151                                   Grumman Aerospace Corp., 47. 59, 71,
global air-sampling program. See GASP.          106
global atmospheric research project. See      GTE Automatic Electric Co., 221
   CARP.                                      Gubarev, Aleksey, 23
global communications (See also radio;        guest observer, 150
   television.), 10, 135, 207                 guidance (See also control systems.), 22,
global positioning. See navigation.             30, 107-108, 118, 122-123, 178
                                              Guidry, Louis E. Jr. (Skip), 36, 202
global TV transmission. See television.
Gms I, 111, 131, 140, 248. 261, 262           Gulf of Mexico, 33, 36, 176, 194
Goddard award, 20                             GUMPS (Goddard-University of Mary-
Goddard Space Flight Center                     land particle study), 215
    -contracts, 42, 148                       gunpowder, 165
    -missions, 56                             Gurevich, M.I., 29
    -people, 14, 55, 79, 166, 169, 210,       Gurovsky, Dr. Nikolai, 206
      216                                     Guzhenko, Timofey B, 158
                                                                    .
  -programs, 7, 42, 54, 64, 66, 67,           gyroscope, 63, 137, 150, 155
    129, 132-133, 137, 138, 148, 155,         gyrostabilization, 14
    161, 168, 172, 189, 215
Goes I , 67                                   habitat, 107, 137
                                              Hachenberg, Otto, 9
G0m2, 112-113, 245, 261, 262
Gold, Gus, 232                                Hackwell, John. 109
                                              Haise, Fred, 118. 135, 150-151, 178, 193,
Goldstone, Calif., 4, 154, 155
                                                196
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 65
                                              Hale telescope, Mt. Palomar. 233
Gorbatko, Col. Viktor V., 26, 189
                                              Haley, Alex, 18
Gorenstein, Marc, 209
                                              Hall, Asaph, 152
Gossamer Condor, 182
government employees. See Civil Service       Halley, Edmund, 40
                                              Halley’s comet, 50, 106, 119, 170, 207
  Commission, US.; employment.
                                              Halliday, Ian, 38
government funding. See funding.
                                              Halo, highaltitude large optics, 58
government-industry cooperation. See
                                              Hamilton Standard Div., United Tech-
  industry.
                                                nologies, 45, 50
Graphic Films Corp., 64,87
Graves, Curtis M., 3                          Hampton, Va., 8, 18, 188, 233
                                              hamsters, 146
Gravitational Probe A. See gravity probe.
                                              handbooks. See publications.
gravity, 4.68,98, 106, 129, 145, 156, 165,
                                              handicapped, 172
  167, 199,211,222,226
                                              handling, 133, 150, 1%. 199, 214, 215,
Gravity Probe-A, 30, 51
                                                216, 218, 233
Great Britain. See United Kingdom.
Grechko, Georgy, 23,223-225                   hangar, 113
                                              Happe, Ralph A.. 192
Greenberg, Daniel S , 141-142
                    .
Greenland, 40                                 hardware, 44,45,50,61,72,79,141,    168,
Gregorek, Dr. G.M., 28                          173, 177. 187, 202-203, 207, 208, 211,
Griffin. Gerald D., 101, 145                    230-23 1
Groo, E.S. (Todd), 123                        Harlow, John H., 121, 201
ground control. See control systems.          Harmon trophy, 235
  -crews, 205                                 harmonics, 19
  -data; ground truth, 1%                     Harris, Patricia Roberts, 47

294
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                              INDEX


Harris Electronic Systems Div., 1           history, 6,24,35,39-40,61,67, 128, 141,
Hartig, Prof. George, 121                      164
                                            Hitch, Charles J., 40
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astro-
  physics. See Smithsonian.                 hodoscope, 215
Harvard University, 129, 150, 228           Holland. See Netherlands.
harvest. See crops.                         Hollinshead. Charles, 104
hatch, crew, 118                            Holman, Jonathan, 133
Havana, Cuba, 183                           holography. 17
Hawaii, 31, 32, 131                         homing devices, 177
Hawaii, University of, 39                   Honest John (rocket), 36
H a w a i i Institute of Geophysics, 31     Honeywell, Inc., 112
Hawker Siddeley Ltd., 53                    Hong Kong, 131
Hayes, Bethanne, 38                         honors. See awards.
hazard. See danger.                         “Hopkins.” See Johns Hopkins Univer-
health (See also medical research.), 85,      sity.
  193,206,208                               Horton, Victor W., 202
                                                                 36,
Heao I , 63, 72, 137, 149-150, 156. 210,    hospitals (See also medical research.), 5,
  212,249,261,262                              8. 74, 214
HEAO-B, 229                                 hotels, 179
hearings. See Congress.                     House of Representatives, U.S. See Cong-
heart, 5                                       gress.
Hearth, Donald F. 132, 152, 194, 212
                 .                          housing, 148
heat, 12, 62, 70, 71. 93, 109. 150, 156,    Housing and Urban Development
                                               (HUD), U.S. Dept. of, 12, 47
  159, 161. 162. 177, 179, 188, 199,215,
  228, 232, 233                             Houston, Texas, 3. 5
heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM),       Hovis. Dr. Warren, 194
                                            Howard University, 145, 177, 216
  229
                                            Hudson Laboratories, Columbia Univer-
heating and cooling. See energy.
heatshield, 93                                 sity, 93, 114
heavy hydrogen. See deuterium.              Hughes Aircraft Co., 22,42,68,125,148,
helicopters, 61, 134, 169, 172. 173. 205,     153-154, 181
  222                                       Hughes Tool Co., 172
heliogyro. See solar sailer.                human rights, 130, 144
helium, 129, 166. 188                       humane groups, 146
Heller, Jack A., 159                        humans, 103, 143, 146, 165, 178, 185
Hello, Bastian (Buz), 112                   Hungary, 20, 159, 174, 1%
Helt, Capt. Robert C ,181
                      .                     hunter/killer satellite. See interceptor sat-
hemophilia, 133                               ellite.
Henize, Karl, 72, 84                        hunting, 11-12
Hercules, 188                               hurricane. See meteorology; storms.
heroes, 204                                 Hydac. 18. 36
Hessberg, Dr. Rufus, 206                    Hydra, 209
high-altitude atmosphere sounding. See      hydraulic, 153
  atmosphere, upper.                        hydrazine, 113,221
high-energy astronomy observatory           hydrodynamics, 25, 80
  (HEAO), 47, 63, 137, 149-150, 156,        hydrogen (See also liquid hydrogen.),
  174, 188. 210, 212                          109, 129, 159, 199
high-speed aircraft (See also super-        Hydromet Service, USSR, 127
  sonics.), %                               hydrophones, 31-32
highways, 94, 192                           hydroponics, 123-124
Himawari. See Gms 1.                        hydrostatic tests, 64
Hinners, Dr. Noel W.,30, 137, 181, 206,     hygiene, 202
  210,212,226                               hypersonics. 219

                                                                                     295
INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTlCSAND AERONAUTICS, 1977


                                               injuries. See accidents; safety.
hypotheses. See theoy.
ice, 18, 39, 66, 79, 110, 158, 227             INMARSAT: International Marine Sat-
Iceland, 141, 172                                ellite Organization, 46
Idaho, 47                                      innovation. See discoveries; new prod-
identification, 43, 188, 196, 205, 213           ucts; new techniques.
IL-62, 176                                     lnsat, 4
ILC Industries, Inc., 201                      insecticides, 5
Illinois, 127                                  insects, 5, 61, 68, 218
                                               inspection. See checkout.
Illinois Institute of Technology, 56
Illinois, University of, 201                   installations, 179, 21 1
illness. See medical research.                 Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton
Ilyushin, Sergei V., 29                           University, 10
Ilyushin, Vladimir, 29                         Institute for Defense Analysis, US., 147
image processing. See data processing.         Institute for High Temperatures, USSR,
imaging, 7, 10, 11, 58, 80, 110, 131, 137,        111
    148, 175, 176, 186, 189, 210, 216, 224,    Institute of Noise Control and Engineer-
    225                                           ing, 192
 IMEWS-7. See integrated missile/early-        Institute of Space and Aeronautical
    warning satellite.                            Science, Japan, 23, 38
impact, 22, 76, 178, 205, 218, 226             instrumentation (See also equipment;
 improvements. See new products; new              sensor systems.), 3, 10, 18, 21, 25,
    techniques.                                   33-34,53,56,57-58,63,66,71,73,74,
 inauguration, 10                                 85,93,96, 101, 109, 112, 117, 119, 127,
 IndependentBusiness Telephone Co., 221           132-133, 134, 137, 148, 154-155, 156,
 India, 4, 32, 174, 196                           158, 159, 161, 164, 165, 167, 168, 169,
 Indian Ocean, 4,41,48,59,69, 131, 139,           171, 175, 177, 181, 188, 189, 194, 196,
                                                  198, 208-209, 21 1, 212, 2 14, 215, 216,
    180
 Indian River, Fla., 57                           219, 220, 222, 234
 indicators. See instrumentation.              insulation, 1JL76, 131, 168, 175
                                               integrated missile/early-warning satellite
 Indonesia, 4, 41, 51, 103
                                                  (IMEWS-7), 239
 industrialization (See also space industri-
                                               integration, 74, 133, 136, 162, 168, 189,
    alization.), 57, 65, 71, 111, 180, 208
                                                  198, 202, 207, 211, 232, 233
 industry-government cooperation, 25,37,
                                               intelligence, military. See spy systems.
    45, 57, 59, 65, 71, 119, 132, 145-146,
                                               Intelsat program, 10, 97-98, 173, 180,
     163, 174, 177, 178, 196, 199-200, 205,
                                                  202, 205, 209, 229
    213, 219, 220
                                               Zntelsat IVA F4, 97-98, 244, 261, 262
 inert flights, Shuttle orbiter. See Shuttle
                                               intensity, 149, 215, 216
    testing.
                                               interagency affairs, 53
 inertia. See moment of inertia.
                                               Inter-American Telecommunications
 inertia1 guidance. See control systems.
                                                  Conference, 222
 inertial navigation. See navigation.
                                               interceptor satellites (See also weapons
 inflation. See pressure.
                                                  systems.), 6-7,22, 52, 54, 59, 102, 177
     -economic, 22, 121, 163
                                               intercontinental weapon. See weapons
 information (See also data; media.), 74,
                                                  systems.
     130, 193
                                               Intercosmos, 174, 196, 206
 infrared, 9, 22, 51, 54, 58, 72, 84, 109-
                                               Intercosmos 16, 66
     110, 131, 161, 169, 189
                                               Intercosmos 17, 254
     -scanning, 12, 148, 161
                                               interference,4, 19,36, 113, 131, 132, 134,
     -sources, 44
                                                   155, 157, 159, 168, 207, 218, 233
     -spectra, 10, 107, 210
                                               interferometer, 155, 166
     -systems, 22, 71, 155
                                               IntergovernmentalMaritime Consultative
  inhibition. See prevention.
                                                  Organization, UN, 46
  injection, 187

296
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                                INDEX


IntergovernmentalPersonnel Act, 162          ionization, 85
Interior, U.S. Dept of (DOI), 47, 111,178    ionosphere. See atmosphere.
International Association against Painful    ions, 146, 230
  Experiments on Animals, 146                Iowa, State University of, 111
international aviation. See international    Iran, 103
  relations; International Civil Aviation    iron, 215
  Organization.                              irrigation, 48, 219
                                             Irwin, James B., 5
International Business Machines (IBM),
  72, 145, 185, 186                          Isee 1, 2 195, 255, 261, 263
                                                      ,
International Civil Aviation Organiza-       ISEE-C, 229
  tion, 212                                  isolation, 60, 72, 123
international cooperation, 24-25, 44-45,     isotopes. See chemicals.
                                             Israel Aircraft Industries, Inc., 71
  46, 57, 65, 67, 81-82, 87, 115-117,
                                             Italy, 65, 111, 119, 139, 142, 154,
  129-130, 139, 141-142, 159, 183, 208
  -inter-European, 1-2, 56, 65, 85                 156-157, 195
  -USSR and others, 4, 20, 28, 31-32,        ITT World Communications, Inc., 140
    56, 59, 111, 117, 121-122, 127, 137-     Itten, Dr. K.I., 55
     138, 143-144, 159-160, 164, 167,
                                             Jackson, Dr. William D., 111, 121
     173-174, 184, 206
                                             Jaffe, Leonard B., 174
  -U.S./Europe, 9, 32, 53-54, 79, 85,
    136, 170, 174-175, 186, 187-188,         Jamesburg, Calif., 10
    189, 193, 196, 198-199                   jamming, 13, 155, 160
International Council of Scientific          Japan, 13, 23, 26, 29, 32, 38, 39, 40, 41,
   Unions, 131                                 45, 46, 58, 105, 106, 111, 131, 140,
International Magnetospheric Project, 73        141, 154, 202, 210, 226, 229
international relations, 62, 177             Jeffs, George W., 180
international sun-earth explorer (ISEE),     Jelm Mt., Wyoming, 109
  112, 193, 195                              jet
International Telecommunications Sat-              -aircraft, 2, 8, 67, 73, 150, 151, 196,
  ellite Organization (INTELSAT), 2,                 208, 218
  65-66, 106, 110, 135, 154, 179, 181, 198      -engines, 13, 73, 192
                                             Jet Propulsion Laboratory
International Telecommunications Union
  (ITU), 207                                    -contractors, 43, 136, 219, 220
international ultraviolet explorer (IUE),       -missions, 62, 108, 125, 154, 155, 159,
  229                                                199
interplanetary, 68, 102-103, 119, 123,             -people, 72, 84, 106, 137, 142, 175,
  170, 176                                         176, 190, 221, 230, 232
                                                -programs, 44, 48-49, 55, 68, 101,
interpreters, 164
interservice cooperation, 7-8                      154, 155-156, 159, 166, 167, 170,
Intersputnik, 173-174                              181, 186, 188, 221-222
interstate. See highways.                    jettison, 119, 156, 160, 167
interstellar space, 143                      JFK. See Kennedy International Airport.
intertank. See Space Shuttle external        Joersz, Capt. Eldon W., 181
                                             Johannesburg, South Africa, 69
  tank.
inventions. (See also new products; new      Johns Hopkins University, 37, 121, 197
                                             Johnson, Katherine G., 35
  techniques; patents.), 35, 63, 152
inventory. See resource management.          Johnson Space Center
investigations, 38, 142, 170, 209              -contractors, 24, 44,45, 70, 118, 147,
Investigators Working Group, 67, 183                201, 207, 234
investment, in space program. See fund-        -people, 48, 56, 84, 101, 104, 109,
  ing, government.                               121, 143, 153, 169, 175, 215-216
Io, 102, 166                                   -programs, 7, 16, 21, 28, 41-42, 50,
ion-propulsion devices, 43, 119, 170             53, 54, 61, 71, 74, 85, 109, 118, 132,


                                                                                      297
INDEX                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


      140, 143, 144, 145-146, 148, 1 6
                                     5.           Klett, Reiner, 4
      1 7 165, 1 8 172-173, 179, 185,
       5,        6,                               Klimuk, Pyotr, 2 3
      188, 191, 194, 196, 201, 202, 205-          Kline, Raymond A., 123,209
      206,214,215-216,218,222,228,232             Koran, 1 3
                                                           0
Johnston, Bradford, 146                           Korean War, 235
Johnstown, Pa., 138                               Korolev medal (USSR), 11
Joiner, Dr. Bennett, 106                          Kourou, Fr. Guiana, 127, 198
joint American-Soviet particle-intercali-         Kovalenok, Vladimir, 189,223
   bration (JASPIC) program, 85                   Kowal. Charles, 203-204
Jones, Robert T , 152
                 .                                Kraft, Dr. Christopher C., 56, 1 9 144,
                                                                                  0,
journals, scientific. See publications.             228
Joyce, Dr. Richard, 39                            Kramer, Dr. James J., 194
judicial proceedings, 1 2                         Kramp, Klaus, 84
Juno 1, 115                                       Krasnoyarsk Institute of Physics, USSR,
Jupiter, 3, 33, 39, 49, 68, 76, 1 2 103,
                                   0.               13
                                                     2
   106, 108, 115, 135-136. 137, 140, 145,         Kremer prize. 182
   159, 165, 166, 167, 1 9 186, 187-188,
                         6,                       Krider, Dr. Phillip, 21
   204,227                                        Kuhn, Dr. Peter M., 1 1 6
                                                  Kuiper airborne observatory (NASA), 48,
Kaman Aerospace Corp., 34                           59,6 . 107
                                                         9
Kapustin Yar, USSR, 66                            Kunkel, Bruce A., 18
Kazakhstan, USSR, 27, 190                         Kurchatov Institute, USSR, 1 9
                                                                               0
Kelly, AI, 56
Kelly, Roy, 156                                  L-5Society, 1 2
Kennedy, President John F., 115                  L-1011,177
Kennedy (, John F.) International Air-           L-band communications, 1 9 3
 port, NYC, 66, 212                              Labor, U.S. Dept. of, 194
Kennedy Space Center                             labor relations, 164
  -contractors, 21-22, 35, 57, 68-69,            laboratory, 72,235
     102, 118, 128, 1 9 185-186,221
                     3,                          Lakeland, Fla., 76
  -missions, 33-34,47                            laminar flow. See aerodynamics.
  -people, 101, 104, 130, 145, 169,229           Lampton, Dr. Michael, 230
  -programs, 2 15, 1 , 21-22, 2 , 28-
                 ,     6         4               Lancaster, Calif., 17
    29, 54, 61,62,68,75, 113, 127, 168,          Lance, Bert, 64
     202,215, 218, 234-235                       land lines, 138
  -Spaceport,21,75,113,132, 133,179,
                                                 land use, 7 48,63
                                                            ,
      205,207,209,211,228-229,231,234
                                                 lander, Viking. See Viking.
Kentucky State University, 68
                                                 landing, 69, 113, 122-123, 150-152, 165,
Kerguelen Island, 69
                                                    196-197,212, 213-214,221, 222, 229,
Kerwin, Joseph P.,M.D., 48
                                                   234
Kettering Group, 158
                                                 landing rights. 53
Key West, Fla., 1 3  8
                                                 Landsat program, 7, 14, 25, 42, 47, 48,
Kezios, Dr. Stothe P., 24
                                                   5 . 54, 5 , 63, 80, 108, 110, 1 1 135,
                                                     2       5                    1,
Khabarov Krai, USSR, 178
                                                    175, 1 3 196,229
                                                          9,
Kiku 2,41,237, 240
                                                 Landsat 1. 1 1
                                                              4
Killeen, Tex., 70
                                                 Langley AFB. Va., 8, 188,233
killer satellites. See interceptor satellites.
Kincheloe, Iven P., 235                          Langley aeronautical laboratory, NACA,
Kingsbury, James E , 50.                            16,219
Kitt Peak National Observatory, 38-39,           Langley Research Center
   51.66                                            -contractors, 8 28, 3 , 35, 79, 110,
                                                                    ,     0
Klate Holt Co., 212                                   128, 145, 158, 163, 177-178, 192,
Kleinknecht, Kenneth S, 153
                          .                           212-213,219,233

298
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                                INDEX


  -people, 35, 63, 71, 132, 152, 169,       life. See lifetimes.
     212, 215-216, 227, 233                 life; life detection; life forms; life sciences.
   -programs, 8, 18, 61, 112, 130-131,         See biology.
     132, 138-139, 140-141, 143, 146,       life support, 45,68,85,123,137,223-224
     147, 148, 172, 181, 188, 192, 194,     lifetimes, 80, 119, 120, 139, 143, 150, 159,
     203, 212, 218, 222, 227, 233              165, 186
Langmuir Laboratories, N.M., 235            lift. See aerodynamics.
languages, 143                              lifting bodies, 217-218
lanthanum, 2                                light; lightwaves, 66, 107, 131, 178, 233
Lamerotti, Dr. L.J., 166                    lightning, 21, 127,207, 234
Large Magellanic Cloud, 37                  Lima, Ohio, 12, 13
large orbiting telescope. See space tele-   limb darkening, 69
                                            Lincoln Laboratory, MIT, 219
   Scope.
lasers, 2,9, 17,66, 82, 140-141, 146, 195   Lindbergh, Charles A., 24, 25
latex, 192                                  Lineas Aereos Nicaragua (LANICA), 176
Latin America (See also individual coun-    liquid-fuel rocket (See also liquid hydro-
  tries in Central and South America.),        gen; liquid oxygen.), 106, 151, 153
  10, 176                                   liquid hydrogen (See also hydrogen.), 44,
latitudes, 85                                 153, 160, 231
launch control. See control.                liquid oxygen (See also oxygen.), 25, 44,
   -program, 64-65, 145. 189, 211, 229,        50, 64,153, 160, 205, 231
    234                                     liquid propellant. See liquid-fuel rocket;
   -reimbursable. See reimbursable.            fuel.
   -rockets. See rockets.                   Lisovsky, Dr. G., 123
   -support. See support services.          lixiscope, 216
   -vehicles. See name of individual        loads. 64, 110, 111, 119-120, 153, 205,
     rocket: Ariane, Atlas, Centaur,          214
     Delta, Saturn, Scout, Titan.           location, 67, 79, 176, 205
law enforcement. 189                        Locke, Capt. Walter (USN). 8
Lawless, Dr. James, 190                     Lockheed Corp., 22, 35, 71, 177, 178
Lawrence Laboratory, Calif., 209            Lockheed Electronics Co., 44, 147
Lazarev, Vasily, 23                         Lockheed-Georgia Co., 112
lead (element), 230                         Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., 136,
leak, 180, 213                                220,233
Learjet, 54, 132                            Lockheed SR-71,181
Leary, Timothy. 12                          log book, 152
leasing, 124-125, 139, 175                  London, England, 46, 124, 146, 182
lecture, 189                                Long Island, N.Y,, 66
Ledford, Harold, 11                         Lord, Dr. Arthur, I06
Lee, Chester M. (Chet), 143, 163            Lord Electric Co., 173
Lee, Thomas J., 170                         Lorre. Jean, 142
Lehigh University, 192                      Los Angeles, Calif., 148, 218
Lei Hung, 182                               Louisiana, 1%
levitation, electromagnetic, 30. 106        Louisville, Kentucky, 38
Levy, Lillian, 192                          Lovelace, Dr. Alan M., 89, 123, 169, 183
Lewis Research Center                       Lowman, Dr. Paul D., 14
                                            Lubarsky. Dr. Bernard, 147
   -contractors, 34, 129, 134, 199, 221
                                            Lucas, Dr. William R., 11, 170,201,214,
   -peopie, 133, 134, 147, 159, 169, 194,
    220                                       215
                                            lumber. See forests.
  -programs, 12,47, 53,61,67,73,94,
                                            Luna 24,28
    134435,159, 180,204,208,231-232
                                            lunar curatorial facility, JSC, 24, 53
Libra, 69
                                              -exploitation. 145-146
Lichtenberg, Byron, 230

                                                                                       299
INDEX                                  ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


                                              -Shuttle (See also Shuttle crews.), 17,
  -module. See moon landing.
Lunar Odyssey, 71                               68, 107, 118, 160, 208, 222, 234
lunar-polar orbiter mission, 207              -Soviet, 10, 67, 158, 187
  -research, 145-146, 156                     -U.S., 27-28, 45, 54, 121, 128
                                            manpower. See employment.
   -rover, 178
                                            manuals. See publications.
   -samples, 53
                                            manufacturers; manufacturing. See aero-
Lunar Science Institute, 28, 57
                                             space industry; fabrication; space in-
Lundin, Dr. Bruce T., 147
Lunokhod, 117                                dustrialization.
Lynn, Donald, 142                           mapper, thematic, 42
                                            mapping, 10, 14,44, 80,82,98, 109, 138,
M-l00B, 137                                   165
                                            Marine Corps, US., 121, 140, 148, 155,
MacCready, Dr. Paul, 182
McCulloch, James C., 52                      173, 179, 194, 201, 205
McDonald, Dr. Frank B., 210, 212            Mariner missions, 33-34, 76, 161
McDonald observatory, N.M., 104             Marion Power Shovel Co., 24
                                            Marisat system, 72, 124, 139
McDonnell Douglas Corp., 11, 68, 79,
                                            maritime (See also individual satellites
  106, 173, 205
McDonnell Douglas Technical Services,        and systems.), 1-2,46, 72, 81,207,229
 Inc., 37, 52                               Mark, Dr. Hans, 147
McGinnis, David F., 110                     Mark, Sir Robert, 189
McLucas, Dr. John L., 72                    Markey, Stanley, 175
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, 39               Marots, 16
                                            Mars, 3, 6, 15, 25, 28, 31, 39,48, 50, 52,
McMurtry, Thomas C., 36, 150, 171,
  191,202                                     62, 76, 101, 106, 124, 132, 140, 152,
                                              155, 161, 165, 181, 206-207, 221-222
McTigue, John G., 175
Mach numbers, 132                             -rover, 50, 52, 106,-207
Madras, India, 69                           Marshall Space Flight Center
magazines. See media.                        -contractors, 5, 7, 11, 18, 25, 35, 45,
                                                51, 54, 56, 59, 64, 74, 75, 76, 79, 80,
magnet; magnetic instruments; mag-
                                                113, 130, 137, 175, 181, 186, 188,211
 netometer, 111, 121, 158, 195
                                             -missions, 18, 56, 132-133
magnetic fields, 40, 73, 98, 134, 153,
                                             -people, 11, 19, 50, 67, 84, 115-117,
  165, 169, 215, 222
                                                128, 149, 152, 157, 169, 174, 179,
magnetodynamics, 54
magnetohydrodynamics, 111, 121                  201, 209, 211, 215, 227, 229-230
magnetosphere. See atmosphere.                -programs, 6, 15-16, 18, 24, 30, 44,
                                                50, 51, 59, 64,67, 69, 71, 80, 95, 98,
magnification, 105, 106
                                                101, 105, 119, 127, 152, 153, 154,
Mahon, Rep. George (D-Tex), 125
                                                157, 160, 168, 170, 174, 178, 179,
Maine, 181
maintenance, 2, 13, 18, 26, 45, 66, 74,         183, 198, 201, 202-203, 205, 208,
                                                211, 228, 230, 231
 134-135, 202, 207, 210, 227
                                            marsquake, 6
Makarov, Oleg, 23
                                            Martin, James S. Jr., 20
Malerba, Franco, 230
                                            Martin, Dr. John J., 132
malfunction (See also failure.), 54, 55,
                                            Martin Marietta (Aerospace) Corp., 25,
 58.62, 63, 70-71, 72, 73, 75, 103, 118,
                                             53, 64, 80, 101, 160, 170, 181, 198,
  122, 150, 155-156, 160, 168, 171, 213
                                             211, 231, 235
management, 65, 66, 123, 178
                                            Maryland Center for Public Broadcast-
manatees, 57
                                             ing, 13
maneuvering; maneuvers, 71, 151, 177,
                                            Maryland, University of, 12, 63, 215
  198, 199, 210, 211
                                            masers, 51
manned flight
                                            mass spectrometers, 152, 166
  -international, 206



300
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                               INDEX


Massachusetts Institute of Technology          meteorology, 18, 19, 25, 39-40, 56, 58,
  (MIT), 4, 31, 71, 106, 133, 147, 182,          62, 64, 66,67, 101, 119, 127, 134, 164,
  212, 219, 230                                  165, 167, 171, 174, 176, 198, 199, 210,
materials, 57, 59, 65, 76, 79, 95, 108, 124,     212, 222, 234
  129, 130, 131, 145, 218, 219, 227, 233       Meteosat @SA project), 16, 112, 202,
   -applications, 11, 45, 59, 69                 210, 213, 256, 261, 263
                                               metesats (See also individual satellites.),
Materials Experiment Assembly, 192
                                                 40, 112, 161, 229
  -processing, 4,30,32,59,62,71, 105-
     106, 137, 141, 192, 194                   methane, 51, 190, 201
                                               Mexico, 40
mathematics (See also data processing.),
  143, 227, 235                                MF-12 (USSR rocket), 85
mating, 80, 113                                Miami, Fla., 171, 176
                                               Michigan, 18
matter (See also theory.), 54,75,209,215,
                                               Michoud Assembly Facility (NASA), 11,
  227
Matthoefer, Hans, 187                            25-26, 44, 51, 64, 121, 170
Maui, Hawaii, 31-32                            micrometeorites. See meteorites.
Max Planck Institute of Astronomy, 9           microphones, 31-32
                                               microwaves. See power sources.
M.B. Associates, 220
measurements, 4, 69, 80, 82, 85, 98, 127,      microwave landing system. See micro-
                                                 wave scanning-beam landing system.
  137, 154, 187, 192, 194, 195, 208-209
                                               microwave radiation, 208
mechanics, science of; mechanisms, 131,
  194                                          microwave scanning-beam landing
Medal of Freedom. See awards.                    system, 113, 122, 178, 191, 222, 229
medals. See awards.                            Middle East (See also Arab nations; in-
media (See also publications;'television.),      dividual nations in that area.), 10, 154,
                                                 210
  10, 12,49,53,64,74,87,143, 157, 158,
  164, 212                                     Middleton, Bob, 179
medical research, 23, 25, 32, 57, 74, 84,      Midgette, Woodrow W., Jr., 194
  85, 146, 157, 169, 174, 187, 193, 194,       MiG-25 (Foxbat; USSR aircraft), 13, 26
  206, 214, 216, 222                           Mikoyan, A.A., 29
medicine. See medical research; pharma-        Milan (Italy) Polytechnic Institute, 157
                                               Milford, Rep. Dale (D-Tex), 60
  ceuticals.
Mediterranean Sea, 14                          military, 154-155, 213
meetings, 2, 8, 28, 39-40, 41, 52, 57, 60,     Military Command and Control System,
  63, 67, 71, 75, 89, 137, 142, 145-146,         US., 38
  147, 152, 154, 157, 174, 189, 192, 203,        -flight operations, 18, 154-155
 206, 212, 220, 227, 228, 234                    -personnel, 22
Megill, Dr. L.R., 4                              -use of space, 54, 122, 155
                                               Milky Way, 54, 209, 215
Meharry Medical College, 152
                                               Millis, Dr. Robert, 48
Mellors, Col. W.J., 154
memorials. See observances.                    minerals, 134, 165
                                               Mini Sniffer, 221
Menzies, Dr. Robert T., 72, 84, 230
Merbold, Ulf, 230                              miniaturization, 70, 169
                                               mining, 57, 178, 199
mercury, 170
                                               ministars. See stars.
Mercury, 28, 161
                                               minority business, 11
Mercury program, 27, 187, 216
                                               minority employment; recruitment (See
Mercury (support services firm), 233
                                                 also women.), 2, 21, 41-42, 133
metals, 108, 128, 190
                                               Miosi, Antoine, 117
Meteor 1-28 (USSR metesat), 247
                                               Mirage (French jet fighter aircraft), 107
Meteor 2-02, 238
Meteor 2-03, 258                               mirrors, 66, 109, 233
                                               miscibility, 192
Meteor 2-07, 241
meteorite; meteoroid, 38, 39, 76, 128,         missiles. See weapons systems.
                                               mission control. See control.
  132, 165, 224, 225
                                                                                     301
INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


                                              mothballing. See deactivation.
mission specialists; payload specialists
  (See also individual astronaut.), 21, 67,   motion pictures. See films.
  72, 84, 132, 140, 157, 167, 179, 183,       motion sickness. See medical research.
  191, 194, 201, 205-206                      motor cars; motorcycles. See vehicles.
mission support. See support services.        Motorola, Inc., 219, 220
Mississippi, 1%                               motors. See power sources, engines.
Mississippi River, 33, 44                     Mt. Palomar Observatory, 10, 66, 204,
Missouri, 127                                  233
Mitchell, Capt. Edgar D., 195                 mountains, 80-81
Mitchell, James P., 194                       movies. See films.
Mitchell, Royce, 211                          MSTJ (Tansei, Japan experimental satel-
Miteq Inc., 106                                lite), 38
Mitre Corp., 72                               MU3C (Japan rocket launcher), 38
Mitsubishi Electric Co., 226                  MU3H, 23, 38
mobile equipment, 72, 84, 139, 167, 185-      Muller, Dr. Richard, 209
  186, 207, 224. 231                          multiplexers (MUX), 221
mockup. See simulation.                       muon, 31-32
models, 55, 59, 132, 136, 138, 163, 188,      Murphy, John, 130
   194, 217-218                               music, 143
modifications, 55, 64, 71, 72, 95, 113,       Mustang (U.S. fighter plane), 16
118,                                          Myers, Dale P., 195
  121, 150, 168, 173, 197, 199, 207-208,      Myrtle Beach AFB, S.C., 105
  216, 229, 231                                                          \
                                                                         '
                                              N rocket (Japan launch vehiole), 29, 40,
Mojave Desert, 148-149, 150, 155, 159
                                               41, 106
molecules, 9, 146, 190
                                              Nantucket Sound, 79
Molniya 1-36, 241
                                              NASA 905 (aircraft). See Boeing 747.
Molniya 1-3 7. 246
                                              Nashville, Tenn., 177
Molniya 1-38, 252
                                              National Academy of Engineering, US.,
Molniya 2-1 7, 239
                                                124
Molniya 3-7, 242
                                              National Academy of Sciences, U.S., 144,
Molniya 3-8, 256
                                               207
moment of inertia, 75
                                              National Advisory Committee for Aero-
money. See budget; funding.
                                               nautics (NACA), 16. 147
Mongolia, 20, 174
                                              National Aeronautic Association (NAA),
monitoring, 57,63, 80, 85, 156, 160. 161,
   186, 202, 214                                19, 76, 162, 172. 181, 182, 213
   -space-based, 1-2, 11-12, 18, 25, 33,      National Aeronautics and Space Adniini-
     47, 55, 58, 84, 102, 112-113, 129-        stration (NASA)
      130, 134, 165-166                         -advisory committees/council, 56, 128
                                                -budget, 18,23,48,50,64-65,61,68,
Montreal, Quebec, 110
Moody, Jewel W.,     11                           72, 104, 108, 114, 135-136, 156, 161,
moon (earth's) (See also lunar research.),        199, 206-207,214-215, 217, 228
  28, 31, 57, 76, 109, 115, 145-146, 174,       -centers, 123, 209
   175                                          -contractors (Headquarters), 1, 18,
   -landings, 28, 115, 117, 132, 165, 181,        42, 55, 68
      191, 220                                  -future plans, 50,64435.67, 106,114-
                                                  115, 116. 117
moonquakes. See seismology.
moons. See planetary satellites.                -Headquarters. See management.
Moore, R. Gilbert, 4                            -management. 3, 51, 56. 61. 65, 104,
                                                  115-117, 121, 123, 161, 169. 197,
Morgens, Howard J.. 65
Moscow, USSR, 111, 121, 167, 173, 206             203, 209, 214-215
                                               -Office of Aeronautics and Space
Moscow, University of, 76
                                                  Technology (OAST), 195
Moss, Frank, 56

302
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                           lNDEX


                                            National Space Institute, 116
  -Office of (Space and Terrestrial)
                                            National Space Technology Laboratories
    Applications (OA), 62, 146, 162,
    168,220                                  (NSTL). NASA, 44,55. 120, 160, 169,
  -Office of Space Flight, 181                170
  -Office of SpaceScience, 32,146,150,      National Transonic Facility, LaRC, 132
    153, 220                                National Weather Service, US.,234
                                            Nato 11 A, 11 B, 7
  -people. 3, 11, 51, 52,56,62,93,   114,
                                            Nato 1 1 A, 7
                                                  1
    115-117, 123, 169, 218, 220
  -research. 5 5 , 6 0                      Nato 111 E, 7, 14, 238, 261, 262
     -Defense, Dept. of, 134, 197           NATO-IIIC. 229
     -Energy, a p t . of/ERDA, 5, 15-       natural disasters. See emergencies.
      16,94,199-u)0,209,219,220,228         natural gas. See gases.
    -ESA. See international coopera-        natural resources, 130
      tion.                                 Naugle, Dr. John E., 220
    -Federal Aviation Administration,       Navajo Tribal Council, 193
        222                                 Naval Observatory, U.S., 152
    -Housing and Urban Development,         Naval Ocean Systems Center, US., 231
      Dept. of, 12                          Naval Research Laboratory, US., 120,
    -Interior, Dept. of, 57                   149, 174
National Air and Space Museum (Smith-       navigation, 35.53,67,122, 124-125, 155,
 sonian), 3, 44, 50, 67, 181                  158, 159, 165, 190, 197.224
National Center for Atmospheric Re-         Navigation Technology Satellite (NTS),
 search, US., 39                              U.S. Navy, 120
National Civil Service League, 3            navsats (See also names of individual
National Consortium for Black Pro-            satellites.), 6, 70, 120, 158, 159, 197,
 fessional Development, 133                   221
National Environmental Satellite Service    Navstar. 22, 54, 122
 (NESS),Doc, 110                            Navy, U.S., 6, 65, 66,93, 114, 120, 124,
National Fire Prevention and Control          139, 140, 148, 157, 173, 178, 179, 184,
 Administration, 59                           194, 197, 201, 202, 205, 207, 208, 229,
National Geographic Society, 203              23 1
National Humcane Center, 171                  -contractors, 8. 192
National Institute of Dental Research,      Near East. See Middle East.
 U.S., 216                                  Nebraska, 48,219
National Institutes of Health, U S , 152
                                ..          nebula IC 133, 9
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-        Nelepov, Evgeny, 164
 ministration (NOAA), US., 11,25,55,        Nelson, Howard W.,105
  67,69,80, 110,112. 134, 148,160-161,      nephelometer, 166
  171, 176, 194                             Neptune, 38-39,49, 204
National Parachute Test Range, U S ,
                                ..          Netherlands, 9,43,44, 136, 154, 186,200
  199,211                                   network, 82, 133. 165, 207, 210
National Physical Laboratory, U.K., 227     Neugebauer, Prof. Gerry, 44
national policy, 1, 3, 48, 56, 58-59, 60,   neutral buoyance facility, MSFC, 64,118,
  106-107, 108, 147, 187, 213, 229            160,208, 224
National Register of Historic Places, 6     neutrons, 75, 109, 149
National Research Council (CNR). Italy,     Nevada, University of, 25
  157                                       New Delhi, India, 182
National Science Board, U S , 31
                         ..                 New England, 63
National Science Foundation, US., 62.
                                            New Guinea, 226
 110, 117, 134, 194,201
                                            New Jersey, 63
National Space Club, 154, 220
                                            New Mexico, 66
National Space Development Agency,
                                            New Orleans, La., 44, 160, 170
 Japan, 29, 41,58, 106. 131,226

                                                                                  303
INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


new products (See also discoveries; inven-    northern lights. See auroras.
                                              Northern Telecom, lnc., 221
  tions; patents.), 2-3, 42-43, 58, 59, 62,
                                              Northrop Services, Inc., 24
  71, 96, 107, 120, 130-131, 140-141,
  145, 169, 175, 195-196, 208, 213-214,       Norway, 1, 32, 46, 79
                                              NOSS , 257
  224,230                                           2
New Scptland Yard (London), 189               nova, 174
                                              Nts 2 120, 246
                                                   ,
new techniques (See also discoveries;
  inventions; patents.), 25-26,45, 56,67,     nuclear energy; nuclear power; nuclear
                                                reactors; nuclear research. See power
  69,85,96, 109, 127, 128, 132, 141, 142,
  146, 159, 160, 177, 178, 196, 214, 216,       sources, nuclear.
                                                -testing, 71
  220, 224
New York, N.Y., 182                             -weapons (Seealso weapons systems.),
New York Bight, 63                                 8, 40-41
New York Port Authority, 66                    Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 53
newspapers. See media.                         numbers; numerical analysis. See mathe-
Nicaragua, 176                                   matics.
Nichols, Nichelle, 41                          Nunelly, Hubert, 13
nickel, 190                                    Nunn, Sen. Sam (D-Ga.), 74
nickel-cadmium batteries. See batteries.       nutrition. See food.
nickel-hydrogen power cells, 2, 120            N.V. Phillips (Netherlands firm), 200
Nicks, Oran W., 132
Nicollier, Claude, 72, 84, 230                 Oak Ridge Associated Universities, 172
                                               Oberth, Hermann, 115
Niemann, Dr. H.B., 166
Nigeria, 103                                   observances, 67, 69, 124, 132, 148-149,
                                                 152, 162, 165, 182, 184, 187, 189, 192,
night, 196
                                                 215, 223, 234
Nimbus program, 194
                                               observations,48, 59,69-70, 98, 127, 158,
Nimbus3, 161
Nimbus 5. 66                                     182, 210
Nimbus 6 64, 79, 172                           observatories (ground-based), 109-1 10,
          .
Nimbus-G, 229                                    156
                                               obsolete, 180
Nimrod (British airborne radar craft),
                                               obstacles. See problems.
  53-54
                                               occultation, 69
Nissan Motor Co., Ltd., 106
nitrogen; nitrogen compounds, 132, 192-        ocean, 149, 152, 184, 198, 212, 231
                                               oceanography, 58, 93, 109, 193-194
  193
Nixon, President Richard M., 52, 143           Ockels, Wubbo, 230
                                               Odenwald, W. Germany, 75
Noaa 2 55
       ,
                                               Odessa (Tex.) Medical Center, 74
Noaa 5, 11
                                               odor, 27
NOAA-A, 229
noise, 2, 66, 118, 135, 143, 195, 200          Office des Postes et Telecommunications,
Noise-Con 77, 192                                Upper Volta, 198
nominations, 93                                Office of Management and Budget
                                                 (OMB), White House, 64, 169
non-nuclear weapons. See weapons sys-
                                               Office of Science and Technology Policy,
  tems.
                                                 White House, 71, 111
Norske Meteorological Institute, Oslo, 79
North American Rockwell. See Rockwell          Ohio River, 44
  International Corp.                          Ohio State University, 28, 219
North American Weather Consultants, 18         oil (See also fuel.), 1, 16,65,73,79, 110-
                                                 111, 130, 188
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
                                               Okhotsk, Sea of, USSR, 178
  (NATO), 7, 14-15, 53-54, 72, 141, 213
                                               Olsen, Dr. Edward J., 39
North Dakota, 127
North Pole, 158, 182, 234                      O’Neill, Gerard K., 12, 137, 149, 185
North Sea, 1, 79                               Ontario, Canada, 110

304
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                              INDEX


OOE. See out-of-ecliptic mission. See        Panama Canal, 121
  solar polar.                               Papazian, Dr. John, 106
open universe. See theory.                   Paperclip, Operation, 115
Operation Paperclip. See Paperclip.          parachutes, 53,93,95, 101, 119-120, 152,
Ophiuchus (constellation), 174                 159, 211-212, 222, 231
optics, 58, 62, 175, 192, 193                Paraguay, 135
orbit, pjanetary, 13, 124, 204               Pans, France, 24, 52, 84, 105, 153
  -spacecraft, 75, 151, 158, 163, 168,       Parker, Loyd C., 5
    198, 211, 223                            Parker, Robert, 84
orbital-test satellite @SA). See OTS.        Parnell, Dr. Thomas A., 88
orbiter. See Space Shuttle orbiter; Viking   particle generator, 25
  project; individual spacecraft.            particles, energetic. See electrons; ions;
orbiter-processing facility. See Space         muons; neutrons.
  Shuttle orbiter.                           parts. See instrumentation.
Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) pro-        passengers (See also airlines.), 19,29, 130,
  gram, 54                                     193, 199, 220
ordnance. See explosives; weapons sys-       patents (See also inventions.), 152, 218,
  tems.                                        232
Oregon, 80                                   pathfinder spacecraft, 33, 226
organic matter, 39, 184, 190, 201            Patrick AFB, Fla., 205
Organization of American States (OAS),       patterns, 154
  222                                        payload
orientation, 98, 156, 158                      -missile; launch vehicle, 8, 221
origins. See theory.                           -Shuttle. See Space Shuttle payloads.
Orillion, Alfred G., 19-20                     -specialists. See mission specialists.
Oriol (USSR spacecraft), 117                 Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, UN Com-
Orion (constellation), 104                     mittee on, 44, 129-130
Orroral Valley, Australia, 82, 133           peaceful uses of space, 57, 143-144
Osborn, Howard J., 152                       Pearl River (NASA barge), 121
                                             Peenemunde (German launch site WWII),
OTS (ESA’s orbital test satellite), 16,
  112, 168, 171, 180, 202,205, 229             115
Ottawa, Ontario, 110                         Pegasus 1, 132
Ottawa River, 110                            Peking, China (PRC), 154
out-of-ecliptic (OOE) mission. See solar     Pennsylvania, 138
  polar.                                     Pennsylvania State University, 72
outer planets, 28, 34, 49, 140, 145          Pensacola, Fla., 36
Owens-Illinois, Inc., 203                    Pentagon. See Defense, U.S. Dept. of.
oxygen (See also liquid oxygen.), 50, 68,    People’s Republic of China. See China,
  123, 159                                     People’s Republic of.
ozone, 138, 193, 204                         Pepin, Dr. Robert, 28
                                             Percy, Sen. Charles (R-lll.), 74
Pacific Conference on Chemistry, 190         performance, 37, 42, 92-93, 96, 98, 108,
                                               111, 156, 159, 168, 171, 186, 231
Pacific Ocean, 23, 31, 57, 58, 131, 134,
  139, 140, 178, 226                         Perkin-Elmer Corp., 136, 192, 232
package. See payload.                        Perkins, Porter C., 204
Page, George F., 229                         Perry, William J., 177
paint, 154                                   Persian, 103
Pakistan, 103, 131                           Persian Gulf, 14
Palapa 2 51-52,240, 261, 262
        ,                                    personnel. See employment.
Palmdale, Calif., 17                         Perth, Australia, 69
Pan American World Airways, 67, 182,         perturbation, 15
  204,205                                    pesticides, 1
Pan American Union. See Organization         Peterson, Dr. Haie, 212
  of American States.                        petroleum. See oil.
                                                                                     305
INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


Petrone, Roceo la., 56                         polar route, 173, 182,204
Petrov, Dr. Boris. 174, 206                    Polaris (weapon), 8
Phobos (moon of Mars), 31,76,124,152,          police, 189
                                               politics, 107, 129-130,131,143-144.157,
  176
pharmaceuticals. 25. 74, 214                     172, 187, 195
Phoenix, M . 94
          i.                                   poll. See public opinion.
phonograph record. See recording sys-          pollution. See also contamination.
  tems.                                          -ash, 8
photodetectors. See detection.                   -atmosphere. See atmosphere.
photography (See also cameras; film.), 7,        -chemical, 5 , 110-111
  14, 23, 27, 48, 59, 104, 105, 125, 131,        -environmental, 25, 63, 79, 141, 165,
  142, 165, 174, 176, 1%. 222                       195, 200
photometry, 210                                population, 60
photons, 49, 119. 140, 189                     Port Everglades, Fla., 205, 231
physics, 23, 65, 75, 115, 230, 233             portable earth terminal, 47, 138, 208
                                               portable systems, 50, 138
physiology. See biology.
piggyback flights, 118, 135, 141               Portugal, 227
Pilliod, Charles J.. Jr., 65                   Porz-Wahn, W. Germany, 33
pilotless vehicle, 17                          Poseidon (weapon), 8
pilots, 13, 26, 128, 132, 140, 148, 150,       postage. See stamps.
   172. 179, 181, 191, 196, 201, 202. 205;     postponement. See delay.
                                               potassium, 146
  235
Pioneer mission, 92, 143, 188, 221, 226-       Powder Puff Derby, 162
  227                                          power levels. See energy levels.
Pioneer IO, 11. 3, 33, 102, 103, 143, 161,     power sources, 58,98, 159, 165-166, 172,
   169, 226-227                                  199, 208, 216
                                                 -atomic. See power sources, nuclear.
Pioneer Parachute Co.. 231
                                                 -batteries, 2, 3, 94, 190
pitch rate, 154
Pittsburgh, University of, 138                   -conversion (See also solar conversion
planetary environment. See environment;            devices.). 140-141, 216, 232
  atmosphere, planetary.                         -electric, 5, 34,227
planetary exploration. See exploration.          -engines, 61, 73, 159, 199-200
planetary satellites, 48, 59, 69, 76, 102.       -galactic, 43
                                                 -generators, 159
  124, 136, 152, 187-188, 203-204, 207.
  226-227                                        -geothermal, 134
planetary science, 28, 48, 62, 66, 92-93,        -lasers, 146
  102-103, 107, 108. 161, 174,206-207            -magnetohydrodynamics, 111, 121
planning. See future plans.                      -microwaves, 5, 56, 57, 66, 141. 153,
plants. See botany.                                 175
                                                  -nuclear, 35-36, 65, 104, 109, 118,
plasma physics, 32, 155
plastic, 17, 93, 119                                140, 146, 158, 159, 161-162. 215,
platforms, data collection, 113, 171                216, 230
Plum Brook station, LeRC, 34                      -satellites. See solar power satellites.
Pluto (planet), 3, 39, 51, 104                    -solar (See also s l r conversion de-
                                                                      oa
plutonium, 65. 161-162                              vices; solar power satellites.), 5,
Pocomoke City, Md., 164                              14, 15-16, 23, 43, 45, 53, 65, 75,
Pogue, William R., 121                               76, 94, 145, 159, 161, 168, 179, 189,
pointing. See aiming.                               203
poisoning. See medical research.                  -steam, 7-8, 14, 188, 233
Poland, 20, 115. 159, 174, 1%                     -wind, 34, 129, 176
polar-orbiting satellite (See also names of    power supply. See power sources.
  individual spacecraft.), 11, 131, 136        power systems, spacecraft. See spacecraft.
polar research, 66. 117,234                    powersats. See solar power satellites.

306
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                             INDEX


Pozinski. Norman, 220                        psychology, 123
practice. 150, 211, 230-231                  public opinion, 116, 156, 213
Prague, Czechoslovakia, 184, 185             public policy. See national policy.
precipitation, 119                           public relations (See also community re-
precision. See accuracy.                       lations.), 6, 63, 67, 74
predictions (See also meteorology; future    publications (See also media.), 106-107,
  plans.), 25, 58, 59, 62, 80. 127. 165,       128, 136. 204
  192                                        publicity. See media.
prefabrication, 69                           Puerto Rico, 222
preservation, 152                            pulsars. 102,210
press; press conferences. See media.         pump. 199
Press, Dr. Frank, 30-31, 71, 111, 144        pyranometer, 53
pressure, 2, 64, 93, 159, 171, 203, 213-
  214, 222                                   quality, 169
pressurization, 45, 118, 224                 quarks, 75
prevention, 146                              quasars, 10, 121, 149, 210
prices. See fees; competition. economic.     Quebec, 110
prime mover. See vehicles.
Primer, Howard, 13                           racing. See contest.
Prince of Wales, 193                         radar, 8, 13, 26, 58, 74, 78, 224, 227
Princeton University, 10, 12                 radiation; radioactive material (See also
printing (See also media; publications.),      electromagnetism; energetic particles.),
  165                                          39-40, 50. 102, 129, 137, 146, 167,
prizes. See awards.                            208, 216
probe, 68, 92-93, 136. 159, 161-162          radio (See also frequencies; broadcast.),
problems, 27, 62, 63, 111, 113, 118, 129-      4, 19, 94, 118, 153, 155, 158, 159, 179,
  130, 137, 154-155, 156, 158, 159, 160,       209, 217,224
  162, 165, 167, 171, 176, 186, 189-190,     radio-technical commission for aero-
  193, I%, 209, 213, 214, 221, 233             nautics, U S , 122
Procter & Gamble, 65                         radioastronomy, 76, 137
procurement, 18, 79, 219                     radioisotope thermal generators (RTGs).
  -policy, 2, 37, 105, 124-125                 See power sources, nuclear.
productivity, 71, 219                        radiometer, 66, 131, 148, 161, 166, 210
Professor Vize (USSR research ship), 85      radiotelescope,9, 66, 76
Prognoz (USSR spacecraft series). 117,       Ruduga 3 (Statsionar comsat, USSR),
  176                                          249
Prognoz 6,253                                Ragent, Dr. Boris, 166
programming, 55, 176                         railroads, 133, 192
propaganda, 130                              rain, 69
propagation, 139                             random-access measurement system, 79
propane, 94                                  range, 57, 82, 195-196, 198
propellant. See fuel.                        Rango, Dr. Albert, 55
propellers, 180, 221                         Ransburgh. John L., 230
propulsion, 61, 125, 133, 147, 167, 170,     RATAN-600 (USSR radiotelescope), 76
  225                                        rates, 213, 217
prosthesis, 169                              rats, 146, 167
protection (See also insulation.), 207       RCA (formerly Radio Corporation of
protonosphere. See atmosphere.                  America), 104. 153-154, 220
protons, 75, 85                              RCA Astroelectronics Div., 153-154, 234
prototypes, 36. 42, 67, 74, 130, 165, 188,   RCA Global Communications, Inc., 139
  230                                        RCA Service Co., 158
                                             reactivation, 132-133
Proxmire, Sen. William (D-Wis.), 64,
  108, 217                                   reactors. See power sources, nuclear.

                                                                                   307
INDEX                                     ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


real-time monitoring, 57                         -spacecraft, 10, 89, 170
receivers; reception, 208                     Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 192
Reclamation, U.S. Bureau of, 80               reorganization, government, 114, 185,
reconditioning. See rehabilitation.              197,203
reconnaissance (See also monitoring; sur-     repair. See rehabilitation.
  veillance.), 22, 54, 221                    reporting systems, 43, 128, 130
record setting, 23, 67, 76, 121, 128, 133,    reprimand, 195
   149, 158, 172, 176, 181, 182, 198,         reprocessing, 65
  219, 227, 235                               rescue, 172, 233-234
recording, 133, 143, 174                      research, atmospheric. See atmosphere.
recording systems, 67, 143, 160, 214          research and development (R&D), fund-
RECOUP (refuse-consuming utility                 ing for, 65, 117, 134, 194
   plant), 88, 233                            reservoirs, 81
recovery, equipment; materials, 38, 53,       resolution, optical, 42, 66, 76, 107, 137,
   91, 101, 119, 138, 205, 211-212, 231          169, 189, 210, 222
recycling, 65, 110, 131, 188,211,229,233      resource management, 42, 47, 63, 161,
Red Cross, American, 138                         185, 193, 196
Red Flug (PRC journal), 131                   Resources for the Future, Inc., 40
red giant. See stars.                         respiration, 71
Redstone (ballistic rocket), 6, 115           retirement, 195, 214-215, 219
Redstone (range instrumentation vessel),      retrieval (See also rehabilitation.), 98,
   213                                           137, 163, 198, 205, 210, 211, 228, 231
Redstone Arsenal, 64, 115, 215                retropropulsion, 187, 222
reduction in force (RIF). See employ-         reusable (See also recycling.), 36, 53, 79,
   ment.                                         95, 101, 118, 120, 133, 168, 198, 211-
redundancy, 14, 151                              212
Reeder, Jack, 222                             revival. See reactivation.
reentry, from orbit, 154, 175, 198, 215       Reynolds, Smith & Hills, 128
refinery; refining. See fuel.                 Rhode Island, 66
                                              Rice Institute, 188
reflectivity, 39, 119
                                              Richardson, John, 169
reform, 62
                                              rings, planetary. See planetary satellites.
refrigeration. See cooling; cryogenics.
                                              Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 222
refuse. See waste disposal.
                                              Rio de la Plata, Argentina, 222
regularity, 209
                                              Rio Grande, 40
regulation, 62, 129, 185, 213
                                              rivers, 110
rehabilitation, 80, 137, 139, 224, 228
                                              RNA. See genetics.
rehearsal. See practice.
                                              Robinson Printing Go., 11
Reid, Henry John Edward, 212
                                              robots, 106
reimbursable, 54, 65, 148, 197, 226, 229
                                              Rocket Propulsion Laboratory, USAF,
Reinhard, CharIes E., 173
                                                 58
relativity, 4, 51
                                              Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Corp., 11,
relay, 1, 67, 113, 134, 166, 197,210, 222,
   223-224, 226                                  51, 55, 79, 121
reliability, 2, 50, 80, 120, 135, 137, 159,   rockets (See also names of individual
                                                 rockets.), 37, 98, 105, 121, 137, 138,
   161, 223-224
                                                 151, 164, 167, 197-198, 211, 215, 217,
remote, 98, 121, 198, 201, 210, 211, 219,
                                                 267-272
   221, 232, 234
                                              rocks, 106
   -sensing, 42, 56, 63, 110, 147, 174,
                                              RockweIl, W.F., Jr., 70
      193
remotely powered vehicles, 221                Rockwell International Corp., 7, 17, 22,
                                                 24, 51, 55, 68-69, 70, 71, 73, 76, 79,
rendezvous
                                                 109, 112, 114, 118, 125, 175, 176, 177,
   -orbital, 10, 207
                                                 180, 192, 195, 202, 207
   -planetary, 49, 207

308
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                            INDEX


Romanenko, Lt. Col. Yuri, 223, 225          Sandia Laboratories, N.M., 109
Romania, 20, 159, 174                       sanitation, 63
Rome, Italy, 181                            Santa Barbara Research Center, 148
Rood, Robert W., 128                        Santa Rose Island, Fla., 36
Ross, Miles, 63, 101                        Satcom series (U.S.comsats), 154
Rostovsev, Capt. Oleg, 164                  Satellite Business Systems, Inc., 72, 154
rotation. See spin rate.                    Satellite Experiment Laboratory, NOAA,
rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA),       193- 194
  61, 134, 216                              satellite network. See network.
Royal Aeronautical Society, London, 16,     Satellite Power Systems (proposed mis-
  182                                         sion), 5
Royal Astronomical Society, U.K., 124       satellites, planetary. See planetary.
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engi-       Satrack (USN Trident support system),
  neers, U.K., 154                            197
                                            Saturn (family of launch vehicles), 11,24,
Royal Observatory Greenwich, V.K.,  69
                                              44, 55, 61, 71, 95, 113, 115, 127, 132,
Royal Society, U.K., 60
                                              139, 215, 228
RTG, radioisotope thermal generators.
                                            Saturn (planet), 3, 33-34, 39,49,60, 102,
  See power sources, nuclear.
                                              103, 106, 137, 145, 155, 161, 186, 204,
Rubel, Werner H., 230
                                              207, 226-227
runoff, water, 55
                                            Saudi Arabia, 14, 53
runway, 113, 154
                                            savings. See cost reduction.
Ryumin, Valery, 189, 223
                                            Sawyer, Ralph (Buzz), 217
                                            scanning, 17, 54, 149, 150, 155, 194, 212
Sacramento, Calif., 218
                                            SCATHA, satellite charging at high alti-
safety
                                              tude, 168
   -automobile, 19
                                            schedule
   -aviation, 19, 43, 128, 135, 138
                                              -launches, 37, 64-65, 162-163, 202,
   -devices, 94, 161, 224
                                                229, 234
   -fire, 47, 131, 159, 218
                                              -operations, 42, 217
   -nuclear, 1
                                            scheduled airlines, 19
   -range, 180
                                            Scherer, Lee, 104
   -systems, 47, 54, 64, 163, 178, 208,
                                            Schlesinger, James R., 185
    224
                                            Schmitt, Sen. Harrison M. (R-NM), 11,
Sagan, Carl, 143, 149
                                              111
sailboats. See ships.
                                            Schneider, Stanley R., 110
St. Lawrence River, 110
                                            scholarships. See awards.
St. Louis, Mo., 33
                                            Schuerer, Paul H., 11
St. Regis Paper Co., 196
                                            Schwartz, Dr. Daniel A., 174
St. Thomas, V.I., 179
                                            Schweikart, Russell L. (Rusty), 162
Sakura. See Cs.
                                            science adviser, White House, 31, 144
Salisbury, Md., 192
                                            Science Applications, Inc., 22
salvage. See recovery.
                                            science court, 1
Salyut program (USSR space vehicle), 20,
                                            science writing, 49
  90,158, 161,206
                                            scientific community, 1, 18, 40, 132
Salyut 4 23
        ,
                                            scientists, 32, 35, 75, 84, 107, 131, 133,
Salyut 5 10, 26, 27, 189, 206
        ,
                                              143, 183, 220
Salyut 6,180, 189,223, 254
                                            Scorpius (constellation), 174
sampling, 63, 106, 167, 193,204,207,222
                                            Scott, Dr. David R., 191
San Diego, Calif., 218
                                            Scout (NASA launch vehicle), 11, 197
San Diego State University, 14
                                            scrap, 211
San Francisco, Calif., 182, 195, 218, 234
                                            sea. See oceanography; name of geo-
San Francisco, University of, 167
                                              graphical area.
Sandford, Maxwell, 104

                                                                                  309
INDEX                                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


seals, 184                                      Sierra Nevada, 80
search and rescue, 64,172, 173,205              signals, 132-133, 140. 155, 159, 168,
SeaSat-A, 1-2, 58, 82, 229                        175, 198, 202,213
Seattle, Wash., 102                            Signe 3 (French/USSR scisat), 66, 117,
Securities and Exchange Commission,               237,245
  U.S., 22                                     Sikorsky Aircraft Co., 134
security measures, 17, 38, 54, 122, 130        silicon, 42, 145, 175. 219, 220
seismology, 31, 62, 71. 82, 156, 165, 222      silver compounds, 18-19
seismometer, 3, 6, 140. 165                    Simpson, Dr. John A., 102
Selcuk, Dr. M. Kudret, 232                     simulations,42,44,53,55,61.64,71.72,
selenide (thermoelectric units), 162              84, 85, 119, 120, 123, 132, 138, 153,
semiconductors, 192                               160, 185, 190, 191, 202-203, 206. 208,
Senate, U.S. See Congress.                        211,224,230.231
sensitivity, 188, 208                          Sinclair Laboratories, 192
sensor systems                                  Sirio (Satellite Italian0 Richerche Indus-
   -aircraft, 13, %                               triale Orientata), Italy comsat, 111,
   -ground-based, 109, 178                         139, 156-157. 251,261, 262
   -spacecraft, 22, 55, 58, 66, 71, 74,         size, 149, 158, 160
      137, 155, 174, 177, 215                   Skyjacker (DFRC experimental aircraft),
Sensor Technology, Inc., 219,220                  217-218
separation, 73, 93, 107, 122-123, 135,          Skylab program, 6, 27, 50, 52, 64, 72.
  150, 151. 158, 160, 166, 168, 179, 180,          121, 128, 160, 161. 165, 198, 211,
  191. 195, 1%. 211                               232, 235
SERT, space electric rocket tests (LeRC         Skylab 1. 80, 162
  program), 170                                 Skylab 4, 48, 121
Sevastyanov, Vitaly. 23                         Slayton, Donald K. (Deke), 42, 143, 1%
707; 737; 747. See Boeing.                      Slidell Computer Complex (NASA), 147
sferics, 166                                    slingshot effect. See gravity.
shadow, 176                                     small astronomical satellites (SAS), 129
Shanghai, China, 154                            Small Business Act, 11
shapes, 124                                     small craft. See ships.
Shatalov, Lt.Gen. Vladimir, 26-27, 223,         Smith, Dr. Bradford A., 137
  224                                           Smith, Richard B., 174
Shepard, Alan B., Jr., 115                      Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory,
shipping (See also air freight; cargo.), 44,      204
  112                                           Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics,
ships, 56, 64,66, 85, 127, 137, 158, 164,         Harvard, 129. 174
  173, 178, 180, 194, 198, 205,213, 223,        Smithsonian Institution, 50
  23 1                                          Smoot, Dr. George. 209
Shklovsky, 1.S. (USSR astrophysicist),          SNAP, system for auxiliary nuclear
                                                  power. See power sources, nuclear.
  124
shore (facilities; terminals), 207              SNAP 19, SNAP 27, 161
Short, Dr. Nicholas M., 14                      Snavely, Lt.Cen. William W.,53
short-stack SRB, 95                             snow, 55.80-81, 172,214
short takeoff and landing (STOL). 72.           social goals, 60,208
  173                                           social policy. See national policy.
shortage. See fuel conservation.                social problems (See also community re-
Shroud of Turin, 142                              lations.), 76, 147, 189
Shulenko, Mariya, 123-124                       socialist bloc. See Soviet bloc.
Shuttle. See Space Shuttle.                     Societe de Telecommunications Inter-
Siberia, 123, 140, 159. 167, 178                  nationales du Chad, 110
Sieff, Dr. Alvin, 166                           Societe Europeenne de Propulsion (SEP),
Sierra Leone, 103                                  225


310
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                              INDEX


Society for Space Travel (Verein fur          South Africa, Union of, I82
  Raumschiffart/VfR), German rocket           South America, 138, 176
  society, 115                                South Pole (See also Antarctica.), 182
Society of Experimental Test Pilots, 235      Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph
                                                eo., 221
Socorro, N.M., 235
                                              Southern California, University of, 167
sodium, 146
Soffen, Dr. Gerald A,, 52                     Souza, Kenneth, 167
soft landing. See landing.                    Soviet Academy of Sciences, 76, 89, 180,
software, 130, 186, 196, 207                    183,206
soil, 101, 106                                Soviet Air Force, 13
Soil Conservation Service, U.S., 80           Soviet bloc, 129-130, 141-142
soil samples, 31, 70-71                       Soviet Ministry
sol (Mars day), 6                               -of Health, 206
solar activity, 39, 117, 119, 148, 153, 176     -of Power and Electrification; of
solar cells. See solar conversion devices.        Power Plant Construction, 76
solar conversion devices                      Soviet space activity (See also Union of
   -arrays, 43, 94, 128, 160, 170, 189,         Soviet Socialist Republics.), 10, 22, 23,
     228                                        26-27,28,52,54,56,59,66,76,89-90,
   -cells, 43, 75, 145, 161, 220, 226           117, 127, 146, 158, 164, 167, 176, 180,
   -collectors, 14, 29, 71, 128, 130, 175,      184, 187, 189-190, 195-196, 197-198,
      179, 232                                  206, 207, 210, 222-225
   -panels. See array.                        Soyuz program (USSR manned flight),
solar corona, 15, 37                            10, 20,89, 187, 189-190, 222-225
solar energy. See power sources, solar.       Soyuz 7. 26
solar environment, 113                        Soyuz 15. 190
solar heating and cooling. See energy.        Soyuz 17, 23
solar particles. See solar activity.          Soyuz 19, 206
solar physics, 32, 199                        Soyuz 20, 23
solar polar mission ( W E ,out-of-eclip-      Soyuz 21, 27
  tic), 68, 199                               Soyuz 23, 190
solar-power satellites (powersats), 5 , 23,   Soyuz 24. 26, 239, 265, 266
  57, 70, 76, 180                             Soyuz 25, 189, 223, 254, 265, 266
Solar Power, Inc., 219                        SOYUZ26, 222-225,251,265, 266
solar radiation. See solar activity.          Space Age, 148. 165
solar research. See sun.                      Space Biology and Medicine working
solar sailer (JPL future project), 48-49,       group, U.S./USSR, 206
   119, 170                                   space
solar system, 3, 9, 48, 64, 103, 104, 107,      -colonization, 12,24-25,68, 137,141,
   119, 199, 204,207, 209, 226-227, 228            149, 185
solar wind, 39-40, 48-49, 73, 155, 156          -communities. See space colonization.
SoIarex Corp., 43, 219, 220                     -construction; structure (See also
solid-fuel rocket, 35, 53, 58, 74, 80, 95,        space station.), 45, 47, 58, 64, 69,
  101, 119, 133, 151, 153, 154, 160. 205,         76, 106, 235-236
  211, 228                                    Space Day, 148
solid rocket (booster). See solid-fuel        space defense systems (See also intercep-
  rocket.                                       tor satellites; weapons systems.), 22, 58
solvents. 110                                 Space Defense Technology Program
sonic booms, 105                                (DOD), 177
sounders; soundings. 148                      space
sounding rockets. See rockets.                  -environment. 57, 85, 148
sounds, 31-32, 143, 184                         -exploration. See exploration.
sources of radiation. See power sources,        -flight, NASA office of. See NASA.
  nuclear; radiation.                           -industrialization, 25,47,57, 137, 180

                                                                                     311
INDEX                                      ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


  -investment in. See funding, govern-           -policy, 48, 90, 104-105, 143, 162-
    ment.                                           163, 206
  -manufacturing. See materials proc-            -prices. See Space Shuttle fees; Space
    essing; space industrialization.                Shuttle users.
  -medicine. See medical research.               -propulsion, 35, 44, 5 5 , 74, 79, 95,
  -observance, U S , 132                            101, 113-114, 119-120, 151, 154,
  -platform. See space station.                     202,211
  - powersat. See solar-power satellites.        -solid-fuel rocket booster. See Space
  -processing. See materials processing.            Shuttle propulsion.
Space Research Institute (USSR Acad. of          -systems, 5 5 , 68-69, 143, 178-179,
  Science), 17                                      234
  -science, 49-51, 53, 65, 71, 73, 134,          -testing, 6, 17, 23-24, 36, 42, 44, 45,
     135-136                                        51, 5 5 , 63, 64, 71, 74, 80, 95, 101,
  -settlement. See space colonization.              103, 107-108, 113-114, 118, 120,
Space Shuttle                                       135, 143, 148, 160, 165, 168, 170,
  -astronauts. See Space Shuttle crews.             178, 185, 190-191, 193, 196-197,
  -boosters. See Space Shuttle propul-              202,205,207,211,228,230,234,235
     sion.                                       -training. See Space Shuttle crews.
  -Costs, 65, 108-109, 121                       -upper stages, 37, 163
  -crews, 21, 42, 45, 63, 107-108, 132,           -users, 143, 163
     140, 143, 144, 148, 163, 172-173,         space spider, 69
     185,201,202,205-206,208,222,228           space station, 23, 50, 72, 89-90, 98,
  -experiments. See Space Shuttle pay-           106-107, 128, 158, 165, 187, 223
    loads.                                     space structure. See space construction;
  -external tank, 25, 44, 50, 51, 5 5 , 64,      space station.
    72, 80, 113, 120, 151, 153, 160, 170,      space suits, 45, 160, 208, 210, 224
    202, 228, 231                              Space Task Group, 216
  -facilities, 64, 113, 201-202, 228-229       Space Telescope
  -fees, 65, 143, 163                            -contractors, 18, 232-233
  -funding, 104-105, 108-109, 121, 217           -planning/management, 10, 18, 52,
  -impact, 75                                       56, 66, 108, 135, 136-137, 189, 207,
                                                    210
  -launch, 50, 113, 128, 139, 211, 228,
                                               Space Transportation System (STS) (See
    234
                                                 also Space Shuttle.), 59, 105, 143, 163,
  -main engine (See also Space Shuttle
                                                 173
    propulsion.), 6, 51, 5 5 , 79, 120, 121,
                                               space travel, 71, 115-116
     160, 201, 202
                                               spacewalk. See extravehicular activity
  -management, 143, 153, 201
                                                 (EVA).
  -military use, 54, 163
                                               spacecraft
  -operations, 1, 21, 23-24, 50, 62, 68-
                                                 -communications, 4-5
     69, 106, 113-114, 143, 145, 150-152,
                                                 -power systems, 74-75, 136
     162-163, 165, 168, 175, 208, 234
                                                 -retrieval, 18
  -orbiter, 17, 23-24, 27-28, 36,42,45,
                                               Spacelab
     55, 63, 74, 80, 103, 107, 108, 113,
                                                 -crew, 84, 85, 166-167, 183, 230
     118, 135, 143, 153, 165, 168, 170,
                                                 -experiments, 32, 65, 67, 72, 85, 119,
     178-179, 190-191, 193, 196-197,
                                                    152-153, 157
     202, 207, 211, 230
                                                 -management, 16, 48, 64-65,67, 153,
  -passengers, 57                                   215
  -payloads, 4,6, 10, 18,25,48, 50,52-           -mission, 72, 73, 206
     53, 54, 58, 64-65, 68, 69, 70, 71,          -operations, 1, 28, 65
    76, 98, 104-105, 119, 143, 160,              -payloads, 25, 85, 130, 133, 175
     162-163, 170, 185-186, 187-188,             -preparation, 25, 52-53, 70, 72-73,
     192, 198, 199, 207, 215, 228, 234              84, 85, 133, 152-153, 166-167, 170,
  -performance, 107-108                             215
312
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                               lNDEX


Spaceport. See Kennedy Space Center,           static testing, 44, 55, 95, 159, 160
  Spaceport.                                   stationkeeping (satellite), 113
Spain, 1, 154                                  statistics, 138
Spanish (language), 103                        steam. See power sources.
SPAR, space-processing applications            steering. See guidance.
  rockets, 30, 105                             stellar object. See star.
spare, 207                                     Stephenson, Charles A., 173
Spaw Glass, Inc., 53                           Stevenson, Sen. Adlai E. (D-Ill), 114
specifications, 165                            Steward Observatory (Univ. of Ariz.),
spectrograph; spectrometer, 155, 166,             107
   168, 210                                    Stickney crater (on Phobos), 124
Spectrolab, Inc., 220                          Stirling engine, 199-200
spectroscopics, 5 1                            Stofan, Andrew J., 220
spectrum, 149                                  Stone, Dr. Edward P., 137
speed (See also high-speed aircraft.), 61,     storage (See also energy storage.), 51,
  67, 96, 150, 151, 152, 160, 168, 176-          222, 229
  177, 179, 181, 186, 191, 196, 197, 202,      Stormovik (11-2. USSR attack plane), 29
  209, 211, 218                                storms, 94, 119, 127, 131, 165, 168, 171,
Speer, Dr. Fred, 149, 156                         176, 234-235
Sperry Rand Corp., 7, 54                       Strack, Bill, 135
Sperry Support Services, Inc., 54              strap-on motors, 106
Sperry Univac, 74                              strategic weapons. See weapons systems.
spin, aircraft, 134, 138                       stratosphere. See atmosphere.
  -motor; spacecraft, 119, 131, 195            Strecker, Dr. D.W., 107
  -rate (planetary, galactic), 38-39, 124,     strength (signal), 133
     209                                       stress, 153
   -stabilization, 73                          Strittmatter, Dr. Peter, 107
  -stages (spacecraft), 173                    structures, 44, 61, 69, 79, 95, 120, 128,
Spirit of St. Louis, 3                            149, 153, 156, 160, 163, 205, 211, 231
Spitzbergen (Norway), 79                       students, 4, 41-42, 133, 143, 152, 235
Springfield, Ill., 12                          Stuhlinger, Dr. Ernst, 116
Sprott, Kingswood, Jr., 76                     Styrofoam, 130
Sputnik I (USSR satellite), 115, 117,          submarines, 6, 8, 57
  165, 184, 187, 189                           subsonic aircraft, 35, 66, 152
spy systems. See surveillance.                 sun, 66, 68, 104, 133, 145, 149, 158, 161,
SR-71 (US. reconnaissance aircraft). See         199
   Lockheed .                                  sunspots. See solar activity.
SSN-8 (USSR missiles), 57                      Super Loki (U.S. rocket), 37
stability, 36, 75, 151, 186, 218               superclusters, galactic, 129
stabilization; stabilizers, 79, 163            superhigh frequencies (SHF), 139
stalling, aircraft. See safety, aviation.
                                               supernovas, 32, 37, 215
stamps, 195
                                               supersonic (aircraft; transport), 29, 64,
stand-in. See Space Shuttle orbiter; simu-
                                                 66,213
   lation.
                                               supersonics, 9, 64, 219
standards, 59, 213
                                               supplies, 21, 224
Stanford University, 16, 75, 107, 147
                                               support (funding, services, systems,
Star Trek, 41
                                                 teams), 42, 44, 45, 55,68-69, 102, 113,
stars; stellar, 37, 104, 107, 117, 121, 137,
                                                 139, 147, 156, 168, 169, 197, 207, 208,
   143, 149, 158, 188, 209, 210, 228
                                                 212, 221, 222, 226, 228-229, 231-232,
State, U.S. Department of, 141
                                                 234
state-federal cooperation, 80, 94, 162
state funding of projects, 110                 surface, 145, 168, 175, 214, 226
static electricity. See insulation.            surgery, 5

                                                                                     313
INDEX                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


surveillance (See also monitoring.), 58,          Teledyne Industries, Inc., 221
  63, 101-102, 122, 136, 149-150, 221-            telegraph, 168
  222                                             telemetry, 158
survival, 22, 68, 202, 226                        teleoperator retrieval system. See remote.
Swain, Charles W.,    148                         telephone, 74, 168, 214, 221, 226
Swainson, Wyn Kelly. 17                           telephotography, 101
Sweden, 66, 103, 154, 174, 200                    teleportation, 16
Switzerland, 84, 154                              Telesat Canada, 32, 153, 229
symposium. See meetings.                          telescope, 18, 37, 38-39, 48, 50, 66, 70,
synchronous (orbits; satellites), 2, 124,           72, 107, 109, 136-137, 149, 152, 188
  138, 139, 148, 210                              Telespazio (Italy comsat control), 157
synthesis, 65, 73, 230                            television, 10, 12-13, 33, 52, 104, 121,
system for auxiliary nuclear power                  129-130, 154, 165, 178, 198, 208,
  (SNAP). See power sources, nuclear.               223-224, 226, 234
systems engineering. See design, engineer-        temperature, 39-40, 62,67, 93, 127, 128,
  ing.                                              148, 150, 159, 161, 165, 168, 171, 175,
Syvertson, C.A., 147, 188                           177,203,232
                                                  Tennessee, 127
T-38 (U.S. trainer/chase aircraft), 132,          Tennessee River, 44
                                                  Tennessee State University, 145
  150
                                                  Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), 227
tactical weapons. See weapons systems.
tadpoles, 225                                     terminal configured vehicle (TCV). See
tail, airplane. See design, aircraft.                microwave landing system.
tailcone, 151, 197                                terrain. See topography.
                                                  Terrile, Dr. Richard J., 230
takeoff, 66
Tallahassee, Fla., 148                            terrorism, 189
                                                  Tesla, Nikola. 19
tandem launch, 193, 195
Tanegashima (Japan launch site), 30, 41           test pilots. See pilots
Tansei 3 (Japan experimental satellite),          testing
                                                     -aircraft, 132, 235
  38, 239
tape recording. See recording systems.               -ballistic missiles, 8, 57
target satellites. See interceptor satellites.       -equipment, 58, 59, 80, 112, 128, 163
                                                     -instrumentation, 93
Taylor, Michael, 72, 84
Taylor, Quentin, 62                                  -Space Shuttle. See Space Shuttle
Taylor, T.H., Construction Co., 63                     testing.
teaching, 14                                      tethered satellite, 98, 181
                                                  Texas, 3, 41, 127, 138
Teal Ruby (DODproject). 71
teamwork, 231                                     Texas Instruments, Inc., 220
                                                  Texas Southern University, 3
Tech House (LaRC), 130-131, 148
technicians, 182, 194                             textbooks, 14
techniques, improved. See new tech-               thematic mapper, 42
   niques.                                        theory, 51,55,75, 117, 129, 190,208-209,
technology                                          217
   -applications, 11, 56, 71, 141-142,            thermal-infrared scanning. See scanning.
                                                  thermal insulation. See insulation.
      145-146
   -comparisons, 13                               thermodynamics, 32
   -funding, 194                                  thermoelectric materials, 140
   -problems. 76                                  thermosphere. See atmosphere.
   -transfer, 71                                  Thiel, Dr. Charles, 62
   -utilization. 51, 130, 131, 208, 212           Thiokol Corp., 35, 133
                                                  third world. 14
telecommunications, 6 . 182
                       0
teleconference, 47                                Thompson, James R., 121
Teledyne. Inc., 30, 134                           Thompson, Dr. Rodger, 107

314
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                              lNDEX


Thornton, Dr. William E , 85
                           .                 transmission, 47. 179, 208, 210
thrust, 153, 160, 205                        transonic, 132
thunderstorm research international          transponder, 15, 197
   program (TRIP), 21-22, 127,234-235        transport aircraft. See aircraft.
thunderstorms, 21, 127                       transportation, 6 , 111, 113-114, 121,
                                                                0
Tiedemann, Trudy, 74                           122, 137, 141, 175, 192
tidal forces, 124                            Transportation, U.S. Department of,
tilt-rotor aircraft, 61, 216                   112, 192, 212
timber. See forests.                         trash. See wastes.
time, 51, 82, 149, 208                       traveling-wave tube (TWT), 181
timing, 175                                  treaty. See international relations.
TIROS-N, 229                                 trees, 39-40
Titan (moon of Saturn), 49                   trials, law court. See judicial proceedings.
                                             Trident (USN ballistic missile), 8, 157,
Titan (U.S. solid-fuel rocket), 211
Titan Centaur (rocket), 33, 155, 167,          197
   220, 221                                  Tropex (USSR-sponsored international
                                                tropical weather experiment), 56
titanium, 108, 233
Tokyo, Japan, 131, 140, 182                  trophy. See awards.
Tokyo, University of, 23, 38                 TRS, teleoperator retrieval system. See
Tomahawk (USN cruise missile), 8                remote.
                                             truck. See vehicles.
tomato can. See interceptor satellites.
tools. See instrumentation.                  Truly, Richard, 122, 135, 170, 171, 191
topography, 109, 176                         Truszynski, Gerald M., 219-220
Toulouse Space Research Center               TRW Systems, Inc., 1, 22, 47, 103
   (France), 117                             Tucson, Ariz., 94
tourism. 6.61, 67, 69                        Tulsa, Okla., 45
                                             tumors. See medical research.
towing, 231
                                             Tupolev (USSR SST jetliner), 105
tracking, 57, 93, 155, 175, 189, 221, 222
    -ground stations, 1, 82, 180             Tupolev, A.N., 29
    -radio beacons, 6, 172, 184              turbines, 134-135
    -ships, 10, 64,66, 180                   turbulence, 61, 161, 191, 218
    -space-based, 58, 71, 79                 turnaround time, 186
                                             Turner Construction Co., 173
    -and data acquisition, NASA office
      of. See NASA.                          typhoons, 131
    -and data-relay satellite system
                                             U-2 (U.S. jet reconnaissance aircraft),
      (TDRSS), 1
Tracor Marine, Inc., 231                        208
tractor. See vehicles.                       U-25 facility, USSR, 111
                                             Uchinoura (Japan launch site), 38
traffic. See air traffic; communications
   problems; orbit, spacecraft.              UH-1H (U.S. helicopter), 132
training, 193, 194, 231                      Uhlman, Dr. Donald, 106
                                             Uhuru (Explorer4 4 , 129
    -astronauts (See also Space Shuttle,
      crews.), 21, 84, 107, 118, 132, 208    UK-6 (British radiation-measurement
    -cosmonauts, 20, 223-224                   spacecraft), 229
                                             Ukraine, region of USSR, 167
 trajectories, 35, 68, 145, 167, 186, 215,
  223, 226                                   ultrahigh frequency (UHF), 139
Transat (USN navsat), 197,256,261,263        ultrasonic, 233
Transcaucasia, USSR. 59                      ultraviolet, 10. 37, 117, 119, 121, 169,
Transit (USN global navigation system),         189,210
                                             underground testing, 71, 140
  197
                                             undersea; underwater, 8, 208
Trunsit 3A (USN navsat), 161
Transit improvement program (TIP), 197       unemployment, 75, 107, 108
transmission. See energy transfer.           unidentified flying objects, 218

                                                                                     315
INDEX                                        ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


uniformity, 185, 209                             V-2 (WW I1 German rocket weapon), 115
Union Baptist Bible College, 3                   vacuum, space, 54, 59
Union of South Africa. See South Africa.           -tubes, 13
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics              Van Allen belt, 102
  (USSR), 146, 158, 176, 234                     Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 109, 120, 211,
  -international cooperation, 4, 46,52,            229
                                                 Vanderhoff, Dr. John W., 192
    85, 89-90, 111, 119, 121, 127, 143-
                                                 Vanguard (USN rocket), 115
     144
  -manned spaceflight, 10, 89, 123-124,          vapor, 192
     180, 189-190, 206, 222-225                  variable systems, 134, 138
  -technology, 13, 111, 121, 195-196             vegetation (See also botany.), 47, 123
  -weapons systems, 13, 57, 101                  vehicle assembly building (VAB), KSC,
United Bank of California, 148                     61, 113
United Kingdom, 1,40,44,46,53,65,66,             vehicles (Seealso transportation.), 19,63,
                                                   74, 111, 113-114, 122, 175, 192, 199-
 84, 115, 119, 141, 152, 154, 186, 193,
 212, 227, 229                                     200
United Kingdom National Physical Labo-           velocity. See speed.
  ratory, 227                                    Venus (planet), 28, 92-93, 106, 119, 161,
United Kingdom Science Research Coun-              22 1
  cil, 9                                         Venus orbiting imaging radar. See VOIR.
United Nations, 44,93, 103, 114, 129-130         verification, 32, 43
United Space Boosters, Inc., 35                  Vernon, France, 225
United States, 24, 46, 53                        Versailles, Treaty of, 115
United States Information Agency                 Verschoore, Chuck, 153
  (USIA), 10                                     vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL)
United States Strategic Institute, 172             craft, 173
United Stirling (Sweden), 200                    vertical test stand, 80
United Technologies Corp., 35, 50, 192           very large array (VLA), 66
Univac 1108 (computer), 74                       Vessot, Dr. Robert, 30, 51
“Universe” (NASA film), 64, 87                   Veterans Administration (VA), U.S., 8,
universe, origins of. See theory.                   146, 188
University (of). See rest of name.               veterinary medicine, 157
university community, 71, 146, 148, 172,         Veverka, Joseph, 124
  174, 188, 228                                  VHF (very high frequency), 113
unmanned flight, missions, 36, 42, 72,           vibration, 55,63, 110, 113, 118, 135, 170,
  149                                               202, 205
unpowered flight, 17, 36, 42, 150-151            videotape, 10
upper atmosphere. See atmosphere.                Vienna, Austria, 129
upper stages. See Space Shuttle.                 Viking: lander, orbiter. See Viking proj-
Upper Volta, 198                                    ect.
uranium, 109, 130, 230                           Viking mission, 3, 15, 33, 49, 52, 125,
Uranus (planet), 3, 34, 38, 48, 49, 59-60,          155, 161
                                                 Viking project, 3, 15, 20, 25, 48, 52, 70,
  69, 103, 137, 161, 204, 226-227
Urban, Dr. Eugene W., 157                           101, 125, 181
Urdu (language), 103                              Viking 1 31, 55, 70, 132, 176
                                                           ,
U.S. Booster, Inc (See also United Space          Viking 2, 31, 62, 76
   Boosters.), 231                               vinegar flies, 68
users; user community (See also data             Vinson, Mack, 229-230
   utilization.), 143                            Virgin Islands, U.S., 179
Users Requirements Committee, 59                 Virginia, 5, 137, 164
Utah State University, 4                         Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI), 5
utilities, private, 15-16, 129                   visibility, 69, 75, 94
Utopia Planitia (region of Mars), 6, 125         visible, 174, 178, 189, 210, 216

316
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977                                            INDEX


                                            Webb, C. Horton, 227
vision, 216
vitamins, 123                               Weber, Mrs. Elizabeth, 67
Vogt, Dr. Rochus E., 190                    Webster, J.J., 81
                                            weight, 45, 79, 114, 123, 128, 134, 145,
voice communications, 158,
                                              150, 162, 177, 182, 211, 214
                                            weightlessness (See also zero gravity.), 30,
volcanoes, 207                                57, 59, 64,146, 160, 167, 206,208, 224
                                            Weis, Judge Joseph F., Jr., 13
von Braun, Dr. Wernher, 115-117, 141,       Weitz, Paul, 160
                                            welding, 25
  209
                                            West Germany. See Federal Republic of
von Zahn, Dr. Ulf, 166
Vought Corp., 30, 177                         Germany.
Voyager mission, 33, 49, 102, 103, 108,     Western American Energy Corp., 51
  137, 140, 143, 145, 155-156, 161, 167,    Western Test Range (WTR), 9, 197, 229
  169, 184, 186, 221, 226-227               Western Union Corp., 22
 Voyager I , 167, 186, 227, 252, 263        Western Union International, 140
 Voyager 2, 155-156, 186, 227, 250, 262     Western Union Space Communications
                                              Go., Inc., 1
Wagner, Dr. J. Bruce, 192                   Westinghouse Electric Corp., 13, 22, 49,
Waldheim, Dr. Kurt, 44, 103                    175, 220
Walker, Curtis L., 232                      Westlake, Reginald, 65
Wallops Flight Center                       whales, 184
  -launches, 30, 127, 164                   wheel, 165
  -programs, 5 , 69, 8 5 , 127, 134, 138,   Whitaker, Ann, 230
     164, 169, 178, 192, 206                Whitcomb, Richard T., 71, 152
Wang, Dr. Taylor, 106                       White (Gen. Thomas D.) space trophy,
war, 74                                       203
warning. See safety devices; safety sys-    white dwarfs. See stars.
 tems.                                      White Sands, N.M., 1
Warwick, Dr. James W., 137                     -Missile Range, 30, 93, 121
Washington, University of, 167                 -Test Facility, 44, 71
wastes, 51, 111, 188, 233                    Whitecloud (USN navigation system). See
Watanabe, Kazuo, 131                           NOSS 2.
water, 106, 123, 160, 218, 224               Wiebe, CPO Richard, 208
  -pollution. See pollution, environ-        Wiedemeier, Dr. Herbert, 192
     mental.                                 wildlife, 47, 157, 193
   -survey, 33, 48, 80, 141                  Wilkins, Dr. Judd, 63
   -tank, 64                                 Wilkinson, Dr. J.H., 227
   -vapor, 10, 110, 161, 204                 Williams, Dr. Bill A,, 85
“waterhole.” See frequencies, broadcast.     Williams Research Corp., 134
waves, 231                                   Williamson, Dave, 218
weapons systems, 162, 203                    wind, 67, 211, 214,222, 231
                                             wind power; windmills. See power
   -aircraft, 29
                                               sources.
   -interceptors. See interceptor satel-
     lites.                                  wind tunnels, 28, 42, 61, 110, 132, 138,
   -intercontinental, 8                        173
                                             Windsor, Richard M., 37
   -missiles, rockets, 8-9, 16, 57, 58,
                                             Windworks, he., 176
      115, 197
                                             winglets, 71-72, 110, 130
   -nuclear, 65, 131, 177
                                             wings, aircraft. See design.
   -satellites, 6-7, 22, 101-102, 177
weather; weather control. See meteor-        Winter, Dr. David, 206
                                             wireless, 19
   ology.
                                             wiring, 177
Weaver, Leon, 84

                                                                                    317
lNDEX                                   ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977


                                            Wright trophy, 172
Wisconsin, 130, 176
                                            Wyoming, University of, 109
Witteborn, Dr. Fred, 107
Woese, Dr. Carl, 201
Wolff, A.B., 186                            X-1 (NASA experimental aircraft), 219
women, in air and space program (See        X-15 (U.S.research aircraft), 235
 also names of individuals.), 41, 57, 74,   XB-70 (experimental aircraft), 235
 79, 123, 132, 157, 162, 176, 185, 191,     XC-8A. See Buffalo aircraft.
  194, 201, 205-206                         XV-15. See tilt-rotor research aircraft.
Wood, H. William, 65                        x-ray, 37, 48, 54, 58, 72, 113, 129, 149-
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, 93,        150, 153, 156, 174, 210, 212, 216, 228
  114
Woomera, Australia, 37
                                             Yakovlev, AS., 29
work force adjustment. See employment.
                                             Yardley, John F., 124, 171, 209, 217
working groups. See meetings.
                                             YF-12 ( U S aircraft), 235
work load, 232
                                             Yin, Dr. Lo I., 216
workshops. See meetings.
                                             Yost, Paul E. (Ed), 181, 227
World Meteorological Organization, 131,
                                             Young, A. Thomas, 106, 207, 226
  210
                                             Young, John, 143
World War I, 115, 141, 172
World War 11, 16, 115, 147
                                             Zelenchuk, USSR, 76
worldwide communications. See global
                                             Zeppelin, 141
  communications.
                                             zero gravity, 25, 152
Wouch, Jerry, 106
                                             zinc, 93, 190
wreck, 205, 214
                                             Zuckerman, Lord (Baron) Solly, 40
Wright Flyer (airplane), 3
                                             Zurich, University of, 55
Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio, 199, 214




318
                     The NASA History Series

HISTORIES
Anderson, Frank W., Jr., Orders of Magnitude: A History of NACA and NASA,
  1915-1980 (NASA SP-4403. 2d ed., 1981).
Benson, Charles D., and William Barnaby Faherty, Moonport: A History of
  Apollo Launch Facilities and Operations (NASA SP-4204, 1978).
Bilstein, Roger E., Stages to Saturn: A Technological History of the
  Apollo/Saturn Launch Vehicles (NASA SP-4206, 1980).
Boone, W. Fred, NASA Office of Defense Affairs: The First Five Years (NASA
  HHR-32, 1970, multilith).
Brooks, Courtney G., James M. Grimwood and Loyd S. Swenson. Jr., Chariots
 for Apollo: A History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft (NASA SP-4205, 1979).
Byers, Bruce K., Destination Moon: A History of the Lunar Orbiter Program
  (NASA T M X-3487, 1977, multilith).
Compton, W. David, and Charles D. Benson, Living and Working in Space: A
  History of Skylab (NASA SP-4208, 1983).
Corliss, William R. NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958-1968: A Historical Summary
  (NASA SP-4401, 1971).
Ezell, Edward Clinton, and Linda Neuman Ezell, On Mars: Exploration of the
  Red Planet, 1958-1978 (NASA SP-4212, 1984).
Ezell, Edward Clinton, and Linda Neuman Ezell, The Partnership: A History of
  the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (NASA SP-4209, 1978).
Green, Constance McL., and Milton Lomask, Vanguard: A History (NASA
  SP-4202, 1970; also Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1971).
Hacker, Barton C., and James W. Grimwood, On the Shoulders of Titans: A
  History of Project Gemini (NASA SP-4203, 1977).
Hall, R. Cargill, Lunar Impact: A History of Project Ranger (NASA SP-4210,
  1977).
Hallion, Richard P., On the Frontier: Flight Research at Dryden, 1946-1981
  (NASA SP-4303, 1984).
Hartman, Edwin P., Adventures in Research: A History of Ames Research
  Center, 1940196.5 (NASA SP-4302, 1970).
Levine, Arnold, Managing NASA in the Apollo ERA (NASA SP-4102, 1982).
Newell, Homer E., Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science
  (NASA SP-4211, 1980).
Pitts, John A., The Human Factor: Biomedicine in the Manned Space Program
  to I908 (NASA SP-4213, 1985).
Roland, Alex, Model Research: The National Advisory Committee for
  Aeronautics, 1915-1958 (NASA SP-4103, 1985).
Rosenthal, Alfred, Venture into Space: Early Years of Goddard Space Flight
  Center (NASA SP-4301, 1968).
Rosholt, Robert L., A n Administrative History of NASA, 1958-1963 (NASA
  SP-4101, 1966).
Sloop, John L., Liquid Hydrogen as a Propulsion Fuel, 1945-1959 (NASA
  SP-4404, 1978).
Swenson, Loyd S., Jr., James M. Grimwood, and Charles C. Alexander, This
  New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury (NASA SP-4201, 1966).
REFERENCE WORKS
Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, annual volumes for 1975-1982.
The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology (NASA SP-4009, vol. 1, 1969; vol. 2,
  1973; vol. 3, 1976; vol. 4, 1978).
Astronautics and Aeronautics: A Chronology of Science, Technology, and
  Policy, annual volumes 1961-1976, with an earlier summary volume,
  Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1951-1960.
Dickson, Katherine M., ed., History of Aeronautics and Astronautics: A
  Preliminary Bibliography (NASA HHR-29, 1968, multilith).
Hall, R. Cargill, ed., Essays on the History of Rocketry and Astronautics: Pro-
  ceedings of the Third through the Sixth History Symposia of the International
  Academy of Astronautics (NASA CP-2014, 2 vols., 1977).
Hall, R. Cargill, Project Ranger: A Chronology (JPL/HR-2, 1971, multilith).
Looney, John J., ed., Bibliography of Space Books and Articles from Non-
  Aerospace Journals, 1957-1977 NASA HHR-51, 1979, multilith).
Roland, Alex F., A Guide to Research in NASA History (NASA HHR-50, 6th
  ed., 1982, available from NASA History Office).
Skylab: A Chronology (NASA SP-4011, 1977).
Van Nimmen, Jane, and Leonard C. Bruno, with Robert L. Rosholt, NASA
  Historical Data Book, 1958-1968, vol. 1, NASA Resources (NASA SP-4012,
  1976).
Wells, Helen T., Susan H. Whiteley, and Carrie E . Karegeannes, Origins of
  NASA Names (NASA SP-4402, 1976).

  Recent volumes are available from Superintendent of Documents, Government
Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; early volumes from National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161.
                                                   2. Government Accession No.
1. Report No.                                                                                            3 Recipient's Catalog No.
                                                                                                         .
          NASA SP-4022
4. Title and Subtitle                                                                                    5. Repon Date
    Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1977: A Chronology
                                                                                                                     h3f
                                                                                                             Code
                                                                                                         6. Performin Or nization Coda


7. Authorkt                                                                                              8. Performing Organization Report No.

     Eleanor H. Ritchie
    1
                                                                                                      10. Work Unit No.
9. Performing Organization Name and Address
    NASA Headquarters History Office                                                                  11. Contract or Grant No.
    Washington, D.C.
                                                                                                      13. Type of Report and Period Covered
2. Sponsoring Agency Name and Address                                                                         Special Publication
                                                                                                      14. Sponsoring Agency Code
     National Aeronautics and Space Administration
     Washington, D.C.
5. Supplementary Notes




6. Abstract

S       This publication is a chronolbgy of events du'ring the year 1977 in the
        fields of aeronautical and space research, development, activity, and
        policy. It includes appendixes, an index, and illustrations.
        Chronological entries list sources f o r further inquiry




                                                                            ~-
                                                                            18. Distribution Statement
7. Key Words (Suggested by Author(rl),

                                                                                    Unc lass? ied--Unl imited
                                                                                             f


                                                                                                               Subject Category 99
                                                                                               NO. of Psger       22. Price
                                              20. Security Clawif. (of this page)        21.
IS. Security Qassif. (of this report1
                                                                                         -4et+
        Unclassified                              Unclassified

                                 For sale by the National Technical Information Service. Springfield. Virginia 22161
 11-305
                                                                Ponags and Fees Paid
                                 SPECIAL FOURTH CLASSMAlL
National Aeronautics and
                                          BOOK                  National A m m t i c s and
Space Administration                                            Srmcs Administration
                                                                NASA451
Washington, D.C.
20546
offloat B U S I n s a
Penalty for Private Uae, $3300




                                                                             If UndelivtralYle(Section 158
                                                            POSTMASTER:
                                                                             Portal Manual) Do No1 Return