At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States’ first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States’ 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life,” 31 January 1998.)
Endeavour separated from Mir to head home at 11:57 a.m. (EST), returning David A. Wolf to Earth and leaving Andrew S. W. Thomas at the Mir station for a four-and-one-half-month stay. Wolf was returning to Earth aboard Endeavour after completing a 119-day stay on Mir. The new crew of Mir, two cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and a French astronaut Léopold Eyharts, lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on Soyuz TM-27, 23 minutes before Endeavour undocked from Mir.(New York Times, “Shuttle Departs, Leaving Last American on Mir,” 30 January 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Endeavour Separates from Mir,” USA Today, 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.”)
Russian space officials cancelled a spacewalk after cosmonauts broke three wrenches on the last of 10 locks, while trying to open a hatch. The cosmonauts had intended to repair a damaged solar panel. NASA rescheduled the spacewalk for April. The incident further increased concerns about the safety of Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 March 1998.)
A Zenit rocket, launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, failed when a computer error caused a premature engine shutdown during the second-stage burn. The rocket fell, crashing in Siberia. The rocket’s failure destroyed 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row,” 13 July 1999; Globalstar Chronology, 13 July 1999, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/glolstar.htm (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Russia announced it would retire the Mir space station during the summer of 1999, six months earlier than originally planned. The decision resulted from a meeting between Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov, who agreed that Russia had insufficient funds to continue to fly the station. The agreement allocated approximately US$100 million for Mir’s final year, including funds for “a series of rockets to direct Mir to an unpopulated area of the Pacific Ocean.” Nemtsov also agreed to pay the Russian Space Agency the US$600 million owed for Mir’s operations in 1997, using “unspecified ‘nonbudgetary sources’.”(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Russia Agrees to Early End for Mir Space Station,” 2 July 1998; Anna Dolgov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 July 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook a 41⁄2-hour-long spacewalk, to install 40 electrical and data connectors linking the U.S.-built connecting module Unity with the Russian-built power module Zarya. The pair also bolted handrails to the side of Unity and photographed two of Zarya’s backup docking antennas, which had failed to deploy. Russian ground controllers sent commands to power up Zarya, jump-starting Unity’s electrical systems. Ross and Newman then removed thermal covers from Unity’s outside computers to prevent overheating.(Paul Hoversten, “Spacewalkers Complete a Tricky Wiring Job,” USA Today, 8 December 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin returned to Earth from a 207-day sojourn aboard Mir, along with former Kremlin aide Yuri M. Baturin, who had accompanied the cosmonauts’ replacements to the space station, spending 12 days in space. The two cosmonauts arrived in Russia to find a devalued ruble and the return of Viktor S. Chernomyrdin as Acting Prime Minister. Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had not yet fired Chernomyrdin’s government at the time Musabayev and Budarin left for Mir, and the two cosmonauts had missed the entire four-month term of Prime Minister Sergei V. Kiriyenko. Yeltsin had dissolved Kiriyenko’s government the week before the cosmonauts’ return flight to Earth. Because Yeltsin had devalued the ruble, the two cosmonauts also found that their pay had diminished.
Russia’s first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russia’s largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a “revolution,” because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, “Delta Lifts Russian Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia,” 23 November 1998.)
A Soyuz TM-28 spacecraft blasted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying the penultimate crew of the Russian space station Mir. The three-member crew was composed of former presidential defense adviser Yuri M. Baturin, Flight Commander Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Engineer Gennady I. Padalka.564 Baturin was the first Russian bureaucrat to travel into space, and his inclusion in the mission attracted “unusually heavy Russian media coverage.” The former Kremlin adviser had trained alongside professional cosmonauts, passing all examinations. Earlier in the year, President Boris N. Yeltsin had fired space physicist Baturin without an explanation, and Baturin had focused since then on training for the mission to Mir.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia Blasts First Bureaucrat into Space,” 13 August 1998; Associated Press, “Mir Mission Under Way Despite Russian Economic Troubles,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 August 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would “play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States.” With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could “detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone.” The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, “Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, “U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket,” 9 May 1998.)
The Russian Space Agency nominated veteran cosmonaut Valery V. Ryumin to fly as a mission specialist aboard Discovery during Mission STS-91 in May. In his last spaceflight in 1980, Ryumin was a member of the Soyuz 35 Mission. During that mission, he had spent 185 days in space from April through October. Ryumin had spent a total of 362 days in space in the course of his three missions.(NASA, “Veteran Cosmonaut Nominated To Fly on Final Shuttle/Mir Mission,” news release, 21 January 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichev’s Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: “This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space.” The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russia’s space program.
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
Just hours before Endeavour touched down in Florida, a new crew from Russia docked at Mir to begin a three-week transition from Mir 24 to Mir 25. Mir 25 Commander Talgat A. Musabayev replaced Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Flight Engineer Nikolai M. Budarin replaced Pavel V. Vinogradov, and Researcher Léopold Eyharts, a 40-year old French air force pilot on his first spaceflight, joined the crew.(NASA, “STS-89”; Washington Post, “2 Russians, Frenchman Blast Off for Mir,” 30 January 1998.)
Following a meeting of the Defence Council, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree giving overall control of Russia’s space industry to the civilian Russian Space Agency. Yeltsin’s intention was “to extract maximum economic benefit from one of the few manufacturing industries in which Russia is a world leader.” With this decree, Yeltsin required the government to create a plan for a restructured space industry, giving priority to national security, to economic and scientific missions, and to strengthening Russia’s position in the world marketplace.(Reuters, “Russia Puts Civilian Agency in Charge of Space,” 20 January 1998.)
Cosmonauts working aboard Mir conducted the first of two tests, using green fluorescent gas made from combining nitrogen, acetone, and biacetyl gases, to search for leaks in the Spektr laboratory module damaged in a collision in June 1997. However, they were unable to pinpoint the sources of any seepage. Because Mir was nearing its decommission stage, Russia planned no repairs, in the event that the cosmonauts were able to locate the leaks precisely. Instead, the tests were intended as practice for finding leaks on the future ISS.
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a “space tugboat” in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit,” 20 November 1998.)
Russian Mission Control monitored Mir’s airlock pressure following the repair work of 9 January. On Friday, 8 January, when the crew entered the airlock without spacesuits to retrieve some equipment, the repair was holding, but the pressure had fallen slightly. Russian ground control near Moscow, which was analyzing the data, planned to decide on Monday whether Mir’s Kvant-2 module was safe.(Reuters, “Mir’s Airlock Pressure Down a Bit—Russian Control,” 11 January 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev announced that Russia had found the funds needed to continue participating in the ISS project. Although the Russian Cabinet had rejected Koptev’s request for additional funds, a meeting with Finance Minister Mikhail M. Zadornov and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov had led to an agreement that funding for the ISS would come from a “special budget section.” However, the Russian Space Agency provided no details of the funding plan. Koptev also announced that the Russian Space Agency might scrap the Mir space station in the fall, a year ahead of schedule, to make more cash available for the ISS. Koptev suggested that the space agency would look for revenue sources outside of the government.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 29 May 1998.)
NASA and Russian Space Agency officials announced that Russia had agreed to sell research time aboard the International Space Station (ISS) for US$60 million, with payment dependent on the Russian agency’s completion of critical milestones. The ISS collaborators, including representatives of the 16 countries participating in the ISS program, had reached the agreement during a week of meetings in Moscow. Russia had missed three target dates because of insufficient funds. The deal, part of NASA’s efforts to bail out its partner and to “prevent costly new delays” in the construction and launch of the ISS, did not release Russia from its obligations to build the service module. As the Moscow meeting concluded, NASA officials also announced that the launches of the first ISS components, the Zarya and Unity modules, remained on schedule, and that the international partners had agreed to reconvene to refine the ISS assembly sequence, at the launch of the Unity module from Kennedy Space Center (KSC).(NASA, “Statement Following Conclusion of Moscow Meetings,” news release 98-176, 2 October 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Agency Makes Sale,” 5 October 1998; William J. Broad, “To Buy Some Time, Russia To Sell U.S. Some Time in Space,” New York Times, 5 October 1998.)
Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mir’s crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
An international group of computer hackers, calling itself Masters of Downloading or MOD, announced that it had stolen key software programs from NASA. The same group had previously broken into the Pentagon’s Defense Information Systems Network, claiming to have stolen enough information to “‘take control’ of military satellites and other systems.” Although U.S. Department of Defense officials said that MOD had downloaded an application for management and record keeping, not for “anything that could perform a control function,” the group claimed that its cyber attack on NASA had “stripped the U.S. space agency of its chief defense against computer intrusion.” MOD had sent the stolen samples of NASA software to a computer expert who maintained a Web site devoted to information-security issues. The group, which included at least two Russian members, asserted that it had broken into NASA’s system through JPL to obtain the software samples and threatened to sell the information to international terrorist groups or foreign governments.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA Becomes Latest Victim of Masters of Downloading,” 23 April 1998.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
In a spacewalk lasting nearly 7 hours, Mir cosmonauts failed to stabilize the solar panel damaged in a collision in 1997. Russian space officials had postponed this spacewalk from 3 March, when the crew had been unable to unlock the hatch, breaking three wrenches in their attempts. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, spent most of the spacewalk setting up a handrail, left outside the space station by the previous crew. After struggling to unfold and assemble the handrail, the pair only had enough time to install one of two footrests. The cosmonauts returned to Mir after the elapse of 6 hours and 40 minutes; their oxygen tanks only held approximately 7 hours of air. Russian Mission Control had intentionally turned off the audio system during most of the spacewalk. Officials said that Mission Control would no longer allow journalists to listen to radio traffic between Mission Control and spacewalkers, because reporters had become overly critical. Russian officials accused reporters of exaggerating problems on the space station, despite the fact that Mir had been operating relatively trouble free for several months before this spacewalk.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Undertakes Six-Hour Spacewalk To Repair Solar Panel,” 1 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 2 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Runs Out of Time, Fails To Stabilize Solar Panel,”1 April 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Terrence W. Wilcutt to replace James D. Halsell Jr. as NASA’s Manager of Operational Activities at Star City, Russia. Wilcutt was the 10th astronaut to serve in the rotational position, supporting the training and preparation of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center and acting as a liaison between NASA and Russian management. Wilcutt had flown on three missions: the first, in 1994, as the pilot on Mission STS-68, to study the Earth’s surface; the second, in 1996, as the pilot for the fourth Shuttle–Mir docking mission, STS-79; and the third, in 1998, as the commander of Mission STS-89, the eighth docking mission.(NASA, “Astronaut Wilcutt Replaces Halsell in Star City, Russia,” news release 98-127, 22 July 1998.)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
Mir Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev celebrated his 50th birthday⎯in space, enjoying a “semi- officially” sanctioned one-gulp-per-person dose of cognac and a birthday dinner chosen from the space station’s supplies. Solovyev had logged an impressive 80 hours of spacewalking during 17 walks. As of this Mir mission, Solovyev’s fifth, the Russian cosmonaut had spent a cumulative total of approximately 20 months on the space station.(Associated Press, “Mir-50-Year-Old Cosmonaut,” 16 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA announced that two of its research pilots had been the first Americans to fly a modified Russian Tu-144 supersonic jetliner, participating in three evaluation flights over a two-week period during mid-to-late September, at Zhukovsky Air Development Center near Moscow. Pilots Robert Rivers of Langley Research Center and C. Gordon Fullerton of Dryden Flight Research Center had flown the jetliner as part of a jointly funded activity under the auspices of NASA’s High-Speed Research Program and the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group. The purpose of the test flights was to gain operational experience and experimental flight data to develop an “environmentally friendly, second-generation, supersonic transport” in the United States.(NASA, “NASA Pilots Fly Russian Tu-144LL Flying Laboratory,” news release 98-186, 13 October 1998.)
Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman made their final spacewalk to free the second Russian docking antenna on Zarya, which had failed to unfurl. The pair also finished outfitting the station. The astronauts had required a total of 21 hours over three spacewalks to complete the work.(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup.”)
The two Russian crew members of the Mir space station completed a record-breaking spacewalk. Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov dismantled and retrieved in record time the Kristall module’s optical-monitoring equipment made by the United States. The scheduled 6-hour spacewalk took only 3 hours and 8 minutes. However, it was unclear whether the cosmonauts had been able to repair a leaky hatch. The problem was not with the rubber sealing, as Russian ground control had suspected, but rather with a malfunctioning lock that was preventing the hatch from sealing hermetically. The cosmonauts activated 10 reserve locks and pumped air into the airlock, planning to monitor the hatch for leaks over the next 24 hours. The spacewalk was Commander Solovyev’s 16th in five flights over 10 years. He had spent more than 70 hours in free space, more than any other person had accrued.(Washington Post, “Mir Commander Walks into Spaceflight History,” 10 January 1998; Washington Times, “Cosmonauts Possibly Fix Leaky Hatch, Do Spacewalk in Record-Short Time,” 10 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.9−6.8 tonnes (6.5−7.5 tons, 13,000−15,000 pounds, or 5,900−6,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESA’s contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, “Third Try’s the Charm for European Rocket,” Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success,” 21 October 1998.)
The Russian government agreed to pay a US$44.5 million debt to the Russian Space Agency, to ensure that the agency would be able to complete a long-delayed component of the new space station. Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev said that the government had agreed to pay the debt in three installments, in October, November, and December.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russian Government To Pay $44.5 Mln Debt to Space Agency,” 6 October 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
Russian Space Agency officials reported, for the first time since Zarya’s launch, that the module had experienced malfunctions. At a press conference, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev explained that none of the module’s three minor malfunctions had any impact on the module’s overall operations. Koptev reported that one of the eight batteries storing energy collected from the module’s solar panels had not performed properly, but he emphasized that Zarya needed only four of the eight batteries to operate. Mission Control had detected an “unexpected abundance of humidity” inside the module, but engineers did not yet know its cause. The third problem involved a malfunctioning antenna in the craft’s automatic docking system, a device that the first ISS crew would not need until after their arrival in January 2000.(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Minor Problems Plague New Space Station,” 25 November 1998.)
A Russian Space Agency official insisted that there had been no problem with Andrew S. W. Thomas’s spacesuit, describing the U.S. astronaut as bad tempered and expressing concern about the implications of Thomas’s attitude for the remainder of the mission. Deputy Flight Commander Viktor Blagov indicated that, since major work would take place on Mir, “any fuss about the space suit is out of place.” Blagov explained that Thomas would keep both David Wolf’s spacesuit and his own.(Reuters, “Balky Suit.”)
Russian cosmonauts aboard Mir located a lost wrench among 12 years’ worth of accumulated spare parts. They used the wrench to loosen the bolt that had broken three wrenches earlier in the week, preventing the two cosmonauts from undertaking a planned spacewalk.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Solve Mystery of Missing Wrench,” 5 March 1998.)
The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that “program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap.” The task force concluded that “the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission,” recommending that NASA “revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task force’s conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, “such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners.” The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would “save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the station’s capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner.” However, the task force’s report concluded that “those assumptions were faulty.”(NASA Advisory Council, “Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station,” 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, “Russia’s Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns,” 24 April 1998.)
