The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space station’s size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the “newest power couple” in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, “Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XM’s ‘Roll’ Satellite,” 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Sends ‘Roll’ Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio,” Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan propelled by a Soyuz-U rocket. The spacecraft carried one of the most controversial space travelers in historyAmerican businessman Dennis A. Tito. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency for the opportunity to accompany cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Yuri M. Baturin on the mission to the ISS. Many space officials, regarding the endeavor as unsafe and capricious, had opposed Tito’s presence on the flight. Only days before the launch, Tito had gained the final approval of the consortium of nations building the ISS, becoming the highest profile space tourist to fly into orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren E. Leary, “Russia Wins Fight To Be First Space Travel Agent,” New York Times, 25 April 2001.)
The Russian cargo craft Progress M1-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, carrying 2.5 tons (2.3 tonnes or 2,300 kilograms) of supplies for the ISS crew. Along with food, research materials, and a new computer system to replace the damaged control machines, the cargo carrier also hauled 1 ton (0.9 tonnes or 907 kilograms) of extra fuel to the space station, so that Progress M1-6 could push the ISS into a higher orbit. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the spacecraft to dock with the ISS two days after launch. The launch was the first using the newly improved Soyuz-FG rocket, a booster designed to use 5 percent less fuel than previous models.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571; Mark Wade, “Progress M1,” Encyclopaedia Astronautica, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/proessm1.htm (accessed 29 July 2008).)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russia’s second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
Researchers published findings from an unprecedented analysis of NASA-produced satellite data of carbon absorption by northern hemisphere forests. The researchers had used the satellite data to study the extent to which forests had absorbed carbon released into Earth’s atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide from fossil-fuel combustion. Many scientists consider atmospheric accumulation of carbon dioxide to be a primary cause of global climate change, because forests act as “sinks,” absorbing carbon dioxide, thereby reducing its atmospheric accumulation. The researchers had found that forests in Europe, Russia, and the United States annually absorbed almost 700 million tonnes (771 million tons or 1.5 trillion pounds) of carbon from 1981 to 1999. They had also found geographic variations in carbon absorption, with Russian forests accounting for nearly 40 percent of the carbon sink and Canadian forests losing carbon. The findings were significant, because they indicated which forests had lost carbon and which had stored it. The findings also validated relationships between satellite measurements and ground-based measurements of carbon absorption, demonstrating the crucial importance of satellites in monitoring forests. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, dedicated to understanding human- induced and natural changes in Earth’s environment, had funded the research.
The People’s Republic of China launched a robotic spacecraft from the Gobi desert, a significant step in the country’s long-term plan to join the United States and Russia as one of the only nations capable of sending humans into space. The Shenzhou 2 craft reached orbit about 10 minutes after launch. China had shrouded its 31-year-old space program in secrecy, releasing few details about funding or about China’s future goals. People’s Daily, however, called the launch “an important step in realizing manned spaceflight.” President Jiang Zemin urged Chinese space officials to further accomplishments, saying, “I hope you will work persistently and unremittingly to achieve even greater victory.” Space experts speculated that a successful Shenzhou 2 mission could mean that China would be ready to send a man or woman to space in the next two to five years. Chinese officials remained circumspect regarding their exact plans.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed to allow the transport of space tourists to the ISS. Although the two agencies did not sign a formal agreement on the matter, media reported that they had agreed to the procedures and standards that spaceflight participantsindividuals who are not professional astronauts or cosmonautsmust satisfy when they visit the space station. NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed that such visitors must demonstrate foreign language ability, undergo specified physical training, and pass a personal suitability test. The issue of spaceflight participants had become a source of contention between NASA and the Russian Space Agency after American businessman Dennis A. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency to transport him to the ISS in April 2001.(Peter Baker, “U.S., Russia Agree To Allow ‘Space Tourists’,” Washington Post, 10 August 2001; ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers” (statement of criteria, Paris, November 2001), http://esamultimedia.esa.int/docs/isscrewcriteria.pdf (accessed 5 November 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency launched a crewless logistics and resupply mission to the ISS. The Progress automatic cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 9:32 a.m., Universal Time (UT),108 on a Soyuz-U rocket. The mission, officially designated as M-45, carried to the ISS 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms, 2.8 tons, or 5,512 pounds) of fuel, oxygen, equipment, and other supplies.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574; Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001: The Year in Review,” http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2001/yearinrev/01YearReview.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Spain’s Prince of Asturias Foundation granted the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation to the ISS partnership, in recognition of the cooperation among the partnering space agencies that had created the orbiting space station. The Prince of Asturias Felipe de Borbón was the heir to the throne of Spain. The foundation granted the Award for International Cooperation to recognize the cultural, humanitarian, scientific, social, and technical efforts of individuals, groups, and institutions. The prince presented the award to officials representing the space agencies participating in the ISS, namely the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. Earlier in the day, the prince had called the astronauts at the ISS to congratulate them on their efforts.(NASA, “International Space Station Receives 2001 Prince of Asturias Award,” news release 01-206, 26 October 2001; Fundación Príncipe de Asturias, “The Aims of the Foundation,” http://www.fundacionprincipedeasturias.org/ing/00/objetivos.html (accessed 28 November 2008).)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russia’s Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISS’s development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, “International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito,” news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist,” 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Financier’s Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance,” Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TM-33 to the ISS on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4 a.m. (CDT). The mission’s crew members consisted of Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyez and Konstantin M. Kozeev and French astronaut Claudie André-Deshays Haigneré; Afanasyez was also Mission Commander. The spacecraft carried supplies and equipment for the ISS. The crew members planned to conduct joint operations and scientific research with the crew of Expedition 3. In addition, one of the main purposes of the mission, designated Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight, was to deliver the Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS, so that the ISS crew could use it as an emergency escape vehicle. The new Soyuz would remain at the ISS, and the spacecraft’s crew would return to Earth in the older Soyuz TM-32, which was already docked at the station.(NASA, “Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp3/taxi3/index.html (accessed 26 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 576, 1 November 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx576.html (accessed 26 November 2008).)
The Soyuz spacecraft, carrying space enthusiast Dennis A. Tito, arrived safely at the ISS, having completed a two-day journey from Kazakhstan. The successful docking took place only 14 hours after Shuttle Endeavour left the ISS, with the crew having completed its mission of installing a Canadian-built robotic arm. Tito arrived at the ISS in good health. Appearing through grainy footage provided by the Russian Space Agency, Tito floated into the space station with arms outstretched and proclaimed, “I love space.” The Soyuz mission mandated that the Russian- American crew remain aboard the ISS for six days.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Leaves Space Station After 8 Days,” Houston Chronicle, 30 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Tito’s ‘Taxi’ Drops Fare at Station, ‘I Love Space’, Says the American Cosmonaut, Who Faces Strict NASA Limits,” 30 April 2001.)
Crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS held a brief ceremony to mark the three-month anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks. The tribute included playing both the Russian and U.S. national anthems in the Space Shuttle and at ISS Mission Control Centers at NASA’s JSC in Houston. Moreover, Endeavour carried U.S. flags and Marine Corps flags that had flown at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol; shields and patches worn by New York City police officers; a New York Fire Department flag; and a poster with pictures of the firefighters who had died in the attacks. Also aboard the Shuttle were 6,000 American flags, which Endeavour would return to Earth, and NASA would distribute to the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks and their families.(NASA, “Shuttle, Station Crewmembers To Honor September 11 Victims,” news release N01-74, 10 December 2001.)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mir’s reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: “The term Joint Airlock means that it’s applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.”(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities,” Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, “NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space,” news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS, the first time ISS crew had walked in space without a Shuttle present. Two tethers attached each cosmonaut to the ISS as the pair departed and reentered the station through the 16- foot (4.9-meter) Russian module Pirs, added to the ISS in September 2001. During the 5-hour spacewalk, the two cosmonauts hooked up a 40-foot (12.2-meter) crane, a ladder, handrails, and other equipment to the exterior of the ISS. American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. monitored the two cosmonauts’ work from inside the station, and Mission Control Center in Moscow supervised the spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts Work Outside on Station; Spacewalk from New Module Is First Without Shuttle Present,” Washington Post, 9 October 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space station’s orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days,” 21 February 2001; Associated Press, “Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit,” 16 February 2001.)
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISS’s science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantis’s crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
The Russian Space Agency launched an automatic cargo carrier to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:24 p.m. (UT). A Soyuz-FG booster lifted the Progress M1-7 cargo carrier. Progress M1-7 was to deliver 2.5 tonnes (2.8 tons or 5,511 pounds) of equipment, food, and fuel to the space station, as well as a microsatellite called Klibri, which the crew would release after the carrier had docked with the ISS.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 577, 1 December 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx577.html (accessed 12 December 2001).)
On the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Mir space station and with its doom imminent, Russian scientists and other space enthusiasts protested the plan to use a controlled descent to destroy the aging vessel. Once a point of pride for the Soviet space program, Mir had remained in use far beyond its planned lifespan and had fallen into disrepair. Russian Space Agency Chief Yuri Koptev attempted once again to explain why Mir had to come down: “The Mir has lived a wonderful life and must end it in a graceful way. We must discard it while we are still capable of controlling it, not turn its descent into roulette that threatens the entire global community.” Russia had planned to initiate Mir’s final descent in mid-March 2001.(Associated Press, “Report: Russia Puts Off Dumping of Mir for a Week,” 15 February 2001; Associated Press, “Russia Marks Mir’s 15th Anniversary by Assuaging Fears of Its Demise,” 19 February 2001; Associated Press, “Scientists Protest on Mir’s 15th Anniversary,” 20 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavour’s stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crew’s installation of the ISS’s robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISS’s hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, “As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station,” New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather,” 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations,” Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
Diplomats from 178 nations reached a compromise agreement to enact the Kyoto Protocol, a pact designed to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases, which scientists believed were contributing to global warming. The United States, represented by Undersecretary of State Paula J. Dobriansky, had rejected the final agreement. Calling the agreement “fatally flawed,” President George W. Bush expressed concern over the effect of the treaty on the U.S. economy. Although Russia and Japan had also expressed major reservations, the two countries had eventually signed the Kyoto Protocol when negotiators included language in the final draft delaying the date of compliance. The treaty called for industrialized nations to limit the emissions released by automobiles, plants, and factories, but the mechanisms for enforcement defied easy solutions. However, according to final rules, each nation must reduce its carbon- dioxide emissions or pay fines for violations. Nations throughout the world criticized the United States’ rejection of the treaty. For example, the chief negotiator for the European Union expressed disappointment at the United States’ decision, saying, “Almost every single country stayed in the protocol. There was one that said the Kyoto Protocol was flawed.” Although an international consensus had emerged, the treaty still required the ratification of the 55 nations responsible for 55 percent of the world’s carbon-dioxide emissions in 1990.(Traci Watson, “Compromise Rescues Kyoto Protocol; Nations Hope Global Warming Treaty Will Take Effect in 2002; U.S. Says Pact ‘Is Not Sound Policy’,” USA Today, 24 July 2001; Peter N. Spotts, “Global Climate Treaty Moves Ahead, Without US,” Christian Science Monitor, 24 July 2001.)
Two members of the ISS crew performed a spacewalk to complete installation of the Russian Pirs docking compartment. During the 5-hour spacewalk, American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir N. Dezhurov connected communications cables between the Pirs module and the adjoining crew-habitation and command module. The pair also tested an external construction crane and photographed an askew solar array attached to the crew-habitation module, so that ground-based experts in Russia could determine whether the array would require repair in the future.
The Russian Space Agency launched a cargo ship headed for the aging Mir space station. The mission’s aim was simple: to remove the 15-year-old space station from orbit safely, by propelling it into Earth’s atmosphere. To accomplish the task, Russia selected an unpiloted Progress M1-5 cargo ship, carrying enough fuel for its own journey and to fire Mir’s thrusters. A series of mechanical problems, including a fire and a collision with another cargo craft in 1997, combined with Russia’s shortage of funds for space endeavors, had led to the Russian government’s decision to end Mir’s successful run. With the launch of the Progress craft, some cosmonauts and Russian space officials protested the destruction of the last remaining symbol of the space heyday of the Soviet Union. Amateur astronomers aimed their telescopes toward the skies to glimpse Mir one last time as it orbited Earth.(Associated Press, “Cargo Ship Intended To Dump Mir Blasts Off Successfully,” 24 January 2001; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia To Launch Ship To Bring Mir Era to End,” 17 January 2001; Agence France-Presse, “Russia Sets January 18 as Date for Mir’s Final Appointment in Space,” 4 January 2001; Michael Alicea, “See Mir in FlightBefore It’s Gone,” Palm Beach Post (FL), 21 January 2001.)
Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed a new director of Russia’s largest manufacturer of spacecraft and rockets, the Khrunichev State Research and Production Company. Putin selected Alexander I. Medvedev to succeed Anatoly Kiselyov, who had headed the company for 26 years. At the time of the change in leadership, Kiselyov had reported failing health. Companies with interests in Russian space exploration continued to adjust to postcommunist operations. The Khrunichev State Research and Production Company, providing much of the revenue to keep Russia’s space projects alive, manufactured Proton booster rockets used to launch commercial and communication satellites.(Associated Press, “New Chief for Russia Space Company,” 7 February 2001.)
Cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS to clear an obstruction that had prevented the pilotless Progress Russian supply ship from docking securely to the space station. The crew believed that the obstruction was a rubber seal from a supply ship that had left the ISS on 22 November. NASA had delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour for five days because of concern that Endeavour’s arrival at the space station could cause the insecurely docked supply ship to wobble, possibly damaging the ISS. However, Dezhurov and Tyurin were able to remove the obstruction during their 3-hour spacewalk, thereby clearing the way for Endeavour to launch on 5 December.(Warren E. Leary, “Endeavour Is Set for Launching After Docking Problem Is Solved,” New York Times, 4 December 2001; Los Angeles Times, “With Space Debris Cleared, Shuttle Launch Set,” 4 December 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASA’s rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russia’s agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Tito’s crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, “Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff,” Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains,” 20 March 2001.)
After months of debate over whether Russia should bring Mir out of orbit and what damage the space station might cause when it fell to Earth, the 15-year-old Mir space station plunged into Earth’s atmosphere, spraying some of its remnants into the Pacific Ocean. The splashdown marked the end of a 2.2 billion-mile journey for Mir. Witnesses in Fiji reported seeing streaks of gold and silver lights across the sky when Mir fell, but nobody reported any damage from pieces of the falling space station. U.S. officials at the Pentagon tracked the descent, while Japan’s public safety chief urged people to stay indoors to avoid falling debris. Anatoly Y. Solovyev, a Russian cosmonaut who had spent 651 days aboard Mir, remarked that he was sad to see the end of the pathbreaking space station: “An entire era of our Soviet space program is ending, into which we invested not only our money, but what is more important, our intellectual potential.” Once Mir had descended safely, officials of the Russian Space Agency praised the precise sequence of maneuvers that had brought the space station safely from orbit.(Patrick E. Tyler, “Mir Space Station Sizzles To Ending Over Pacific,” New York Times, 23 March 2001; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Officials Exultant After Flawlessly Bringing Down Mir,” 23 March 2001; Peter Baker, “Mir’s Fall to Earth Marks a Fiery End to Bumpy Mission,” Washington Post, 23 March 2001; Associated Press, “Japan’s Public Safety Chief Urges People To Stay Inside To Avoid Mir Debris,” 16 March 2001; World Reporter, “Pentagon To Track Mir Station’s Descent from Orbit,” 10 March 2001.)
