NASA astronauts Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Sunita L. Williams undertook their third spacewalk outside the ISS in nine days. Over 6.5 hours, the astronauts accomplished their primary task—jettisoning two large thermal covers, folding them with smaller shrouds that had covered an electronics box, and tossing them away from the ISS, so that they would eventually burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. The astronauts also connected cables to a new system that would allow the ISS to share power with a docked orbiter; added a platform intended to hold a storage container; and photographed the docking port. Lopez-Alegria set a new U.S. spacewalking record of 61 hours and 22 minutes. The all-time record of more than 82 hours belonged to Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyov. Sunita L. Williams extended the spacewalking record she had set on 4 February to 29 hours and 17 minutes. The series of spacewalks that had begun on 31 January marked the first time that ISS crew had conducted three spacewalks within such a short time, without a Space Shuttle docked at the ISS.(Mike Schneider, “Astronaut Sets U.S. Spacewalking Record,” Associated Press, 9 February 2007. 8)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Oleg V. Kotov restored two of the three data channels on each of the two computers that had failed on 12 June during the deployment of the solar arrays on the ISS’s new power module. Russian engineers had determined that backup- power supplies for the computers had also failed. While Yurchikhin and Kotov worked on restoring the computers, U.S. astronauts James F. Reilly II and John D. Olivas conducted the third scheduled EVA of the Atlantis Mission STS-117. During a spacewalk lasting 7 hours and 58 minutes, Reilly installed a hydrogen vent on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory, and Olivas repaired a 4-by-6-inch (10.2-by-15.2-centimeter) piece of thermal blanket on Atlantis’s left orbital- maneuvering-system pod. The thermal blanket had loosened during launch. Together, Olivas and Reilly also finished retracting the old solar panels.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Cosmonauts Reboot Space Station Computers,” Los Angeles Times, 16 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete To-Do List on Shuttle, Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 16 June 2007.)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS lasting 6 hours and 18 minutes. In undertaking his 10th spacewalk, Lopez-Alegria set another U.S. record, surpassing Jerry L. Ross’s nine spacewalks. Although Tyurin initially encountered problems with his spacesuit’s cooling system, causing his visor to fog up, he and Lopez-Alegria accomplished several tasks, including repairing an antenna. The antenna had failed to retract on 26 October 2006, when a Russian Progress vehicle docked at the ISS’s Zvezda service module. To ensure the antenna would not interfere with the undocking of the craft in April, Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin partially retracted the stuck antenna and secured
Over the course of 10 hours, NASA’s Mission Control remotely unfurled the S3/S4 solar arrays located on the new truss segment. Tip to tip the solar arrays spanned a distance of 240 feet (73 meters). With the solar arrays added to the left and right sides of the new power module, the ISS achieved an unprecedented symmetry in its appearance. In the midst of the solar-array- deployment operation, a fire alarm sounded in the Russian sector of the ISS, but crew and mission managers quickly determined that a computer malfunction was the cause. Russian computers, working in conjunction with American computers, had failed, and attempts to reboot the Russian computers had triggered the false fire alarm. However, because of the computer failure, the small maneuvering jets on Atlantis had assumed control of the ISS’s attitude, placing the station’s solar panels in a poor position for gathering sunlight and causing power levels to drop. Mission Control ordered the crew to turn off some nonessential equipment until the ISS regained attitude control. Thereafter, engineers successfully reestablished gyroscope control, and the left-side array began tracking the Sun properly.(Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array,” 13 June 2007; John Schwartz, “Glitch Blamed for Fire Alarm on Orbiter,” New York Times, 13 June 2007; William Harwood, “Computer Glitches Impact Station Attitude Control,” Spaceflight Now, 12 June 2007.)
for a new module scheduled to arrive later in the year. ISS Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineers Oleg V. Kotov and Clayton C. Anderson worked from inside the space station to move the Pressurized Mating Adapter-3 (PMA-3) from its port-side perch on NASA’s Unity module to a berth facing Earth. The crew had delayed the relocation process by approximately 1 hour, because three of the sixteen bolts securing the PMA had returned intermittent fault messages. However, Mission Control determined that the error messages would not affect the relocation or the installation of the Harmony node later in the year. Kotov assisted Anderson in operating the ISS’s robotic arm, while Yurchkhin oversaw the bolt-latching systems, alternately freeing and securing the module during its relocation. PMA-3 detached from Unity at 8:23 a.m. (EDT) and, at 9:07 a.m. (EDT), the crew successfully reattached the port to its new berth. NASA’s lead Expedition 15 Flight Director Robert C. Dempsey acknowledged the cooperation between the Russian and American crew members. Dempsey remarked that Expedition 15’s crew was one of the first truly integrated crews that he had seen, noting that the mission marked the first time that Russian cosmonauts had operated NASA-controlled components, such as the Canadian-built robotic arm.(Tariq Malik, “Space Station Crew Clears Port for New Module,” Space.com, 30 August 2007, http://www.space. com/missionlaunches/070830_exp15_pma3move.html (accessed 30 June 2010).)
The heads of space agencies from Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at the ESA headquarters in Paris to review International Space Station (ISS) cooperation. The ISS partners discussed the significant accomplishments and milestones in implementing the ISS’s configuration and assembly sequence, as endorsed at the previous meeting of the partners in March 2006. Milestones for the ISS included reestablishing a three-person crew, reinitiating station-assembly activities, and completing three extremely challenging Space Shuttle missions, which included the extravehicular accomplishments of American, Canadian, European, and Russian astronauts.(NASA, “Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement,” news release 07-013, 23 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07013_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 14 October 2009). 11 Edward Cody, “China Confirms Firing Missile To Destroy Satellite,” Washington Post, 24 January 2007; Jason Dean, “China Verifies Antisatellite-Missile Test,” Wall Street Journal, 24 January 2007.)
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson conducted a fourth unscheduled spacewalk outside the ISS, to wrap up incomplete tasks. During the spacewalk, which lasted 6 hours and 29 minutes, Forrester and Swanson completed their primary task of activating the SARJ, a rotating joint on the ISS’s new power module; installed a new camera stanchion on the S3 Truss; and linked a computer-network cable between the U.S. and Russian sides of the stations. The two astronauts were unable to bolt down the debris shields that Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov had installed on the Zvezda module during the spacewalk on 6 June. Instead, they opted to tether the two panels in place.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Astronauts Complete 4th Spacewalk,” 18 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Finish Power Upgrades to Station,” Houston Chronicle, 18 June 2007.)
The Soyuz craft carrying Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Oleg V. Kotov, and Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor landed at 6:36 a.m. (EDT), more than 200 miles (322 kilometers) west of the designated landing site in Kazakhstan. The craft, returning from the ISS, had veered off course, causing the crew to experience higher than normal gravity load during the descent. The steep off-course landing was similar to the Soyuz incident in May 2003. However, this time, Russian crews were able to locate the Soyuz crew quickly. Medical tests showed that none of the three space travelers had experienced injuries and that all were in good condition. The two Russian cosmonauts were returning from a six-month assignment at the ISS, and Muszaphar, Malaysia’s first astronaut, was returning from 10 days aboard the station conducting scientific research.
of the ISS in preparation for the expansion of the space station.(Patrick Peterson, “Docking Port Relocated, Attached to Harmony,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010). 167 Xinhua News Agency, “Russia, India To Develop Advanced Military Aircraft, 13 November 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Russia, India To Join in Moon Mission,” 12 November 2007.)
ESA and Russia successfully launched Foton M-3 aboard a Russian Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 11:00 (UT). The 6.4-tonne (6,400-kilogram or 7-ton) satellite carried a payload of approximately 40 European experiments, including a 35-kilogram (77-pound) student-built module called the Young Engineers Satellite 2 (YES2), which the Foton craft would deploy to orbit Earth for 12 days. When the orbiting period had ended, the YES2 mission would use an experimental tether to return the picosatellite and reentry vehicle Fotino to Earth on 25 September. ESA and Russia had planned the tether-technology demonstration to test and produce data related to “space mail,” a concept developed to enable the return of material from space without the use of conventional chemical propulsion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647; European Space Agency (ESA), “Young Engineers’ Satellite 2; Mission Facts,” 5 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/YES/SEMLRV8OY2F_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010); ESA, “Focus On; Foton-M3 Mission To Launch European Experiments,” 11 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ SEMN5ZMPQ5F_FeatureWeek_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010).)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Q—all CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)—were technology demonstrators, including two—CalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)—that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSat—CAPE 1—with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
Yuzhnoye, the Ukrainian rocket-construction bureau and a member of the Sea Launch consortium, released its findings on the failed 30 January 2007 launch of the Zenit-3SL rocket. Yuzhnoye stated that a stray metal fragment had entered a pump in the rocket’s engine, causing the Zenit-3SL to explode during its attempt to launch a Boeing-built commercial communications satellite for the Netherlands-based SES New Skies. Representatives of the Ukrainian and Russian developers of the Zenit-3SL rocket had comprised the commission that investigated the launch failure.(Associated Press, “Company: Metal Fragment Doomed Rocket,” 14 March 2007; RIA Novosti, “Sea Launch Explosion Due To Engine Failure,” 14 March 2007.)
Progress M-62, a Russian cargo spacecraft, docked with the ISS to bring the Expedition 16 crew supplies—1.26 tonnes (1,260 kilograms or 1.4 tons) of food and water, fuel, and other cargo, such as research equipment and Christmas and birthday presents. The crew had detached Progress M-61 from the ISS on 22 December to make room for M-62’s arrival. Instead of sending M-61 directly back to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere, Russian space program officials had decided to use it first as a platform for technical experiments. Roskosmos had also used Progress M-60 for research after undocking the craft from the ISS.(RIA Novosti, “Russian Cargo Spacecraft Docks with ISS,” 26 December 2007.)
it with wire ties, leaving 6 inches (15 centimeters) of clearance, a distance adequate for undocking. Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin also photographed a Russian satellite navigation antenna, changed out a Russian materials experiment, photographed a German robotics experiment, and inspected and photographed an antenna and the docking targets for the European cargo craft, the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). The ATV, designed with greater capacity than the Russian Progress craft, had not yet made its first trip to the ISS.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-10,” 22 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0710_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
NASA announced the successful activation and operation of its new oxygen-generation system, which it had tested aboard the ISS between 11 and 14 July. Space Shuttle Discovery had delivered the 1,800-pound (816.5-kilogram) component during Mission STS-121 in July 2006, and the crew had installed it in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory. Since the new system’s installation, the crew had added several pieces of hardware and software to the ISS to support its operation. The crew had installed the last required part, a hydrogen-vent valve, during a spacewalk on Space Shuttle Atlantis’s Mission STS-117 in June 2007. Software updates to U.S. computers earlier in July had completed preparations for the system’s activation and operation. The new system, which would augment the Russian Elektron oxygen generator, would allow the increase of the ISS crew in 2009. NASA had designed the system to generate approximately 12 pounds (5.4 kilograms) of oxygen per day, enough for six people, but it was capable of providing as much as 20 pounds (9 kilograms), enough for 11 people. During the test, the system had generated approximately 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) of oxygen.(NASA, “New NASA System Will Help Space Station Crews Breathe Easier,” news release 07-159, 17 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07157_station_oxygen.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASA’s LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars— measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments,” news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
On the 50th anniversary of the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik, publisher Harry N. Abrams released America in Space, a photographic record of the history of space exploration, documenting NASA’s achievements in aeronautics, science and technology, and human spaceflight. Published in cooperation with NASA, the book contained 500 color and black-and- white photographs, including many previously unpublished photographs, selected from NASA’s archives. Heralding the space age, the launch of Sputnik led to the creation of NASA one year later.(NASA, “New Book Chronicles NASA’s First 50 Years,” news release 07-210, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07210_NASA_book.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Jeremy Hsu, “NASA Book Commemorates 50 Years of Spaceflight,” Space.com, 5 October 2007, http://www.space.com/entertainment/ 071004-nasabook-anniversary.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
TMA-10 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 17:31 (UT), carrying Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, as well as Charles Simonyi, who had paid US$25 million to travel to the ISS as a tourist. After joining Microsoft Corporation in 1981, Simonyi had led the development of the computer software programs Word and Excel, but he had since left Microsoft to start International Software Corporation of Bellevue, Washington. Simonyi planned to participate in several medical and engineering experiments during his 11-day visit to the ISS and to update the blog for his student- oriented Web site, www.charlesinspace.com, among other educational activities. Simonyi remarked that his one goal was to educate students about the science of space travel. The Russian space agency Roskosmos had scheduled Simonyi to return to Earth on 20 April, with Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin. Lopez- Alegria and Tyurin had been aboard the ISS since September 2006. Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams, who had served with Expedition 14 since December 2006, would remain aboard the ISS as a member of Expedition 15 until later in 2007.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report SS07-18,” 7 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/homehqnews/ 2007/apr/HQ_SS0718_station_status.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642, 1 May 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx642.html (accessed March 1, 2010); Marc Carreau, “5th Space Tourist Goes into Orbit on $25 Million Ticket,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2007; Scott Gutierrez, “Developer of Word on Way to Space Station,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 9 April 2007.)
Russia and India signed an agreement in Moscow for India to participate in Russia’s 2011 Moon- Globe Program to design a spacecraft for lunar exploration. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia and India would jointly build a robotic laboratory, with India supplying the rocket and flight module and Russia developing and producing the landing module of a Moon rover and a scientific complex. The agreement allowed for joint lunar exploration through 2017.
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolev’s name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmos’s announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russia’s space scientists, reminding them, “the launch of the Earth’s first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age.” The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, “Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.”(Agence France-Presse, “Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 2007.)
NASA announced modifications to the ISS contract with Roskosmos. The US$719 million modified contract covered crew rotations for 15 crew members—six in 2009, six in 2010, and three in 2011—as well as the delivery and removal of 5.6 tonnes (6.2 tons) of cargo. The modification also included NASA’s purchase of a Russian Docking Cargo Module flight in 2010, which would carry 1.4 tonnes (1.5 tons) of NASA cargo to the ISS, and the purchase of a flight opportunity in 2009, which would allow an astronaut from one of the ISS partner nations to
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the People’s Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russia’s Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, “China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars,” 28 March 2007.)
ISS Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and ISS Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov undertook a 5.5- hour spacewalk to install protective panels designed to shield the space station from dangerous space debris. The IISTF had issued a report in February 2007 finding that the impact from space debris was the top threat to the future of the ISS and to the safety of its inhabitants. Yurchikhin and Kotov installed 5of 17 panels on a Russian section of the ISS, a section that had been among the first components launched and was not as heavily protected as the later U.S. modules. Each panel measured approximately 2 feet by 3 feet (0.6 meters by 0.9 meters) and 5 inches thick (12.7 centimeters thick) and weighed approximately 20 pounds (9 kilograms). The cosmonauts also successfully rerouted a cable for a navigation antenna that the crew would use later in the year at the scheduled arrival of the first new European cargo vehicle.(Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Protective Shielding,” 31 May 2007; Mark Carreau, “Cosmonauts Install Protective Panels on Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2007; International Space Station Independent Safety Task Force, “Final Report” (NASA, Washington, DC, February 2007), 17, http://www. nasa.gov/pdf/170368main_IIST_%20Final%20Report.pdf (accessed 29 January 2010).)
The ISS Expedition 15 crew completed their second spacewalk in eight days. During the 5-hour- and-37-minute spacewalk, Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov performed a number of tasks. They installed on the Pirs module sample containers for a Russian experiment on the effect of space on microorganisms and placed a section of Ethernet cable on the exterior of the Zarya module. The installation of the cable completed a remote computer network, enabling the crew to command the Russian segment of the ISS from the U.S. segment. Furthermore, Yurchikhin and Kotov successfully completed their primary task, installing 12 debris-shield panels on the conical section of the Zvezda module. During the previous week, the crew had installed five panels, and in 2002 the ISS crew had installed six others, to provide the module with better protection from micrometeoroid-debris strikes. During the spacewalk, Yurchikhin and Kotov found a dent or hole from a meteorite, measuring approximately 5−6 millimeters (approximately 0.2 inches), in an outer pumping component on the Zarya module. This damage was the first of its type ever found on a module of the ISS. In addition, with the completion of the spacewalk, both cosmonauts had logged 11 hours and 2 minutes of experience in Russia’s new Orlan spacesuits.(Agence France-Presse, “International Space Station Holed by Meteorite,” 7 June 2007; Spaceflight Now, “Cosmonauts Begin Another Station Spacewalk,” 7 June 2007.)
South Korean Vice Minister of Science and Technology Chung Yoon announced the selection of Ko San, a 30-year-old expert on artificial intelligence, to visit the ISS as South Korea’s first astronaut. Ko San had been one of two finalists. The other finalist, Yi So-yeon, was a 29-year- old female doctoral student in biotechnology. More than 36,000 South Koreans had applied to become the first person in South Korea to travel in space. Ko and Yi had been training in Russia when South Korean authorities selected Ko as the winner. They appointed Yi as his backup, in the event Ko was unable to participate in the mission. They selected Ko over Yi because he had performed better in certain experiments and had demonstrated a stronger capability of communicating with Russian cosmonauts. As backup, Yi would continue to train with Ko and would serve as a consultant in planning Ko’s mission.(Kurt Achin, “S. Korea Names Astronaut for the Country’s First Voyage into Space,” Voice of America, 6 September 2007; “Space Mission To Help Boost Aerospace Research,” Korea Times, 6 September 2007.)
ESA’s YES2 craft attempted to deliver Fotino, a 12-pound (5.4-kilogram) reentry capsule, to a landing site in Kazakhstan, via an experimental tether system. YES2 deployed Fotino from the Foton-M3 spacecraft. A metal brace and straps held Fotino in place while the tether unwound, gradually lowering the capsule. The mission plan called for the tether to lower the capsule 30 kilometers (18.6 miles) below Foton-M3. However, a malfunction prevented the tether from unreeling to its full length. Telemetry data indicated that the tether had deployed approximately 8.5 kilometers (5.3 miles). Automated timers aboard the craft commanded Fotino to separate approximately a half hour before the scheduled touchdown time, even though the tether had not extended fully. However, because the tether had not completely deployed before Fotino’s release, early estimates predicted that the reentry vehicle would orbit for 4–11 days before reentering the atmosphere. Lead Engineer for the YES2 mission Â. Michiel Kruijiff remarked that, apart from the problem with the tether, the mission had been largely successful, achieving many of the mission objectives.(Stephen Clark, “Space Tether Experiment Hits Major Snag,” Spaceflight Now, 26 September 2007; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Attempt To Deliver Parcel from Space Fails,” 26 September 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched a German satellite called TerraSAR-X from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 (UT). The 3,000-pound (1,361-kilogram) TerraSAR-X was a night-vision radar system designed to create the most precise maps and imagery that a civilian space-radar system had produced to date. The craft’s mission was to map Earth and its oceans at a rate of 1 million square kilometers per day (almost 400,000 square miles per day), to capture scientific data such as sea-ice coverage, vegetation and crop estimates, and to acquire military reconnaissance information at a 1.0-meter (3.3-foot) resolution.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 644, 1 July 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx644.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Stephen Clark, “German Radar Imaging Satellite Launched into Space,” Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2007.)
