ISS Expedition 20 and 21 crew members ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, cosmonaut Roman Y. Romanenko, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz TMA- 15 capsule. Soyuz TMA-15 landed in Kazakhstan at 2:15 a.m. (EST) in icy weather, ending a 188-day mission to the ISS. Although poor weather conditions had grounded the eight Mi-8 helicopters normally used in the recovery process, recovery crews in all-terrain vehicles were able to reach the spacecraft within 15 minutes of touchdown. Astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev remained on board the ISS, representing the smallest space station crew since July 2006.(William Harwood, “Space Station Crew Lands in Frigid Kazakhstan,” Spaceflight Now, 1 December 2009; James Dean, “Soyuz Makes Safe Return to Cold Earth,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2009.)
Soyuz TMA-16 docked with the ISS Zvezda service module at 4:35 a.m. (EST), safely delivering to the ISS NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams, Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev, and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté. Williams and Suraev were joining ISS Expedition 21 as flight engineers. The docking marked the first time that three Soyuz craft had docked at the space station at one time. The automated docking system worked flawlessly.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: Crew Docks Safely at Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 October 2009. 147 NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Impacts Lunar Crater in Search for Water Ice,” news release 09-236, 9 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-236_LCROSS.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Moon Crash: Public Yawns, Scientists Celebrate,” 10 October 2009.)
Participants in a simulated mission to Mars, the Mars-500 project at the Russian Institute of Biomedical Problems (IMBP) in Moscow, completed a 105-day session locked in a series of hermetically sealed tubes. The project was a joint venture between ESA and the IMPB. In addition to the isolation, the simulation experiment included communication delays of up to 20 minutes and unexpected emergency situations. Since 31 March 2009, the Mars-500 crew, comprising four Russians, a German soldier, and a French airline pilot, had conducted approximately 70 experiments testing psychological and physical reactions to long-term isolation. The international team of scientists, representing Europe and the United States, was seeking ways to help subjects avoid mental breakdowns and other consequences that could result from prolonged monotony. For this experiment, researchers locked participants into a Soviet-era isolation chamber and observed their responses. Mission physician Aleksei V. Baranov described daily life for the crew members participating in the experiment, explaining that their work did not stop from day to day. During the rare moments when a crew member was free to relax, he remembered that he was away from home, far from loved ones, and that the schedule required that he wake up early to work every day. Baranov added that individuals find preparing for unceasing, monotonous work psychologically difficult. The experiment was the precursor to a longer simulation planned for early 2010, in which the researchers planned to isolate another six- member crew in the same capsule for 520 days.
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
A Russian Soyuz craft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 10:34 (UT), carrying Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) Robert B. Thirsk, Russia’s Roman Y. Romanenko, and ESA’s Frank De Winne of Belgium on a landmark mission to expand the crew of the ISS from three crew members to six. At the ISS, the Soyuz crew would join ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka of Russia and Flight Engineers Michael R. Barratt of NASA and Koichi Wakata of JAXA. De Winne, scheduled to replace Padalka as station commander in October, would be the first ESA astronaut to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “New Station Crew Launches on Soyuz; Briefing from Space on June 1,” media advisory M09-094, 27 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_M09-094_ISS_crew_briefing.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Peter Leonard, “Russian Capsule Blasts Off for Space Station,” Associated Press, 28 May 2009; Benoit Finck, “Astronauts Blast Off To Double Space Station Crew,” Agence France-Presse, 28 May 2009; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667.)
NASA announced that, in 2012 and 2013, it had signed a US$306 million modification to its ISS contract with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos for crew transportation and related services. According to Alexei B. Krasnov, Director of Human Flight Programs at Roscosmos, NASA would pay US$51 million per astronaut aboard the Soyuz craft. The modification covered all necessary Soyuz training and preparation for launch, crew rescue, and landing of a long- duration mission for six individual ISS crew members. The agreement covered four Soyuz launches—two in the spring of 2012 and two in the fall of 2012, with landings scheduled for the fall of 2012 and the spring of 2013—as well as postflight rehabilitation, medical exams, and services. The agreement allowed for limited cargo per person, to and from the station: 110 pounds (49.9 kilograms) launched to the ISS, 37 pounds (16.8 kilograms) returned to Earth, and 66 pounds (29.9 kilograms) of trash disposal.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russian Federal Space Agency,” contract release C09-024, 28 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09-024_Soyuz_Con_Mod.html (accessed 20 June 2011); RIA Novosti, “Russia To Charge NASA $51 Mln for Seats on Soyuz Spacecraft,” 29 May 2009.)
Progress 31, a new digitally controlled Russian Progress M-01M-series cargo spacecraft, completed its mission when its remaining fragments fell into the Pacific Ocean after reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. The craft had launched from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, on 26 November 2008, to deliver 2.5 tons (2,267 kilograms, or 2.27 tonnes) of cargo to the ISS, including scientific equipment and supplies of food, fuel, and water. The craft had undocked from the ISS on 6 17 February, undergoing tests at a safe distance from the space station before decommissioning.
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
Soyuz TMA-17, carrying Timothy J. Creamer, Soichi Noguchi, and Oleg V. Kotov, docked with the ISS at 22:48 (GMT). An automated docking system successfully brought the craft into port on the Earth-facing side of the Russian Zarya module. Hatches opened at 00:30 (GMT). The new arrivals floated onto the station wearing red Santa hats and elf hats and carrying a small Christmas tree and a white sack of gifts. Jeffrey N. Williams and Maxim V. Suraev welcomed them on board the ISS, where they would live for six months as members of the Expedition 22 and Expedition 23 missions.(James Dean, “New Crew Set To Begin Six-Month Stay on Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Arrives at Space Station,” Space.com, 23 December 2009, http://www.space. com/7704-crew-arrives-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt carried out a 12-minute spacewalk inside the station, tying the record for the shortest spacewalk. The record dates to 1965, the first spacewalk ever conducted. Although the men remained inside the ISS, NASA considered the activity a spacewalk because they were working in a vacuum, wearing their Orlan MK spacesuits, connected to umbilicals. Padalka and Barratt’s task was to connect a port in the Zvezda command module, in preparation for the arrival of a new docking module, the MRM 2. The new module, the fourth Russian docking port, would support the increased traffic at the station associated with the full-time crew of six.(William Harwood, “Crew Performs Unusual Spacewalk Inside Station,” Spaceflight Now, 10 June 2009.)
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, “Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earth’s atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1’s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Korea’s launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (North Korea’s) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Korea’s launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Korea’s complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, “South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space,” 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, “South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch,” Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt undertook a 4-hour, 54-minute spacewalk to install a pair of antennas for automated rendezvous equipment. The astronauts undertook the work to prepare for the arrival of the Russian Mini Research Module 2 (MRM 2), which would serve as an additional docking port for Russian vehicles. Padalka and Barratt also connected each antenna to a series of power cables and photographed them from aboard the long Strela extension pole. Padalka operated the Strela boom, while Barratt took pictures from multiple vantage points, to allow Russian mission control to analyze the antennas and to ensure that the crew had installed them correctly.
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASA’s commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceX’s remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners’ vehicles—three Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities” (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, “Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASA’s Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads,” 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, “GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
A Russian satellite launched in 1993, and that engineers believed to be nonfunctioning, crashed into an Iridium commercial satellite that had been in orbit since 1997. The collision marked the first instance of high-speed impact between two intact spacecraft. At the time of the event, Iridium had a system of 65 active satellites relaying calls from portable telephones approximately twice the size of regular mobile phones. Iridium was serving approximately 300,000 subscribers, including one of its largest cellular subscribers, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). The loss of the satellite caused brief, occasional outages in service. Iridium planned to replace the lost satellite within 30 days with one of eight in-orbit spares. Communications satellites, which typically orbit at high altitudes and travel separately, rarely collide. However, Iridium satellites traveled fast, at a low orbit. The Iridium collision, which occurred approximately 500 miles (805 kilometers) from Earth, created a huge debris field. Nicholas L. Johnson of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) explained that the risk of the ISS encountering debris was low, because the space station is 215 miles (346 kilometers) from Earth.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Big Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia,” 12 February 2009; Traci Watson, “Two Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia,” USA Today, 12 February 2009.)
Eilene Marie Galloway, a pioneer in space law and policy, died of cancer at the age of 102. As a national defense analyst at the Library of Congress, Galloway had helped organize hearings on U.S. space preparedness following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik in 1957, which had led to the creation of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Aeronautics. Galloway had also served as an advisor during the formation of the House Select Committee on Astronautics and Space Exploration. When the House Select Committee recommended the creation of a national space agency, Galloway had suggested that Congress constitute the new entity as an administration responsible for coordinating space-related activities across the federal government. In addition to advising Congress on space policy, Galloway had helped establish the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS). She had frequently served on UNCOPUOS as a representative of the United States. Galloway had also been a founding member of the International Institute of Space Law (IISL) and had frequently voiced her support for Article II of the Outer Space Treaty, which states, “celestial bodies are not subject to national appropriations by claims of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.” In 2006 Galloway had become the first woman elected Honorary Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. She had also been a fellow of the AAS, an Honorary Director of the IISL, a Trustee Emeritus of the International Academy of Astronautics, the first recipient of a Lifetime Achievement Award from Women in Aerospace, and the recipient of the NASA Public Service Award and Gold Medal.(Frank Morring Jr., “Space-Law Pioneer Eilene Galloway Dead at 102,” Aviation Week, 5 May 2009.)
Progress 32 successfully carried out an automated docking at the ISS Pirs docking compartment, with Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov monitoring the process from a terminal inside the space station. The two spacecraft linked up flawlessly and the docking required no intervention from Lonchakov.(Tariq Malik, “New Russian Cargo Ship Docks at Space Station,” Space.com, 13 February 2009, http://www. space.com/4777-russian-cargo-ship-docks-space-station.html (accessed 10 March 2011).)
NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev launched aboard Soyuz TMA-16 from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 a.m. (CDT), to become the next residents of the ISS. Also aboard was spaceflight participant Guy Laliberté, the Canadian founder of Cirque du Soleil, who was flying to the ISS under an agreement with Space Adventures and the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Laliberté had paid US$35 million to travel to and from the ISS and to reside at the ISS for nine days. He planned to use his experience to publicize a growing global problem—the shortage of clean water.(NASA, “New Space Station Crew Launches; In-Orbit News Conference Set,” news release 09-226, 30 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-226_Soyuz_Exp21_Launch.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Canadian Circus Billionaire Heads to Space Station,” 30 September 2009.)
NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, and spaceflight participant Charles Simonyi, who had visited the ISS for the second time, landed safely in a Soyuz spacecraft in the steppes of southern Kazakhstan after undocking from the station on 7 April. The Russian federal space agency Roscosmos had delayed the landing for one day after discovering that spring flooding had affected the original landing site. Roscosmos had moved the landing to a location further south. Fincke and Lonchakov were returning from Expedition 18. During that expedition, the ISS had gained full power and had begun water-supply recycling in preparation for the station’s first six-person crew. In addition, the crew of Expedition 18 had performed scientific experiments, including many experiments designed to gather information about the effects of long-duration spaceflight on the human body.
A new Russian MRM 2 named Poisk, or Explore, docked with the ISS at 10:41 a.m. (EST). A cargo ship carrying Poisk had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 10 November. The 4-ton (3.63-tonne, or 3,628-kilogram) module, measuring 13 feet long (4 meters long) and 8 feet (2.4 meters) in diameter, attached to the space-facing port of the Zvezda service module. Poisk would provide a fourth Russian docking port, an airlock for Russian spacewalkers, and an experiment platform. In addition to Poisk, the Russian delivery included water-supply equipment, hygiene supplies for the crew, medical equipment, personal items, and spare parts.(Associated Press, “Space Station Gets New Research Module,” 13 November 2009; James Dean, “Watch Live: Russian Module Docking at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Gets New Russian Module,” Space.com, 12 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7518-space-station-russian- module.html (accessed 28 November 2011).)
