M. Scott Carpenter Day in Denver as an estimated 300,000 persons witnessed the Memorial Day parade honoring the Mercury Astronaut from Colorado.
telstar relayed two 20-minute live TV shows, the first formal exchange of programs across the Atlantic. The first U.S. program to the Eurovision network of stations in 18 nations included sequences on the Statue of Liberty, a major league baseball game in Chicago, President Kennedy’s news conference, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra from Cape Canaveral, and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir from Mt. Rushmore. Three hours later on another orbit, the Eurovision program was beamed to the U.S. where it was carried by all three networks. It included scenes of Big Ben in London, the Colosseum in Rome, the Champs Elys6cs in Paris, reindeer in the Arctic Circle region of Sweden, Sicilian fishermen tending their nets, and a scene in the Sistine Chapel of Vatican.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., made 6)(-hr. simulated flight in Sigma 7 spacecraft for Project Mercury flight MA-8. Worldwide tracking network of 21 ground stations and ships also participated in exercise, in which Cdr. Schirra and the tracking stations practiced solving emergency situations that could arise in actual orbital flight.
sigma 7 spacecraft with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., as pilot was launched into orbit by Mercury-Atlas vehicle at Cape Canaveral. Orbital data: apogee, 176 mi.; perigee, 100 mi.; period, 88.5 min. Schirra traveled 160,000 mi., nearly six orbits, returning to earth at predetermined point in Pacific Ocean about 9 hrs., 14 min. after blastoff. Within 40 min. after landing he and his spacecraft were safely aboard aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge. Highly successful MA-8 flight proved the feasibility of (1) prolonged weightless flight in space and (2) drifting in orbit without consumption of hydrogen-peroxide attitude control fuel and without physically endangering the astronaut. Schirra, who spent a total of hrs. in drifting flight, reported there were no unusual attitude control problems during drifting. Various other scientific experiments during MA-8 flight included astronaut’s sighting of luminous particles in space, also reported by Astronauts John H. Glenn and M. Scott Carpenter; and photographing cloud formations with a special hand camera. sigma 7 was sighted by observers on Indian Ocean tracking ship for five min. as the spacecraft made its third orbit more than 100 mi. high. The observers said sigma 7 appeared almost as bright as Venus. This was the first reported visual sighting of a manned spacecraft during orbital flight. Only technical difficulty of the entire operation was attaining proper adjustment of Schirra’s spacesuit coolant supply and failure of body temperature measurements in first orbit. However, desired suit temperatures were achieved early in second orbit.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter returned to work at Langley afb facilities of the Manned Spacecraft Center after a four-day trip to Colorado. All seven Mercury astronauts were scheduled to receive Peninsula Distinguished Service Awards, a tribute from several civic groups on Virginia’s lower peninsula, on June 1.
aec-dod-nasa announced that results of joint study of artificial radiation belt indicated Project Mercury flight MA-8 could be made with no change of plans and with no fear of harm to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn). Study showed that radiation on outside of capsule during Cdr. Schirra’s 6-orbit flight would be about 500 roentgen (R). Shielding, vehicle structures, and flight suit would cut this to 8 R on the astronaut’s skin. “This exposure is well below the mission limit previously established by nasa for the manned flight program,” the report said. Other results of the investigation: Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich (vostok iii and iv orbital flights in August) received very small radiation doses on their double-mission flight; radio interference caused by new radiation belt constituted “a significant problem to radio astronomy”; radiation doses caused rapid deterioration of solar cells aboard ariel, traac, transit iv-b satellites as previously reported, but telstar solar cells were apparently unaffected; future space missions were being reviewed “in light of the present information concerning the new belt.” It appeared likely that “a substantial number” of future space experiments would be changed to avoid possible damage from radiation.
Estimated that over 60 million Americans witnessed the launch of friendship 7 on live TV. Voice of America carried live overseas radio coverage. The U.S. Senate recessed at 2:30 PM est just before the landing of Mercury spacecraft. The U.S. Post Office placed Project Mercury postage stamp on sale minutes after Astronaut Glenn stepped on the deck of Noa.
Announced that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would study Eerful light sources in Australia and South Africa, during his -8 orbital flight, nasa said experiment was to determine how well a space traveler could see light sources of known density on earth. Three high-intensity flares would burn at Woomera, Australia, and electric lamps at Durban, So. Africa. Schirra would try to determine effects of atmosphere on light observed from orbital altitude and to establish which light source was more readily visible. Other scientific experiments of the MA-8 flight would be studies of cosmic radiation, search for rare particles in space, and effects of re-entry heating on new materials.
Space Technology Center of General Electric Co. said it was designing an escape system for astronauts to use if orbiting capsule malfunctioned and could not return safely to earth. Called “Moose” (Man Out Of Space Easiest), the system involved use of a “prepackaged spacecraft” consisting of plastic sack, folding heat shield, retrorocket pack, containers of foaming plastic, and a standard parachute. Astronaut, zipped into sack, would step out of faulty spacecraft, aim himself with special scope, and fire the retrorocket. Then his heat shield would unfold and sack would fill with rapid-hardening plastic foam, protecting him from re-entry heat. At 30,000-ft. altitude, he would open parachute and descend slowly to earth.
Scientists of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, at Boulder, Colo., after intensive interviews with Astronaut Scott Carpenter, concluded that the layer of “haze” reported on the horizon by both Carpenter and Glenn was in reality the phenomenon known as airglow—the emission of light of various colors and wavelengths, caused by chemical reactions in gas molecules in the upper atmosphere.
President Kennedy personally congratulated Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter by telephone shortly after the aurora 7 pilot arrived by helicopter aboard the carrier Intrepid, saying: “. . . I wanted to tell you we are relieved and very proud of your trip. I am glad that you got picked up in good shape and we want to tell you that we are all for you and send you the very best of luck to you and your wife.” Carpenter said: “My apologies for not having aimed a little bit better on re-entry.” President Kennedy: “Oh, fine and good. We want to congratulate you and I look forward to seeing you in Washington sometime soon . . . .”
nasa postponed MA-7 flight attempt until at least May 22, 1962, because of modification of altitude-sensing instrumentation in the parachute deployment system. Project Mercury Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter was pronounced in “excellent condition” for his orbital flight after a 5-hour physical examination.
Reported that usaf had offered to train nasa’s “second generation” astronauts at its Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, California.
Reported that nasa was conducting a study to determine what effect Soviet nuclear test series might have on forthcoming orbital flight (MA-8) of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Final evaluation was expected within a week.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and his family were received by President Kennedy at the White House, then flew to New York for the city’s reception and to receive New York City’s highest award, the Gold Medal. The reception committee included, in addition to Mayor Wagner, former Presidents Herbert C. Hoover and Harry S. Truman.
In ceremony at Cape Canaveral, President Kennedy thanked the Project Mercury team for the successful flight of friendship 7: “. . . it’s my great pleasure to speak on behalf of all our fellow Americans in expressing pride and satisfaction to those intimately involved in this effort. All of us remember a few dates in this century and those of us who were very young remember Col. Lindbergh’s flight, Pearl Harbor, and the end of the war, and remember the flight of Alan Shepard, Major Grissom and we remember the flight of Col. Glenn ...”	_ President Kennedy then awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal to Robert R. Gilruth and read the citation, “for his distinguished leadership of the team of scientists and engineers that carried Project Mercury, the U.S. initial manned space flight program, from its inception to the successful accomplishment of man’s flight in orbit about the earth ...” Lt. Col. John H. Glenn also was awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal by the President, the citation to which said:“ . . . made an outstanding contribution to the advancement of human knowledge of space technology and a demonstration of man’s capabilities in space flight. His performance was marked by his great professional skill, his skill as a test pilot, his unflinching courage. . . .” In his remarks, Astronaut Glenn thanked fellow astronauts and the entire Mercury organization: “we all acted literally and figuratively as a team. ... It goes across the board . . . sort of a crosscut of Americana, of industry, and military and civil service. . . . It was headed up by nasa, of course, but thousands and thousands of people have contributed as certainly much or more than I have to the project. . . .”
Reported that at nasa meeting of lunar scientists the view presented by astronomers, a geologist, and geophysicists that scientists can learn to become astronauts as well as an astronaut can make scientific observations. Which scientific discipline should be represented as a member of the 3-man Appollo crew did not receive a unanimous endorsement.
Hibernation of space crewmen was proposed for long-term space travel, by usaf surgeons Capt. T. K. Cockett and Capt. Cecil C. Beehler of sam, Brooks afb, Texas. Under their plan, one astronaut would work while the other would ride in state of suspended animation, with life processes slowed to the minimum. During simulated hibernation the body withstands stresses that would be harmful under normal body conditions, the surgeons said.
In Pentagon ceremony, usaf Chief of Staff LeMay pinned astronaut wings on Major Robert M. White, the first man to fly a winged aircraft, the X-15, into space.
In an impromptu speech at opening of an Italian industrial exhibition in Moscow, Soviet Premier Khrushchev acknowledged that the U.S. had achieved “notable successes” in space and saluted the courage of Mercury astronauts Glenn and Carpenter. Commenting on M. Scott Carpenter’s MA-7 flight in aurora 7, Khrushchev declared: “I congratulate him especially because he gave proof of great courage in a situation in which he collid have been burned in his ship or drowned in the sea. All the scientists collid do from the earth was to advise him to drink water and to land. But he had the presence of mind and the courage to continue his flight.”
Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom Day in Mitchell, Indiana, the hometown of the second Mercury astronaut into space.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Mercury team went through complete simulated MA-7 mission exercise.
Reported that, if Astronaut Schirra’s six-orbit flight (MA-8) is fully successful, nasa would conclude Project Mercury with one 18-orbit, 24-hour flight. Present plans called for four 24-hour flights with the one-man Mercury capsule; new plan under consideration would cancel three of these and assign their mission to two-man Gemini capsule.
Walter M. Schirra, aboard the recovery vessel U.S.S. Kearsarge, reportedly suggested to Project Mercury engineers that the ground communications stations should give the orbiting astronaut “more quiet time” in space. Extraneous conversation could interrupt the astronaut’s concentration on technical duties.
50 AM, Astronaut Glenn said: “I guess it was to be expected. We all knew the weather was marginal.”
afsc announced development of “self-maneuvering unit” (smu), a 160-lb. pack which converts a pressure-suited spaceman into a one-man space vehicle. Designed to position and stabilize an astronaut or crewman outside a spacecraft and to give him mobility in an orbiting assembly area, smu contains its own stabilization, control, propulsion, and power systems.
Astronaut Scott Carpenter received a B.S. degree in aeronautical engineering from the University of Colorado, a degree he missed in 1949 by not taking the final examination in a course in heat transfer. He also received the school’s Norlin Award, given annually to an alumnus for outstanding achievement.
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) was first astronaut to pilot paraglider in test at Edwards, Calif., in development tests for Gemini manned spacecraft landings. Kite-like paraglider was towed aloft by biplane and released to glide downward. Maj. Grissom landed the paraglider upright, although the craft’s nose wheel crumpled upon hitting the ground.
Reported that two radio hams of Ann Arbor, Mich., J. Schmidt and E. Nuttle, recorded the voice transmissions of Astronaut Glenn during the three-orbit flight of friendship 7.
X-15 No. 3 flown to record altitude of 58.7 miles (314,750 feet) by Major Robert White (usaf). Flight was programed for only 282,000 feet but maximum speed of 3,784 mph was 284 mph faster than planned. White’s flight made him eligible for astronaut wings, reserved for those who have flown over 50 miles high, previously held only by four Mercury astronauts. Flight was also the first to achieve the original design altitude of the X-15 of 50 miles.
Astronaut Gus Grissom was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Space Science degree by the Brevard Engineering College, Melbourne, Florida.
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Captain, usaf) promoted to Major,
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., on board aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge, began debriefing and medical check. Schirra would arrive in Honolulu Oct. 6 and then fly to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
nasa announced it would begin taking applications for additional astronauts now and continue until June 1, 1962. In July persons meeting the requirements would be interviewed, selected applicants given thorough physicals, and final selection of some 5 to 10 astronauts would be made in the fall. Qualifications were also announced; these were slightly less demanding in terms of test-pilot time, but more demanding in that they lowered the age limit to under 35 and required a college degree in science or engineering.
At sam symposium on aerospace medicine, Lt. Col. Burt Rowen (usaf), Chief of Bioastronautics at afftc, presented heartbeat and breathing records of Maj. Robert White during X-15 record speed flight of November 9, 1961. “When the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee first became aware of the high heart and respiration rates [of pilots in high-performance aircraft] they became concerned with the question of success of the Mercury program. . . . But now this has come to be regarded as normal.” Dr. Charles Sandhous of the University of California warned that an astronaut caught in space during a solar flare might age three years or more as a result of the radiation received.
nasa announced new policy under which astronauts would be permitted to negotiate individually for the sale of their stories, the policy being “aimed at assuring equal access by all news media to the Astronauts’ stories of their flight missions.” Notable provisions of new policy were: (1) requirement for a second postflight news conference in which representatives of news media could question the astronaut “in depth” about his flight; and (2) prohibiting of any publication’s advertising “exclusive” stories purchased from astronauts, with requirement that the contracting publication provide a method to avoid this inference and with all such agreements subject to approval of the nasa Administrator. Inherent in the policy was that “all information reported by the Astronauts in the course of their official duties, which is not classified to protect the national security, wlli be promptly made available to the public.” New guidelines applied to all nasa astronauts, civilian and military.
Decision to sell Cape Colony Inn, partially owned by the seven Project Mercury astronauts, was announced by attorney C. Leo DeOrsey of Washington. He said the astronauts’ investment in the motel near Cape Canaveral “had become the subject of controversy in some quarters of the press and might become embarrassing to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I believe it is in the best interests of all concerned to sell the motel.”
At opening session of the Legal Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. delegate, Leonard Meeker, proposed that all members of the U.N. undertake to aid space vehicles or astronauts in distress, and to return to the launching countries any that are forced to land elsewhere.
Position of Special Assistant for Astronaut Affairs created by nasa under the Director, Manned Spacecraft Center. Temporarily filled by Ford Eastman, the position provides central coordination of commitments to extra-program activities of the astronauts.
Project Mercury flight officials studied tropical storm “Daisy,” which continued moving westnorthwest about 300 mi. east of Puerto Rico, the general landing area for third orbit of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s six-orbit MA-8 flight planned Oct. 3. Mercury Operations Director Walter C. Williams, indicating continuing surveillance of “Daisy,” ordered preparations for the launch attempt to continue.
Hughes Research Laboratories announced development of highpower amplifier tube that could eliminate spacecraft radio blackouts such as those experienced by astronauts during atmospheric re-entry. Tubes produce about 10 times the continuous power output of any previous tubes and could pierce heat-induced ion shields to transmit messages.
nasa Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was greeted by cheering crowds in Honollliu, transferring from aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge to usaf jet at Hickam afb, for trip back to Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Texas.
Civil Service Commission ruled that nasa was authorized to hire an “aerospace engineer and pilot,” one whom nasa would designate an astronaut, at maximum salaries for Government service grades GS 13, 14, and 15.
Dr. Clarence P. Oliver of the University of Texas zoology department suggested to the House Space Committee that astronauts traveling through space “for any extended period” should refuse to have any more children. Radiation exposure exceeding normal dosage on earth would pose a “genetic risk,” he testified.
nasa selected Chance-Vought Corp. as contractor to study rendezvous of space vehicles. A primary part of the contract would be a flight simlliation study exploring the capability of an astronaut to control an Apollo-type spacecraft.
Editorial in the New York Times said: “Since the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is a civilian agency, it might be wiser to make all the astronauts civilians so that no questions of inequality or discrimination arise among them and also so that they might receive more adequate pay than is provided by the low military pay scales. . . . “In permitting the astronauts to cash in on their exploits, the Kennedy Administration is following an unwise precedent set by the Eisenhower Administration. “While the practice of profiting from memoirs of Government service is an old one, such memoirs are normally written by persons who have already left Federal employment. . . . “The government would be far wiser if it paid its astronauts a sufficiently generous salary so that it could in good conscience ask them to observe the same practices of discretion and modesty which have hitherto been considered normal for all other Government employees.”
Letter from President Kennedy defending Administration policy of permitting astronauts to sell their personal stories for profit was made public by M. B. Schnapper, editor of Public Affairs Press, in Washington, D.C. Replying to Mr. Schnapper’s criticism of the policy, the President said the “policy decision was reached only after most careful review of all the facts and lengthy consultation both within and without the Government. Efforts were directed toward removing specific controversial aspects of the original astronaut agreement, and we feel that this goal has been reasonably achieved.”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., told newsmen he hoped Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper would be selected for Project Mercury flight MA-9. Astronaut selection had not yet been made for the 18-orbit 24-hour flight.
