nasa announced that it would recruit 10 to 15 new astronaut trainees this summer. ( msc Space News Roundup, 1 /8/64,2)
On 36th anniversary of Lindbergh’s historic transatlantic flight, Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper was presented nasa Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in White House ceremony. Also presented were nasa Medals for Outstanding Leadership to: G. Merritt Preston, Manager of Project Mercury Operations at nasa Launch Operations Center; Floyd L. Thompson, Director, nasa Langley Research Center; Kenneth S. Klein-knecht, Manager of Project Mercury Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations Div. of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis, commander of afmtc, Cape Canaveral, nasa Group Achievement Awards were presented to: dod Recovery Forces; and Air Force Space Systems Div. Following ceremony, Astronaut Cooper was hailed by thousands in motorcade to the Capitol, where he addressed special joint session of Congress:	. .1 don’t think I have ever been with a team that was more dedicated, or striving harder, or was more completely sold on their product than the total space effort and particularly the manned flight effort in which I am involved .... “I named my spacecraft faith 7 for three reasons: First, because I believe in God and country; second, because of the loyalty to organization, to the two organizations, actually, to which I belong; and, third because of the confidence in the entire space team .... “I think of all things that I am constantly amazed at is the public’s response to this program ... it is tremendously impressive.” The parades and activities following each flight “show tlist Americans want to express tlieir fsslin^s and tlieir confidence-that we . . . can conduct peaceful research programs; that we can conduct them openly, and under the surveillance of every man, woman and child in the entire world.” (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2; CR, 5/28/63, A3420-21)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine announced signing of four-year contracts with 16 nasa astronauts for their personal stories; Field Enterprises acquired newspaper syndication and book rights, Life, the magazine rights. (AP, NYT, 9/18/63,15)
At regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “Did the astronauts raise with you . . . their desire for another Mercury flight? Do you have any opinion yourself, tentative or otherwise, as to the desirability of another Mercury flight?” President Kennedy replied: “I think they feel that it’s worthwhile. I haven’t discussed it with Mr. Webb, nasa should make the judgment and will make the judgment, and I would not intervene. But they do feel that a flight is useful and that the experience of Major Cooper has indicated that the time between the last Gemini flight as scheduled—the Mercury flight and the new Gemini flight, which is a period of almost 18 months—they feel may represent a gap which could be filled very usefully by another Mercury flight. “This will be a matter which I think they’re going to be talking about this week with Mr. Webb and which I will discuss with him next week. But the final judgment must be nasa’s.” (Transcript, NYT, 5/23/63,18)
The Iven C. Kincheloe Award was presented by Mrs. Dorothy Kincheloe to the seven original Mercury astronauts as the highlight of the Seventh Annual Awards Banquet of The Society of Experimental Test Pilots held at Lancaster, Calif. The award is presented annually for the recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the conduct of flight testing. (Space News Roundup, 10/16/63) e non	r»r\n TTinito /I tbo	-f n oiIiItt	l W o 11 at»c?	I?o1oo eac* _QA	onrl UjWO	OOUO tioitvu LilCl	IUCH1 cj .	y v f	AiL/AUWkAAJ	wt/ O A	Muu
According to three Ling-Temco-Vought aerospace scientists, astronauts operating outside their japsules in outer space would have considerable difficulty estimating distances to other objects, even of known size. Results of experiments suggest that observers cannot make accurate distance estimates without the aid of some kind of artificial ranging device. The accuracy of visual observation will affect the complexity of the guidance system and the total thrust requirement for close-in maneuvering. For this reason, man’s visual performance capability must be defined as accurately as are other design data for successful space missions. (Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc.; Space Information Digest, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1/28/63) During January: Dr. Douglas McKie, Univ. of London, writing in Jan. 1963 Endeavour, traced the history of the metric system, a subject of renewed interest in the U.K. since Parliament was considering; the adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. Dr. McKie pointed out that the recent adoption of the wavelength of a line in the spectrum of krypton-86 as the basis for an international unit of length was the realization of an old French dream at the time of the adoption of the metric system—the use of an invariable natural standard. At the time of the French Revolution, Dr. McKie asserted, France had become weary of the chaos of variable systems of weights and measures and the government and the National Academy urged the States-General to adopt a national system. The States-General authorized the Academy to formulate a system of weights and measures based on measurement of an arc of the meridian as the universal standard and decimals as the notation system. This was done by 1793, but Revolutionary politics intervened, having done away with the States-General and even replaced the Academy. Not until Dec. 10, 1799, did the new standards become legal, and by then it had been discovered that the earth was not a perfect sphere and therefore that the arc of the meridian was not the invariable standard the Academy had thought. (SIN, Mar. 1963,11-13)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s faith 7 Mercury spacecraft was clearly visible to unaided eye to observers in Johannesburg, South Africa, (upi, NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced ejection seat escape system for Gemini two-man spacecraft had successfully undergone first high-speed rocket-sled test, at Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif. Both dummy astronauts were safely recovered after ejection at nearly 600 mph from boilerplate spacecraft, simulating emergency ejection during boost phase of Gemini mission. Tests simulating ejection before launch were also being conducted, consisting of firing ejection seats from 150-f£. tower and parachuting dummy astronauts to safe landing, (msc Release 63-111)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, was the principal speaker at the Space Age Symposium held in Shawnee, Okla., in conjunction with the city’s homecoming celebration for Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
Advertising executive Hany A. Batten, representing nine nasa astronauts, said that withdrawal of Field Enterprises Education Corp. contract offer for astronauts’ personal stories did not mean nasa disapproved this type contract. Rather, he said nasa believed astronauts should conclude such a contract to protect their own and their families’ privacy. He predicted astronauts would reach story-contract agreement with some other firm. (AP, Houston Post, 7/10/63)
C. Leo DeOrsey, attorney for the original seven nasa astronauts, announced the astronauts had sold their interest in the Cape Colony Inn in Cocoa Beach, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/31/63)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj. usaf) flew simulated Project Mercury launch in faith 7 at Cape Canaveral in preparation for MA-9 flight scheduled for May 14. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/63)
Unnamed U.S. official was quoted as saying Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s one-day Project Mercury flight MA-9 was set for April 2, “for planning purposes.” Flight would be 18 orbits (about 27 hours) or, if all goes well, 22 orbits (about 34 hours), nasa had not yet officially announced precise launch date in April or length of flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/63, A2)
Millions of Americans heard and watched MA-9 launching and subsequent flight activities on commercial radio and television. Estimated 8,000 people watched launching on Grand Central Station, New York, 12-by-16-ft. television screen. Attempt to telecast launching to European viewers via relay i communications satellite was unsuccessful because “an error on the part of the broadcast company programmers . . . resulted in the transmission of live TV monitors at Cape Canaveral which consisted of a hodgepodge of random pictures and sounds that was virtually meaningless.” Videotape of launch activities and of first TV pictures from Astronaut Cooper was successfully transmitted via relay i later in the day. Beginning at 6:55 p.m. edt, the three U.S. TV networks received via relay i a three-minute program on European reaction to Astronaut Cooper’s flight. (NYT, 5/16/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/16/63; nasa Release 63-106)
Reported that Lear Siegler, Inc., delivered to nasa the slow-scan television camera systems and receiving equipment intended for use on the forthcoming flight of Astronaut Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
In response to inquiries about rumors that Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Walter M. Schirra were ill with space-flight aftereffects, unnamed nasa Hq. spokesman quoted Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of msc Medical Operations Office, as saying: “Neither Carpenter nor Schirra has any difficulties at all, and they are in excellent health. “In fact, none of the astronauts who have made space flights has suffered any ill effects, and the entire group is in top physical condition.” (ch, Houston Chronicle, 8/3/63, 9)
Writing in Hypnosis Quarterly, Frank M. Frazitta said astronaut trained in self-hypnosis could alleviate pain and discomfort during space flights. In event of air-conditioning unit’s failure, selfhypnosis could be used to lessen astronaut’s perspiration rate or make him feel cooler or warmer. (M&R, 4/8/63, 21)
Announced that transistorized sensory system, Myoelectric, to provide astronauts with automatic control during high g was patented recently by two Sperry Gyroscope engineers. (A&AE, December 1963, 5)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, speaking before aerospace medicine conference at sam, San Antonio, said that all three U.S. astronauts who had made orbital space flights had found state of weightlessness presented no problems; rather, it tended to become “addictive.” (upi, Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A 4)
Presentation on Project Gemini, prepared by Drs. Stanley C. "White and George B. Smith of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and presented at Lectures in Aerospace Medicme series, sam, said that present Gemini “flight program includes the performance of manned extra-vehicular operation. The accomplishment of this maneuver requires the opening of the hatch over the astronaut who will venture outside. During this period, the cabin pressure is lost, and both astronauts are dependent upon the suit for prime environmental protection. “. . . The program as it is now planned would start out with flights of two-days duration and move forward to flights of up to two weeks duration upon successful completion of the first phase. Ultimately, the more complex 14-day duration mission, the inter-vehicular rendezvous, and the extra-vehicular manned operation goals would be achieved. The intermediate steps offer an excellent opportunity to study the man, the vehicle, the man-machine interface, and to accomplish other bioscience experiments while the program moves toward its final objectives . . . .” (Text, msc Fact Sheet 134)
President Kennedy telephoned Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper aboard carrier Kearsarge, saying, “I just want to congratulate you. That was a great flight .... We are very proud of you.” (upi, NYT, 5/17/63,1)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced the 271 applicants for astronauts had been screened to 30. Of these, 10-15 would be selected in late October. (AP, Wosli. Post, 8/29/63)
Ballute drag balloon was being built by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for use in Gemini manned spacecraft, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Ballute would be used as part of Gemini ejection-seat-escape system, planned means of emergency escape for altitudes below 70,000 ft. The inflatable rubberized fabric structure would stabilize and slow the astronauts’ fall until conventional parachutes could be deployed at lower altitudes. ( msc Release 63-67)
McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St Louis shipped the first of two Gemini mission simulators to Cape Kennedy, Fla., to provide nasa astronauts and ground crews with realistic training before actual launching of the two-man spacecraft. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/14/63)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said in Palo Alto, Calif., press conference: “People who do the spectacular things in space are few—they owe their success to many, many people behind the scenes who are not given proper recognition—scientists, technicians, industrial workers—people in all walks of life .. ..” (Palo Alto Times, 1/5/63)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp., publishing subsidiary of Marshall Field, was reported as having offered nasa astronauts a multimillion-dollar contract for their personal stories. Spokesman for Field Enterprises said proposition was under discussion with C. Leo DeOrsey, Washington lawyer representing original seven Mercury astronauts, and Harry A. Batten, Philadelphia advertising man representing nine Gemini-Apollo astronauts. {NYT [Western Ed.], 2/9/63)	...	.
Gemini astronauts would learn how to “apprehend” another vehicle traveling in space on a special trainer in a darkened hangar-high structure now being erected at Manned Spacecraft Center’s Clear Lake home, (msc Space News Roundup, 1/8/64)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter disclosed seeing twin tails on one side of sun’s corona during solar eclipse July 20. The twin-tailed corona did not appear in photographs Carpenter made of the eclipse while flying in DC-8 jetliner with other scientific observers. (O’Leary, Houston Post, 9/14/63)
Inter-Parliamentary Union’s seven-nation space subcommittee, meeting in Geneva, approved draft treaty on space law. Treaty would provide that outer space be subject to international law, including U.N. Charter, and that astronauts forced to land in foreign countries would be granted diplomatic immunity. Treaty would be presented to plenary meeting of ipu’s 60-member nations in Lausanne, Switzerland, April 15-21. (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/3/63)
nasa announced from Cape Canaveral that recruiting 9-12 new astronauts would begin next month. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center had begun training nasa’s 16 astronauts in techniques of water and land parachute landings. In preparation for safe parachute landings in low-altitude abort during Project Gemini launching, astronauts were towed to heights of 400 ft. suspended under pre-inflated canopy, then cut loose for free descent to earth. Towing was by power boat for water descents and truck for land descents, (msc Release 63-151)
22-orbit MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper was reported delayed from planning date of May 7 until at least May 21 because of difficulties in Atlas booster’s guidance system. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Thirty nasa astronaut candidates underwent physical examinations at School of Aerospace Medicine. Final selection would be made next month. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
Astrovoice,” device to enable voice communications with astronauts during manned spacecraft re-entry, was displayed publicly by Avco Corp. Device adds voice channel to tracking radar, which is not blacked out during re-entry ionization. Modifications to existing ground radar receivers would require only “a few hours,” Avco spokesman said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)
Former President Eisenhower in Rochester, N.Y., hailed Astronaut
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Project Mercury launch crews conducted simulated MA-9 final countdown and launching. (AP, NYT, 5/11/63,4)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced recruitment of astronauts had been broadened in current recruitment call for volunteers: change in criteria for selection, eliminating need for test pilot school certificate; and soliciting letters of recommendation from industries, professional groups, military services, and other organizations throughout the country, (msc Release 63-102)
Aetna Life Insurance Co. issued first individual life insurance policies to seven Project Mercury astronauts, astronauts’ legal adviser C. Leo DeOrsey announced in Washington. (Goodman, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)	_
