A study at Northrop Space Laboratories was reported as indicating that a fluid-filled “bladder” might offer the best form of protection to astronauts during impact acceleration. Using guinea pigs, the investigators found that the fluid-filled garment seemed to offer the same advantages in minimizing internal organ displacement as did water immersion, but without the risk of generating high hydraulic pressure pulses. (M&R, 12/21/64,21)
Three NASA astronauts began flights in T-33 trainer jets simulating approaches to the lunar surface. Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. David R. Scott, and Elliott M. See, Jr., sent their planes into dives from altitudes of about 15,000 ft. toward the large, rugged lava flow in southern Idaho; cameras in the planes recorded the,.approaches, and the astronauts made their own observations of the surface. Planes were leveled out at about 3,000-ft. altitude. (Houston Post, 9/3/64)
Jet-propelled back-pack, part of a Modular Maneuvering Unit (mmu) for Gemini astronauts, was described by AFSC, whose Aero Propulsion Laboratory conceived the device. The unit would enable astronauts to fly outside their Gemini spacecraft for up to an hour and travel as far as 1,000 “ft. from the spacecraft, although the first flight would be made with astronaut on a 200-ft. tether to send the astronaut forward, backward, up, and down. In addition to the back-pack, mmu consisted of a chest-pack, furnished by NASA, which the astronaut would use when leaving and entering the spacecraft, before donning and after discarding the back-pack. First flight test of the unit on Gemini mission was planned for mid-1965. (afsc Release 47-22—113; MSC Roundup, 1/16/64,5)	_
NASA and dod announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would participate in USN Project Sea Lab I off coast of Bermuda in July. The submerged lab would collect and evaluate scientific data on physiological and psychological reactions to the undersea environment. (nasa Release 64-112; dod Release 383-64)
15 NASA astronauts began three days and two nights of jungle survival training in the Panama Canal Zone, under supervision of the usaf Tropic Survival School, (msc Roundup, 6/24/64, 8)
At meeting in Geneva, U.S. delegation to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Legal Subcommittee submitted to the Subcommittee drafts of two treaties. One draft treaty dealt with aid to astronauts in distress, calling for nations to take “all possible steps to assist or rescue promptly the personnel of spacecraft” having difficulty or making emergency landings. Astronauts making emergency landings would be returned to their own country “promptly and safely,” and any spaceship or its parts falling to earth would be returned to country of ownership at the country’s request. The second treaty, dealing with liability for damage caused by spacecraft, would establish a “simple and expeditious procedure to provide financial protection against damage.” (nyt, 3/10/64, 8)
World Book Encyclopedia announced 14 new NASA astronauts had been added to the 16 astronauts with four-year contracts for newspaper distribution rights to their life stories. World Book—a unit of Field Enterprises Educational Corp.—also said the astronauts had signed separate contracts with Life magazine. (AP, NYT, 3/28/64, 20)
David B. Clark Co. began building eight flight suits for Project Gemini astronauts, msc suit engineer Henry Friloux said the pressurized suits would protect astronauts up to 150-mi. altitudes. (M&R, 5/25/64, 31)
Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (Capt., usaf) was killed when his T—38 jet trainer crashed near Houston. The former experimental test-flight instructor was among third group of NASA astronauts, selected last October, and was first U.S. astronaut to lose his life. (AP, NYT, 11/2/64)
USAF announced selection of the first six astronauts for its manned orbiting laboratory (MOL) program. An additional six would be named in early 1965. Following a six-month basic training course, the crewmen, all graduates of USAf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, would be assigned specialty areas. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64,25)
Capt. Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) was buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetey, Va., with the entire astronaut team attending the services, (msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 1)
Paul P. Haney, Public Affairs Officer at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, asserted that the bulk of 550 communications regarding NASA scientist-astronauts had to be classified as letters of interest. Seventy-five per cent of this number, or 412, were lacking some detail and about 100 had been eliminated altogether. The number of applications was ahead of the number received for other classes of astronaut, he said. These figures clarified figures given by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, who had said on Nov. 22 that only 20 applications had been received and that only nine of these applicants qualified. (Houston Post, 11/24/64)
Weber Aircraft Co. of Burbank, Calif., demonstrated the astronaut escape system that it had developed for NASA. System was designed to boost astronauts out of their Gemini spacecraft and open escape parachutes in 10 sec. if a spacecraft malfunction should develop. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/30/64) 0 Minuteman II icbm flight test from Cape Kennedy marked second success in as many launchings, usaf said the advanced missile achieved all test objectives. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
An msc investigative board announced that a snow goose, weighing about eight lbs., with a wingspan of more than 24 in., caused the fatal crash of Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) on Oct. 31. The bird struck the left side of the airplane canopy causing both engines to flame-out on impact. Captain Freeman, however, still had control of the aircraft and attempted to make a landing at Ellington. He flew a looping pattern over the Gulf Freeway and lowered his landing gear as he approached the field. When he apparently realized that a landing was not possible, he veered to the left into an open field, probably to avoid buildings at Ellington. Seconds later, at slightly under 100-ft. altitude, he ejected, too late for his parachute to deploy fully, (msc Roundup, 11/25/64)
More than 900 persons had applied to NASA for the 10 to 20 positions for scientist astronaut that it would fill next year. To qualify, a scientist had to be under 34 years old, a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, with a B.A. degree and a doctorate or the equivalent in experience. Recruitment would end Dec. 31. Recommendations would be made by the National Academy of Sciences to NASA in the spring of 1965. (AP, Miami Her., 12/18/64)
Soviet cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich (VOSTOK ill and rv) had orthostatic hypotension following their space flights, Soviet physiologist Prof. Vasily V. Parin revealed. The condition was noted in the cosmonauts “even two days after the flight.” In address at cospar—prepared and delivered in English—and in the discussion which followed, the Soviet Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology, Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, said that the cosmonauts “showed no disturbances in their state of health” after their prolonged space flights, and the “transient functional reactions” were said to have “disappeared in seven or 10 days. . . He added that “post-flight disturbances were largely related to the central nervous system, the cardiovascular systems and metabolism.” Prof. Nello Pace, head of Physiology Dept, at Univ. of California (Berkeley), closely questioned Prof. Parin about his statements. Prof. Pace considered that hypotension was “among the most significant facts” disclosed at the conference. He noted that the condition had been observed in U.S. Astronauts Schirra and Cooper, and that NASA had said that implications of blood pressure responses “will have to be given very serious consideration as larger missions are undertaken.” (Text; Hillaby, NYT, 5/16/64,8; Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/17/64)
Maj. Edwin Aldrin, Jr., from the newest group of NASA astronauts, already was qualified as a scientist-astronaut, holding a doctorate in astronautics. Two other astronauts were nearing completion of doctoral studies: R. Walter Cunningham (physics) and Russell L. Schweikart (aeronautics/ astronautics).	(Houston Post, 10/20/64)
Development of astronaut techniques for egress from Gemini spacecraft began this week at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, msc announced. Boilerplate model of Gemini spacecraft floats in water-filled tank; two subjects in the closed spacecraft practice egress and the manner, procedure, and time required are recorded for study, (msc Release 64^-19)
The USn’s Sea Lab I, with four Navy divers aboard, began ascent to the surface after 10 days on the ocean floor at a depth of 192 ft. The experiment was terminated 11 days ahead of schedule because of an approaching storm. Astronaut Scott Carpenter was to have participated in the experiment, but was forced to withdraw because of the broken arm he suffered recently, (dod Release 558-64)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter was involved in a motor bike accident in Bermuda and suffered a fracture of his lower left arm. Carpenter was in Bermuda to participate in a Navy test in which he would have submerged in Sea Lab I diving chamber with four Navy divers to a depth of 192 feet, but his injury precluded his participation in the test. He was reported to be resting comfortably. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/17/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
NASA received patent for life preserver carried by Mercury astronauts on all orbital space flights. Invented by MSC engineers Mathew I. Rad-nofsky and Glenn A. Shewmake, life-preserver was called “Ram’s Horn” because of its shape: main part fits across wearer’s chest and hook-like ends fit over the shoulders. (Jones, NYT, 10/17/64, 35)
NASA awarded $1,125,040 contract to Ling-Temco-Vought for construction of Dynamic Crew Procedures Simulator which would allow astronauts to simulate orbital, lunar, and interplanetary flights in model spacecraft. Simulator’s completion was scheduled for May 1965, when it would be delivered to msc. (msc pao; Denver Post, 7/5/64)
Researchers at Lankeneau Hospital in Philadelphia had concluded that orthostatic hypotension such as occurred in Astronauts Schirra and Cooper after orbital space flights could be caused as much by dehydration as by weightlessness, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/6/64, 25)
X-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joe Engle (usaf), flew 3,511 mph (mach 4.94) and gained altitude of 170,000 ft. in first test of infrared horizon scanner designed to give sharper outline of earth to astronauts re-entering earth’s atmosphere. Flight also enabled Engle to make pilot checkout of adaptive control system which had ability to sense atmospheric conditions surrounding the craft. Flight was postponed twice before successful effort, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced $133,358 contract was awarded to AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. of Garrett Corp. for design and production of extravehicular pressurization ventilation system to be used by astronauts in Project Gemini, (upi, San Diego Union, 2/9/64)
usaf was reported continuing to seek industry support for avionics subsystems studies for DOD’s manned orbiting laboratory (mol) program. The Space Systems Div. of afsc asked avionics companies to submit bids for a study of an image velocity sensor subsystem, which would enable orbiting astronauts to acquire and track space targets visually and to take fixes on terrestrial bodies for navigation. SSD also asked Honeywell to submit a sole-source proposal for a study of the laboratory’s attitude control system. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 24)
In experiment to test reactions of astronauts under environmental conditions they would encounter outside their spacecraft, three out of four subjects suffered the bends. Capt. Eugene A. Degner, expert in body metabolism conducting tests planned on 50 volunteers at Brooks afb, said: “All three men with the grade one [least severe] bends had them dramatically dissipate as the altitude chamber pressure dropped below that of 30,000 feet. “I was surprised at the results, and a little worried because the three men complained of the bends and mild discomforts early in the experiment period. “I was afraid they would keep getting worse, but the trouble was intermittent and not severe enough to abort the [10-hour] test.” (upi, Houston Chron., 3/21/64)
NASA announced the large air-filled bag safety system performed successfully in DC-7 crash experiment conducted April 24. Results indicated that if a man had sat in for the dummy, he would have survived the crash. Martin Co. designed the airbag system under NASA contract, for possible use by both airline passengers and astronauts. (NASA Release 64-121)
Dr. Charles A. Berry of NASA’s msc said that some communicable diseases could develop on space missions of up to 14 days if astronauts were exposed during preflight preparation period. Therefore nasa plans included turning the spacecraft around and returning to earth in severe cases and equipping vehicles with emergency medical supplies. Also, doctors might be trained as astronauts for 30- to 60-day missions. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 7/14/64)	_
On the eve of his 85th birthday, M/G Renjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) was honored for his achievements in aviation at a dinner at Andrews'afb. General Foulois, who was the United States’ first military pilot, was inducted into the Primus Club—an elite group of aerospace pioneers— and hailed as “a living link between the age of the Wright Brothers and today’s astronauts.” (Raymond, NYT, 12/9/64,53)
The newest 14 NASA astronauts began week-long desert survival course in Nevada, under direction of usaf 3637th Survival and Special Training Squadron, Stead afb. (msc Roundup, 8/19/64, 2)
In study financed by NASA, a Mexico City matador had his heart heat, respiratory rate, and body temperature monitored during the height of a bull fight. Readings from sensors fixed to his skin were telemetered to instruments inside bull ring. Doctors at msc used information in study to determine how much physical stress human body could withstand and what effect stress had on performance. It had been determined previously that many athletes undergo more physical stress than do astronauts in flight. (AP, NYT, 7/8/64,12; msc Roundup, 7/22/64,7)
Labor Dept, said industry employed 885,000 engineers and scientists in 1963, about 4% more than in 1962. 715,000 of the 885,000 were engineers and 170,000 were scientists. (AP, NYT, 9/l/64>, 22) During August: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received five Northrop T-38 aircraft on loan from USAF for use as space-flight readiness trainers to maintain proficiency of astronauts. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 25)
Astronauts’ contracts with Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Time Inc. were discussed in Editor and Publisher editorial, which stated that the “principle of letting the astronauts sell their stories is all' wrong.” Before granting personal interview, editorial said, “astronaut must get permission in writing from Field and Time which will grant approval ‘in an instance where the acceptance of such outside offers will not materially affect the value of any of the rights granted.’ . . .” It concluded by saying that reporters could not interview these “national figures” unless two “competitors say it’s okay.” (E&P, 8/15/64)
At Aerospace Medical Association conference, Dr. Dietrich E. Beischer and James C. Knepton, Jr., of Naval School of Aviation Medicine said high magnetic fields, such as those under study for spacecraft shielding, may have noticeable effect on behavior of heart. Squirrel monkeys subjected to high magnetic fields (20,000 to 70,000 gauss) showed up to decrease in heart rate and marked change in heartbeat’s rhythm. Dr. Beischer also reported sea urchin eggs exposed to 140,000 gauss were retarded in their development, but fruit fly showed no effects after two-hour exposure to high gauss. High magnetic fields were being investigated for use in shielding astronauts against cosmic radiation and other space hazards, and Dr. Cornelius Tobias and N. M. Amer reported that magnetic fields around 3.5 kilogauss appeared to have protective effect against high doses of ionizing radiation. (M&R, 5/18/64,16)
usaf Space Systems Div. reinitiated its program to develop Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (amu) for extravehicular space activity. Earlier this year SSD had requested bids for “remote space maneuvering system” but canceled this in favor of the amu, to be used in MOL-oriented program, amu would consist of five subsystems—hydrogen peroxide propulsion, environment control, attitude stabilization, manual control, and telemetry and voice communications. (SBD, 2/17/64, 255)
Mercury capsule (MA—9) in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper flew 22 earth orbits was viewed by more than 20,000 people when on display in Nebraska State Capitol at Lincoln. (Omaha Eve. World-Her., 7/13/ 64)
By this date USAF had made 21 manned drop-tests of the ballute at El Centro, Calif., from C-130 flying at altitudes up to 35,000 ft. Basically a drag balloon, the ballute was under development by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. with NASA funds. To be installed in the ejection seat system of Gemini spacecraft, the self-inflating ballute would stabilize the astronaut during free fall down to 10,000 ft., where final recovery parachute would deploy. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 40-45; msc Roundup, 4/15/64, 8)
Soviet draft treaty for aid to astronauts in distress and for return of spacecraft was submitted to Legal Subcommittee of U.S. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva. Draft treaty differed from U.S. draft by providing that country of origin reserve “exclusive right” to search unassisted for the downed spacecraft on the high seas. Soviet draft also specified two conditions for returning spacecraft: (1) the spacecraft must have been launched “for the purposes of peaceful exploration and use of outer space” and (2) the purpose and launching of the spacecraft must have been “officially announced.” (NYT, 3/11/64,5)
In speech to cospar on the NASA Biosatellite Program, Dr. Dale Jenkins, Bioscience Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, remarked: “The United States Biosatellite Program is a second generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and equipment development. This program has been designed to study the biological effects of: (a) zero gravity or weightlessness, (b) the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation, and (c) removal of living organisms from the Earth’s rotation. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to critically test major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will delineate hazards to astronauts, and determine and define effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights, for example, may involve changes observed in ten days of bed rest such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown.” (Text)
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA Director of Space Medicine, said in Dallas: “Physiologically, women would make excellent astronauts.” However, he added, “They lack the experience in flying high-speed planes and handling the complicated equipment used in the program. “All of our astronauts are seasoned test pilots or men with much experience in combat flying. It would be very difficult for any woman to gain such experience.” (Dallas Morning News, 5/23/64)
NASA msc announced Gemini test vehicle for training astronauts in recovery procedures had arrived at MSC, and water tests with the astronauts and recovery forces would be conducted in nearby Galveston Bay. (msc Release 64-2)
At Aerospace Medical Association meeting, Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander of afsc Research and Technology Div., said usaf was studying use of “space lifeboats” for astronauts who might have to abandon their spacecraft. The self-contained unit would be designed to sustain astronauts until they were rescued, (upi, NYT, 5/12/64,43)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced scientists were investigating use of chewing gum for astronauts on long-duration space flights, “to stimulate dental tissues and freshen the astronaut’s mouth. . . (msc Release 64-69)
