Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), who had lost his lower legs in an aircraft crash, was advised that the Navy was considering his application to become an astronaut. “The only difference between me and any normal man,” he said, “is running and jumping ability. There is no change in my flying ability . . . I’ve wanted to be an astronaut ever since I first heard the word. That field is moving more and more into actual controlled flying. I’m a fly boy. Count me in.” (ap, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
Columbus Association of Genoa, Italy, announced that Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., had been selected to receive the 1965 Columbus Prize, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/25/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), carried two one-dollar bills during the GEMINI v mission to prove on landing that they were the same spacemen who were launched, upi reported. A representative of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale recorded the serial numbers on the bills before the launch and would check them after the landing. The Federation Aeronautique Internationale, with 54 member nations, is the agency that certifies world aviation and space records, (upi, NYT, 8/25/65, 1)
The Gemini 6 spacecraft underwent final checkout of all systems; its crew, Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas Stafford, received final briefings. NASA announced that Gemini VI would be launched December 12, one day ahead of schedule. (WSJ, 12/10/65, 1; Wilford, NYT, 12/11/65, 1, C54)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie in the royal palace in Addis Ababa, then made the fourth stop of their goodwill tour—after Greece, Turkey, and Ethiopia—the Malagasy Republic. They were received cordially. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; upi, Miami Her., 9/22/65)
nasa astronauts gathered at nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center for a debriefing by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr. The meeting was held primarily for the Gemini Vi and vn crews, but other astronauts attended as observers, (ap, NYT, 9/6/65, 6; Wash. Post, 9/5/65, A8)
President Johnson sent letters to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn), Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf), and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), congratulating them on successful completion of the gemini vi and gemini vii space missions and advising them that promotions for new astronauts would be submitted to Congress for confirmation in January. (Pres. Doc., 12/27/65, 606)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., received a warm welcome in Ankara, Turkey, in contrast to cool receptions in Izmir and Istanbul. President Cemal Gursel told the astronauts their flight of nearly eight days had demonstrated “great courage ... to your nation and to the whole world.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/20/65)
Bodies of nasa Director of Space Medicine Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, his wife, and pilot were found near the wreckage of their two-engine aircraft about 40 mi. southeast of Aspen, Colo. Aircraft had been missing since Dec. 12. Coroner’s report later said that the cold and not injuries had apparently caused the deaths. A space medicine pioneer, Dr. Lovelace had parachuted from record 44,000-ft. altitude in 1944, had helped determine criteria for selection of Mercury astronauts, and had founded the famous Lovelace Clinic. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A18; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A3; NYT, 12/16/65, 50; ap, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Prospecting for high-grade silver could be done, according to Thor H. Kiilsgaard, Chief of the Resources Research Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, by using an infrared system mounted on aircraft. He explained that deposits of silver in the earth were associated with hot water and that areas of heat flow could be detected by the infrared devices. If the heat zones conformed with mineral zones or faults, silver might be present. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 2/28/65, 64) During February: The prime and backup crews for the upcoming GT-3 three-orbital mission underwent parachute and egress training exercises. Parachute training, with the astronauts in space suits, was conducted in Galveston Bay, Tex. Egress training from a submerged Gemini boilerplate spacecraft was conducted in a large tank at Ellington, afb. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 2)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) and four aquanauts began a 45-day, USN-sponsored experiment in 12 x 58-ft. Sealab II to test how well man can function at 205-ft. depth in the Pacific under pressure six times that at the surface. Carpenter would try to stay down 30 days to set a record; the other aquanauts would remain below for varying periods. The group would collect and study marine specimens, map the ocean floor, and explore a deep marine canyon. (Wash. Post, 8/29/65)	•
Pravda described Lt. Col. Leonov’s exit and return to VOSKHOD II in giving the first detailed description of the inside of the spacecraft. The airlock was apparently built into the place occupied by a third astronaut during the voskhod i flight Oct. 12. After Col. Leonov moved into the airlock, his companion, Col. Belyayev pressed a button that closed the inside door and created a vacuum inside the lock chamber. At the prescribed moment, Col. Belyayev pressed a second button that opened the hatch between the airlock and space, allowing Col. Leonov to climb out. The procedure was apparently reversed for the astronaut’s return, (ap, NYT, 3/30/65)
President Johnson commented on the success of the gemini v flight during a news conference at his Texas ranch: “This is a moment of great achievement, not only for astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, but for those whose hopes have ridden with Gemini 5. “I am so happy that Mr. Webb and Mr. Seamans, who had so much to do directing this very successful venture, are here to share with us the pride we all feel today, And I deeply regret that our late, beloved President Kennedy, under whose leadership all of this work was so carefully planned and thought out, can’t be here to enjoy the fruits and success of his planning and his forethought. “The successful completion of the eight-day, 3-million mile flight of the Gemini 5 proves, I think, not only man’s capacity for endurance in space, but it proves that man is in space to stay. “We can be, and we are enormously proud of every member of our space team. That means all the scientists, and the technicians, and the controllers, and the trackers—to everyone who contributed in any way. As President of this country, I want, this afternoon, to extend the thanks of the entire nation for a job well done. To Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, and to their wonderful families, I want to simply repeat again: we are all very deeply proud of you. “The difficulties and disappointments of this flight have served to increase our appreciation, respect and trust for the skill and ability of all the men involved—at all their posts of duty. We can face the challenges and opportunities with far greater confidence and certainty —and this is an unmistakable gain. “Only seven years ago we were neither first nor second in space— we were not in space at all. Today the capacity of this country for leadership in this realm is no longer in valid question or dispute. Openly, proudly, we are proceeding on our course willing always to share our knowledge, our gains with all mankind. I would repeat and renew this country’s invitation to all nations to join together to make this adventure a joint adventure. “This globe seems smaller today than ever before. “Somehow the problems which yesterday seemed large and ominous and insoluble today appear less foreboding. As man increases his knowledge of the heavens, why should he fear the unknown on earth? As man draws nearer to the stars, why should he not also draw nearer to his neighbor? “As we push ever more deeply into the universe—probing its secrets and discovering its way—we must also learn to cooperate across the frontiers that divide earth’s surface. “No national sovereignty rules in outer space. Those who venture there go as envoys of the human race. Their quest must be for all mankind—and what they find belongs to all mankind. That is the basis of the program of which astronauts Cooper and Conrad are a part. . . . “This flight of Gemini 5 was a journey of peace by men of peace. Its successful conclusion is a noble moment for mankind—and a fitting opportunity for us to renew our pledge to continue our search for a world in which peace reigns and justice prevails. “To demonstrate the earnestness of that pledge, and to express our commitment to the peaceful uses of space exploration, I intend to ask as many of our astronauts as possible—when their schedule and program permit—to visit various capitals of the world. Some, I hope, will be able to journey abroad soon. “Gemini is but the beginning. We resolve to have many more such journeys—in space and on earth—until man at last is at peace with himself.” (Transcript, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 170-72)
President Johnson, after viewing on television the launching of gemini vii, said: “Once again, two brave Americans have carried the quest for knowledge to the threshold of space. They also take with them our prayers, and our pride. As they orbit the earth in the days and weeks ahead, Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell will broaden our knowledge of space. But they will do more. Their voyage will be a continuous reminder that the peaceful conquest of space is the only form of conquest in which modern man can proudly and profitably engage. In this struggle, all men are allies, and the only enemy is a hostile environment. The victory over the final enemy will belong, not just to Americans, but to all the world. We are proud that these fine young Americans have brought us one step closer to that goal.” (Pres. Doc., 12/4/65)
The appropriateness of President Johnson’s comments on the achievements of Astronauts Cooper and Conrad during the GEMINI v spaceflight was discussed editorially in the New York Times: “He did not gloat over the evident Soviet discomfiture at the United States forging ahead in the space race. Nor did he follow the repeated Soviet practice of claiming that a particular achievement in the cosmos somehow ‘proved’ the superiority of one political system over another. Instead, he appealed to all nations to join together for the conquest of space, an arena in which cooperation could help ease world tensions. “. . . the President’s statement . . . should help to dispel . . . fears. He has made clearer than ever that this country sincerely wants full cooperation in space. If Gemini 5’s flight helps to bring that objective closer, its immediate political contribution will rival its enormous gains for science and for technology.” (NYT, 8/30/65, 24C)
The world applauded the success of the GEMINI v mission: many leaders in Western Europe sent congratulatory cables to President Johnson, and newspapers in Great Britain, Malaysia, India, and Japan were among those giving the flight front-page coverage. The Soviet Union televised pictures of the astronauts and broadcast news reports of their landing. Only a few dissenting voices were heard— among them the Cuban newspaper Revolucion which described the flight as “cosmic espionage.” Communist China remained silent. {Wash. Post, 8/31/65, A3)
Gemini vi Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were “very healthy,” reported Dr. Howard Minners at the conclusion of their post-flight physical examination aboard the carrier Wasp, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65)
Astronaut Walter Schirra said that he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had maneuvered the GEMINI VI spacecraft to within one foot of Gemini VII during their Dec. 15 rendezvous and that although they were backed up by an advanced type of computer, they probably could have effected rendezvous without it. Schirra and the three other astronauts involved in the GEMINI VII-VI flights gave reports on their missions at an msc news conference, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/31/65, Al; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
iTT-designed portable transmitter onboard the Wasp sent pictures of splash-down and recovery of Gemini vi Astronauts Schir-ra and Stafford to early bird i comsat which relayed them to the Andover, Me., ground station from which they were transmitted to major television networks in U.S. and Canada. It was the first time recovery of astronauts had been shown in real-time on television. (Gould, NYT, 12/17/65, 28)
Four Ohio college students ended a six-week isolation test at WrightPatterson afb, Ohio, to study diets, effect of continuous wearing of a spacesuit, and microbiology of the human body. The four, comprising the eighth group to take part in space tests conducted by the Aerospace Research Labs., spent the first three weeks on a balanced but monotonous diet and the last three weeks on a liquid diet with the same nutrients as their earlier meals. All agreed that astronauts would probably be able to wear spacesuits for long missions but that “something would have to be done” about the proposed liquid diet, (ap, NYT, 5/19/65; ap, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/19/65)
GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Athens with their wives and children at the start of a six-nation goodwill tour and were greeted with cheers from the crowd. The astronauts would attend the International Astronautical Federation Congress which opened Sept. 13. (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/16/65)
The radar set that would guide Gemini astronauts on rendezvous missions in space, beginning with the August 19 Gemini v flight, was demonstrated by Westinghouse Corp.—working under an $18 million contract with	NASA—at	Friendship International Airport, Baltimore. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) would carry a self-contained Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) into orbit on the back end of their spacecraft. An Agena rendezvous radar transponder and flashing beacons would be packaged in the Rep along with batteries and antenna. Midway through the second revolution, at 2 hrs. 25 min. after liftoff, command pilot Cooper would yaw the Gemini 5 spacecraft 90° to the right. Explosive charges would eject the Rep from its canister northward at 5 fps. Gemini 5 would then maneuver away from the Rep to attain a position six miles below and 14 mi. behind the Rep. Subsequent phase adjustment would place Gemini 5 in a co-elliptical orbit—that is, the spacecraft would be at constant altitude below the Rep but reducing the trailing distance, since the spacecraft in its lowest orbit would be traveling faster than the Rep. Range and range-rate data would be displayed to the Gemini 5 crew by the rendezvous radar system. The radar system would continuously compute distance and angles from the spacecraft to the Pod, and calculate the maneuvers necessary to effect rendezvous. At five hours and 36 min. after liftoff, if the mission went as planned, Gemini 5 should be closing in on the Rep just north of the Carnarvon, Australia, tracking station. Gemini 5 would not physically dock with Rep; the experiment would simply provide training for Gemini VI and other rendezvous missions and evaluate the rendezvous radar hardware to be used on the Agena target vehicle in later missions. (Clark, NYT, 7/8/65, 12; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/8/65; Msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1, 2)
gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman completed the medical phase of their debriefing at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for MSC, said that “a quick look at data available . . . indicates man has fared extremely well in two weeks of space environment.” A detailed medical analysis would be available later, nasa released several terrain photographs taken by Astronaut Lovell during gemini vii’s spaceflight Dec. 4—18. (ap, NYT, 12/22/65, 14; ap, Wash. Post, 12/22/65, A3)
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium, said in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “As of this moment, the Soviets have tentatively determined that the maximum ‘safe’ period of weightlessness is 24 hr. They hold that after this period, ‘irreversible physiological changes begin to occur in the human system which, if not corrected, will eventually lead to death’. . . . “The Soviets have also discovered a correlation between high accelerations and weightlessness. They believe that when an astronaut is subjected to high accelerations on launch he tends to overestimate or to overcompensate for his movements. Once the astronaut is weightless, then a radical reversal takes place in which the astronaut undercompensates and may suffer disorientation. . . . “The Soviets appear to have concluded that flight crews of the future will be selected as medical teams, and they will further be selected on the basis of biological and bacteriological compatibility. The crew will be concerned with developing means for forecasting their own health during the entire trip so as to preserve it.” (Phil. Inq., 1/17/65)
Battelle Memorial Institute reported reasons the sweet potato would be the best vegetable for a space garden: (1) it would yield a large number of calories per pound and would have a high count of vitamin A; (2) its leaves are edible, either cooked or raw; (3) under simulated space conditions, it would grow in 90 to 120 days; (4) it would give off oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide, aiding air conditions inside a spacecraft. The plan, Battelle said, would be to grow the sweet potato in a spacecraft in a soilless culture to provide fresh vegetables for astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/16/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Izmir, Turkey. Only about 5,000 of the city’s 750,000 residents turned out to watch their motorcade drive the 15 mi. into Izmir from the NATO air base at Cigli. Spokesman for the Turkish Foreign Office said the visit was an “unofficial culture visit,” and the governors of three cities on the astronauts’ itinerary were instructed not to welcome the party. Coolness was attributed to U.S. stand on Cyprus in 1964.	(Wash. Post, 9/19/65)
Philadelphia’s Mayor James H. J. Tate, presenting a bronze medal to Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Cdr., usn), said: “I cannot imagine a more appropriate time to honor a space explorer than on the anniversary of the day back in 1492 when an Italian explorer named Christopher Columbus first set eyes on the New World and made a similar enormous contribution to history.” (NYT, 10/13/65, 47)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (usn), said he probably would be assigned as command pilot to the sixth Gemini flight, which would be the first U.S. attempt to meet and join two vehicles in space. (ap, Balt. Sun, 2/2/65)
Physical condition of GEMINI VII Astronauts Borman and Lovell was “better than expected,” reported Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director. (Waldron, NYT, 12/19/65, 68)
At a news conference in Washington, D.C., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said that although “extravehicular activity” was not planned for Gemini astronauts until GT-5, “we are working hard at trying to qualify the space suit and the hatch itself to see whether we can accelerate that date.” If their spacesuits and the spacecraft’s hatch passed tests in time, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would lean halfway out of the capsule for perhaps 15 min. on flight GT-4, scheduled for early June. He and Astronaut James A. McDivitt would attempt to orbit the earth 63 times in 98 hours, taking off from Cape Kennedy and landing in the Atlantic near Grand Turk Island. Maj. White and Maj. McDivitt appeared at the news conference with their backup crew—Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), and Maj. Frank Borman (usaf). (Transcript)
Scientists at Boeing Co., Seattle, had devised a “trampoline” bed designed to exercise the blood vessels in a weightless environment, it was reported. Compared in effect to a cocktail shaker, the device, by its to-and-fro motion, would send the blood surging from the head to the feet and back again. Some scientists had feared that days of inactivity in a weightless environment without exercising the blood vessels could result in death to an astronaut, (ap, Newport News Daily Press, 2/4/65; ap, Huntsville Times, 2/4/65; Orl. Sen., 2/4/65)
Within an hour after landing on the Lake Champlain, Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) received a telephone call from President Johnson congratulating them on their courage in the face of disappointments and discouragement: “You have certainly proved once and for all that man has a place in the exploration of the great frontier of space.” (Clark, NYT, 8/30/65, 1)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) and James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), passed their 5-hr. preflight physical examination at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director, said he could find no medical problem that might interfere with the scheduled launch of Gemini vii Dec. 4. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/65, A3; Wilford, NYT, 12/2/65, 22)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief of medical operations at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had said that new body sensor equipment developed for astronauts had “stretched the doctor’s stethoscope to reach 100 miles,” reported Norm Spray in an article in the Houston Chronicle: “This could open the door for new types of medical research and treatment potentially as important to the family physician as to space scientists, Dr. Berry believes.
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that it would take “a great deal of effort over a number of years” for the United States to achieve first place in space and warned it would be “a mistake to believe” that the successful GEMINI iv spaceflight had “overcome a lead of several years” held by the Soviet Union. He said “the most important result” of the GEMINI iv flight might be the condition of the astronauts upon their return, based on the preliminary medical examinations of Astronauts McDivitt and White. The final medical report on the flight and their postflight condition would take about two months. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/16/65, 13)
A temporary injunction was issued banning a steel fabricating firm from running internal combustion engines while GEMINI vu orbited over the Corpus Christi, Tex., area. The Government, in asking for the injunction, said machinery at Safety Steel Services, Inc., interfered with radio signals to the spacecraft and “threatened the safety of the astronauts.” (ap, Wash. Post, 12/9/65)
Pope Paul vi, in a mid-day Pentecostal message to a crowd in St. Peter’s Square, blessed Astronauts McDivitt and White: “Our benediction goes to all on earth and rises also to the skies for those who are exploring astral paths.” {NYT, 6/7/65, 33)
The successful Gemini vii-vi mission received extensive editorial comment. New York Times: “The exploits of astronauts Borman, Lovell, Schirra and Stafford and the extraordinary pictures they brought back from space have thrilled men everywhere. Admiration for their high achievements has—if only for the moment—overcome most of the usual division of this quarrelsome world. . . . “Borman and Lovell in Gemini 7 took the longest journey in history —more than five million miles. They showed that creatures of the earth’s surface can live and work effectively for fourteen days in a weightless environment, in which men must encapsulate themselves as in the womb and bring their own air, food and water to survive . . . they proved that a human organism is up to the task of staying in space long enough to fly to the moon, to do work there for several days, and then to return to this planet. “The unprecedented precision navigation feat of Schirra and Stafford in Gemini 6 was important primarily because, for the first time, it brought two spaceships close enough together to be joined. Their demonstration opens the way for construction in space and vastly expands the potentialities for human activity in that realm. . . .” (NYT, 12/19/65, 8E) Washington Sunday Star: “Now it is all over, but it will be remembered in history as one of man’s finer achievements. . . .” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/19/65, C2)
The White House announced that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., would leave Sept. 15 on a six-nation goodwill tour to Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, and Nigeria. The astronauts would be accompanied by their wives, Cooper’s daughters, Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts, and President Johnson’s Army aide, Maj. Hugh Robinson. (Pomfret, NYT, 9/12/65, 1, 33)
The rendezvous of Geminis 6 and 7 had been scheduled tentatively for the eighth day of Gemini 7’s 14-day endurance flight, revealed Command Pilot Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) at a news conference held by Gemini vu’s prime and backup astronaut crews at MSC. Gemini 7 would act as a passive target vehicle, but would expend fuel to circularize its 108-mi.-perigee orbit to 161-mi.-perigee orbit and to maneuver into range of Gemini 6’s radar, if necessary. Borman said there would be no Eva on Gemini vii because the crew would be wearing new lightweight spacesuits unsuitable for work in the vacuum of space; he was unaware of any plans for Eva on Gemini VI. During ten days of the mission, the Gemini vii crew would fly in USAF-issue longjohn underwear. Pilot James Lovell (Cdr., usn) said that training for Gemini vii had emphasized stowage reviews because of the serious stowage problems encountered by Astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on their eight-day GEMINI v flight August 19. (Transcript; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/65, A3)
C. Leo De Orsey, financial advisor and attorney for the seven original astronauts and acting president of the Washington Redskins football team, died, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/65; ap, NYT, 5/2/65, 89)
Gemini astronaut parachute system for use in launch emergency failed to function properly during test at El Centro, Calif. When the jumper stepped from a c-130 aircraft at 23,000-ft. altitude, a “ballute” (combination balloon and parachute) device for stabilizing the fall failed to deploy; the chute was opened manually at 12,000 ft. (upi, Minneapolis Trib., 3/10/65)
U.S. and Soviet astronauts had accumulated 19,610,000 accident-free miles—greatest total in the history of transportation—reported the National Geographic Society. A compilation released by the society showed that U.S. astronauts had traveled 10,692,000 mi. and Soviet astronauts, 8,918,000 mi. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/3/65)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nine fellow aquanauts rose 205 ft. from Sealab II in a pressurized personnel transfer capsule. They would decompress on the support ship Berkone for about 30 hrs. before being exposed to atmospheric pressure. Carpenter had completed a record 29 days and 14 hrs. in the ocean-bottom laboratory; his associates had been below 15 days as had another team before them. A third team of ten men would complete the Navy’s 45-day experiment in underwater living and working. President Johnson phoned congratulations to Carpenter. [Wash. Post, 9/27/65)
Extravehicular equipment for Gemini vin. underwent two qualification tests in the 20-ft. vacuum chamber at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The Extravehicular Life Support System was combined with the Extravehicular Support Pack (Esp), a 92-lb. backpack in which the astronaut would carry his oxygen and maneuvering gas supply. First test evaluated capability of the oxygen bottle in the pack to supply the extravehicular astronaut with air at a high rate of flow. Second test was a propellant blowdown qualification in which the space gun was fired in 30-sec. bursts to exhaust the freon supply. A vacuum equal to 150,000-ft. altitudes existed in the chamber, and the walls of the thermal box had been cooled to —300° F to simulate the conditions of orbital night for both tests. (MSC Release 65-105)
Four airmen emerged with high voices and a hunger for meat after five weeks of confinement in a simulated space cabin at the USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Scientists were studying a helium-oxygen atmosphere for possible future space cabin work because it did not produce decompression sickness in astronauts and was less hazardous in terms of spacecraft fires. (Chic. Trib., 4/8/65; M&R, 4/12/65, 10)
NASA absolved Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) of any blame in the 58-mi.-off-target landing of the GEMINI ill spacecraft following the three-orbit flight Mar. 23, according to msc spokesman. The mishap was attributed to the fact that the spacecraft did not develop as much lift as expected. The possibility that Major Grissom might have banked GEMINI in improperly as a result of misunderstanding instructions from ground stations had been investigated, (upi, NYT, 4/21/65, 11, msc gemini iii Fact Sheet)
As part of the ceremonies dedicating the Capt. Theodore C. Freeman Memorial Library of Astronautics at the Houston Baptist College, Faith L. Freeman, lO-yr.-old daughter of the late astronaut, was awarded a scholarship to the college. (Houston Post, 1/22/65; msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
On arrival at KSC, Astronauts Schirra and Stafford personally thanked the 400 men responsible for the successful GEMINI VI launching. The astronauts would undergo medical examinations and debriefings for three days and then fly to MSC for a reunion with their families, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/18/65, Al; upi, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
“I certainly have seen nothing in the eight-day data that would lead me to be worried about a 14-day flight,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, told reporters at a news briefing in Cocoa Beach. He said that the GEMINI V astronauts were in good physical condition and were returning to normal as quickly as had the pilots of the four-day Gemini GT-4 flight in June. Changes in such indicators as the heart rate and blood pressure characteristics seemed to reflect adaptation to the weightless space environment and, later, to the stress of returning to normal gravity of earth, Dr. Berry explained. Heart rates became lower in space and rose above normal on returning to earth. At first, on return to earth, blood pressure did not respond as promptly as normal to tilt-table tests designed to show how well the circulatory system copes with sudden changes from horizontal to nearly-vertical posture. Cooper and Conrad lost about TV2 and 8Y2 lbs. respectively, but had gained most of it back. This loss might have been a response to the space environment but was believed to be partly water loss after reentry while waiting in the sun to be rescued, Berry said. Both seemed to be less tired than their predecessors. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/1/65, 1, 15)
It was reported that President Johnson was disappointed that the twoman Gemini-Titan 4 spacecraft scheduled for June 3 launching, had no cameras aboard for simultaneous TV transmission of the space walk. The President had hoped that at completion of the four-day flight by Astronauts McDivitt and White, the U.S. would have pictures similar to those released by the Soviet Union after VOSKHOD II flight. TV cameras had been sacrificed for experimental instruments. (Humphrey, Phil. Eve. Bull., 5/27/65)
Gemini astronaut parachute system was successfully tested in drops from a c-130 at 15,000 ft. altitude by USN Chief Warrant Officer Mitch Kanowski and usaf Maj. Dan Fulgham over the Naval Air Facility El Centro. Parachutes deployed at 9,000 ft. as they would on actual Gemini missions. Additional tests would be made in drops from altitudes up to 35,000 ft. (Miles, L.A. Times, 3/9/65)
Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff reported to the Medical Society of the State of New York at its annual convention that the semicircular canals of the inner ear had been demonstrated to play a key role in motion sickness that astronauts might experience in a rotating, orbiting spacecraft. Capt. Ashton Graybiel at the usn School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, expressed optimism that astronauts could be taught to overcome the effects of motion sickness. One way, he said, was to precondition selected persons by teaching them how to avoid movements that would invariably upset them. Another promising development, Dr. Graybiel said, was drug research. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/16/65)
Dispatch to Moscow from Tass’ New York correspondent, Leonid Ponomarev: “The flight of the U.S. spaceship Gemini-5 . . . proceeded normally for only two hours, although the flight program was calculated for eight days. “The main reason [was] that a new system for providing electric power. . . was being used in the Gemini-5 spacecraft for the first time. . . . “It is a noteworthy fact that the new system for providing electrical power has never once been tested in spaceflight conditions. From the test stands on earth, the installation was put directly into working conditions in space. “There are several reasons that explain this haste and a certain degree of risk. The program chiefs were given the task of ‘catching up with the Soviet Union’ at any price regarding the length of flight in space. However, the present power of U.S. rockets and the size of the astronauts’ capsule are utterly inadequate for lifting and storing reliably tested battery-powered electrical power installations, which would weigh more than the new system. U.S. scientists were compelled to rapidly create a system, new in principle, in order to provide power for the Gemini-5 spacecraft for eight days so that it could fulfill its tasks.” (Tass, 8/22/65
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., (LCdr., usn) discussed the GEMINI v spaceflight with the Oba (King) of Benin in his palace in Nigeria. In his luncheon speech, the Oba said: “In this age, astronauts are physically making visits to some sphere in the universe our ancient people thought was possible to visit only in spirit form. . . . Such journeys may prove or disprove such theories that the space is limitless, according to scientists, or that over and above the outer space there is a canopy, according to the saying of our ancient people.” (Louchheim, Wash. Post, 9/29/65, Al)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham suffered a simple compression fracture of a neck vertebra during exercise unrelated to astronaut training. Cunningham would be grounded during the three months he would wear a neck brace but would continue other phases of astronaut training. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/65)
The 2 million people of Melbourne, Australia, saluted Astronauts McDivitt and White as GEMINI iv passed overhead by turning on all the lights in the city. McDivitt said to the Carnarvon tracking station: “Tell them I thank them for lighting the night for me.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6; Houston Chron., 6/7/65)
A Benedictine nun, Sister M. Margaret Bealmear, said she had declined an invitation to apply for astronaut training and that she assumed the letter from NASA Manned Spacecraft Center had been a mistake. Sister Bealmear, a candidate for a doctorate in biology from the Univ. of Notre Dame, said she had received the invitation in December 1964. Invitations had been extended by NASA to select names appearing on a list provided by the National Academy of Sciences. (ap, NYT, 3/16/65, 5; msc Historian)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., were lost briefly over Kenya while flying a small aircraft to Keekerok Game Lodge to visit President Jomo Kenyatta. With Cooper at the controls, they landed at Keekerok only 20 min. late, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/24/65)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn), primary crew for Gemini vn, said they would attempt to communicate with a ground station via laser beam during their 14-day mission planned for early 1966. The laser—a beam of intense light— can transmit voices or other messages. Ground station at White Sands, N. Mex., aiming by radar, would fire the first laser signal at Gemini 7 as it passed overhead. The Gemini 7 crew would attempt to answer by pointing their capsule downward, aiming, and shooting a 10-lb., hand-held transmitter toward the ground. (Transcript; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/7/65; upi, Wash. Post, 7/7/65; upi, NYT, 7/7/65, 20)
In a letter of explanation to Congress, NASA discussed priorities in the fy 1966 budget: “. . . As the President pointed out when he submitted the budget to the Congress, ‘It is a budget of priorities. It provides for what we must do, but not for all we would like to do.’ In assessing priorities and the most urgent national needs, the 260-inch solid propellant rocket program, the M-l liquid hydrogen-oxygen rocket engine capable of providing l1/^ million pounds of thrust, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power generating system to provide 35 kilowatts of electrical power in space could not be supported in the Fiscal Year 1966 budget. “. . . [nasa] is, therefore, preparing plans for reprogramming Fiscal Year 1965 funds so as to logically phase out these program activities in such a way as to obtain as much technical information as is possible for future use. . . . Every effort is being made to achieve the greatest possible benefit from the funds already invested.” (Text) *	Prof. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, discussing RANGER viii photographs in an interview with John Lear, World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., suggested that long, narrow rills and irregular depressions could be caused by moon’s surface collapsing into crevasses opened by the movement of a glacier hidden beneath lunar dust. He attributed gently rounded shapes to a shifting of small particles by electrical forces which, on earth, were inhibited by atmosphere. Concerning the manned expedition, Gold indicated: “The presence of ice oceans could give rise to many problems. But once these were solved, the ice itself could be mined and used to make hydrogen for fuel for rockets returning to Earth.” Referring to the electrically-charged particles: “Many particles would be dislodged mechanically by the landing of a spacecraft or the footstep of a man. Once loose, the dust would jump in response to electrical attraction or repulsion. If particles landed on the astronaut’s visor, brushing wouldn’t remove them but would instead intensify the electrical charges affecting their behavior.” Dr. Gold recommended more research on possible control of these electrical forces. (Lear, Houston Chron., 3/2/65; Ind. Star, 3/7/65; wbe Sci. Serv.)
Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, told a press conference that “there is a question whether astronauts can stand long confinement, let alone weightlessness.” Dr. Gilruth was in Los Angeles to accept the 1964 Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the asme at the Aviation and Space Conference. (Miles, L. A. Times, 3/17/65; naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., left with their wives on a six-nation goodwill tour arranged by President Johnson to demonstrate the U.S.’ peaceful intentions in space. They would visit Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, Nigeria, and the Canary Islands. At a State Department luncheon prior to departure, Cooper told the audience, which included ambassadors from the six countries he and Conrad would visit, that from the GEMINI V cockpit “you don’t see any of the combat, you don’t see any of the fighting and bickering, the world looks like a very peaceful place.” (vpi, NYT, 9/16/65, 27)
Gemini vil astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., reviewed for several hours where they would put food wrappings and other waste materials during their 14-day spaceflight scheduled to begin Dec. 4. Study of the problem was part of the final phase of training for the mission, (ap, NYT, 11/29/65, 55)
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. reported that tests conducted for USAF had indicated that a spin in a centrifuge might recondition astronauts living for weeks or months in a state of weightlessness. Previous research had indicated that long stays in the weightless state could have a debilitating effect on the body and cause the heart and circulatory system to lose their tone, (nyt News Service, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 2/9/65)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell flew from the carrier Wasp to KSC where they had a brief reunion with GEMINI VI Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford, who were departing later in the day for msc for further medical debriefing, (ap, NYT, 12/20/65, 10C)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that USAF would send 12 f-5a jet fighter aircraft to Vietnam this fall to evaluate the performance of this new multipurpose aircraft under combat conditions. Built by Northrop Corp., the f-5a was a lightweight supersonic aircraft that could carry 6,200 lbs. of bombs, rockets, air-to-air missiles, or other ordnance. With two' 20-mm. cannons mounted in its nose, it could take off fully loaded from unpaved runways. (dod Release 614-65) “Why they would not appear at all, said Scheer. He said no one had cleared such a meeting with him . . . The Russians were angry and left the scene in a huff, and at a news conference later, Sedov made no secfet of the fact that they considered the incident a snub and an affront. “An air of mistrust now prevailed. There was, as Pete Conrad observed later, ‘some real bad feeling around this place.’ “Scheer, trying to right things, sent a letter to Dr. William Pickering, president of the International Astronautical Federation, urging that the astronauts be brought together. . . . “Friday afternoon Cooper and Conrad spoke before a Congress session. . . . “As soon as that meeting was over, the two Americans jumped from the conference stage and headed for the white-uniformed Belyayev . . . Conrad [said] through the Russian’s interpreter ‘Tell him we would like to show them all our pictures. . . . Tell him we’ve got 250 slides and they can see them all. When would they like to see them?’ ” Hicks said Belyayev exchanged his lapel pin with Cooper and Conrad gave his to Belyayev to be delivered to Leonov. Hicks continued: “That night, considerably more progress was made at the Congress’s large banquet. Cooper and Belyayev, strategically seated within talking distance, even went so far as to exchange watches. . . . Finally the astronauts warmed up the cosmonauts from the earlier chill. They ail posed for a four-way handshake photograph. No more fooling around through official channels, drawled Cooper. Why don’t you fellows come up to our place for breakfast tomorrow morning? “The Russians agreed. . . . The talk, through an interpreter, was almost entirely personal and non-technical. . . . Conrad and Leonov exchanged writing pens. All traded autographs and Leonov . . . drew a picture of himself walking in space. . . . “As they departed, the spacemen locked in Kussian-styie bear-hugs. . . . Said one of the Soviet pilots, ‘We are colleagues and we have a full understanding. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad are good boys.’” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/65, A10; Hicks, Life, 10/1/65, 113-116)
250 photos taken by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., during the GEMINI v spaceflight were released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 17)
Editorial commentary in Washington Post on GEMINI VII-VI flight: “On the crowded globe beneath the soaring astronauts men were still fighting each other, cursing each other, starving each other and maltreating each other. Not yet have mortals risen above man’s inhumanity to man. Not yet have they surmounted the emotions that set at naught the generations of light and learning. Not yet are they wise enough to govern their passions. But hope soars aloft with the astronauts. The creatures who can do this, the beings who can defy gravity, disregard distance, conquer space, circumnavigate the planet and mingle with the stars, may yet make the larger conquests of mind and spirit that are necessary if human beings are to live together in peace.” (Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A20)
faa awarded two research contracts to obtain jet operations data on atmospheric turbulence: General Dynamics/Convair Corp. was awarded a $30,100 contract to develop a test program for obtaining highly precise data on the responses of pilot and aircraft to turbulence encountered in regular jet airline service; a $23,700 contract was awarded Eastern Air Lines to conduct a meteorological study of clear air turbulence (Cat), (faa Release 65-118) On Dec. 16, gemini vi Astronaut Schirra reported to Mission Control that an unidentified satellite in a low trajectory in polar orbit was trying to contact him. Before ground officials could respond, he and Stafford played Jingle Bells with a harmonica and bells. GEMINI VI began reentry northeast of Canton Island in the Pacific during its 15th revolution; four retrorockets fired automatically in the correct sequence, each providing 2,500 lbs. thrust. Reentry was normal and was the first controlled reentry to a predetermined landing point in the U.S. manned spaceflight program. Gemini vi splashed down in the Atlantic at 10:29 a.m. est, 700 mi. south of Bermuda—only 14 mi. off target—after a 26-hr., 1-min. flight. Assisted from the spacecraft by Navy frogmen, the astronauts arrived by helicopter at the carrier Wasp at 11:20 a.m. for medical debriefing. Recovery and rendezvous section of the GEMINI VI spacecraft splashed down near the spacecraft itself and was retrieved by another team of swimmers. This was first time the service section—complete with rendezvous radar equipment—had been recovered. Main parachute also was retrieved, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/16/65, 1, 28, 29, 30; 12/17/65, 1, 28; 12/18/65, 1, 16; 12/19/65, 1, 68, 69; WSJ, 12/17/65, 1; 12/20/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, Al, A14, A15; 12/17/65, Al, A8, A17; 12/18/65, Al, A7; 12/19/65, Al, A16, A17; 12/20/65, Al, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, Al, A14; 12/18/65, Al, A3; 12/19/65, Al, A8, A9; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc GEMINI VII/GEMINI VI Fact Sheet)
“Should the MOL blueprint as envisioned by the Air Force’s Systems Command be approved by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, the Navy conceivably could be the first to use this earth-orbiting station as a new technique for charting ship movements on all the oceans of the world,” wrote Frank Macomber in the San Diego Union. Macomber envisioned “two Navy astronauts . . . spinning around the earth as early as 1968 in a 10-foot diameter, 25-foot long orbital laboratory—about the size of a small house trailer filled with electronic detection gear . . (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 7/25/65, 13)
