New York Times editorial: "Space historians will have to invent new superlatives to describe the contributions of Gemini 11 and astronauts Conrad and Gordon to man’s entry into the cosmos. From the link-up with the Agena in the very first orbit to the incredibly accurate automatic return to earth, the three-day flight demonstrated a new level of capability far surpassing that shown in any previous flight by any nation.” (NYT, 9/16/66, 34M)
The Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II received editorial comment. Washington Evening Star: "Yesterday’s tragedy is all the more shocking in that it needn’t have happened at all. . . . "It is assumed that Bassett was Togging flying time’. .. See, a civilian, was not eligible for flight pay but as an astronaut was encouraged to keep his hand as an airplane jockey, "It is difficult to see why it is necessary for military men on astronaut duty to fly airplanes to qualify for 'hazardous duty’ pay . . . "Let’s save our spacemen for space, and let’s make it a bit easier for them by amending the military pay act to give uniformed astronauts those fjew hundred extra dollars a month just for being astronauts.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A6) Houston Post: "There is ... an element of irony in the fact that two men preparing for a highly hazardous space mission should die in this prosaic manner, but actually, under the procedures that are followed in space flights, there are just as great risks on the surface of the earth and in its atmosphere as in space, and they probably are much more numerous. If air travel is safer than land travel today, space travel is probably even safer . . .” (Houston Post, 3/2/66) Missiles and Rockets: "By emphasizing the everyday risk taken by all the astronauts in the course of training, the deaths of Capt. Freeman, Mr. See and Maj. Bassett have almost certainly lessened the outcry against the space program in the event of similar losses during space operations. "Each time an astronaut steps into a military jet aircraft, he is running a risk perceptibly greater than that he takes in space. . . . [nasa] takes the greatest of care to assure that manned spacecraft launches are as safe as the best engineering talent in the nation can make them. A launch atop a Titan II, hazardous as it may be, cannot compare with the danger inherent in groping through low fog for an elusive runway in a jet aircraft.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/14/66, 54)
Gemini xii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., arrived at ksc to begin debriefing. Addressing some 700 workmen, Lovell said "everyone here has done an outstanding job to get us into space”; Aldrin described the four-day mission as a "treat to me as an individual that I would like to have shared with every person in the world.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 11/17/66)
Tass told the Soviet people that gemini viii had achieved history’s first docking in space, and added: "But its program was carried out only partly. Its main elements—more practice in linking up, a lengthy stay by an astronaut outside his ship and the maneuvering of the ship and astronaut—remained unsolved.” (upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 41)
Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan held their first post-mission press conference. Cernan said that during his space walk he could not keep his feet from floating, was unable to use both hands while trying to don backpack containing maneuvering unit, and "had to work continually against the pressure suit. ... I was devoting 50 per cent of my work load just to maintain position.” This extra effort saturated the environmental control system and led to fogging of his faceplate so that he could not test the maneuvering unit. About the same time, he felt his back becoming "extremely hot.” It was later revealed some of the insulation had been ripped from his spacesuit. After recounting his adventures, Cernan said: "I found no new voodoo out there.... You’re at home out there ... I’m convinced we can do just about anything we want to do.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; NYT, 6/18/66, A10)
Gemini x spacecraft, its heatshield forward, aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. tions and drawings” for vehicles being proposed to transport astronauts on lunar surface, (msfc Release 66-157)
Prototype unfolding tool box containing 16 geological tools for astronauts to examine and obtain samples of lunar rock was delivered to msc by Martin Co. Box would also provide storage area for rock samples. Tools included battery-powered drill; dust scoop; sample-weighing device; hand-held magnifier designed for use through spacesuit visor; surveying instruments and rangefinder; and retriever to pick up small specimens of rock which pressure-suited astronaut could not reach, (msc Release 66-9)
U.S.S.R. was entering second phase of space medicine research, seeking the "why” of physiological changes, V. V. Parin, a Soviet physician-scientist with a major role in selecting and training cosmonauts, told Technology Week in a Moscow interview. In phase one "we merely made objective observations of animals ... we were interested in just keeping them alive, in generating the atmosphere, maintaining thermal control, humidity, pressure, and the rest,” Parin said. "Now we want to know the intimate details of animal adaptation” to space, because lower animals could be more intensively studied in space flights than man. Parin cited four areas in which improved medical technology could aid the study of physiology: measuring calcium loss in astronauts; analyzing process of water loss in astronauts; measuring muscle tone; and devising better telemetry. Parin said he was satisfied with the interchange of space-medical data between U.S.S.R. and U.S. (Beller, Tech. Wk., 7/4/66, 12, 13)
Soviet cosmonauts had not been troubled by perspiration, breathing difficulties, or high heartbeat rates as was Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Gemini xi mission, Soviet physician-cosmonaut Dr. Boris Yegorov said at press conference in Geneva. Probable reason was that cosmonauts worked in "completely normal” atmospheric conditions and breathed ordinary air, while astronauts used artificial air mixture containing more oxygen than normal, he said. Yegorov, one of three crew members in Oct. 12, 1964, voskhod i mission, was attending congress on space biology. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/66, A3)
gemini xi Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., arrived at ksc from recovery ship U.S.S. Guam to undergo physical examination and to begin debriefing. (Wilford, NYT, 9/17/66, 11)
U.S. domestic airlines flew 25 per cent more revenue passenger miles during first six months of 1966 than during comparable 1965 period, according to Air Transport Assn, report. Nearly 30.2 billion revenue passenger miles were flown during first half of 1966 by scheduled trunk, local service, and helicopter carriers compared with 24.1 billion revenue passenger miles during first half of 1965. (Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 40) During week of July 25: Patent was granted to Wolfgang G. Offik, senior staff engineer for Chrysler Corp., for escape system to rescue workers from booster-launch gantry in case of explosion or fire. Equipment included series of rescue cabins, each suspended in its own cable at a different level in front of gantry. In emergency, workers and astronauts still outside spacecraft would enter cabins and drop in them into underground shelter, protecting them from flames on gantry and on ground. (Jones, NYT, 7/30/66, 29)
NASA, to "allow a better time and motion evaluation of the workloads and stresses” experienced by an astronaut during extravehicular activity, had canceled plans to test usaf Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu) on Gemini XII mission. NASA and dod would study plans to reschedule experiment on later manned spaceflight, (nasa Release 66-258)
Sun had blinded Gemini ix Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan for more than two minutes of the critical liftoff period June 3, preventing them from reading control gauges or dials, ksc officials disclosed. As a result, NASA was considering fitting outside of spacecraft windows with tinted coverings on launchings when sun might be a serious problem. Coverings would be sprung free of windows when spacecraft had achieved orbit. Cernan’s suggestion of sunglasses would probably be rejected, NASA said, because it would be impossible to wear them under helmets. (NYT, 7/10/66, 45)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said surgeons would have to remove a callus, formed on his left forearm after he broke it in a July 1964 motorcycle accident in Bermuda, before he could be considered for another spaceflight. Ability to rotate the arm properly was hampered. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/66, A2; AP, Chic, Trib., 1/25/66)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., met with Japanese space scientists in Tokyo and presented Japanese Premier Eisaku Sato with a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph of their gemini vii/vi rendezvous in space. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/66, Al; Wash. Post, 2/25/66)
Long-range HC-130H cargo aircraft equipped with Fulton Recovery System successfully snatched Capt. Gerald T. LyVere (usaf) from Rogers Dry Lake at afftc in first test of new ground-to-air recovery system for rescuing downed fliers and astronauts. At 400-ft. altitude aircraft clamped onto balloon-suspended nylon cable attached to harness dropped earlier by parachute, pulled Captain LyVere up behind aircraft, and reeled him over rear ramp. In later demonstration, Col. Allison Brooks (usaf) and A-3C Ronald Doll (usaf) were recovered simultaneously in side-by-side two-man pickup using double harness. Lockheed-built HC-130H, which would become operational June 30, could fly missions to more than 2,000 mi. from its base, loiter at sea level, and rescue up to five persons in multiple pickups from land or sea. For NASA projects, aircraft would carry complex uhf spacecraft reentry tracker equipment to locate reentering spacecraft, (afftc Release)
NASA reported that smudgy spacecraft windows and exposure problems had compromised quality of most of movie film taken by Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Still pictures were all "of good quality” and showed earth’s curvature more clearly than on any other manmade photographs. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A8)
Soviet physicians, according to Tass, had reported that highlanders or people who had lived for a long time in mountain areas made the best astronaut candidates since they "spend the energy of their organism much more economically.” They used less oxygen when doing physical work; had approximately 30 per cent greater resistance to oxygen shortage; and possessed "heightened resistance to infrared, ultraviolet, and cosmic radiations.” (Tass, 9/29/66)
Speaking in Denver at Colorado Women’s College, Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, ossa, said a primary reason for lack of women in space was that few had the scientific training. Even NASA’s 300 women professionals were few compared to their number in other agencies, she said. Young women interested in a career in space science were advised to concentrate first on the basics of their preferred area "because the fundamentals of the science used in space study are no different from those in more traditional fields. Equally important is to learn how to think, to face and solve problems and how to find the facts we need, not just remember them .... Space as a career depends on the individual who’s considering it. It is glamorous— and it’s also dirty work.” Dr. Roman said she was sure there would be women astronauts "if manned space flights continue as we expect them to.” (von Ende, Denver Post, 3/19/66)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), speaking at national convention of Naval Reserve Officers Assn, in Denver, described his astronaut-aquanaut occupation as a liaison between space and undersea exploration. He said there were plans to train astronauts under water to better withstand the tiring work of maneuvering outside spacecraft—a major problem of recent space flights. Models of spacecraft would be used; astronauts would wear spacesuits and would work without swim fins. Carpenter, who had volunteered in May 1964 for usn’s Project Sea Lab, said aquanauts could work in water until they became tired or hungry. (Denver Post, 10/9/66)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., gemini vi command pilot, received a tiny gold harmonica from the Italian National Union of Mouth Organists and Harmonica Musicians for being "the first mouth organist in outer space.” (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/26/66)
Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr. (Cdr., usnr), and Charles A. Bassett II (Maj., usaf), killed-Feb. 28 when their T-38 jet training plane crashed in St. Louis, were buried in Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors in two separate ceremonies. Fifteen astronauts attended, 12 of whom served as pallbearers. See and Bassett had been selected as prime crew for the Gemini IX mission scheduled for spring 1966. (Hoagland, Wash. Post, 3/5/66, Bl; AP, NYT, 3/5/66, 9)
usaf School of Aerospace Medicine had concluded 15-day test to evaluate effects of increased carbon dioxide on four airmen in spacecraft cabin simulator. One of a series of such experiments, the latest took the level of experience up to the 4% C02 mark, compared with normal ground level conditions of 0.033% C02. Aim was to assess problems astronauts might have to face with a partial failure of their life support system. (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 4)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter decided not to attend Second International Congress on Oceanography in Moscow after learning that the U.S. ocean research vessel U.S.S. Silas Bent had been denied permission to dock at Leningrad in connection with the conference. Carpenter, who had participated in the Sealab II experiment in living and working underwater, would have attended as an aquanaut and would have been the first astronaut to visit Moscow, nas had designated Silas Bent to respond to Soviet invitation for oceanographic ships to visit Soviet ports during Congress so delegates could visit them but Soviet Foreign Ministry had refused permission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/24/66)
Dr. Seibert Dudley of the Univ. of California’s Visibility Lab., San Diego, said test equipment on the ground and in the gemini v spacecraft had definitely demonstrated that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had seen what they claimed they had seen below on earth during their Aug. 21-29, 1965, mission. On a one-man Project Mercury spaceflight May 15-16, 1963 (MA-9), Cooper had drawn skepticism for reporting he could see dust clouds, roads, and other small features. (AP, Houston Post, 1/6/66)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., passed their medical examinations for the Gemini XII mission, scheduled for launch from etr Nov. 9. (Wash. Post, 11/6/66, A17)
Gemini Astronauts Charles A. Bassett II and Elliot M. See, Jr., were killed when their T-38 aircraft overran St. Louis Municipal Airport in rain and fog and crashed into the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. building which housed Gemini 9 and 10 spacecraft. The jet, cleared for an instrument landing, was left of center in its approach to the runway when it turned toward the McDonnell complex 1,000 ft. from instrumented landing strip. It struck the roof of Building 101, bounced into an adjacent courtyard, and exploded. Several McDonnell employees in Building 101 were treated for minor injuries. See and Bassett, enroute to McDonnell for two weeks training in space simulator, were followed later by Gemini IX backup crew Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, who landed safely. NASA Hq. officials announced that the backup crew would fly the Gemini IX mission on schedule. (Wagner, Wash. Post, 3/1/66, Al, A4)
afsc had awarded Bell Aerospace Corp. a one-year study contract to develop Dual-purpose Maneuvering Unit (Dmu) that could be worn by astronaut or operated by remote radio and TV signals. Dmu would combine "best features” of Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)— which Astronaut Eugene Cernan was unable to test during Gemini ix-A flight—and Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu)—which had been tested in laboratory, (afsc Release 116.66)
nasa’s 31 veteran astronauts would lose over $6,000 annually from sale of their personal stories if 19 new astronauts joined them in contract with Time, Inc., and Field Enterprises Educational Corp., AP reported. Under terms of contract, Time, Inc., and Field paid $520,000 annually for equal division among "participating astronauts,” in return for exclusive rights to all unofficial personal stories and photos. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/1/66, N8)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan were greeted by their families on their arrival in Houston after four days of debriefing at ksc. (upi, NYT, 6/11/66, 62)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., began eight-nation good-will tour of Asia with four-day visit to Japan. (NYT, 2/23/66)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received rousing welcome on arrival at Seoul, South Korea. Many flag-waving schoolchildren had to be restrained by policemen during welcoming ceremonies at City Hall. (NYT, 2/27/66, 14; N.Y. J/Amer., 2/27/66, 28)
Gemini v spacecraft in which Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., orbited the earth Aug. 21-29, 1965, went on display at Buenos Aires (Argentina) Municipal Airport as part of a U.S.-sponsored exhibit on U.S. advances in space. (ITsia; Reuters, Wash. Post, 2/21/66, A6)	„	.	.
Oklahoma City welcomed home a favorite son, Gemini ix Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, and conferred honorary state citizenship on his crewmate Eugene A. Cernan. Both astronauts were inducted into the National Cowboy Hall of Fame, dedicated to the memory of Western frontiersmen. (AP, NYT, 7/9/66, 29)
Gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and Gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman were named joint winners of the 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for achieving the first rendezvous in space by two separately launched, maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. Award, established by late pioneer aviator and balloonist Col. Clifford B. Harmon (usaf) "for exceptional feats of pilotry,” would be conferred in fall 1966. (NYT, 8/7/66, 4; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/7/66, A18)
Astronaut James Lovell and nuclear submarine U.S.S. Benjamin Franklin’s crew exchanged mementos of a joint experiment conducted during Dec. 4-18 gemini vn mission. Benjamin Franklin, with two seconds to fire a Polaris missile so it could be seen by gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman as they passed over Cape Kennedy, fired perfectly, enabling the astronauts to track the missile visually. In a ceremony aboard the submarine docked in Newport News, Va., Lovell was presented gas generator plate from the Polaris missile and crew received the NASA patch from Lovell’s gemini vii spacesuit. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/6/66)
NASA might not in future be able to order aircraft carriers and large ships for recovery of astronauts, Chicago Tribune sources reported, usn felt vessels could be put to better use to support or relieve forces in Vietnam, usaf had proposed to NASA use of new long-range helicopters. (Chic. Trib., 7/1/66)
Of 351 astronaut applicants, 192, including all 6 female candidates, failed to meet minimum requirements, an MSC spokesman reported. The successful 15 would be announced in May. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 3; AP, New Haven Register, 1/7/66)
Comparing earth to a "manned spaceship hurtling through the infinity of space,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address at San Fernando State College that exploration of space would bring home the fact that "earth is a mere speck in the universe.” He said it would seem increasingly absurd we had not better organized our living together on this planet: "Our experience in space can be a powerful stimulus to all of us, wherever we live, to move towards a world of law, a world without war. And may we find also in the space effort that 'moral equivalent of war’ for which philosophers have been searching over many centuries. Like war, it stretches our human capabilities to the utmost. It demands all that we possess of ingenuity, determination, persistence, and intelligence—and, on the part of our gallant astronauts, the highest degree of courage and resourcefulness in the face of danger. Space activities —even competition in space—can be a substitute for aggression, a bridge for mutual understanding and the identification of common interests with other nations, and a major tool of arms control and disarmament.” (Text)
15-lb. pigtailed monkey, connected to intricate battery of miniaturized instruments, would be launched into earth orbit in 1967 to provide U.S. scientists with 30-day study of his health, jpl announced. Monkey—an astronaut stand-in—would be part of the Biosatellite series projected by NASA. Particularly meaningful to NASA’s space biology program would be urinalysis tests, showing changes in calcium and other primate urine constituents, which should indicate how astronaut’s metabolism might vary during prolonged space flights. ARC was in charge of the program, (jpl Release)
usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) was "moving quietly but quickly toward its first test launch, now scheduled for Oct. 28 from Cape Kennedy,” Aviation Week reported. Operational Mol would consist of modified Gemini spacecraft connected to a "can-shaped” laboratory. usaf astronauts, while orbiting in space, would pass through door in spacecraft’s heatshield to reach laboratory. October test would show whether configuration would endanger astronauts in spacecraft during reentry. (Av. Wk., 7/18/66, 25)
Delays at major U.S. airports totaling 20 million minutes cost aircraft operators $63.6 million in 1965, faa reported in a staff study. One third of total delays was caused by air traffic controls, and the remainder by airport limitations such as weather conditions, ground congestion, and construction, (faa Release 66-68) Maneuvers were executed as planned, with docking of gemini x and gatv x occurring at 5:58 get. Only about 380 lbs. maneuvering fuel of 940 lbs. at liftoff were left, whereas a 680-lb. remainder had been expected. An out-of-plane error had necessitated a major correction, with excessive fuel consumption. Mated spacecraft, using gatv x’s primary propulsion system, attained 476-mi. (766-km.) record altitude for manned flight. Burn of gatv x’s secondary propulsion system at 22:38 get brought docked configuration into same orbit as gatv viii—launched March 16 for gemini viii mission—preparatory to later rendezvous. Standup Eva began at 23:27 get with Collins photographing stellar ultraviolet radiation through open hatch. Young orderea termination of Eva when both he and Collins experienced severe watering and irritation of eyes from an unidentified source. Separation of Gemini x-gatv x— which had remained docked 38 min. 42 sec.—occurred at 44:40 get. Series of maneuvers brought gemini x within 50 ft. of gatv viii. Umbilical Eva began at 48:08 get: Collins removed fairing from gatv viii and retrieved micrometeoroid detection experiment—completing first productive work ever accomplished on Eva mission. Collins lost Eva camera; photographic coverage was limited to pictures taken by Young from spacecraft. Eva was terminated after 28 min. to conserve maneuvering fuel; 50 lbs. had been used, as against 35 lbs. estimated consumption for planned 55 min. Third hatch opening of mission occurred when astronauts, cramped by unstowed equipment, jettisoned 12 items. Reentry July 21 after 70 hrs. 47 min. in space and 43 revolutions was normal. At 5:07 p.m. edt, gemini x splashed down in Atlantic Ocean 544 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than three miles off target and five miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Within minutes, usn pararescue team dropped from helicopters had attached flotation collar to spacecraft, and Young and Collins were transported by helicopter to recovery ship. gemini x had accomplished (1) two rendezvous, one involving longest docking yet achieved, the other a close approach to a passive satellite from which an object was retrieved; (2) two Eva exercises; (3) successful maneuvering by astronaut from one spacecraft to another and back; and (4) use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked spacecraft. (NASA Release 66-179; NASA Proj. Off.; Wilford, NYT, 7/19/66, 1; Hines, Wdfch. Eve. Star, 7/19/66, Al, A3; 7/20/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 7/20/66, 1; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 7/22/66, Al, A4; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 26-30)	_
Gemini IX Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan passed their final major physical examinations at ksc. Mission review board confirmed May 17 launch date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/15/66, Al)
"Moonwalker”—device developed by Space General Corp. for astronauts to travel on the moon—had been adapted for crippled children. Built under fiew grant, 90-lb. machine, which walked on eight mechanical legs, could negotiate sand or mud, climb and descend stairs, step up a normal street curb, and climb grades of 15° or more. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/66, Al; Brevard Sentinel, 5/13/66)
