Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced that it would not exercise its option to extend its rights for book and newspaper distribution of the personal stories of NASA astronauts and their families. Present four-year agreement, which paid the astronauts $320,000 annually for exclusive publishing rights and provided each astronaut with $50,000 life insurance policy, would expire Aug. 31. Field Enterprises president Bailey K. Howard said large number of astronauts now, compared with number four years ago, made continuation of the project impractical. (AP, NYT, 5/3/67,13; US News, 5/15/67)
nas had received 923 applications for 20-30 positions in NASA’s astronaut training program. Academy was expected to forward NASA a list of 60-75 recommended candidates in March for final selection. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/26/67)
NASA published Earth Photographs from Gemini III, IV, and V, an atlas containing reproductions of 244 high-quality earth photos taken by Gemini astronauts. Pictures, which were taken with hand-held cameras from 100- to 215-mi altitudes as scientific, meteorological, and terrain experiments, showed major • natural features and some manmade ones in 50 countries around the world, (nasa SP-129; nasa Release 67—153)
Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva reached provisional agreements on aiding and returning astronauts who landed in foreign countries and on payment of damages caused by space launches. Agreements would be submitted to full U.N. Committee for approval and then placed before U.N. General Assembly for final action, (dpi, P EB, 7/18/67; upi, W Post, 7/18/67, A3) Program Plans, OMSF Plans and Analysis Directorate, had been appointed Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Administration effective July 17; (2) R/Adm. Roderick 0. Middleton (usn), former Deputy Director of omsf Missions Operations Directorate, had been appointed Apollo Program Manager at ksc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18; (3) Stanley de Jongh Osborne, a general partner of Lazard Freres & Co. investment banking firm in New York, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Government-industry relations and on the impact of space technology on the national economy; and (4) Erskine E.	Harton, Jr., former Assistant Safety Director, had been appointed Acting Safety Director, replacing George D. McCauley who recently retired from Government service, (nasa Ann, 7/20/67; NASA Releases 67-189, 67-190)
usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory Systems Program Office, Los Angeles, Calif., issued a $3.5-million initial increment to an $8.7-million fixed-price contract to Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for development, procurement, and support of astronaut pressure suit systems for the MOL program, usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization issued a $4-million increment to an $8.1-million definitive contract for engineering services in support of the Agena space vehicle program, (dod Release 912-67)
President Johnson presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies for 1967 to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Capt., usn), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (l/c, usaf), and Alvin S. White, former naa test pilot. Lovell and Aldrin were cited for successful Gemini XII mission
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter would never be able to fly in space again because of an arm injury suffered in 1964 motorcycle accident, the Washington Evening Star reported. Surgery performed six months ago had failed to restore full mobility of the arm. (AP, W Star, 4/17/67, A6)
In its final 1967 session U.N. General Assembly unanimously endorsed new space rescue treaty, and urged signature by all countries. Primary provisions: (1) immediate notification when astronauts landed in other countries; (2) assistance to these astronauts, including rescue efforts on the high seas; (3) safe and prompt return of the astronauts; and (4)	notification and return of objects launched into outer space. Treaty would be open to all nations and would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. President Johnson, praising the agreement, said: “I hope that this agreement will help to ensure that nations will assist astronauts in the event of accidents or emergency. The agreement would carry forward the purpose of this administration to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/17/67, 1; Esta-brook, W Post, 12/20/67, A20; upi, NYT, 12/21/67, 29; SBD, 12/21/67,263; PD, 1/1/68,1763)
Two-to-six percent weight loss in astronauts returning from space flights might reflect natural readjustment of body water content, not simple dehydration, Paul Webb of Webb Associates reported in Science. He based his theory on similar losses which had occurred during experiments in simulated weightlessness; blood normally pooled in the extremities returned to circulation, increasing central blood volume and causing excretion of water not replaced during space flights. Webb said it was not yet clear whether reduced water content during weightlessness has harmful effects. (Webb, Science, 2/3/67,558-9)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, repeated his request that Congress reopen its investigation of NASA [see June 12]: “The Apollo hearings should be reconvened—not for the purpose of continuing further a technical discussion of possible technical causes for the Apollo fire—but to undertake a serious and far-ranging management review of the sort that would force NASA to take stock and develop sound management practices for the protection of the public’s investment in the space program. This is not to mention the safety of our astronauts. . . .” (CR, 7/17/67, H8750)
President Johnson appointed Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Special Consultant to the President for Physical Fitness, to replace Stan Musial who resigned in January. Lovell would assume the new position in addition to his regular duties as an astronaut. (PD, 6/12/67, 833—4*)
NASA announced that primary mission objectives of Biosatellite II (launched Sept. 7) had been accomplished. Biological experiments had been conducted to investigate synergistic and antagonistic effects of weightlessness and controlled gamma radiation aboard attitude-controlled spacecraft. Spacecraft recovery—essential to success—had been completed as planned. Environmental control of capsule and experiment packages had kept organisms alive while radiation source was exposed for flight duration. Dr. Rudolph H. T. M^ttoni, principal investigator for bacteria experiment, said bacteria had increased 20 to 30% faster in weightless condition. He concluded “cellular turnover may be higher in man” during weightlessness and could be harmful to astronauts during long-duration space flights. He suggested that if further research proved growth of human cells to be faster in weightless state, future spacecraft might have to be equipped with some form of artificial gravity or astronauts might have to carry drugs to prevent too-rapid turnover of their body cells. Since the 45-hr experiment with bacteria equaled many years of human life, this would not be significant on flights of a few weeks or even a few months. The pepper plant experiment showed abnormal growth, indicating that plant leaves also depend on gravity. Other experiments did not show significant change and were still being analyzed, (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/15/67,46)
Twenty-one U.S. astronauts began a week of training at usaf’s Tropical Survival School in Panama. Their first meeil was iguana thermidor and baked armadillo. (W News, 6/13/67; AP, C Trib, 6/14/67)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial on Dec. 8 death of Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., (usaf) : “[His death] deprives the Nation of another highly trained scientist who had been selected for future service in space. . . . “With the toll of astronauts now at nine victims, it is significant that not one has been lost in space itself. ... Our astronauts are not only men who have extensive educational qualifications but who have equally extensive experience as test pilots and similar extremely hazardous activities. . - “They may put their lives on the line willingly, but the Nation should strive to safeguard them as much in their non-space activities as ... in space.” (PInq, 12/11/67,10)
Selection of NASA’s sixth astronaut class [see Aug. 4] indicated that astronaut “glamour” grew with each new peril, Neal Stanford reported in Christian Science Monitor. “Scientists . . . compete more intensively for the few scientist-astronaut jobs open than do jet pilots in the military services for the pilot j obs available. “The glamour has not entirely gone out of space flying. What has happened is that its perils have become more apparent, its scientific opportunities more exciting, and its financial rewards less considerable. “There have been 6 selections of astronauts, 4 of flier astronauts, and 2 of science astronauts. In this sixth and latest selection 939 [sic] scientists applied for the 11 positions open. In the previous selection of pilot astronauts only 403 applied for 19 positions open. . . .” (Stanford, CSM, 8/15/67)
Brian Todd O’Leary, one of NASA’s 12 new scientist-astronauts, was appointed assistant professor of Astronomy Dept., Univ. of Texas. Although flight training portion of astronaut’s program would continue for next two years, 30% of O’Leary’s time would be available for scientific activities. (AP, B Sun, 10/6/67)
msc engineer Caldwell C. Johnson was granted patent for a cocoonlike escape device for orbiting astronauts. Device, which would be stored in an external compartment on the spacecraft, consisted of an insulated zippered nylon bag with a retrorocket. Astronaut would don his pressure suit with oxygen supply, seal himself in the bag, and fire retrorocket to thrust toward a landmark on earth. He would then inflate a bladder to shape the bag into a sphere for stability during reentry. Sphere would deflate during reentry, notifying astronaut when it was time to deploy parachute for safe landing. (U.S. Patent Off; msc Roundup, 7/7/67, 8; Jones, NYT, 7/15/67, 29)
NASA had presented monetary awards totaling $4,200 to six inventors, all employed by industrial contractors, for advancements in space technology: Charles R. Peek and Lewis E. Boodley, RCA—$1,000 for new type of interconnector for satellite solar cells; G. Richard Blair, Hughes Aircraft Co.—$1,000 for passive heat protective coating used on Surveyor spacecraft; Kenneth A. Ruddock and Robert G. Rempel, Spectra-Physics, Inc.—$1,000 for magnetometer to measure earth’s magnetic field more precisely; and Paul A. Jensen, Hughes—$1,200 for low-noise antenna feed system used in all NASA Deep Space Network stations. (NASA Release 67-^2) During February: Space flights lasting one month or more should pose no new respiratory problems for astronauts, but additional research was necessary to ensure against respiratory problems that could arise from prolonged weightlessness and an artificial environment, nrc Space Science Board study concluded. Only serious effects of weightlessness on respiratory system anticipated were possibility that astronauts might inhale dust and other solid particles floating in the spacecraft and that muscles controlling the lungs might weaken because work was easier in weightless environment. Areas recommended for further study included: toleration limits for carbon dioxide in case spacecraft’s absorption system malfunctioned; problems of infection during long missions; possibility of intentionally filling astronauts’ lungs with a liquid to prevent collapse of blood vessels and tissues during acceleration greater than 15 g; and basic medical training and use of drugs for self-medication by crew during weightlessness. Committee also recommended efforts to improve methods to detect and extinguish spacecraft fires, and suggested that a two-gas system with nitrogen or helium be used until effective methods of fire control in 100% oxygen were developed. Report, to be released shortly by NAS, was the product of a June 26-July 9,1966, conference held at Woods Hole, Mass., at oart request. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 2/67)
nasa Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., tested space simulator at Martin Co.’s plant near Littleton, Colo. Unit, which provided 6° of freedom, was linked to computer that determined exertion forces on astronaut as he performed simple tasks in simulated weightless environment. {Denver Post, 1/19/67)
U.S. astronauts would one day encounter “other living things” in outer space, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of ksc, told Rollins College audience. “This prospect cannot be dismissed as metaphysical speculation. ... It is much more a mathematical certainty than were the early theories expounded by scientists and philosophers whose observations and discoveries made possible many of our activities today.” (upi, NYT, 2/27/67,12)
Illustrations of the predictive ability of the contemporary engineer were made by arc’s Simulation Sciences Div. chief, George A. Rathert, Jr., at Moffett Field Scholarship Night Banquet for Bay Area Joint Engineers Council: “. . . faa pilots were experiencing certain characteristics of the supersonic transport on simulators at the Ames Research Center 15 months before the FAA asked for bids on the design studies. You will recall Astronaut Gordon Cooper having to manually control the attitude of his space ship during a reentry retrofiring to successfully complete his mission. Engineering test pilots at Ames were studying problems of coping with manual control of a simulated spacecraft reentering with , partly failed control systems more than nine years ago.” (Text)
Dr. Heinz von Diringshofen, a German pioneer in flight and space medicine, died in Frankfurt, Germany, at age 67. Among the first to study the effects of weightlessness in vertical flight, Dr. Diringshofen recorded reactions of humans in weightless periods of up to eight seconds. He also developed systems currently used in the training of U.S. astronauts, including a centrifuge that produced 17 g’s pressure. (NYT, 5/9/67, 43)
nas forwarded to NASA a list of 69 recommended candidates for 20-30 positions in nasa’s astronaut training program. A total of 923 applications had been evaluated. NASA was expected to make final selections before Aug. 15. (nas-nrc—nae News Report, 3/67, 3)
