usaf experiments in human reactions to extreme heat had indicated astronauts could survive reentry through earth’s atmosphere if their cabin cooling system failed. In tests at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, airmen were being subjected to 300°F and 400°F heat in four-foot-high oven three times daily. Some could stand up to 15 min at 300°F; limit at 400°F had been two or three minutes. (AP, LA Times, 8/6/68)
usaf denied decision had been made to cut back or cancel FB—111 production [see Nov. 15], Wall Street Journal said, but reports persisted that fewer than 253 would be purchased because of their high cost and indifferent performance. Aerospace Daily said its sources reported recommended cutback of more than 50% was “essentially accurate” and put figure at “about 100” to give usaf Unit Equipment force of 90 aircraft. (WSJ, 11/18/68,12; Aero Daily, 11/18/68) Air Transport Assn, of America reported that 15- to 19-mo use at three major airports had convinced airlines that runway surface grooving was “an effective aid in overcoming hydroplaning” during wet landings. Airline operation evaluation had “dispelled earlier fears that grooving might damage runways or aircraft.” (Text; NYT, 11/24/68, 84) Dr. Walton W. Jones, nasa Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference U.S. could keep astronauts in earth orbit a year within 10 yr if U.S. would allocate sufficient resources to project. arc experiments had shown rats subjected to gravitational pull 4.7 times above normal had increased life expectancy. He said after meeting that NASA planned experiments with rats at zero gravitation to determine if aging process was suspended while mem was free from gravitational pull. Dr. J. F. Kubis of Fordham Univ. emphasized importance of psychological factors in selecting space crews. On long flight, “lack of privacy, crowding, and continuous exposure to interaction will become sources of aggravating stress.” He recommended no more than one in crew with dominant personality. Soviet scientist Dr. N. N. Gurovsky said condition of two dogs after 22-day orbital flight (in Cosmos CX Feb. 22—March 16, 1966) had aroused forebodings on effect of year-long flights on astronauts. Loss of calcium in bones would make them prone to breaking. Both dogs had .developed liver and intestinal ailments including edemas. Human beings could expect same effects. Earlier reports had noted dogs suffered muscular reduction, dehydration, and confusion in adjusting to walking. Cal Tech Prof. Fritz Zwicky said some apparently unexplained deaths on earth each year could he due to blows from meteors or heavy nucleons in cosmic rays. (Hamilton, NYT, 11/20/68, 31; 11/21/68, 18; AP, B Sun, 11/22/68,1)
Slide-wire escape way, 1,200-ft-long, from 215-ft level to ground at ksc Complex 34 was declared man-rated following tests by five dummies and five men. Slide wire was designed as last means of escape from ton of Saturn IB gantry for astronauts and close-out crews if emergency should shut off other routes. (Spaceport News, 9/12/68,1)
U.S.S.R. announced through Tass successful completion of experiment in which three researchers spent from Nov. 5, 1967, to Nov. 5, 1968, in isolated chamber consisting of living compartment and greenhouse linked to outside world by videotelephone. Purpose of experiment was to test man’s ability to live in isolation for year, using water and oxygen regenerated from waste products and dehydrated food supplemented by greenhouse-grown vegetables; study effects of various factors on human organism and establish optimum conditions for long isolation; and evaluate effectiveness of self-contained life-support systems based on regeneration of waste products. Daily requirements of astronauts on long voyage included 700 g of food, 2.4 kg of drinking water plus 5.5 kg of water for other purposes, and 800 g of oxygen, amounting to 11 tons of supplies for one-year space voyage. Report said there were no significant changes in body weight and temperature of experimenters except one lost eight to nine pounds before his weight stabilized in five to six months. Electrocardiogram remained unchanged and no dehydration was observed. Pulse and respiration rates had fluctuated before assuming lower level than at start of experiment. Researchers Gherman A. Manovtsev, Andrey N. Bozhko, and Boris N. Ulybshev were reported in good health at conclusion of experiment. (Shabad, NYT, 12/25/68, 38)
Dr. R. G. Mclver, head of aeromedical research at Holloman afb, N. Mex., said tests on chimpanzees had shown astronaut experiencing sudden decompression outside spacecraft might live at least three minutes in total vacuum, giving his companions time to get him inside pressurized cabin. Survival of astronauts in ruptured space cabin would depend on presence of one man wearing space suit and thus able to place other crewmen in suits after they lost consciousness. Earlier, scientists had predicted sudden death for astronauts experiencing space vacuum decompression. Revised estimates of life expectancy were based on simulated space capsule experiments with 150 chimpanzees. (AP, B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)
Dr. Charles A. Berry. Director of Medical Research and Operations, msc, was elected 1969 President of Aerospace Medical Assn, at 39th Annual Meeting in Bal Harbour, Fla. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin was named honorary member, (msc Roundup, 5/24/68,1)
In 12-yr NASA-sponsored experiments with roosters spinning at 130 rpm up to 15 mo on double-deck centrifuge, Univ. of California’s Davis Chronic Acceleration Laboratory gravity experts had noted possible adverse effects of long-term weightlessness on astronauts. Without steps to counter effects, “man in space for long periods will find his body decalcified,” said Dr. Arthur H. Smith. “He will not be able to stand up without fracturing bones. All his muscles will shrivel up including those around his blood vessels. He will be overloaded with fat which he may not be able to use.” Among methods being developed to offset disturbances to human body in space were drugs which stabilized proper balance of red cells and steroids which helped maintain calcium metabolism. Roosters were used in tests since their upright posture, heart-to-head distance, and circulatory systems were similar to man’s. (Hillin-ger,W Post, 9/19/68, Gil)
nasa issued Management Instruction establishing Committee on ExtraVehicular Activities (eva), activities performed in space by astronaut outside space vehicle. Seven-member committee, serving for two-year period, would provide Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight with recommendations on overall NASA eva planning and development by: identifying eva capabilities which must be defined and developed to support manned space flight activities; identifying ground-based, orbital, and lunar surface experiments to establish required eva capabilities; providing recommendations on short- and long-term EVA program plans; reviewing proposed eva flight experiments and making recommendations; and maintaining awareness of EVA-related activities of organizations other than NASA, (nmi 1152.36)
NASA investigation board reported that primary cause of Oct. 5, 1967, crash of T—38 jet trainer near Tallahassee, Fla., was “a jam in the lateral control system (ailerons) from unknown source.” Accident had claimed life of pilot, Astronaut Clifton C. Williams. Board recommended improvement in T—38 inspection procedures, (nasa Release 68-102; upi, W Post, 6/7/68, A2; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 6/7/68, A3)
usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was conducting research with 5-million-w arc heater to determine temperature and pressure limitations of ablative materials used to prevent military reentry vehicles from burning up on encountering earth’s atmosphere. Military reentry vehicles had to withstand conditions similar to high-speed reentry of interplanetary vehicles on return to earth, far more severe than those to be met by lunar astronauts. Data had been produced for civilian and military agencies, (afsc Release 117.68)
The space age, no doubt, will produce many future heroes and many other historic accomplishments, New York Times said, “but even now it is plain that yesterday Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders assured themselves of immortality as the first men literally to break the shackles of earth and travel successfully to another destination in this suddenly shrunken solar system.” (NYT, 12/25/68, 30)
Orbital workshop engineering mockup was readied for five-day crew station review Feb. 12—16 at msfc. It was second of three design reviews. First had been conducted Dec. 11—14, 1967. In mockup, recently returned to msfc from McDonnell Douglas Corp., astronauts would carry out tasks on ground that would later be done in orbit under zero gravity conditions, including experiment installation and operation, msfc announced that third and final critical review in July would precede production of flight model of orbital workshop. (msfc Release 68-18)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was announced winner of Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics. Trophy would be presented at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif., Dec. 6. (upi, W Star, 11/19/68, A2)
President Johnson proclaimed Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts, and the Return of Space Objects in effect with deposit in three capitals of instruments of ratification by U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. Ireland and Nepal had previously ratified treaty, which had been signed by 75 countries. Proclamation noted new agreement was essentially humanitarian. Its provisions “carry forward the goals qf international cooperation to which the United States has been dedicated since enactment of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and to which the United States renewed its commitment in the outer space treaty of 1967.” {PD, 12/9/68, 1658; AP, NYT, 12/5/68, 13; nasa Off of General Council)
usn announced selection of 54 men to serve as aquanauts in 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living, scheduled to begin in October. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), team leader for Sealab II (Aug. 28—Sept. 26, 1965), would serve as Senior Aquanaut. Ocean floor experiments would be conducted at 620-ft depth off San Clemente Island by 40 aquanauts in 5 teams serving 12 days each. Remaining 14 men would serve as alternates and backup surface support divers, (dod Release 579—68; Aero Daily, 6/26/68)
Senate unanimously approved space rescue treaty, providing for rescue and return of astronauts downed on foreign soil. It had been signed by '75 nations. (CR, 10/8/68, S12215-6; AP, B Sun, 10/9/68, A10)
msfc awarded $49,985 nine-month study contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. to assess possible radiation damage to film used on atm to record solar activity and to consider radiation hazards to astronauts in Saturn I orbital workshop, (msfc Release 68—43)
Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved space rescue treaty providing for rescue and recovery of astronauts down in foreign lands. U.S.S.R. had given final approval along with 73 other nations. (AP, NYT, 9/25/68, 17; WSJ, 9/25/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/25/68, A6)
