msc Roundup described Skylab food system being developed “to compensate partially for astronauts’ long absence from the usual fare of Earthlings and the warmth and delight of home-cooked meals...Skylab food system would maintain caloric level between 2000 and 2800 calories per day and provide at least minimum dietary allowances recommended by nas. Meals would be selected from a variety of foods and cooked by each crewman on special food tray. Four kinds of food would be prepared: dehydrated, including scrambled eggs, beverages, and desserts; intermediate moisture, including peanuts and coohies; wetpack, including turkey with gravy and meatballs with sauce; and frozen, including filet mignon and lobster Newburg. (msc Roundup, 11/6/70, 1)
Heart-rate tachometer invented by msfc engineers James R. Currie and Ralph R. Kissel to monitor astronauts’ heart beat in space might have medical application on earth, msfc said. Device, which could measure heart rates between 40 and 200 beats per minute and furnish almost instantaneous rate after measuring only two heart beats, might be used to monitor heart rates of cardiac patients, (msfc Release 70-226)
Walker G. Bennett, newly appointed President of Augustana Hospital in Chicago, said at Chicago dinner that he hoped to reduce patient costs by 5% to 10% by equipment and techniques for space industry. Bennett was formally introduced by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, who later said sensors developed to monitor astronauts were being used to monitor patients at Augustana and other hospitals. (C Trib, 12/6/70)
msc announced selection of Singer-General Precision, Inc., Link Div. to receive $4-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to design, develop, install, and support Skylab simulator for astronaut and ground crew training at msc. (msc Release 70-101)
Researchers at Ohio State Univ. headed by physiologist Dr. Harold S. Weiss had received grants totaling $452 975 to study artificial atmospheres inside space vehicles, upi reported. They were trying to eliminate undesirable side effects on astronauts from breathing pure oxygen. (NYT, 4/16/70, 30)
nas released Infectious Disease in Manned Spaceflight: Probabilities and Countermeasures. Report of nas-nrc Space Science Board recommended biological precautions taken after lunar flights be taken before flights as well. Preflight quarantine period should be instituted to permit acute disease to express itself, prevent contact and infection of astronauts by general population, and permit crosscontact of flora and exchange of microorganisms among spacecraft crew. During last two weeks before launch, astronauts’ contacts should be limited to essential technical crew held under same isolation regulations.	. Report called for extensive and periodic screening of astronauts by immunological tests and “microbiological surveillance” of astronauts’ families and close associates before and after missions. Astronauts with even minor respiratory infections should be barred from mission because they might “result in greatly accelerated clinical responses under space-cabin conditions if transmitted to other astronauts.” (Text)
msc had accepted delivery of three of eight new supersonic Northrop T-38 trainers for astronauts, purchased at $800 000 each, Washington Post reported. Two-engine aircraft would replace 10 Lockheed subsonic, single-engine T-33s in NASA service for past 10 yrs. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/29/70)
Only medical side effect to astronauts found thus far from long periods spent in space was “some cardiovascular deterioration,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told Los Angeles press conference. This was “normal response of the body to a less demanding environment.” But medical
MSC announced award of $3 000000 NASA contract to Garrett Corp. AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. for portable astronaut life support assembly (alsa) to support extravehicular and intravehicular activity in Skylab program. (MSCRelease 70-43)
Responding to question on astronaut pay, Washington Daily News columnist Hy Gardner quoted NASA as saying astronauts received no supplemental allowance for flying space missions. During last weeks before mission launch, they were on temporary duty assignment at KSC where they resided at Government expense. Status continued until they returned home to Houston after mission. During temporary duty period, military astronauts received allotment of $2 per day and civilian astronauts, $3.20 per day. (W News, 3/26/70, 40)
faa announced publication of new taxiway system design standards to increase airport capacity by speeding ground movements of large aircraft, including Boeing 747, McDonnell Douglas DC-10, and Lockheed L-1011. (faa Release 70-100) November 16-20; eva critical design review was held at Skylab mock-up area and Neutral Buoyancy Simulator (NBS)at msfc. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart headed 10-astronaut team performing under normal earth gravity in Saturn Workshop mockup and nbs. (msfc Release 70-235)
Newspaper editorials marked lunar landing anniversary: New York Times: “. . .the Eagle’s landing was one of mankind’s finest hours. The scientific dividends from the new era of lunar exploration have already been very rich, and they will be even more abundant in the future when numerous astronauts from many nations will work on the lunar surface. Men now inhabit the earth-moon system, not earth alone, and much in tomorrow’s history will be shaped by the developments that will follow the Eagle’s triumph.” {NYT, 7/20/70,26) Washington Post: “The basic issue involved in NASA’s appropriations this year, as it will be in the next year and for many years to come, is whether this country should give up something it has done and which is going well, something that has brought it great international prestige and internal pride, and something that we believe may well hold the key to man’s future.” (WPost, 7/20/70)
Hospital in Sydney, Australia, was using blankets coated with aluminum foil and lined with polyester film to keep infants warm, Chicago Tribune said. Both substances, used in astronauts’ spacesuits, had high-heat-retention properties. (CTrib, 3/16/70)
Nine astronauts, headed by Richard H. Truly, began walk-through of Skylab Workshop tasks in week-long Saturn Workshop crew-station review at msfc. (MSFC Release 70-189)
Series of reviews to select flight design of Saturn Workshop, part of Skylab program, was announced by msfc. Government engineers, astronauts, and industry representatives would determine any changes necessary before final approval of Workshop scheduled for 1972 launch into earth orbit. In Sept. 9-10 review at msfc, astronauts would study Workshop procedures in mockup. Sept. 14-18 critical design review at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Huntington Beach, Calif., facility would be attended by more than 200. At Workshop crew station review Sept. 21-24 at msfc, astronaut crewmen would “walk through” Skylab tests. Results of reviews would be considered during preliminary review at Huntington Beach Sept. 28-29 and at Workshop Critical Review Board meeting at Huntington Beach Oct. 2. (msfc Release 70-181)
Dynalectron Corp. announced it had been awarded $3 805 000 NASA contract for maintaining and servicing lunar landing training vehicles and aircraft used by astronauts and management at msc. Contract was one-year renewal of agreement under which Dynalectron had carried out management, maintenance, engineering, technical, and logistic functions in support of aircraft at MSC. (Dynalectron Release)
Visiting Soviet SoyuzlX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov took turns with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., flying Boeing 747. They were accompanied by Boeing test pilot during flight from Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash. (AP, B Sun, 10/28/70)
Motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch perfected by space engineers was delivered to Texas Medical Center in Houston by msfc for evaluation. Second wheelchair would be delivered to Ron-cho Los Amigos Hospital in Downey, Calif., in November. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movement with his eyes and move easily without assistance. Switch had been developed to help astronauts in training operate essential equipment under extreme flight conditions. Manufacturer, Hayes International Corp., was extending application of switch as control device for handicapped, (msfc Release 70-218)
Atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair carried her suit to ban broadcast and telecast of prayers by astronauts in space to U.S. Supreme Court. She appealed Dec. 2, 1969, decision of U.S. District Court that prayers were individual decisions of astronauts. (AP, NYT, 2/ 17/70, C3)	.
Firemen in Evendale, Ohio, had worked two years to perfect new firefighting uniform of aluminum-beta glass, material used in astronauts space suits, UPI said. (W News, 4/20/70, 4)
