New York attorney Paul Sawyer, who had joined nasa to evaluate agency’s public relations efforts on March 22, had taken 30-day leave from law firm in which he represented astronauts in negotiating exclusive rights to their stories for magazines, Washington Post reported. Sawyer had said he would not be representing astronauts during NASA assignment. (W Post, 3/26/71, A3)
NASA board investigating Jan. 23 helicopter crash in Indian River near ksc—in which pilot, Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, escaped injury— had named misjudgment in estimating altitude as primary cause, nasa announced. Mitigating factors were lack of familiar objects on Indian River surface to help pilot judge altitude, possible visual focusing on false water surface because of water’s smoothness, change in sun reflection on water caused by change in course, and possibility that Ceman’s experience with high-speed aircraft might have contributed to altitude misjudgment in slower craft. Board said Cer-nan’s survival training as astronaut and naval aviator was major factor in his escape from submerged wreckage and burning fuel. (nasa Release 71-206)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was named Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC. Veteran of four space flights totaling nearly 30 days in space, Lovell would assist in overall management of Science and Applications Directorate, (nasa Special Release; msc Release 71-34)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 11487 for himself and cosponsors. Bill would authorize sale of up to seven acres of unimproved land adjacent to ksc Visitor Information Center to Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc. Organization was nonprofit Florida corporation interested in constructing and operating nonsectarian chapel on property, No federal funds were involved in proposed transaction. (Text; H Rpt92-600)
aec announced it was developing plutonium-fueled water recovery and waste management system for crew on extended space flights. Device converted liquid wastes into sterile drinking water by high-temperature processing and disposed of nonmetallic cabin wastes by incineration. System would meet needs of four astronauts for up to 180 days, (aec Release 0-47)
More than 15 astronauts were taste-testing three meals daily for five days in msc experiment to evaluate proposed food items for 28- and 56-day Skylab missions in 1973, msc announced. Tests would determine astronauts’ preferences and each astronaut’s energy requirements. They were coordinated by Technology, Inc., and conducted in msc Life Systems Laboratory. (Msc Release 71—74)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on “ambiguous” announcement of progress in NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings to develop compatible space docking system [see Dec. 3]: “The first interpretation was that agreement soon would be reached on a joint mission involving astronauts of the two countries in an orbital linkup. In hasty clarification, NASA explained that the mooted accord covered only the technical matters which could make such a mission possible. . . . Either way, the conclusion is obvious: The two space powers are moving at last, and seriously, toward the sort of shared space planning that logic and economics have long indicated but which competition and secretiveness have prevented.” (KC Times, 12/8/71)
Former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had also been aquanaut in USN’s Sealab Project, testified before Senate Committee on Commerce’s Subcommittee on Oceans and Atmosphere. Carpenter, president of Sea Sciences Corp., said man must explore ocean floor if he is to understand it, just as he had to explore lunar surface to understand it. Subcommittee was examining ocean pollution. (CR, 10/18/71, D1039; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/19/71, Al)
Sleep analyzer developed for nasa by Dr. James D. Frost of Baylor Univ. and built by sci Electronics, Inc., Div. of sci Systems, Inc., as Skylab experiment had been made available as research device to U.S. medical institutions, NASA announced. Device would record quality of sleep of Skylab astronaut during 28-day stay in space by combining and evaluating inputs of electro-encephalogram and electro-occulogram. Medical application of device could be to treat insomniacs and other patients experiencing “sleep neuroses.” faa doctors were considering study of sleeping patterns of air controllers and pilots after stressful duty. (NASA Special Release)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., received Honorary Knight of St. Patrick Award from College of Engineering, Univ. of Missouri at Columbia, Mo. (NASA Activities, 4/15/71, 61)
Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York Univ. Medical Center had accepted for evaluation and testing motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch, NASA announced. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movements with his eyes. It had been developed under NASA direction to help astronauts in training to operate equipment under extreme flight conditions. Institute’s director, Dr. Howard A. Rusk, had estimated that more than 100 000 quadriplegics—persons with no use of arms or legs—could achieve mobility if chair could be made available, (nasa Release 71-122; A&A 1970)
Ashes of Soyuz 11 Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N.	Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev, killed during reentry from June 6— 30 mission, were buried in Kremlin Wall in Moscow’s Red Square. Military funeral, climaxing national day of mourning, was watched by millions of TV viewers and attended by leading Soviet and foreign officials and thousands of other onlookers. Condolences were sent by world leaders. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford represented President Nixon at funeral. Eulogy at funeral was presented by Andrey P. Kirilenko, head of funeral commission: “On a small island of the motherland traveling at a fantastic speed across the expanses of the universe they were filled with courage and the conviction that the tasks of the party and people would be fulfilled; and they fulfilled these tasks, successfully completing a complex and varied program of scientific research and technical experiments. The results of their observations are invaluable for science, for the future of space technology, for mankind. For 24 days we saw the valorous cosmonauts on the television screens and listened to their voices. With unbated attention we followed their work. Millions of people, as it were, became intimately linked with the heroes of the cosmos. We all impatiently awaited the cosmonauts’ safe return to home territory. Their lives tragically came to an end when the long cosmic journey was close to completion.” Letter from 19 surviving cosmonauts printed in Pravda said: “Today we are paying the last tribute to our talented and courageous comrades. There is not only grief in our hearts, but also pride for what they have done for the homeland in outer space. We know that our road is a difficult and thorny one, but we never doubted the correctness of our choice and were always ready for any difficult flight. We express firm confidence that what happened cannot stop the further development and perfection of space engineering and man’s striving for space, striving for knowledge of the mysteries of the universe.” (fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI; Kingston, Canada, Whig-Standard, 7/2/71,1; AP, W Star, 7/1/71, A2)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, named to five-man board chaired by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to investigate Jan. 23 crash of NASA helicopter piloted by Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan. (msc Release 71-03)
Washington Post editorial commented on NASA’s public information policy: “There is something strange about the decision ... to bring in a New York lawyer, Paul Sawyer, as a consultant on its public affairs policies. NASA has had, for a decade now, what seems to us and to most journalists to be the most effective and most honest public information program in government. It is hard to see why public monies should be spent to study it, particularly when the man chosen to make the study has represented the astronauts in recent months in negotiating private contracts for the stories of their activities.” (W Post, 3/27/71, A18)
House passed and sent to Senate H.R. 11487, bill to permit sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. {CR, 11/15/71, H10998, D1171)
U.S. Dept, of Justice asked Supreme Court to deny atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair’s request that U.S. astronauts be prohibited from undertaking religious activities during lunar missions. Solicitor Gen. Erwin Griswold said astronauts carried only personal religious items which improved their morale and contributed “to the success of the flight.” (upi, H Post, 2/17/71)
Skylab astronauts would begin extravehicular training in pressurized suits in msfc Neutral Buoyancy Space Simulator later in year. Mockups of Skylab space laboratory modules had been submerged in water tank 12 m (40 ft) deep and 23 m (75 ft) wide, which simulated weightlessness of space environment, (nasa Release 71—205)
Miniature analytical clinical laboratory to monitor astronauts’ health on spacecraft was being developed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, aec announced. “Gravity-Zero” system would permit astronauts to perform quickly and automatically 16 parallel chemical tests on samples of plasma or serum, based on colorimetric determinations. Test results would be automatically radioed to ground control, which would recommend action to astronauts, (aec Release 0—51)
Dangers inherent in separation of science and government were discussed in New York Times article by Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Prizewinning Hungarian biochemist at Marine Biological Laboratories in Woods Hole, Mass. “Among our 450 representatives in Washington there is not a single scientist, so they do not know that problems are like equations which cannot be solved by trickery, blows or bombs, not even atomic bombs.” With different assumptions different selfconsistent systems could be constructed; each seemingly logical. “Ptolemy placed the earth at the center of the universe, Copernius the sun. Each system is perfectly logical and self-contained. Copernicus himself never dared to give preference to his own. The only way to decide between the two is to see where they lead. An astronaut basing his calculation on Ptolemy would end in the nowhere. Our present political system leads to poverty, inflation, unemployment, crime, drugs, war and the neglect of our priorities toward a final catastrophe. The solution is not separating science from politics . . . but making it penetrate into politics.” (NYT, 10/23/71, 33)
