NASA test pilots Stuart M. Present, age 41, and Mark C. Heath, age 37, were killed when their T-38 aircraft crashed on landing at Matagorda Island off coast of Texas. Radar contact was lost during third instrument approach to landing strip while fog bank was moving in. Pilots were checking out T—38 for use by astronauts to maintain flight proficiency. (msc Release 72-20)
Washington Evening Star article cited results of “intolerable pressure” on astronauts’ domestic life. Of 73 original astronauts, 2 had remained bachelors and 6 had received divorces. Astronauts were away from families on average three out of four weeks. As mission time approached they were away continuously. Danger in training and “almost constant cross-country flying” added to pressures; 8 married astronauts had died in accidents. (Recer, W Star, 4/18/72, Cl)
Large storage battery at Manned Spacecraft Center exploded, killing one man and seriously injuring another. Battery was near underwater tank where astronauts trained in simulated weightlessness. Training Supervisor Kirby C. Dupree, who was killed, and James E. Scott—both employed by Brown & Root-Northrop—apparently had been performing routine maintenance on the 240-cu-m (64 000-gal) tank. No astronauts were in the huilding. (W Post, 3/1/72, A4; Reuters, NYT, 3/1/72, 24)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced it was negotiating parallel contracts for space-walk studies with ltv Aerospace Corp. and Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. Contracts were to investigate emergency, contingency, and normal extravehicular and intravehicular activities by astronauts and protective equipment required. Firm-fixed-fee con' tracts would amount to $126 000 for ltv and $98 511 for Hamilton Standard, (msc Release 73-78)
French scientist Michel Siffre emerged from cave beneath Edwards Plateau near Del Rio, Tex., after six-month experiment to determine whether human time cycle was product of planetary system or of man’s physiology. Results of experiment sponsored by NASA, French Speleological Institute, and French Defense Ministry would be used to serve astronauts on long-duration missions, jet pilots crossing time zones, and nuclear submarine crews on long cruises. Siffre told news conference that he had achieved 48-hr-day cycle twice, though average daily cycle underground had been 25 hrs. (Anderson, W Post, 9/5/72, A3)
Germ-control and dust-purging techniques developed for spacecraft sterilization were being used in St. Luke’s Hospital in Denver, Colo. Below, a surgery team performed a hip-joint replacement in a new clean-room facility that could be folded for storage when not in use. Air was forced in a gentle breeze from the rear of the room to the open front. Team members “'upwind” of the patient wore astronaut helmets and garments impermeable by bacteria, while air around the downwind team members was carried away from the patient. Application of the technique was developed for NASA by the Martin Marietta Corporation’s Denver Division. System ordered materials classified Top Secret, Secret, or Confidential only if their unauthorized disclosure “could reasonably be expected” to cause exceptionally grave damage, serious damage, or damage to national security. NASA, Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Defense, and United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency were among Government departments whose heads and their senior deputies were empowered by order to classify material or information as Top Secret. (PD, 3/13/72, 542-50)
Achievements of U.S.-U.S.S.R. summit meetings in Moscow to date were summarized in New York Times article by Max Frankel. U.S. and Soviet officials had “duly signed the agreements that had been specially packaged for the occasion. Some, on cooperative ventures in health research, environmental control, scientific cooperation and a link-up of astronauts in space, had been merely rewritten or upgraded from earlier agreements, to add to the cumulative sense of achievement. One of the accords, to avoid naval harassment and incidents at sea, had been negotiated under the deadline of the summit.” Another, on trade, had become “too complicated to resolve” and was “earmarked for energetic followup this summer.” Agreement to limit construction of defensive and offensive nuclear weapons “was finally finished in a whirlwind round of all-night sessions.” Main premises behind summit meeting were “that the two superpowers are now truly strategic equals, that they both have enough invulnerable weapons to deter nuclear attack, that they need to stop adding more weapons before they can reduce the number of weapons, that they both can use the money they might eventually have for better purposes, that they must avert even indirect conflicts that might draw them into war, and that they must collaborate more broadly in other fields to avoid the intrusions of inevitable conflicts of interest and conflicts among smaller nations.” (NYT, 5/28/72, 4:1)
Issuance of requests for proposals for new astronaut space suit was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Companies were asked to develop prototype space suit that would weigh less than 18 kg (40 lbs), be fully mobile with high degree of hand dexterity while pressurized at 55 200 newtons per sq m (8 psi), give trouble-free service in earth orbit for up to one year with 50, six-hour extravehicular activity (eva) periods, and be repairable in space, (msc Release 72-152)
