A New York Times editorial criticized the inclusion in the FY 1974 Federal budget of $5.8 million for further studies of the supersonic transport’s possible effect on the stratosphere: “While there may be no harm in pursuing a scientific study of the question, the Government’s intent clearly goes beyond pure research or the problem raised by foreign and military supersonic planes. A high Administration official has bluntly stated that the study would be ‘prefatory to possible introduction of an SST program at a later date.’ The option ‘is held open.’ With an array of fiscal, political and scientific factors against it, the case for the SST at this late date would seem to rest solely on the advantage to a tiny handful of people crossing the oceans in three or four hours instead of six or seven—scarcely a reason for reviving a discredited project which is still being liquidated at public expense.” (NYT, 4/17/73, 39) April 18:	nasa released a preliminary timeline of the Skylab missions scheduled to begin with the Skylab 1 launch of the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm EDT May 14 from Kennedy Space Center. The Skylab 2 mission, carrying the first three crewmen, would leave the pad at 1:00 pm EDT May 15 and dock with the orbiting laboratory at 8:40 pm edt. At 8:30 am May 16 the tunnel would be pressurized and the astronauts would enter Skylab. On the 28th day, at 8:46 am June 12, the crew would reenter the command module, undock, and return for splashdown at 1:44 pm, 1300 km (800 mi) southwest of San Diego. Skylab was to operate for eight months in earth orbit, occupied at intervals by three-men crews who would make scientific and technical investigations and observations related to such areas as earth resources, physiological effects of long-duration weightlessness, solar phenomena, and metal processing in zero-g conditions. (NASA Release 73—78)
Soviet journalist Victor Louis discussed U.S.S.R. plans for the Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft in a New York Times article. The aircraft was scheduled to go into regular passenger service in 1975, when it was expected to begin carrying 120 million passengers annually. Soviet territory was so sparsely populated that “fewer people will be troubled by noise than in Europe or the United States.” Soviet statistics showed 3500 internal airfields in the U.S.S.R. Soviet aircraft flew to 63 major cities throughout the world—operating between Moscow and Santiago, Chile, and eastward between Moscow and Jakarta. SST watchers had calculated that the U.S.S.R. would not sell more than 20 Tu-144s initially. “Ten are estimated to be sufficient to satisfy [Soviet national airline] Aeroflot’s demands for its internal and international European, African and Asian routes, and perhaps a further ten would be taken up by the Czechs . . . and other countries of Eastern Europe.” Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev—who had taken over Tu-144 planning after the death of his father, Tu-144 designer Andrey N. Tupolev—had predicted 50 times more air passengers by the year 2000 and talked of aircraft that would cruise in the stratosphere and carry 1000 persons at speeds of 10 060 km (6250 mi) per hr. (NYT, 6/2/73, 31) June 3:	The Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft exploded and disintegrated in mid-air over the French village of Goussainville near Le Bourget Airport on the final day of the Paris Air Show, killing 13 persons [see May 24-June 3], (Randal, W Post, 6/4/73, Al) June 4:	NASA was “fighting for its political life,” a Detroit News editorial said as the Skylab 2 astronauts considered ways to release a stuck solar wing on the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14: “Its funds have been cut drastically since the moon landings were accomplished. Skylab itself is a vehicle costing $295 million. If it has to be abandoned the people will demand more expenditures be cut. So NASA is trying to prove that man really is boss of the machines he produces, that money is not being thrown away. There is a limit, however, to what NASA can devise and the astronauts accomplish. That limit must not be overstepped.” (D News, 6/4/73)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 2 astronaut Cdr. Paul J. Weitz, Jr. (usn), for permanent promotion to the grade of captain. (CR, 7/20/73, S14273)
Skylab’s contribution to better understanding of solar processes, leading to possible generation and control of solar energy for earth use, was described by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers in a speech before the Poor Richard Club in Philadelphia: The sun was the “original model of nuclear energy,” understanding of which could lead to fusion control and its efficient use for power generation. “The Skylab investigators are concerned with this and also with explaining how solar events affect the Earth, particularly solar flares that trigger auroras and disrupt radio transmission. Because sunspot activity correlates with temperature and density variations in the Earth’s upper atmosphere, it is conceivable that the injection of energy into the atmosphere by solar particles may trigger world-wide weather phenomena. Our astronauts saw flares shooting up 100 000 miles [160 000 kilometers] above the surface and they watched giant snakelike clouds erupting in the corona that disturbed radio transmissions here on Earth. Two massive flares exploded on the Sun, producing auroral lights on Earth; . . . each one could supply the world’s energy needs for the next 500 years.” (Text)
A New York Times editorial commented on the manned Skylab 2 launch: “The possibility of repairing a damaged spaceship, now brought to the fore by the last two weeks’ developments, points up one of the advantages of man’s presence in space. If something goes awry with an unmanned spaceship, and there are no arrangements for bringing repair men to it, it is more probable than not that little can be done to save the mission. Now the world is faced with a major effort to overcome unexpected difficulties by assigning additional duties to the astronauts originally involved. The success or failure of these repair efforts in the period immediately ahead will provide important evidence for the future debates between the advocates of manned and unmanned efforts to explore space.” (NYT, 5/25/73, 32)
Newspaper editorials commented on the success of the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission. New York Times: “This first group of astronauts did much more . . . than demonstrate man’s biological capability to live and work in space for four weeks. They proved that men in space can do what machines cannot do, they can repair their vehicle.” It was conceivable that “when all the Skylab data are available, the field of solar astronomy may be advanced as radically as lunar astronomy has been in recent years.” At Skylab’s completion “a strong economic and scientific case will doubtless have been made for creating one or more permanent manned stations in space. Any such orbiting laboratories should surely be United Nations ventures in international cooperation, not new instruments for senseless and expensive national rivalries.” (NYT, 6/24/73) The Philadelphia Inquirer: It had been shown that “enterprising spacemen can do more than routine work for long periods of time. They can deal with the unexpected, correct serious malfunctions and adjust routine to changed circumstances. In space, as on earth, things do not always go well. There, as here, adversity is the true test of men. The Skylab pioneers have met that test with distinction.” (P Inq, 6/24/73)
A St. Louis Post Dispatch editorial commented on the repair of the Skylab 1 Workshop [see May 14-June 22] as its Skylab 2 astronaut crew surveyed the U.S. heartland from space: “Now that Skylab is operating under something approaching full power, scientists will be able to judge how well man can exist for prolonged periods of weightlessness and whether experiments they carry out cannot be duplicated or outperformed by machines. The Skylab astronauts have managed to establish conditions under which the mission may receive a fair test and that is of paramount importance, for had they failed, the manned space program, for budgetary reasons, might have come to a halt.” (St. Louis P-D, 6/10/73) June 11:	Skylab 3’s Saturn IB launch vehicle and Apollo command module were moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for the July 27 launch of the second Skylab crew—Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. The astronauts would join the Skylab Workshop (orbited May 14) for 56 days of experiments and observations, (ksc Release 124-73; W Post, 6/12/73, A13)
NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved results of the Feb. 26-March 3 Moscow meeting of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine, NASA announced. The Group had agreed on common medical procedures to permit comparison of pre- and postflight data on astronaut and cosmonaut body functions. (NASA Release 73-79)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on the plight of Skylab 3 as the astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched
A Chicago Tribune editorial commented on “the brave men of Skylab” as the Skylab 2 astronauts (launched May 25 as the first crew to man the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14) continued to conduct experiments in space: In repairing the Workshop’s protective shield they had “behaved with such matter-of-fact competence, tinged with homely humor and flashes of exasperation when things refused to go right, that one almost overlooked the fact that this was an act of incredible sustained bravery.” (C Trib, 6/11/73)
Newspaper editorials commented on the successful conclusion of Skylab 2 the day after splashdown. Baltimore Sun: “The Skylab experience, it is said, shows once again the value of man over computer, or rather of man-plus-computer over computer alone, in the exploration of space; and that may be one of its lessons. The larger lesson is that human curiosity and human intelligence are still operating in regions of concern beyond the day-by-day, and will keep on so operating.” (B Sun, 6/23/73) New York Daily News: “The venture proved . . . that man is needed in space to repair and regulate equipment when something goes wrong. But for the skill, coolness and courage of astronauts Conrad, Kerwin and Weitz, the entire Skylab project would have wound up as an expensive washout.” (NY News, 6/23/73)
The Skylab Saturn IB/Apollo rescue vehicle, readied for rescue of Skylab 4 astronauts (launched Nov. 16), was rolled out from Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B. By Dec. 19 the vehicle would complete flight readiness tests, the two-day final overall test of spacecraft systems and ground support equipment, and a simulated launch. On Dec. 21 the rescue vehicle would he within nine days of launch readiness and would hold at that point Until needed in an emergency or returned to the vab at the end of the mission. The rescue command module was equipped with two additional crew couches and additional life support and communications connections to permit it to return the three Skylab 4 crewmen and the two rescue crew members, Vance D. Brand and Dr. Don L. Lind, (ksc Release 283—73)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 3 Astronaut Jack R. Lousma to be a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps. He had held the rank of major. {CR, 10/20/73, S20947)
The Univ. of California at Davis successfully completed a 15-wk, NASAsponsored study to determine how astronauts on extended space missions would cope with isolation [see May 18]. Six male students, in groups of three, lived in 3- by 5-m (11- by 17-ft) rooms with bathrooms and closets. Interior lighting was controlled to interchange day-night cycles and provide long periods of uninterrupted light barely bright enough to read by. Each room was monitored by closed-circuit TV. The students, selected from 100 volunteers, were paid $1600 each to participate. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, codirector of the study, said it had proved that, while space explorers should be able to live without sex for extended periods, they needed someone outside their spacecraft to whom “they could blow their tops” from time to time. (AP, W Post, 6/27/73)
The Space Science Board of the National Research Council released HZEParticle Effects in Manned Spaceflight. The report, prepared for NASA by the Board’s Radiobiological Advisory Panel to the Committee on Space Biology and Medicine, concluded that the high-energy, heavy-ion irradiation encountered by astronauts outside the earth’s magnetosphere or in high-inclination earth orbits would have negligible biological effects for periods of less than two years in space, (nrc Release)
