Astronaut Paul J. Weitz, Captain, USN, would retire from military service
NASA was negligent in the 1972 death of Kirby Dupree, supervisor of a support unit for astronauts, a federal judge ruled in awarding $575 000 to the widow and a 4-yr-old daughter. When a battery box exploded in an astronaut training facility at JSC, Dupree and James E. Scott were assisting with water experiments used to simulate space flights. Scott won $100 000 for injuries suffered in the accident. Both Dupree and Scott were employees of a contractor at the facility. (ATT, 25 Nov 76, 20)
Correlations between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion sickness on the ground and his susceptibility in space were the subject of studies by JSC scientists, based on data from U.S. and Soviet manned space flights and on data from tests aboard a zero-gravity training aircraft. Motion sickness had been difficult to study because of the variety of separate sensory inputs to the brain. The three major components of human balance and posture were generally accepted to be visual input, defining the local vertical component; vestibular input from the semicircular canals and otoliths in the inner ear, sensing angular and linear acceleration and the presence or absence of gravity; and muscle sensors, monitoring posture. These interrelated inputs normally function to keep the body balanced; in an earth-normal gravity, balance would be reflexive, and persons would not be conscious of the body-movement patterns that kept them upright. In a moving vehicle, the inputs to the brain might produce contradictory information resulting in a feeling of discomfort; “motion sickness” is not an adaptive response and does not improve the situation, as coughing would do to relieve a throat blockage. Persons without sight can experience motion sickness, but persons without their vestibular functions intact apparently do not. Although little was known about the interactions among the three sensory systems, motion sickness seemed to be more related to vestibular input. During Skylab missions, in the relatively large areas of living space, much vestibular relearning apparently occurred in the first 2 wk of spaceflight, after which all crewmen became very resistant to motion sickness. No correlation was apparent between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion sickness on the ground and his susceptibiity in space. The studies postulated that the otolith (chalky concretion in the inner ear) was the receptor affording the most direct information on gravity, and therefore was the source of many of the inputs causing disequilibrium or motion sickness. (JSC Release 76-67)
The long-secret site of USSR space launches—previously identified by U.S space experts as Tyuratam, for the name of the local railway station—was identified in the newspaper Kazakhstanskaya Pravda as “Leninsk,” in a dispatch on construction of electric power-transmission lines. The dispatch, stating that the Leninsk area had been connected to the Central Asian power grid, was believed to be the first in which the name appeared in a Soviet publication. U.S. astronauts who visited the space complex last year during Apollo-Soyuz mission preparations had reported that a city of about 50 O0O population was associated with the launch complex, and was known as Leninsk. Publication of the name—which had not appeared on Soviet maps or reference books—was considered either an oversight by the censor or a decision to make the name public. (ATT, 15 Feb 76, 12)
