NASA announced that a fourth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Sept. 19 for a week of physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group were pilot applicants, one a civilian. Of the others, 12 were USAF; 4, U.S Navy; 3, U.S Marine Corps. A final group would report to JSC in mid-Nov. (NASA Release 77-192)
JSC announced that the second group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Aug. 15 for individual interviews and physical examinations. Like the first group, all those in the second group had applied for pilot positions. The second group included 11 USAF applicants, 7 Navy, 1 Marine, and 1 civilian. (NASA Release 77-171; JSC Release 77-44)
MSFC reported that astronaut Paul Weitz had arrived on center to check out a procedure developed for jettisoning a jammed-open outer door of the Shuttle scientific airlock while on a space mission. Weitz would wear a pressurized space suit for the task, to be carried out in MSFC’s neutral buoyancy simulator. The 75ft-diameter tank filled with water 40ft deep would duplicate movement of people or hardware almost as if weightless in space. Engineers and technicians could design instruments and procedures to handle almost any foreseeable problems before actual spaceflight, and unforeseen problems (such as solar array failure on Skylab) could be solved during a space mission. Center workers had been devising a way to remove the outer door of the airlock in case it could not be closed at the end of a mission, using a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle cargo bay in the simulator. Underwater TV cameras would record the astronaut’s movements on control room monitors, and both video and voice communications would be recorded for later study. Scuba divers in the simulator would help as needed. (MSFC Release 77-158, 77-166)
NASA reported that JSC had produced a compact medical kit containing most of the instrumentation of a well-equipped physician’s office, using techniques and tools developed to monitor astronauts’ vital signs during spaceflight. The NASA “black bag,” weighing less than 14kg and fitting into a case 18cm by 56cm by 36cm, would contain electronic equipment, drugs, bandages, and instruments needed to diagnose and treat many kinds of illnesses or accidents; electronic tools included an electrocardiograph and electroencephalograph, plus either a strip-chart recorder or a cassette tape recorder, with a coupler built in to transmit data over a standard telephone line. The package would improve the treatment possible on emergency or house calls and provide more complete data before hospital admission. (NASA Actv, Nov 77, 24) •
