NASA announced that 35 new astronaut candidates would report to JSC July 10 to begin 2yr of training and evaluation, including life-support and ejection-seat training for the T-38 aircraft, aircraft physiological training, and T-38 aircraft systems and operations. In Aug., the candidates would take the standard USAF water-survival course at Homestead AFB in Fla., and would attend lectures on spaceflight history, technical-assignment methods and procedures in the astronaut office, manned-spacecraft engineering, Space Shuttle program, aerodynamics, flight operations, and the many disciplines associated with preparing and operating vehicles in space. Astronauts, engineers, and JSC management and support contractors would be instructors and lecturers. (NASA Release 78-98; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1; Marshall Star, July 19/78, 2)
The Congressional Record, at the request of Congressman Olin D. Teague (D-Tex), reported the remarks of Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, who introduced the President at the KSC ceremony, presenting for the first time the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts. Dr. Frosch said in part: “NASA people have been privileged, not only to continue and to advance the 20th century transportation revolution in aeronautics, but to participate in laying the foundations of the future human adventure in and use of space. . . . The true marks and memories of a civilization are found not only in its physical creations, and how it cares for itself and its people, but in the progress it has contributed toward liberation of the mind from the constraining horizons of the past. One major force has been the growth of scientific knowledge through the exercise of human reason. “The spirit of man aspires to the stars. Every generation has looked out at the universe in search of faith, of hope, of beauty, of adventure, and of the power of knowledge. In our generation, a very few have taken the first brave steps out there to begin the great human adventure of using and understanding the universe beyond the earth. To honor those recent accomplishments, and to lead our way into America’s next decades of space, it is my privilege to introduce the President of the United States.” (CR, Oct 4/78, E 5400)
