Control of motion sickness might be learned as one learns to balance or to ride a bicycle, according to ARC’s Dr. Patricia Cov/ings. Half of all astronauts exposed to the weightless environment of space had symptoms of motion sickness; young athletes were often the persons most sensitive to motion. Cowings and her team had taught about 50 volunteers to suppress illness when subjected to a chair spinning ever faster; another 60 subjects were studied without the training. Of the trained subjects, 85% improved their ability to withstand effects of motion, 65% being able to suppress their symptoms completely. The other 20% took significant increase in rpms before becoming ill. In the control group of 60 subjects who received no training, no one showed any significant improvement with time. The trained subjects monitored their own respiration and heartbeat during the tests, biological feedback long used by researchers and known to produce positive results. After the subjects were trained to detect the onset of sickness, 65 % were able to suppress the symptoms by using the feedback. Biofeedback was preferred to conventional treatment, which is use of drugs, because it had no side effects, such as sleepiness. The success of the theory led Cowings to propose a life-science experiment tentatively accepted for a Spacelab flight on which two trained crew persons would wear a harness feeding eight channels of a small data recorder collecting information on heart rate and other factors and providing the subjects with a feedback display. A subject feeling ill would consciously use the feedback training for a maximum 30 minutes. When subjects succumbed to motion sickness, they would mark the point where they became ill so the researchers could learn which responses led to the sickness. So far Cowings had found no sex differences in susceptibility to motion sickness; also, of a group aged 18 to 45, older subjects appeared less likely to suffer. (NASA Release 80-57; ARC Release 80-32)
JSC reported that the third group of 20 astronaut applicants from the 3,122 received in the fall of 1979 would report March 24 for interviews and physical exams. This group included 9 pilot and 11 mission-specialist applicants; 5 of them were women. (JSC Release 80-017)
ARC reported that eight men aged 35 to 50 would participate in a study of weightlessness to help NASA learn why spaceflight dehydrates humans. Dr. Joan Vernikos-Danielis of ARC’s biomedical research division would use a head-down method in prolonged bed rest for the study; the rush of blood to the head in the first exposure to zero gravity might trigger the body mechanism that eliminated fluids and salts. The Soviets for some time had been using bed rest with head down 6° from the horizontal to simulate weightlessness. Usable measurements were not obtainable during actual spaceflight because of the heavy demands on astronauts in the first stages of a mission. (ARC Release 80-68; NASA Release 80-131)
