Japanese Prime Minister Tustomu Hata's Space Activities Commission announced that Japan's first woman astronaut, Chiaki Mukai, a medical researcher, was to take part in NASA's Columbia flight set for launch July 8. The flight was to conduct some 80 experiments under the second International Microgravity Laboratory Project, of which Japan is a member. (UP, May 11/94)
Six astronauts went through a countdown drill aboard Shuttle Endeavour, and NASA set the date of April 7 for the spaceship's launch on an environmental research mission. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. was leaving NASA after 14 years to return to the Marine Corps to serve as Deputy Commandant of Midshipmen at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 94-97; W Times, Jun 19/94)
NASA's inspector general in a report published in February indicated that an audit showed that astronauts flew two-seater supersonic training jets, T-38 Talons, to Colorado Springs on weekends during ski season as well as to New Orleans and Fort Lauderdale, Florida. NASA required astronauts to log 15 hours of proficiency flying each month. Steve Holly, NASA Deputy Director for Flight Crew Operations, said although flying 10 to 12 hours a day was efficient in a time management sense, improved proficiency was gained through more shorter flights. (NY Times, Apr 24/94; B Sun, Apr 24/94; UP, Apr 25/94)
Lieutenant Colonel Tom Akers, an astronaut, presented NASA's $500,000 check to the state of Arkansas's Aerospace Education Center. (Arkansas Democrat Gazette, Apr 6/94; Fla Today, Apr 17/94)
Astronaut Tom Jones was featured in a telephone interview in which he described his thrill with the experience of weightlessness, the spectacular views from the air, especially of the oceans and the distinctiveness of the various continents, the beauty of the United States, and the difficulty of readjusting physically to Earth's atmosphere. (B Sun, May 2/94)
Thomas D. Jones was one of the astronauts scheduled to fly on the Endeavour. Since boyhood he always wanted both to fly and to study science. (B Sun, Mar 30/94)
NASA and Loma Linda University in California announced that NASA planned to use the University's Proton Treatment Center to find ways to protect astronauts in space. The University had the nation's only hospital-based proton treatment center for cancer. The program did not involve experiments on human subjects. (NASA Release N94-83; Sun, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced that the six astronauts who recently returned from Endeavour's mission would be available for interviews as time permits during their debriefing schedule. (NASA Release 94-67)
In connection with the November 21 field hearing in Spokane, Washington, of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, the media featured articles on tests performed on 131 prison inmates in Oregon and Washington from 1963 to 1971. The tests were sponsored by the Atomic Energy Commission in order to help determine how much radiation U.S. astronauts could safely bear during spaceflights. The testicles of inmate volunteers were irradiated in return for a small stipend. Classified documents dealing with the project were only made available recently. (W Post, Nov 20/94; USA Today, Nov 21/94; AP, Dec 5/94)
