NASA released the first four images taken by the HST’s newly installed Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS). During Mission STS-109 in March 2002, astronauts had installed the ACS, capable of providing images with double the area and resolution of those provided by the Wide Field Planetary Camera 2, which the ACS had replaced. The ACS had captured images of a turbulent galaxy, which scientists called Tadpole because of its long tail of stars; of two colliding spiral galaxies known as the Mice; of the Cone Nebula, which looks like a red volcano; and of the M17 Swan Nebula, a richly colored, cloudy-looking nebula containing newly forming planetary systems.(NASA, “Hubble’s New Camera Delivers Breathtaking Views of the Universe,” news release 02-74, 30 April 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Telescope Opens Window on Dawn of the Universe,” New York Times, 1 May 2002.)
ESA announced that an international group of astronauts would attend a training session at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany, to prepare for missions to the ISS. The specific objective of the training was to prepare the astronauts for the tasks they would need to accomplish when a Japanese experiment module and ESA’s Columbus laboratory docked with the ISS. Upon completing the training, the international ISS partners planned to assign the astronauts to specific, long-duration ISS missions. The training session, scheduled to last from 26 August to 6 September, would include ESA astronauts Pedro Duque, Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, and Thomas Reiter; Japan’s NASDA astronauts Takao Doi, Satoshi Furukawa, Aikihiko Hoshide, and Koichi Wakata; and NASA astronauts Nicole Passonno Stott and Stephanie D. Wilson.(ESA, “Ten Astronauts Train in Europe for the International Space Station,” ESA news release 56-2002, 19 August 2002.)
The General Services Administration (GSA) presented the Federal Aviation Award to the Aircraft Operations Division (AOD) of NASA’s JSC. The AOD, which provided astronauts with spaceflight training, had an exemplary safety record. In addition, GSA gave Chief of AOD Robert J. Naughton an Honorable Mention for the Federal Aviation Professional Award. GSA’s awards recognized effectiveness, efficiency, and safety in federal aviation operations, in the hope that honoring outstanding federal aviation programs and professionals would promote excellence in government aviation.(NASA JSC, “JSC’s Aircraft Operations Division Wins Top Federal Aviation Award,” news release J02-93, 19 September 2002.)
