NASA announced appointments to the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), formed to conduct an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s recommendations. On 13 June, NASA had initially announced the formation of the SCTG to oversee an independent assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement the CAIB’s recommendations. Cochaired by veteran astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, NASA had selected the SCTG’s members from experts in industry, academia, and government, active in fields relevant to spaceflight safety. NASA had organized the SCTG pursuant to the Federal Advisory Committee Act, selecting only non-NASA employees as members, as well as one nonvoting, ex officio NASA representativethe Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “NASA Names Return to Flight Task Group Members,” news release 03-248, 25 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03248_SCTG_Named.html (accessed 23 December 2003).)
NASA and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) commissioned the US$34 million NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at the DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, where NASA biologists and physicists would perform thousands of experiments to measure the hazards of space radiation and to develop countermeasures to protect astronauts. Construction of the facility had begun in 1998. NASA and the DOE had cooperated in building the NSRL, which housed an accelerator producing beams of protons or heavy ions, like those that the Sun and other cosmic sources typically produce. The beams moved through a 328-foot (100-meter) transport tunnel to a 400-square-foot (37-square-meter) target hall, to hit a target composed either of a biological sample or of shielding material. Scientists planned to measure the interaction of specific particles with targets to determine the effectiveness of various materials in shielding against radiation and to develop and to test new materials. An NSRL health team would perform tests with biological samples to learn how radiation damages cells, how to predict risks, and to develop countermeasures to mitigate radiation effects.(NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Help Protect Space Crews from Radiation,” news release 03-326, 14 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03326_new_facility.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
At the Mojave Airport in California, aircraft designer Burt Rutan unveiled for the first time his White Knight launch system and SpaceShipOne spacecraft, which he had built in secret. Rutan had designed the White Knight, a type of aircraft, to carry the spacecraft to 50,000 feet, where the White Knight would release SpaceShipOne to launch like an aircraft into a steep climb. Rutan had begun testing the launch platform at lower altitudes in August 2002, also testing on the ground the release mechanism between the spacecraft and the launch platform. In the public unveiling, Rutan flew the White Knight only. The craft flew to an altitude of 9,000 feet (2,734 meters) before spiraling down to make a soft but extremely short landing. Rutan demonstrated SpaceShipOne’s systems, explaining that the craft should land in the same manner as the launch system. The flight profile of the system allowed SpaceShipOne to reach 54 nautical miles (62 miles or 99.8 kilometers) maximum altitude over a flight patch of 35 miles (56.3 kilometers). NASA designated anyone flying at an altitude of over 50 miles (80.4 kilometers) as an astronaut. If Rutan’s system succeeded in flights outside the atmosphere, it would become the first private human spaceflight program.(Jon Bonne, “Private Manned Space Plane Unveiled,” MSNBC.com, 19 April 2003.)
