Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and Sunita L. Williams conducted the third spacewalk for Mission STS-116, rearranging electrical channels on the station’s exterior. The completion of that task finalized preparations for the planned additions of European and Japanese laboratory modules to the ISS. During the lengthy 7.5-hour spacewalk, Curbeam and Williams also made some progress on retracting a solar array, although they were unable to fold the device completely. NASA planned for a fourth spacewalk to continue work on the array.
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang conducted a fourth spacewalk for Mission STS-116. The goal of the 6.5-hour spacewalk was to retract the troublesome solar arrays on the P6 truss, located on the ISS’s exterior. It constituted Curbeam’s fourth spacewalk for STS-116, making him the first astronaut to conduct four spacewalks during a single mission. The retraction of the array would enable the astronauts to move the power-producing array to another location on the ISS and to install a permanent electrical grid for the orbiting station.(Michael Cabbage, “Spacewalkers Retract Solar Array,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 December 2006; NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power.”)
Discovery crew members used the orbiter’s robotic arm to check Discovery’s wing for damages. This marked the first time that astronauts had used an orbiter’s robotic arm to conduct such an inspection. NASA believed that Discovery might have sustained damage during its docking at the ISS and wanted to assess the orbiter before its scheduled return to Earth the following day.89 The inspection revealed no obvious damage to protective material on the spacecraft’s exterior.
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang conducted a second spacewalk for Mission STS-116, the 75th in the history of the ISS. During the near 6-hour excursion, the spacewalkers completed the first phase of the reconfiguration of the station’s electrical system, a complex task that required the astronauts to plug in and unplug various cables, while simultaneously coping with the harsh environment of space. The second phase of the power reconfiguration would take place on 16 December. The rewiring was part of an extensive project to switch the ISS from its temporarily configured power system to a permanent arrangement. For the previous six years, the ISS had drawn its electrical power from one array of solar panels, but under the planned permanent configuration, the station would draw power from another set of solar arrays, which would rotate to face the Sun as the ISS orbited Earth.
Atlantis crew members Daniel C. Burbank and Steven G. MacLean performed the second spacewalk for Mission STS-115. During the spacewalk, which lasted nearly 7 hours, the two astronauts further prepared the P3/P4 truss for installation, releasing locks on an automobile- sized component of the truss that would enable the ISS’s solar arrays to track the Sun. The purpose of the locks was to secure the truss during launch.(NASA, “STS-115.”)
