Astronauts Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the second EVA of STS-118, to install the 600-pound (272-kilogram) CMG on the Z1 segment of the ISS’s truss, and to remove and replace the gyroscope that had failed in late 2006. The defective gyroscope was one of four such devices controlling the ISS’s position. NASA announced it had added a new computer program, the Inductive Monitoring System, to assist in monitoring these four gyroscopes. NASA had begun using the system earlier in 2007. David L. Iverson, the computer scientist at NASA’s ARC who had led the five-year effort to develop the new system, explained that the purpose of the software was to alert ground controllers to anomalies, so that they could analyze the situation immediately and take any necessary preventive measures. During the test phase, the new software had identified problems with the gyroscopes long before the previous system would have flagged anomalies. Engineers had also used the software program in F-18 fighter planes and in the Space Shuttle’s leading-edge impact-detection system, as well as in monitoring electric-power plants and water quality.(NASA, “New NASA Software Monitors Space Station Gyroscopes,” news release 07-201, 13 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07201_ISS_Gyro_Software.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Traci Watson, “Endeavour Astronauts Replace Faulty Gyroscope,” USA Today, 14 August 2007.)
NASA announced the winner of the first Astronaut Glove Challenge, one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$200,000 for his design of a glove that performed better overall than those his competitors had created, according to tests rating the glove’s strength, flexibility, and comfort. NASA stated that Homer had made innovations in finger dexterity that could enhance the gloves created for NASA’s astronauts in the future.(NASA, “Peter Homer Wins NASA’s Challenges for Improved Astronaut Gloves,” news release 07-101, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07101_Winner_of_Astronaut_Glove_ Challenge.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA released safety-review findings that showed no evidence of astronauts using alcohol improperly before spaceflight. NASA Chief of Safety and Mission Assurance Bryan D. O’Connor had conducted the review to evaluate allegations included in the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s report, released in late July. For the safety review, which covered the past 20 years of spaceflight, NASA had interviewed approximately 90 participants in and witnesses to the activities that had occurred during the last few days before Shuttle and Soyuz launches. In addition, NASA had reviewed more than 40,000 records, from as far back as 1984, including reports of mishaps and close calls, anonymous safety reports, safety-hotline reports, and alcohol- and drug-related disciplinary actions, as well as NASA’s relevant policies and procedures. The review had also included an inspection of crew quarters at NASA’s JSC in Houston and NASA’s KSC in Florida. O’Connor remarked that the investigation had been much more exhaustive than NASA’s usual response to an anonymous allegation concerning a matter of safety; therefore, he expressed confidence that NASA had sufficient safeguards to prevent an impaired crew member from participating in spaceflight.(NASA, “NASA Safety Review Finds No Evidence of Improper Alcohol Use by Astronauts Before Space Flight,” news release 07-184, 29 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07184_oconnor_alcohol_ study.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “No Evidence of Drunken Astronauts, NASA Says,” New York Times, 30 August 2007.)
NASA issued a statement regarding the status of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak, the U.S. Navy captain charged with attempted kidnapping and related charges. Under a mutual agreement with the U.S. Navy, NASA was terminating Nowak’s detail as an astronaut, effective 8 March. Nowak, the first astronaut ever dismissed by NASA, had begun her detail with NASA following her selection as a member of the astronaut class of 1996. She had flown on her only mission, STS-121, in 2006. NASA had requested the U.S. Navy’s agreement to terminate Nowak’s detail because NASA lacked the administrative authority to address the criminal charges pending against Nowak. Because Nowak was a naval officer assigned to NASA, rather than a NASA civil servant, she was not subject to administrative action by NASA. NASA further stated that the decision to terminate Nowak’s detail did not indicate that NASA had taken a position on the criminal charges against her.(NASA, “Statement Regarding the Status of Lisa Nowak,” news release 07-26, 7 March 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07026_Nowak_Status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Lianne Hart, “NASA Fires Astronaut Charged in Assault on Rival,” Los Angeles Times, 8 March 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted a spacewalk to connect power and heater cables, as well as the coolant lines that would carry ammonia between the Harmony module and the ISS. The astronauts took turns carrying the 18.5-foot (5.6 - meter), 300-pound (136-kilogram) tray containing the coolant lines to Harmony, where they bolted the tray to the adjacent lab module. After securing the tray, Whitson and Tani worked ahead of schedule, routing the coolant lines and other cables. The spacewalk lasted 7 hours and 16 minutes.
Mission Specialists Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the first EVA of STS-118, marking the first time that either astronaut had spacewalked. Over the course of 6 hours and 17 minutes, the pair worked to install and activate the 1.58-ton (1.4-tonne or 1,433-kilogram), 11-by-14-foot (3.33-by-4.3-meter) S5-truss segment and to retract the forward heat-rejecting radiator from the P6 truss. NASA planned to relocate the forward heat-rejecting radiator to the end of the port truss during the upcoming STS-120. Pilot Charles O. Hobaugh assisted Williams and Mastracchio from inside the ISS, operating the ISS’s robotic arm, which held the truss.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Begin Spacewalk as NASA Analyzes Shuttle Damage.”)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted their third spacewalk in 15 days, to connect a second set of ammonia-coolant lines to the Harmony module, to finish reconnecting the station-to-Shuttle power-transfer system, and to carry out a second inspection of the ISS’s right-side SARJ. According to ISS Flight Director J. Derek Hassmann, the SARJ inspection revealed significant and widespread “race ring damage and particulate that was consistent with the damage Daniel M. Tani observed” in late October. The astronauts also prepared Harmony’s right-side port for the upcoming attachment of the Columbus laboratory. On the ground, JSC flight controllers checked out electrical- and cooling-system connections in preparation for fully activating Harmony.(William Harwood, “Successful Spacewalk Ends as Harmony Activation Proceeds,” Spaceflight Now, 26 November 2007.)
Timothy Shank, a researcher on board the Alvin submersible, located 2.5 kilometers (1.5 miles) deep in the Pacific Ocean, placed a telephone call to Sunita L. Williams, a NASA astronaut
Over a period of 6 hours and 56 minutes, Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the 100th spacewalk for ISS construction. The astronauts focused on inspecting two devices related to the power-generating solar arrays—the SARJ and the beta gimbal assembly (BGA) on the starboard side. Both devices had malfunctioned. The spacewalk, a so-called fact-finding mission, sought to determine what had caused the SARJ to shed metal filings and the BGA to trip circuit breakers. Whitson and Tani found widespread contamination inside the gear that rotates the SARJ. They also retrieved a set of bearings—one of 12 on the joint—suspected of being a source of the contamination. They used orange Kempton tape to take samples of the metal filings. The astronauts found no damage to the cables and other hardware on the BGA joint, which had suffered triple electrical failures on 8 December. During this EVA, Whitson, who had already made history as the first female commander of the ISS, surpassed Sunita L. William’s spacewalking record to set a new record for women in space, at 32 hours and 36 minutes.
