Astronaut Virgil Grissom was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by Administrator Webb at conclusion of MR-4 press conference at Cape Canaveral.
Three astronauts selected for Mercury-Redstone flight (MR-3) were ordered to take refresher course in Navy centrifuge at Johnsville, Pa.
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Captain, usaf) promoted to Major,
sigma 7 spacecraft with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., as pilot was launched into orbit by Mercury-Atlas vehicle at Cape Canaveral. Orbital data: apogee, 176 mi.; perigee, 100 mi.; period, 88.5 min. Schirra traveled 160,000 mi., nearly six orbits, returning to earth at predetermined point in Pacific Ocean about 9 hrs., 14 min. after blastoff. Within 40 min. after landing he and his spacecraft were safely aboard aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge. Highly successful MA-8 flight proved the feasibility of (1) prolonged weightless flight in space and (2) drifting in orbit without consumption of hydrogen-peroxide attitude control fuel and without physically endangering the astronaut. Schirra, who spent a total of hrs. in drifting flight, reported there were no unusual attitude control problems during drifting. Various other scientific experiments during MA-8 flight included astronaut’s sighting of luminous particles in space, also reported by Astronauts John H. Glenn and M. Scott Carpenter; and photographing cloud formations with a special hand camera. sigma 7 was sighted by observers on Indian Ocean tracking ship for five min. as the spacecraft made its third orbit more than 100 mi. high. The observers said sigma 7 appeared almost as bright as Venus. This was the first reported visual sighting of a manned spacecraft during orbital flight. Only technical difficulty of the entire operation was attaining proper adjustment of Schirra’s spacesuit coolant supply and failure of body temperature measurements in first orbit. However, desired suit temperatures were achieved early in second orbit.
Decision to sell Cape Colony Inn, partially owned by the seven Project Mercury astronauts, was announced by attorney C. Leo DeOrsey of Washington. He said the astronauts’ investment in the motel near Cape Canaveral “had become the subject of controversy in some quarters of the press and might become embarrassing to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I believe it is in the best interests of all concerned to sell the motel.”
nasa announced it would begin taking applications for additional astronauts now and continue until June 1, 1962. In July persons meeting the requirements would be interviewed, selected applicants given thorough physicals, and final selection of some 5 to 10 astronauts would be made in the fall. Qualifications were also announced; these were slightly less demanding in terms of test-pilot time, but more demanding in that they lowered the age limit to under 35 and required a college degree in science or engineering.
Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom Day in Mitchell, Indiana, the hometown of the second Mercury astronaut into space.
X-15 No. 3 flown to record altitude of 58.7 miles (314,750 feet) by Major Robert White (usaf). Flight was programed for only 282,000 feet but maximum speed of 3,784 mph was 284 mph faster than planned. White’s flight made him eligible for astronaut wings, reserved for those who have flown over 50 miles high, previously held only by four Mercury astronauts. Flight was also the first to achieve the original design altitude of the X-15 of 50 miles.
telstar relayed two 20-minute live TV shows, the first formal exchange of programs across the Atlantic. The first U.S. program to the Eurovision network of stations in 18 nations included sequences on the Statue of Liberty, a major league baseball game in Chicago, President Kennedy’s news conference, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra from Cape Canaveral, and the Mormon Tabernacle Choir from Mt. Rushmore. Three hours later on another orbit, the Eurovision program was beamed to the U.S. where it was carried by all three networks. It included scenes of Big Ben in London, the Colosseum in Rome, the Champs Elys6cs in Paris, reindeer in the Arctic Circle region of Sweden, Sicilian fishermen tending their nets, and a scene in the Sistine Chapel of Vatican.
Reported that at nasa meeting of lunar scientists the view presented by astronomers, a geologist, and geophysicists that scientists can learn to become astronauts as well as an astronaut can make scientific observations. Which scientific discipline should be represented as a member of the 3-man Appollo crew did not receive a unanimous endorsement.
Civil Service Commission ruled that nasa was authorized to hire an “aerospace engineer and pilot,” one whom nasa would designate an astronaut, at maximum salaries for Government service grades GS 13, 14, and 15.
nasa announced new policy under which astronauts would be permitted to negotiate individually for the sale of their stories, the policy being “aimed at assuring equal access by all news media to the Astronauts’ stories of their flight missions.” Notable provisions of new policy were: (1) requirement for a second postflight news conference in which representatives of news media could question the astronaut “in depth” about his flight; and (2) prohibiting of any publication’s advertising “exclusive” stories purchased from astronauts, with requirement that the contracting publication provide a method to avoid this inference and with all such agreements subject to approval of the nasa Administrator. Inherent in the policy was that “all information reported by the Astronauts in the course of their official duties, which is not classified to protect the national security, wlli be promptly made available to the public.” New guidelines applied to all nasa astronauts, civilian and military.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., told newsmen he hoped Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper would be selected for Project Mercury flight MA-9. Astronaut selection had not yet been made for the 18-orbit 24-hour flight.
Space Technology Center of General Electric Co. said it was designing an escape system for astronauts to use if orbiting capsule malfunctioned and could not return safely to earth. Called “Moose” (Man Out Of Space Easiest), the system involved use of a “prepackaged spacecraft” consisting of plastic sack, folding heat shield, retrorocket pack, containers of foaming plastic, and a standard parachute. Astronaut, zipped into sack, would step out of faulty spacecraft, aim himself with special scope, and fire the retrorocket. Then his heat shield would unfold and sack would fill with rapid-hardening plastic foam, protecting him from re-entry heat. At 30,000-ft. altitude, he would open parachute and descend slowly to earth.
At opening session of the Legal Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. delegate, Leonard Meeker, proposed that all members of the U.N. undertake to aid space vehicles or astronauts in distress, and to return to the launching countries any that are forced to land elsewhere.
Project Mercury flight officials studied tropical storm “Daisy,” which continued moving westnorthwest about 300 mi. east of Puerto Rico, the general landing area for third orbit of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s six-orbit MA-8 flight planned Oct. 3. Mercury Operations Director Walter C. Williams, indicating continuing surveillance of “Daisy,” ordered preparations for the launch attempt to continue.
nasa Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was greeted by cheering crowds in Honollliu, transferring from aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge to usaf jet at Hickam afb, for trip back to Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Texas.
Dr. Clarence P. Oliver of the University of Texas zoology department suggested to the House Space Committee that astronauts traveling through space “for any extended period” should refuse to have any more children. Radiation exposure exceeding normal dosage on earth would pose a “genetic risk,” he testified.
Position of Special Assistant for Astronaut Affairs created by nasa under the Director, Manned Spacecraft Center. Temporarily filled by Ford Eastman, the position provides central coordination of commitments to extra-program activities of the astronauts.
In an impromptu speech at opening of an Italian industrial exhibition in Moscow, Soviet Premier Khrushchev acknowledged that the U.S. had achieved “notable successes” in space and saluted the courage of Mercury astronauts Glenn and Carpenter. Commenting on M. Scott Carpenter’s MA-7 flight in aurora 7, Khrushchev declared: “I congratulate him especially because he gave proof of great courage in a situation in which he collid have been burned in his ship or drowned in the sea. All the scientists collid do from the earth was to advise him to drink water and to land. But he had the presence of mind and the courage to continue his flight.”
Editorial in the New York Times said: “Since the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is a civilian agency, it might be wiser to make all the astronauts civilians so that no questions of inequality or discrimination arise among them and also so that they might receive more adequate pay than is provided by the low military pay scales. . . . “In permitting the astronauts to cash in on their exploits, the Kennedy Administration is following an unwise precedent set by the Eisenhower Administration. “While the practice of profiting from memoirs of Government service is an old one, such memoirs are normally written by persons who have already left Federal employment. . . . “The government would be far wiser if it paid its astronauts a sufficiently generous salary so that it could in good conscience ask them to observe the same practices of discretion and modesty which have hitherto been considered normal for all other Government employees.”
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., made 6)(-hr. simulated flight in Sigma 7 spacecraft for Project Mercury flight MA-8. Worldwide tracking network of 21 ground stations and ships also participated in exercise, in which Cdr. Schirra and the tracking stations practiced solving emergency situations that could arise in actual orbital flight.
Walter M. Schirra, aboard the recovery vessel U.S.S. Kearsarge, reportedly suggested to Project Mercury engineers that the ground communications stations should give the orbiting astronaut “more quiet time” in space. Extraneous conversation could interrupt the astronaut’s concentration on technical duties.
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) was first astronaut to pilot paraglider in test at Edwards, Calif., in development tests for Gemini manned spacecraft landings. Kite-like paraglider was towed aloft by biplane and released to glide downward. Maj. Grissom landed the paraglider upright, although the craft’s nose wheel crumpled upon hitting the ground.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and his family were received by President Kennedy at the White House, then flew to New York for the city’s reception and to receive New York City’s highest award, the Gold Medal. The reception committee included, in addition to Mayor Wagner, former Presidents Herbert C. Hoover and Harry S. Truman.
aec-dod-nasa announced that results of joint study of artificial radiation belt indicated Project Mercury flight MA-8 could be made with no change of plans and with no fear of harm to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn). Study showed that radiation on outside of capsule during Cdr. Schirra’s 6-orbit flight would be about 500 roentgen (R). Shielding, vehicle structures, and flight suit would cut this to 8 R on the astronaut’s skin. “This exposure is well below the mission limit previously established by nasa for the manned flight program,” the report said. Other results of the investigation: Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich (vostok iii and iv orbital flights in August) received very small radiation doses on their double-mission flight; radio interference caused by new radiation belt constituted “a significant problem to radio astronomy”; radiation doses caused rapid deterioration of solar cells aboard ariel, traac, transit iv-b satellites as previously reported, but telstar solar cells were apparently unaffected; future space missions were being reviewed “in light of the present information concerning the new belt.” It appeared likely that “a substantial number” of future space experiments would be changed to avoid possible damage from radiation.
Astronaut Gus Grissom was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Space Science degree by the Brevard Engineering College, Melbourne, Florida.
50 AM, Astronaut Glenn said: “I guess it was to be expected. We all knew the weather was marginal.”
Astronaut Scott Carpenter received a B.S. degree in aeronautical engineering from the University of Colorado, a degree he missed in 1949 by not taking the final examination in a course in heat transfer. He also received the school’s Norlin Award, given annually to an alumnus for outstanding achievement.
Hughes Research Laboratories announced development of highpower amplifier tube that could eliminate spacecraft radio blackouts such as those experienced by astronauts during atmospheric re-entry. Tubes produce about 10 times the continuous power output of any previous tubes and could pierce heat-induced ion shields to transmit messages.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and Mercury team went through complete simulated MA-7 mission exercise.
Hibernation of space crewmen was proposed for long-term space travel, by usaf surgeons Capt. T. K. Cockett and Capt. Cecil C. Beehler of sam, Brooks afb, Texas. Under their plan, one astronaut would work while the other would ride in state of suspended animation, with life processes slowed to the minimum. During simulated hibernation the body withstands stresses that would be harmful under normal body conditions, the surgeons said.
Letter from President Kennedy defending Administration policy of permitting astronauts to sell their personal stories for profit was made public by M. B. Schnapper, editor of Public Affairs Press, in Washington, D.C. Replying to Mr. Schnapper’s criticism of the policy, the President said the “policy decision was reached only after most careful review of all the facts and lengthy consultation both within and without the Government. Efforts were directed toward removing specific controversial aspects of the original astronaut agreement, and we feel that this goal has been reasonably achieved.”
Estimated that over 60 million Americans witnessed the launch of friendship 7 on live TV. Voice of America carried live overseas radio coverage. The U.S. Senate recessed at 2:30 PM est just before the landing of Mercury spacecraft. The U.S. Post Office placed Project Mercury postage stamp on sale minutes after Astronaut Glenn stepped on the deck of Noa.
In ceremony at Cape Canaveral, President Kennedy thanked the Project Mercury team for the successful flight of friendship 7: “. . . it’s my great pleasure to speak on behalf of all our fellow Americans in expressing pride and satisfaction to those intimately involved in this effort. All of us remember a few dates in this century and those of us who were very young remember Col. Lindbergh’s flight, Pearl Harbor, and the end of the war, and remember the flight of Alan Shepard, Major Grissom and we remember the flight of Col. Glenn ...”	_ President Kennedy then awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal to Robert R. Gilruth and read the citation, “for his distinguished leadership of the team of scientists and engineers that carried Project Mercury, the U.S. initial manned space flight program, from its inception to the successful accomplishment of man’s flight in orbit about the earth ...” Lt. Col. John H. Glenn also was awarded the nasa Distinguished Service Medal by the President, the citation to which said:“ . . . made an outstanding contribution to the advancement of human knowledge of space technology and a demonstration of man’s capabilities in space flight. His performance was marked by his great professional skill, his skill as a test pilot, his unflinching courage. . . .” In his remarks, Astronaut Glenn thanked fellow astronauts and the entire Mercury organization: “we all acted literally and figuratively as a team. ... It goes across the board . . . sort of a crosscut of Americana, of industry, and military and civil service. . . . It was headed up by nasa, of course, but thousands and thousands of people have contributed as certainly much or more than I have to the project. . . .”
President Kennedy personally congratulated Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter by telephone shortly after the aurora 7 pilot arrived by helicopter aboard the carrier Intrepid, saying: “. . . I wanted to tell you we are relieved and very proud of your trip. I am glad that you got picked up in good shape and we want to tell you that we are all for you and send you the very best of luck to you and your wife.” Carpenter said: “My apologies for not having aimed a little bit better on re-entry.” President Kennedy: “Oh, fine and good. We want to congratulate you and I look forward to seeing you in Washington sometime soon . . . .”
In Pentagon ceremony, usaf Chief of Staff LeMay pinned astronaut wings on Major Robert M. White, the first man to fly a winged aircraft, the X-15, into space.
Announced that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would study Eerful light sources in Australia and South Africa, during his -8 orbital flight, nasa said experiment was to determine how well a space traveler could see light sources of known density on earth. Three high-intensity flares would burn at Woomera, Australia, and electric lamps at Durban, So. Africa. Schirra would try to determine effects of atmosphere on light observed from orbital altitude and to establish which light source was more readily visible. Other scientific experiments of the MA-8 flight would be studies of cosmic radiation, search for rare particles in space, and effects of re-entry heating on new materials.
Scientists of the National Center for Atmospheric Research, at Boulder, Colo., after intensive interviews with Astronaut Scott Carpenter, concluded that the layer of “haze” reported on the horizon by both Carpenter and Glenn was in reality the phenomenon known as airglow—the emission of light of various colors and wavelengths, caused by chemical reactions in gas molecules in the upper atmosphere.
M. Scott Carpenter Day in Denver as an estimated 300,000 persons witnessed the Memorial Day parade honoring the Mercury Astronaut from Colorado.
nasa selected Chance-Vought Corp. as contractor to study rendezvous of space vehicles. A primary part of the contract would be a flight simlliation study exploring the capability of an astronaut to control an Apollo-type spacecraft.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., on board aircraft carrier U.S.S. Kearsarge, began debriefing and medical check. Schirra would arrive in Honolulu Oct. 6 and then fly to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
Reported that usaf had offered to train nasa’s “second generation” astronauts at its Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, California.
Reported that nasa was conducting a study to determine what effect Soviet nuclear test series might have on forthcoming orbital flight (MA-8) of Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Final evaluation was expected within a week.
afsc announced development of “self-maneuvering unit” (smu), a 160-lb. pack which converts a pressure-suited spaceman into a one-man space vehicle. Designed to position and stabilize an astronaut or crewman outside a spacecraft and to give him mobility in an orbiting assembly area, smu contains its own stabilization, control, propulsion, and power systems.
Reported that, if Astronaut Schirra’s six-orbit flight (MA-8) is fully successful, nasa would conclude Project Mercury with one 18-orbit, 24-hour flight. Present plans called for four 24-hour flights with the one-man Mercury capsule; new plan under consideration would cancel three of these and assign their mission to two-man Gemini capsule.
At sam symposium on aerospace medicine, Lt. Col. Burt Rowen (usaf), Chief of Bioastronautics at afftc, presented heartbeat and breathing records of Maj. Robert White during X-15 record speed flight of November 9, 1961. “When the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee first became aware of the high heart and respiration rates [of pilots in high-performance aircraft] they became concerned with the question of success of the Mercury program. . . . But now this has come to be regarded as normal.” Dr. Charles Sandhous of the University of California warned that an astronaut caught in space during a solar flare might age three years or more as a result of the radiation received.
nasa postponed MA-7 flight attempt until at least May 22, 1962, because of modification of altitude-sensing instrumentation in the parachute deployment system. Project Mercury Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter was pronounced in “excellent condition” for his orbital flight after a 5-hour physical examination.
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter returned to work at Langley afb facilities of the Manned Spacecraft Center after a four-day trip to Colorado. All seven Mercury astronauts were scheduled to receive Peninsula Distinguished Service Awards, a tribute from several civic groups on Virginia’s lower peninsula, on June 1.
Reported that two radio hams of Ann Arbor, Mich., J. Schmidt and E. Nuttle, recorded the voice transmissions of Astronaut Glenn during the three-orbit flight of friendship 7.
nasa announced that it would recruit 10 to 15 new astronaut trainees this summer. ( msc Space News Roundup, 1 /8/64,2)
On 36th anniversary of Lindbergh’s historic transatlantic flight, Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper was presented nasa Distinguished Service Medal by President Kennedy in White House ceremony. Also presented were nasa Medals for Outstanding Leadership to: G. Merritt Preston, Manager of Project Mercury Operations at nasa Launch Operations Center; Floyd L. Thompson, Director, nasa Langley Research Center; Kenneth S. Klein-knecht, Manager of Project Mercury Office, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations Div. of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis, commander of afmtc, Cape Canaveral, nasa Group Achievement Awards were presented to: dod Recovery Forces; and Air Force Space Systems Div. Following ceremony, Astronaut Cooper was hailed by thousands in motorcade to the Capitol, where he addressed special joint session of Congress:	. .1 don’t think I have ever been with a team that was more dedicated, or striving harder, or was more completely sold on their product than the total space effort and particularly the manned flight effort in which I am involved .... “I named my spacecraft faith 7 for three reasons: First, because I believe in God and country; second, because of the loyalty to organization, to the two organizations, actually, to which I belong; and, third because of the confidence in the entire space team .... “I think of all things that I am constantly amazed at is the public’s response to this program ... it is tremendously impressive.” The parades and activities following each flight “show tlist Americans want to express tlieir fsslin^s and tlieir confidence-that we . . . can conduct peaceful research programs; that we can conduct them openly, and under the surveillance of every man, woman and child in the entire world.” (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2; CR, 5/28/63, A3420-21)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Life Magazine announced signing of four-year contracts with 16 nasa astronauts for their personal stories; Field Enterprises acquired newspaper syndication and book rights, Life, the magazine rights. (AP, NYT, 9/18/63,15)
At regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “Did the astronauts raise with you . . . their desire for another Mercury flight? Do you have any opinion yourself, tentative or otherwise, as to the desirability of another Mercury flight?” President Kennedy replied: “I think they feel that it’s worthwhile. I haven’t discussed it with Mr. Webb, nasa should make the judgment and will make the judgment, and I would not intervene. But they do feel that a flight is useful and that the experience of Major Cooper has indicated that the time between the last Gemini flight as scheduled—the Mercury flight and the new Gemini flight, which is a period of almost 18 months—they feel may represent a gap which could be filled very usefully by another Mercury flight. “This will be a matter which I think they’re going to be talking about this week with Mr. Webb and which I will discuss with him next week. But the final judgment must be nasa’s.” (Transcript, NYT, 5/23/63,18)
The Iven C. Kincheloe Award was presented by Mrs. Dorothy Kincheloe to the seven original Mercury astronauts as the highlight of the Seventh Annual Awards Banquet of The Society of Experimental Test Pilots held at Lancaster, Calif. The award is presented annually for the recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the conduct of flight testing. (Space News Roundup, 10/16/63) e non	r»r\n TTinito /I tbo	-f n oiIiItt	l W o 11 at»c?	I?o1oo eac* _QA	onrl UjWO	OOUO tioitvu LilCl	IUCH1 cj .	y v f	AiL/AUWkAAJ	wt/ O A	Muu
According to three Ling-Temco-Vought aerospace scientists, astronauts operating outside their japsules in outer space would have considerable difficulty estimating distances to other objects, even of known size. Results of experiments suggest that observers cannot make accurate distance estimates without the aid of some kind of artificial ranging device. The accuracy of visual observation will affect the complexity of the guidance system and the total thrust requirement for close-in maneuvering. For this reason, man’s visual performance capability must be defined as accurately as are other design data for successful space missions. (Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc.; Space Information Digest, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1/28/63) During January: Dr. Douglas McKie, Univ. of London, writing in Jan. 1963 Endeavour, traced the history of the metric system, a subject of renewed interest in the U.K. since Parliament was considering; the adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. Dr. McKie pointed out that the recent adoption of the wavelength of a line in the spectrum of krypton-86 as the basis for an international unit of length was the realization of an old French dream at the time of the adoption of the metric system—the use of an invariable natural standard. At the time of the French Revolution, Dr. McKie asserted, France had become weary of the chaos of variable systems of weights and measures and the government and the National Academy urged the States-General to adopt a national system. The States-General authorized the Academy to formulate a system of weights and measures based on measurement of an arc of the meridian as the universal standard and decimals as the notation system. This was done by 1793, but Revolutionary politics intervened, having done away with the States-General and even replaced the Academy. Not until Dec. 10, 1799, did the new standards become legal, and by then it had been discovered that the earth was not a perfect sphere and therefore that the arc of the meridian was not the invariable standard the Academy had thought. (SIN, Mar. 1963,11-13)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s faith 7 Mercury spacecraft was clearly visible to unaided eye to observers in Johannesburg, South Africa, (upi, NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced ejection seat escape system for Gemini two-man spacecraft had successfully undergone first high-speed rocket-sled test, at Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif. Both dummy astronauts were safely recovered after ejection at nearly 600 mph from boilerplate spacecraft, simulating emergency ejection during boost phase of Gemini mission. Tests simulating ejection before launch were also being conducted, consisting of firing ejection seats from 150-f£. tower and parachuting dummy astronauts to safe landing, (msc Release 63-111)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, was the principal speaker at the Space Age Symposium held in Shawnee, Okla., in conjunction with the city’s homecoming celebration for Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64,2)
Advertising executive Hany A. Batten, representing nine nasa astronauts, said that withdrawal of Field Enterprises Education Corp. contract offer for astronauts’ personal stories did not mean nasa disapproved this type contract. Rather, he said nasa believed astronauts should conclude such a contract to protect their own and their families’ privacy. He predicted astronauts would reach story-contract agreement with some other firm. (AP, Houston Post, 7/10/63)
C. Leo DeOrsey, attorney for the original seven nasa astronauts, announced the astronauts had sold their interest in the Cape Colony Inn in Cocoa Beach, Fla. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/31/63)
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj. usaf) flew simulated Project Mercury launch in faith 7 at Cape Canaveral in preparation for MA-9 flight scheduled for May 14. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/63)
Unnamed U.S. official was quoted as saying Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s one-day Project Mercury flight MA-9 was set for April 2, “for planning purposes.” Flight would be 18 orbits (about 27 hours) or, if all goes well, 22 orbits (about 34 hours), nasa had not yet officially announced precise launch date in April or length of flight. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/63, A2)
Millions of Americans heard and watched MA-9 launching and subsequent flight activities on commercial radio and television. Estimated 8,000 people watched launching on Grand Central Station, New York, 12-by-16-ft. television screen. Attempt to telecast launching to European viewers via relay i communications satellite was unsuccessful because “an error on the part of the broadcast company programmers . . . resulted in the transmission of live TV monitors at Cape Canaveral which consisted of a hodgepodge of random pictures and sounds that was virtually meaningless.” Videotape of launch activities and of first TV pictures from Astronaut Cooper was successfully transmitted via relay i later in the day. Beginning at 6:55 p.m. edt, the three U.S. TV networks received via relay i a three-minute program on European reaction to Astronaut Cooper’s flight. (NYT, 5/16/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/16/63; nasa Release 63-106)
Reported that Lear Siegler, Inc., delivered to nasa the slow-scan television camera systems and receiving equipment intended for use on the forthcoming flight of Astronaut Gordon Cooper. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
In response to inquiries about rumors that Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Walter M. Schirra were ill with space-flight aftereffects, unnamed nasa Hq. spokesman quoted Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of msc Medical Operations Office, as saying: “Neither Carpenter nor Schirra has any difficulties at all, and they are in excellent health. “In fact, none of the astronauts who have made space flights has suffered any ill effects, and the entire group is in top physical condition.” (ch, Houston Chronicle, 8/3/63, 9)
Writing in Hypnosis Quarterly, Frank M. Frazitta said astronaut trained in self-hypnosis could alleviate pain and discomfort during space flights. In event of air-conditioning unit’s failure, selfhypnosis could be used to lessen astronaut’s perspiration rate or make him feel cooler or warmer. (M&R, 4/8/63, 21)
Announced that transistorized sensory system, Myoelectric, to provide astronauts with automatic control during high g was patented recently by two Sperry Gyroscope engineers. (A&AE, December 1963, 5)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, speaking before aerospace medicine conference at sam, San Antonio, said that all three U.S. astronauts who had made orbital space flights had found state of weightlessness presented no problems; rather, it tended to become “addictive.” (upi, Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A 4)
Presentation on Project Gemini, prepared by Drs. Stanley C. "White and George B. Smith of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and presented at Lectures in Aerospace Medicme series, sam, said that present Gemini “flight program includes the performance of manned extra-vehicular operation. The accomplishment of this maneuver requires the opening of the hatch over the astronaut who will venture outside. During this period, the cabin pressure is lost, and both astronauts are dependent upon the suit for prime environmental protection. “. . . The program as it is now planned would start out with flights of two-days duration and move forward to flights of up to two weeks duration upon successful completion of the first phase. Ultimately, the more complex 14-day duration mission, the inter-vehicular rendezvous, and the extra-vehicular manned operation goals would be achieved. The intermediate steps offer an excellent opportunity to study the man, the vehicle, the man-machine interface, and to accomplish other bioscience experiments while the program moves toward its final objectives . . . .” (Text, msc Fact Sheet 134)
President Kennedy telephoned Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper aboard carrier Kearsarge, saying, “I just want to congratulate you. That was a great flight .... We are very proud of you.” (upi, NYT, 5/17/63,1)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced the 271 applicants for astronauts had been screened to 30. Of these, 10-15 would be selected in late October. (AP, Wosli. Post, 8/29/63)
Ballute drag balloon was being built by Goodyear Aircraft Corp. for use in Gemini manned spacecraft, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Ballute would be used as part of Gemini ejection-seat-escape system, planned means of emergency escape for altitudes below 70,000 ft. The inflatable rubberized fabric structure would stabilize and slow the astronauts’ fall until conventional parachutes could be deployed at lower altitudes. ( msc Release 63-67)
McDonnell Aircraft Corp. of St Louis shipped the first of two Gemini mission simulators to Cape Kennedy, Fla., to provide nasa astronauts and ground crews with realistic training before actual launching of the two-man spacecraft. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/14/63)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said in Palo Alto, Calif., press conference: “People who do the spectacular things in space are few—they owe their success to many, many people behind the scenes who are not given proper recognition—scientists, technicians, industrial workers—people in all walks of life .. ..” (Palo Alto Times, 1/5/63)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp., publishing subsidiary of Marshall Field, was reported as having offered nasa astronauts a multimillion-dollar contract for their personal stories. Spokesman for Field Enterprises said proposition was under discussion with C. Leo DeOrsey, Washington lawyer representing original seven Mercury astronauts, and Harry A. Batten, Philadelphia advertising man representing nine Gemini-Apollo astronauts. {NYT [Western Ed.], 2/9/63)	...	.
Gemini astronauts would learn how to “apprehend” another vehicle traveling in space on a special trainer in a darkened hangar-high structure now being erected at Manned Spacecraft Center’s Clear Lake home, (msc Space News Roundup, 1/8/64)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter disclosed seeing twin tails on one side of sun’s corona during solar eclipse July 20. The twin-tailed corona did not appear in photographs Carpenter made of the eclipse while flying in DC-8 jetliner with other scientific observers. (O’Leary, Houston Post, 9/14/63)
Inter-Parliamentary Union’s seven-nation space subcommittee, meeting in Geneva, approved draft treaty on space law. Treaty would provide that outer space be subject to international law, including U.N. Charter, and that astronauts forced to land in foreign countries would be granted diplomatic immunity. Treaty would be presented to plenary meeting of ipu’s 60-member nations in Lausanne, Switzerland, April 15-21. (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/3/63)
nasa announced from Cape Canaveral that recruiting 9-12 new astronauts would begin next month. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/16/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center had begun training nasa’s 16 astronauts in techniques of water and land parachute landings. In preparation for safe parachute landings in low-altitude abort during Project Gemini launching, astronauts were towed to heights of 400 ft. suspended under pre-inflated canopy, then cut loose for free descent to earth. Towing was by power boat for water descents and truck for land descents, (msc Release 63-151)
22-orbit MA-9 flight of Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper was reported delayed from planning date of May 7 until at least May 21 because of difficulties in Atlas booster’s guidance system. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Thirty nasa astronaut candidates underwent physical examinations at School of Aerospace Medicine. Final selection would be made next month. (M&R, 9/2/63,12)
Astrovoice,” device to enable voice communications with astronauts during manned spacecraft re-entry, was displayed publicly by Avco Corp. Device adds voice channel to tracking radar, which is not blacked out during re-entry ionization. Modifications to existing ground radar receivers would require only “a few hours,” Avco spokesman said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/13/63)
Former President Eisenhower in Rochester, N.Y., hailed Astronaut
Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Project Mercury launch crews conducted simulated MA-9 final countdown and launching. (AP, NYT, 5/11/63,4)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced recruitment of astronauts had been broadened in current recruitment call for volunteers: change in criteria for selection, eliminating need for test pilot school certificate; and soliciting letters of recommendation from industries, professional groups, military services, and other organizations throughout the country, (msc Release 63-102)
Aetna Life Insurance Co. issued first individual life insurance policies to seven Project Mercury astronauts, astronauts’ legal adviser C. Leo DeOrsey announced in Washington. (Goodman, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)	_
Astronauts’ contracts with Field Enterprises Educational Corp. and Time Inc. were discussed in Editor and Publisher editorial, which stated that the “principle of letting the astronauts sell their stories is all' wrong.” Before granting personal interview, editorial said, “astronaut must get permission in writing from Field and Time which will grant approval ‘in an instance where the acceptance of such outside offers will not materially affect the value of any of the rights granted.’ . . .” It concluded by saying that reporters could not interview these “national figures” unless two “competitors say it’s okay.” (E&P, 8/15/64)
By this date USAF had made 21 manned drop-tests of the ballute at El Centro, Calif., from C-130 flying at altitudes up to 35,000 ft. Basically a drag balloon, the ballute was under development by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. with NASA funds. To be installed in the ejection seat system of Gemini spacecraft, the self-inflating ballute would stabilize the astronaut during free fall down to 10,000 ft., where final recovery parachute would deploy. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 40-45; msc Roundup, 4/15/64, 8)
Paul P. Haney, Public Affairs Officer at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, asserted that the bulk of 550 communications regarding NASA scientist-astronauts had to be classified as letters of interest. Seventy-five per cent of this number, or 412, were lacking some detail and about 100 had been eliminated altogether. The number of applications was ahead of the number received for other classes of astronaut, he said. These figures clarified figures given by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, who had said on Nov. 22 that only 20 applications had been received and that only nine of these applicants qualified. (Houston Post, 11/24/64)
Jet-propelled back-pack, part of a Modular Maneuvering Unit (mmu) for Gemini astronauts, was described by AFSC, whose Aero Propulsion Laboratory conceived the device. The unit would enable astronauts to fly outside their Gemini spacecraft for up to an hour and travel as far as 1,000 “ft. from the spacecraft, although the first flight would be made with astronaut on a 200-ft. tether to send the astronaut forward, backward, up, and down. In addition to the back-pack, mmu consisted of a chest-pack, furnished by NASA, which the astronaut would use when leaving and entering the spacecraft, before donning and after discarding the back-pack. First flight test of the unit on Gemini mission was planned for mid-1965. (afsc Release 47-22—113; MSC Roundup, 1/16/64,5)	_
The USn’s Sea Lab I, with four Navy divers aboard, began ascent to the surface after 10 days on the ocean floor at a depth of 192 ft. The experiment was terminated 11 days ahead of schedule because of an approaching storm. Astronaut Scott Carpenter was to have participated in the experiment, but was forced to withdraw because of the broken arm he suffered recently, (dod Release 558-64)
NASA and dod announced Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Lt. Cdr., usn) would participate in USN Project Sea Lab I off coast of Bermuda in July. The submerged lab would collect and evaluate scientific data on physiological and psychological reactions to the undersea environment. (nasa Release 64-112; dod Release 383-64)
At Aerospace Medical Association conference, Dr. Dietrich E. Beischer and James C. Knepton, Jr., of Naval School of Aviation Medicine said high magnetic fields, such as those under study for spacecraft shielding, may have noticeable effect on behavior of heart. Squirrel monkeys subjected to high magnetic fields (20,000 to 70,000 gauss) showed up to decrease in heart rate and marked change in heartbeat’s rhythm. Dr. Beischer also reported sea urchin eggs exposed to 140,000 gauss were retarded in their development, but fruit fly showed no effects after two-hour exposure to high gauss. High magnetic fields were being investigated for use in shielding astronauts against cosmic radiation and other space hazards, and Dr. Cornelius Tobias and N. M. Amer reported that magnetic fields around 3.5 kilogauss appeared to have protective effect against high doses of ionizing radiation. (M&R, 5/18/64,16)
Development of astronaut techniques for egress from Gemini spacecraft began this week at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, msc announced. Boilerplate model of Gemini spacecraft floats in water-filled tank; two subjects in the closed spacecraft practice egress and the manner, procedure, and time required are recorded for study, (msc Release 64^-19)
Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (Capt., usaf) was killed when his T—38 jet trainer crashed near Houston. The former experimental test-flight instructor was among third group of NASA astronauts, selected last October, and was first U.S. astronaut to lose his life. (AP, NYT, 11/2/64)
On the eve of his 85th birthday, M/G Renjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) was honored for his achievements in aviation at a dinner at Andrews'afb. General Foulois, who was the United States’ first military pilot, was inducted into the Primus Club—an elite group of aerospace pioneers— and hailed as “a living link between the age of the Wright Brothers and today’s astronauts.” (Raymond, NYT, 12/9/64,53)
Dr. Charles A. Berry of NASA’s msc said that some communicable diseases could develop on space missions of up to 14 days if astronauts were exposed during preflight preparation period. Therefore nasa plans included turning the spacecraft around and returning to earth in severe cases and equipping vehicles with emergency medical supplies. Also, doctors might be trained as astronauts for 30- to 60-day missions. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 7/14/64)	_
An msc investigative board announced that a snow goose, weighing about eight lbs., with a wingspan of more than 24 in., caused the fatal crash of Astronaut Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) on Oct. 31. The bird struck the left side of the airplane canopy causing both engines to flame-out on impact. Captain Freeman, however, still had control of the aircraft and attempted to make a landing at Ellington. He flew a looping pattern over the Gulf Freeway and lowered his landing gear as he approached the field. When he apparently realized that a landing was not possible, he veered to the left into an open field, probably to avoid buildings at Ellington. Seconds later, at slightly under 100-ft. altitude, he ejected, too late for his parachute to deploy fully, (msc Roundup, 11/25/64)
NASA msc announced Gemini test vehicle for training astronauts in recovery procedures had arrived at MSC, and water tests with the astronauts and recovery forces would be conducted in nearby Galveston Bay. (msc Release 64-2)
15 NASA astronauts began three days and two nights of jungle survival training in the Panama Canal Zone, under supervision of the usaf Tropic Survival School, (msc Roundup, 6/24/64, 8)
World Book Encyclopedia announced 14 new NASA astronauts had been added to the 16 astronauts with four-year contracts for newspaper distribution rights to their life stories. World Book—a unit of Field Enterprises Educational Corp.—also said the astronauts had signed separate contracts with Life magazine. (AP, NYT, 3/28/64, 20)
NASA awarded $1,125,040 contract to Ling-Temco-Vought for construction of Dynamic Crew Procedures Simulator which would allow astronauts to simulate orbital, lunar, and interplanetary flights in model spacecraft. Simulator’s completion was scheduled for May 1965, when it would be delivered to msc. (msc pao; Denver Post, 7/5/64)
NASA announced the large air-filled bag safety system performed successfully in DC-7 crash experiment conducted April 24. Results indicated that if a man had sat in for the dummy, he would have survived the crash. Martin Co. designed the airbag system under NASA contract, for possible use by both airline passengers and astronauts. (NASA Release 64-121)
In experiment to test reactions of astronauts under environmental conditions they would encounter outside their spacecraft, three out of four subjects suffered the bends. Capt. Eugene A. Degner, expert in body metabolism conducting tests planned on 50 volunteers at Brooks afb, said: “All three men with the grade one [least severe] bends had them dramatically dissipate as the altitude chamber pressure dropped below that of 30,000 feet. “I was surprised at the results, and a little worried because the three men complained of the bends and mild discomforts early in the experiment period. “I was afraid they would keep getting worse, but the trouble was intermittent and not severe enough to abort the [10-hour] test.” (upi, Houston Chron., 3/21/64)
David B. Clark Co. began building eight flight suits for Project Gemini astronauts, msc suit engineer Henry Friloux said the pressurized suits would protect astronauts up to 150-mi. altitudes. (M&R, 5/25/64, 31)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced scientists were investigating use of chewing gum for astronauts on long-duration space flights, “to stimulate dental tissues and freshen the astronaut’s mouth. . . (msc Release 64-69)
NASA received patent for life preserver carried by Mercury astronauts on all orbital space flights. Invented by MSC engineers Mathew I. Rad-nofsky and Glenn A. Shewmake, life-preserver was called “Ram’s Horn” because of its shape: main part fits across wearer’s chest and hook-like ends fit over the shoulders. (Jones, NYT, 10/17/64, 35)
Soviet draft treaty for aid to astronauts in distress and for return of spacecraft was submitted to Legal Subcommittee of U.S. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva. Draft treaty differed from U.S. draft by providing that country of origin reserve “exclusive right” to search unassisted for the downed spacecraft on the high seas. Soviet draft also specified two conditions for returning spacecraft: (1) the spacecraft must have been launched “for the purposes of peaceful exploration and use of outer space” and (2) the purpose and launching of the spacecraft must have been “officially announced.” (NYT, 3/11/64,5)
X-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joe Engle (usaf), flew 3,511 mph (mach 4.94) and gained altitude of 170,000 ft. in first test of infrared horizon scanner designed to give sharper outline of earth to astronauts re-entering earth’s atmosphere. Flight also enabled Engle to make pilot checkout of adaptive control system which had ability to sense atmospheric conditions surrounding the craft. Flight was postponed twice before successful effort, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
Maj. Edwin Aldrin, Jr., from the newest group of NASA astronauts, already was qualified as a scientist-astronaut, holding a doctorate in astronautics. Two other astronauts were nearing completion of doctoral studies: R. Walter Cunningham (physics) and Russell L. Schweikart (aeronautics/ astronautics).	(Houston Post, 10/20/64)
Mercury capsule (MA—9) in which Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper flew 22 earth orbits was viewed by more than 20,000 people when on display in Nebraska State Capitol at Lincoln. (Omaha Eve. World-Her., 7/13/ 64)
Three NASA astronauts began flights in T-33 trainer jets simulating approaches to the lunar surface. Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. David R. Scott, and Elliott M. See, Jr., sent their planes into dives from altitudes of about 15,000 ft. toward the large, rugged lava flow in southern Idaho; cameras in the planes recorded the,.approaches, and the astronauts made their own observations of the surface. Planes were leveled out at about 3,000-ft. altitude. (Houston Post, 9/3/64)
More than 900 persons had applied to NASA for the 10 to 20 positions for scientist astronaut that it would fill next year. To qualify, a scientist had to be under 34 years old, a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, with a B.A. degree and a doctorate or the equivalent in experience. Recruitment would end Dec. 31. Recommendations would be made by the National Academy of Sciences to NASA in the spring of 1965. (AP, Miami Her., 12/18/64)
In study financed by NASA, a Mexico City matador had his heart heat, respiratory rate, and body temperature monitored during the height of a bull fight. Readings from sensors fixed to his skin were telemetered to instruments inside bull ring. Doctors at msc used information in study to determine how much physical stress human body could withstand and what effect stress had on performance. It had been determined previously that many athletes undergo more physical stress than do astronauts in flight. (AP, NYT, 7/8/64,12; msc Roundup, 7/22/64,7)
USAF announced selection of the first six astronauts for its manned orbiting laboratory (MOL) program. An additional six would be named in early 1965. Following a six-month basic training course, the crewmen, all graduates of USAf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, would be assigned specialty areas. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64,25)
Capt. Theodore C. Freeman (usaf) was buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetey, Va., with the entire astronaut team attending the services, (msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 1)
Researchers at Lankeneau Hospital in Philadelphia had concluded that orthostatic hypotension such as occurred in Astronauts Schirra and Cooper after orbital space flights could be caused as much by dehydration as by weightlessness, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/6/64, 25)
Labor Dept, said industry employed 885,000 engineers and scientists in 1963, about 4% more than in 1962. 715,000 of the 885,000 were engineers and 170,000 were scientists. (AP, NYT, 9/l/64>, 22) During August: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received five Northrop T-38 aircraft on loan from USAF for use as space-flight readiness trainers to maintain proficiency of astronauts. (Av. Wk., 8/31/64, 25)
At meeting in Geneva, U.S. delegation to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Legal Subcommittee submitted to the Subcommittee drafts of two treaties. One draft treaty dealt with aid to astronauts in distress, calling for nations to take “all possible steps to assist or rescue promptly the personnel of spacecraft” having difficulty or making emergency landings. Astronauts making emergency landings would be returned to their own country “promptly and safely,” and any spaceship or its parts falling to earth would be returned to country of ownership at the country’s request. The second treaty, dealing with liability for damage caused by spacecraft, would establish a “simple and expeditious procedure to provide financial protection against damage.” (nyt, 3/10/64, 8)
At Aerospace Medical Association meeting, Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander of afsc Research and Technology Div., said usaf was studying use of “space lifeboats” for astronauts who might have to abandon their spacecraft. The self-contained unit would be designed to sustain astronauts until they were rescued, (upi, NYT, 5/12/64,43)
In speech to cospar on the NASA Biosatellite Program, Dr. Dale Jenkins, Bioscience Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, remarked: “The United States Biosatellite Program is a second generation series of carefully planned and selected experiments, including some highly sophisticated experiments which have required several years of baseline study and equipment development. This program has been designed to study the biological effects of: (a) zero gravity or weightlessness, (b) the effects of weightlessness combined with a known source of radiation, and (c) removal of living organisms from the Earth’s rotation. These orbiting recoverable Biosatellites provide an opportunity to critically test major biological hypotheses in the areas of genetics, evolution, and physiology. The Biosatellite studies will delineate hazards to astronauts, and determine and define effects on degradation of human performance. Prolonged manned flights, for example, may involve changes observed in ten days of bed rest such as decalcification of bones (particularly the vertebrae), loss of muscle tone and physical capability, and certain cardiovascular changes. The effect of continued sensory deprivation on behavior and performance is unknown.” (Text)
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA Director of Space Medicine, said in Dallas: “Physiologically, women would make excellent astronauts.” However, he added, “They lack the experience in flying high-speed planes and handling the complicated equipment used in the program. “All of our astronauts are seasoned test pilots or men with much experience in combat flying. It would be very difficult for any woman to gain such experience.” (Dallas Morning News, 5/23/64)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter was involved in a motor bike accident in Bermuda and suffered a fracture of his lower left arm. Carpenter was in Bermuda to participate in a Navy test in which he would have submerged in Sea Lab I diving chamber with four Navy divers to a depth of 192 feet, but his injury precluded his participation in the test. He was reported to be resting comfortably. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/17/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
usaf was reported continuing to seek industry support for avionics subsystems studies for DOD’s manned orbiting laboratory (mol) program. The Space Systems Div. of afsc asked avionics companies to submit bids for a study of an image velocity sensor subsystem, which would enable orbiting astronauts to acquire and track space targets visually and to take fixes on terrestrial bodies for navigation. SSD also asked Honeywell to submit a sole-source proposal for a study of the laboratory’s attitude control system. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 24)
Soviet cosmonauts Andrian Nikolayev and Pavel Popovich (VOSTOK ill and rv) had orthostatic hypotension following their space flights, Soviet physiologist Prof. Vasily V. Parin revealed. The condition was noted in the cosmonauts “even two days after the flight.” In address at cospar—prepared and delivered in English—and in the discussion which followed, the Soviet Director of Institute of Normal and Pathological Physiology, Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, said that the cosmonauts “showed no disturbances in their state of health” after their prolonged space flights, and the “transient functional reactions” were said to have “disappeared in seven or 10 days. . . He added that “post-flight disturbances were largely related to the central nervous system, the cardiovascular systems and metabolism.” Prof. Nello Pace, head of Physiology Dept, at Univ. of California (Berkeley), closely questioned Prof. Parin about his statements. Prof. Pace considered that hypotension was “among the most significant facts” disclosed at the conference. He noted that the condition had been observed in U.S. Astronauts Schirra and Cooper, and that NASA had said that implications of blood pressure responses “will have to be given very serious consideration as larger missions are undertaken.” (Text; Hillaby, NYT, 5/16/64,8; Burkett, Houston Chron., 5/17/64)
usaf Space Systems Div. reinitiated its program to develop Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (amu) for extravehicular space activity. Earlier this year SSD had requested bids for “remote space maneuvering system” but canceled this in favor of the amu, to be used in MOL-oriented program, amu would consist of five subsystems—hydrogen peroxide propulsion, environment control, attitude stabilization, manual control, and telemetry and voice communications. (SBD, 2/17/64, 255)
Weber Aircraft Co. of Burbank, Calif., demonstrated the astronaut escape system that it had developed for NASA. System was designed to boost astronauts out of their Gemini spacecraft and open escape parachutes in 10 sec. if a spacecraft malfunction should develop. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 10/30/64) 0 Minuteman II icbm flight test from Cape Kennedy marked second success in as many launchings, usaf said the advanced missile achieved all test objectives. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
A study at Northrop Space Laboratories was reported as indicating that a fluid-filled “bladder” might offer the best form of protection to astronauts during impact acceleration. Using guinea pigs, the investigators found that the fluid-filled garment seemed to offer the same advantages in minimizing internal organ displacement as did water immersion, but without the risk of generating high hydraulic pressure pulses. (M&R, 12/21/64,21)
The newest 14 NASA astronauts began week-long desert survival course in Nevada, under direction of usaf 3637th Survival and Special Training Squadron, Stead afb. (msc Roundup, 8/19/64, 2)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced $133,358 contract was awarded to AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. of Garrett Corp. for design and production of extravehicular pressurization ventilation system to be used by astronauts in Project Gemini, (upi, San Diego Union, 2/9/64)
As part of the ceremonies dedicating the Capt. Theodore C. Freeman Memorial Library of Astronautics at the Houston Baptist College, Faith L. Freeman, lO-yr.-old daughter of the late astronaut, was awarded a scholarship to the college. (Houston Post, 1/22/65; msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
Battelle Memorial Institute reported reasons the sweet potato would be the best vegetable for a space garden: (1) it would yield a large number of calories per pound and would have a high count of vitamin A; (2) its leaves are edible, either cooked or raw; (3) under simulated space conditions, it would grow in 90 to 120 days; (4) it would give off oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide, aiding air conditions inside a spacecraft. The plan, Battelle said, would be to grow the sweet potato in a spacecraft in a soilless culture to provide fresh vegetables for astronauts, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/16/65)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that USAF would send 12 f-5a jet fighter aircraft to Vietnam this fall to evaluate the performance of this new multipurpose aircraft under combat conditions. Built by Northrop Corp., the f-5a was a lightweight supersonic aircraft that could carry 6,200 lbs. of bombs, rockets, air-to-air missiles, or other ordnance. With two' 20-mm. cannons mounted in its nose, it could take off fully loaded from unpaved runways. (dod Release 614-65) “Why they would not appear at all, said Scheer. He said no one had cleared such a meeting with him . . . The Russians were angry and left the scene in a huff, and at a news conference later, Sedov made no secfet of the fact that they considered the incident a snub and an affront. “An air of mistrust now prevailed. There was, as Pete Conrad observed later, ‘some real bad feeling around this place.’ “Scheer, trying to right things, sent a letter to Dr. William Pickering, president of the International Astronautical Federation, urging that the astronauts be brought together. . . . “Friday afternoon Cooper and Conrad spoke before a Congress session. . . . “As soon as that meeting was over, the two Americans jumped from the conference stage and headed for the white-uniformed Belyayev . . . Conrad [said] through the Russian’s interpreter ‘Tell him we would like to show them all our pictures. . . . Tell him we’ve got 250 slides and they can see them all. When would they like to see them?’ ” Hicks said Belyayev exchanged his lapel pin with Cooper and Conrad gave his to Belyayev to be delivered to Leonov. Hicks continued: “That night, considerably more progress was made at the Congress’s large banquet. Cooper and Belyayev, strategically seated within talking distance, even went so far as to exchange watches. . . . Finally the astronauts warmed up the cosmonauts from the earlier chill. They ail posed for a four-way handshake photograph. No more fooling around through official channels, drawled Cooper. Why don’t you fellows come up to our place for breakfast tomorrow morning? “The Russians agreed. . . . The talk, through an interpreter, was almost entirely personal and non-technical. . . . Conrad and Leonov exchanged writing pens. All traded autographs and Leonov . . . drew a picture of himself walking in space. . . . “As they departed, the spacemen locked in Kussian-styie bear-hugs. . . . Said one of the Soviet pilots, ‘We are colleagues and we have a full understanding. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad are good boys.’” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/65, A10; Hicks, Life, 10/1/65, 113-116)
President Johnson sent letters to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn), Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf), and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), congratulating them on successful completion of the gemini vi and gemini vii space missions and advising them that promotions for new astronauts would be submitted to Congress for confirmation in January. (Pres. Doc., 12/27/65, 606)
Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, told a press conference that “there is a question whether astronauts can stand long confinement, let alone weightlessness.” Dr. Gilruth was in Los Angeles to accept the 1964 Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the asme at the Aviation and Space Conference. (Miles, L. A. Times, 3/17/65; naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that it would take “a great deal of effort over a number of years” for the United States to achieve first place in space and warned it would be “a mistake to believe” that the successful GEMINI iv spaceflight had “overcome a lead of several years” held by the Soviet Union. He said “the most important result” of the GEMINI iv flight might be the condition of the astronauts upon their return, based on the preliminary medical examinations of Astronauts McDivitt and White. The final medical report on the flight and their postflight condition would take about two months. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/16/65, 13)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., (LCdr., usn) discussed the GEMINI v spaceflight with the Oba (King) of Benin in his palace in Nigeria. In his luncheon speech, the Oba said: “In this age, astronauts are physically making visits to some sphere in the universe our ancient people thought was possible to visit only in spirit form. . . . Such journeys may prove or disprove such theories that the space is limitless, according to scientists, or that over and above the outer space there is a canopy, according to the saying of our ancient people.” (Louchheim, Wash. Post, 9/29/65, Al)
NASA absolved Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) of any blame in the 58-mi.-off-target landing of the GEMINI ill spacecraft following the three-orbit flight Mar. 23, according to msc spokesman. The mishap was attributed to the fact that the spacecraft did not develop as much lift as expected. The possibility that Major Grissom might have banked GEMINI in improperly as a result of misunderstanding instructions from ground stations had been investigated, (upi, NYT, 4/21/65, 11, msc gemini iii Fact Sheet)
nasa astronauts gathered at nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center for a debriefing by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr. The meeting was held primarily for the Gemini Vi and vn crews, but other astronauts attended as observers, (ap, NYT, 9/6/65, 6; Wash. Post, 9/5/65, A8)
The rendezvous of Geminis 6 and 7 had been scheduled tentatively for the eighth day of Gemini 7’s 14-day endurance flight, revealed Command Pilot Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) at a news conference held by Gemini vu’s prime and backup astronaut crews at MSC. Gemini 7 would act as a passive target vehicle, but would expend fuel to circularize its 108-mi.-perigee orbit to 161-mi.-perigee orbit and to maneuver into range of Gemini 6’s radar, if necessary. Borman said there would be no Eva on Gemini vii because the crew would be wearing new lightweight spacesuits unsuitable for work in the vacuum of space; he was unaware of any plans for Eva on Gemini VI. During ten days of the mission, the Gemini vii crew would fly in USAF-issue longjohn underwear. Pilot James Lovell (Cdr., usn) said that training for Gemini vii had emphasized stowage reviews because of the serious stowage problems encountered by Astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on their eight-day GEMINI v flight August 19. (Transcript; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/65, A3)
Lt. Frank K. Ellis (usn), who had lost his lower legs in an aircraft crash, was advised that the Navy was considering his application to become an astronaut. “The only difference between me and any normal man,” he said, “is running and jumping ability. There is no change in my flying ability . . . I’ve wanted to be an astronaut ever since I first heard the word. That field is moving more and more into actual controlled flying. I’m a fly boy. Count me in.” (ap, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
Gemini vi Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were “very healthy,” reported Dr. Howard Minners at the conclusion of their post-flight physical examination aboard the carrier Wasp, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65)
GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Athens with their wives and children at the start of a six-nation goodwill tour and were greeted with cheers from the crowd. The astronauts would attend the International Astronautical Federation Congress which opened Sept. 13. (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/16/65)
At a news conference in Washington, D.C., Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said that although “extravehicular activity” was not planned for Gemini astronauts until GT-5, “we are working hard at trying to qualify the space suit and the hatch itself to see whether we can accelerate that date.” If their spacesuits and the spacecraft’s hatch passed tests in time, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would lean halfway out of the capsule for perhaps 15 min. on flight GT-4, scheduled for early June. He and Astronaut James A. McDivitt would attempt to orbit the earth 63 times in 98 hours, taking off from Cape Kennedy and landing in the Atlantic near Grand Turk Island. Maj. White and Maj. McDivitt appeared at the news conference with their backup crew—Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), and Maj. Frank Borman (usaf). (Transcript)
“Should the MOL blueprint as envisioned by the Air Force’s Systems Command be approved by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, the Navy conceivably could be the first to use this earth-orbiting station as a new technique for charting ship movements on all the oceans of the world,” wrote Frank Macomber in the San Diego Union. Macomber envisioned “two Navy astronauts . . . spinning around the earth as early as 1968 in a 10-foot diameter, 25-foot long orbital laboratory—about the size of a small house trailer filled with electronic detection gear . . (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 7/25/65, 13)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., left with their wives on a six-nation goodwill tour arranged by President Johnson to demonstrate the U.S.’ peaceful intentions in space. They would visit Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, Nigeria, and the Canary Islands. At a State Department luncheon prior to departure, Cooper told the audience, which included ambassadors from the six countries he and Conrad would visit, that from the GEMINI V cockpit “you don’t see any of the combat, you don’t see any of the fighting and bickering, the world looks like a very peaceful place.” (vpi, NYT, 9/16/65, 27)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (usn), said he probably would be assigned as command pilot to the sixth Gemini flight, which would be the first U.S. attempt to meet and join two vehicles in space. (ap, Balt. Sun, 2/2/65)
Physical condition of GEMINI VII Astronauts Borman and Lovell was “better than expected,” reported Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director. (Waldron, NYT, 12/19/65, 68)
Gemini vil astronauts Frank Borman and James A. Lovell, Jr., reviewed for several hours where they would put food wrappings and other waste materials during their 14-day spaceflight scheduled to begin Dec. 4. Study of the problem was part of the final phase of training for the mission, (ap, NYT, 11/29/65, 55)
President Johnson, after viewing on television the launching of gemini vii, said: “Once again, two brave Americans have carried the quest for knowledge to the threshold of space. They also take with them our prayers, and our pride. As they orbit the earth in the days and weeks ahead, Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell will broaden our knowledge of space. But they will do more. Their voyage will be a continuous reminder that the peaceful conquest of space is the only form of conquest in which modern man can proudly and profitably engage. In this struggle, all men are allies, and the only enemy is a hostile environment. The victory over the final enemy will belong, not just to Americans, but to all the world. We are proud that these fine young Americans have brought us one step closer to that goal.” (Pres. Doc., 12/4/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., were lost briefly over Kenya while flying a small aircraft to Keekerok Game Lodge to visit President Jomo Kenyatta. With Cooper at the controls, they landed at Keekerok only 20 min. late, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/24/65)
faa awarded two research contracts to obtain jet operations data on atmospheric turbulence: General Dynamics/Convair Corp. was awarded a $30,100 contract to develop a test program for obtaining highly precise data on the responses of pilot and aircraft to turbulence encountered in regular jet airline service; a $23,700 contract was awarded Eastern Air Lines to conduct a meteorological study of clear air turbulence (Cat), (faa Release 65-118) On Dec. 16, gemini vi Astronaut Schirra reported to Mission Control that an unidentified satellite in a low trajectory in polar orbit was trying to contact him. Before ground officials could respond, he and Stafford played Jingle Bells with a harmonica and bells. GEMINI VI began reentry northeast of Canton Island in the Pacific during its 15th revolution; four retrorockets fired automatically in the correct sequence, each providing 2,500 lbs. thrust. Reentry was normal and was the first controlled reentry to a predetermined landing point in the U.S. manned spaceflight program. Gemini vi splashed down in the Atlantic at 10:29 a.m. est, 700 mi. south of Bermuda—only 14 mi. off target—after a 26-hr., 1-min. flight. Assisted from the spacecraft by Navy frogmen, the astronauts arrived by helicopter at the carrier Wasp at 11:20 a.m. for medical debriefing. Recovery and rendezvous section of the GEMINI VI spacecraft splashed down near the spacecraft itself and was retrieved by another team of swimmers. This was first time the service section—complete with rendezvous radar equipment—had been recovered. Main parachute also was retrieved, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/16/65, 1, 28, 29, 30; 12/17/65, 1, 28; 12/18/65, 1, 16; 12/19/65, 1, 68, 69; WSJ, 12/17/65, 1; 12/20/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, Al, A14, A15; 12/17/65, Al, A8, A17; 12/18/65, Al, A7; 12/19/65, Al, A16, A17; 12/20/65, Al, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, Al, A14; 12/18/65, Al, A3; 12/19/65, Al, A8, A9; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc GEMINI VII/GEMINI VI Fact Sheet)
Dispatch to Moscow from Tass’ New York correspondent, Leonid Ponomarev: “The flight of the U.S. spaceship Gemini-5 . . . proceeded normally for only two hours, although the flight program was calculated for eight days. “The main reason [was] that a new system for providing electric power. . . was being used in the Gemini-5 spacecraft for the first time. . . . “It is a noteworthy fact that the new system for providing electrical power has never once been tested in spaceflight conditions. From the test stands on earth, the installation was put directly into working conditions in space. “There are several reasons that explain this haste and a certain degree of risk. The program chiefs were given the task of ‘catching up with the Soviet Union’ at any price regarding the length of flight in space. However, the present power of U.S. rockets and the size of the astronauts’ capsule are utterly inadequate for lifting and storing reliably tested battery-powered electrical power installations, which would weigh more than the new system. U.S. scientists were compelled to rapidly create a system, new in principle, in order to provide power for the Gemini-5 spacecraft for eight days so that it could fulfill its tasks.” (Tass, 8/22/65
Douglas Aircraft Co. Missile and Space Systems Div. reported that tests conducted for USAF had indicated that a spin in a centrifuge might recondition astronauts living for weeks or months in a state of weightlessness. Previous research had indicated that long stays in the weightless state could have a debilitating effect on the body and cause the heart and circulatory system to lose their tone, (nyt News Service, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 2/9/65)
President Johnson commented on the success of the gemini v flight during a news conference at his Texas ranch: “This is a moment of great achievement, not only for astronauts Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, but for those whose hopes have ridden with Gemini 5. “I am so happy that Mr. Webb and Mr. Seamans, who had so much to do directing this very successful venture, are here to share with us the pride we all feel today, And I deeply regret that our late, beloved President Kennedy, under whose leadership all of this work was so carefully planned and thought out, can’t be here to enjoy the fruits and success of his planning and his forethought. “The successful completion of the eight-day, 3-million mile flight of the Gemini 5 proves, I think, not only man’s capacity for endurance in space, but it proves that man is in space to stay. “We can be, and we are enormously proud of every member of our space team. That means all the scientists, and the technicians, and the controllers, and the trackers—to everyone who contributed in any way. As President of this country, I want, this afternoon, to extend the thanks of the entire nation for a job well done. To Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, and to their wonderful families, I want to simply repeat again: we are all very deeply proud of you. “The difficulties and disappointments of this flight have served to increase our appreciation, respect and trust for the skill and ability of all the men involved—at all their posts of duty. We can face the challenges and opportunities with far greater confidence and certainty —and this is an unmistakable gain. “Only seven years ago we were neither first nor second in space— we were not in space at all. Today the capacity of this country for leadership in this realm is no longer in valid question or dispute. Openly, proudly, we are proceeding on our course willing always to share our knowledge, our gains with all mankind. I would repeat and renew this country’s invitation to all nations to join together to make this adventure a joint adventure. “This globe seems smaller today than ever before. “Somehow the problems which yesterday seemed large and ominous and insoluble today appear less foreboding. As man increases his knowledge of the heavens, why should he fear the unknown on earth? As man draws nearer to the stars, why should he not also draw nearer to his neighbor? “As we push ever more deeply into the universe—probing its secrets and discovering its way—we must also learn to cooperate across the frontiers that divide earth’s surface. “No national sovereignty rules in outer space. Those who venture there go as envoys of the human race. Their quest must be for all mankind—and what they find belongs to all mankind. That is the basis of the program of which astronauts Cooper and Conrad are a part. . . . “This flight of Gemini 5 was a journey of peace by men of peace. Its successful conclusion is a noble moment for mankind—and a fitting opportunity for us to renew our pledge to continue our search for a world in which peace reigns and justice prevails. “To demonstrate the earnestness of that pledge, and to express our commitment to the peaceful uses of space exploration, I intend to ask as many of our astronauts as possible—when their schedule and program permit—to visit various capitals of the world. Some, I hope, will be able to journey abroad soon. “Gemini is but the beginning. We resolve to have many more such journeys—in space and on earth—until man at last is at peace with himself.” (Transcript, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 170-72)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., arrived in Izmir, Turkey. Only about 5,000 of the city’s 750,000 residents turned out to watch their motorcade drive the 15 mi. into Izmir from the NATO air base at Cigli. Spokesman for the Turkish Foreign Office said the visit was an “unofficial culture visit,” and the governors of three cities on the astronauts’ itinerary were instructed not to welcome the party. Coolness was attributed to U.S. stand on Cyprus in 1964.	(Wash. Post, 9/19/65)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn), primary crew for Gemini vn, said they would attempt to communicate with a ground station via laser beam during their 14-day mission planned for early 1966. The laser—a beam of intense light— can transmit voices or other messages. Ground station at White Sands, N. Mex., aiming by radar, would fire the first laser signal at Gemini 7 as it passed overhead. The Gemini 7 crew would attempt to answer by pointing their capsule downward, aiming, and shooting a 10-lb., hand-held transmitter toward the ground. (Transcript; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/7/65; upi, Wash. Post, 7/7/65; upi, NYT, 7/7/65, 20)
Four Ohio college students ended a six-week isolation test at WrightPatterson afb, Ohio, to study diets, effect of continuous wearing of a spacesuit, and microbiology of the human body. The four, comprising the eighth group to take part in space tests conducted by the Aerospace Research Labs., spent the first three weeks on a balanced but monotonous diet and the last three weeks on a liquid diet with the same nutrients as their earlier meals. All agreed that astronauts would probably be able to wear spacesuits for long missions but that “something would have to be done” about the proposed liquid diet, (ap, NYT, 5/19/65; ap, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 5/19/65)
Within an hour after landing on the Lake Champlain, Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) received a telephone call from President Johnson congratulating them on their courage in the face of disappointments and discouragement: “You have certainly proved once and for all that man has a place in the exploration of the great frontier of space.” (Clark, NYT, 8/30/65, 1)
Gemini astronaut parachute system was successfully tested in drops from a c-130 at 15,000 ft. altitude by USN Chief Warrant Officer Mitch Kanowski and usaf Maj. Dan Fulgham over the Naval Air Facility El Centro. Parachutes deployed at 9,000 ft. as they would on actual Gemini missions. Additional tests would be made in drops from altitudes up to 35,000 ft. (Miles, L.A. Times, 3/9/65)
Pope Paul vi, in a mid-day Pentecostal message to a crowd in St. Peter’s Square, blessed Astronauts McDivitt and White: “Our benediction goes to all on earth and rises also to the skies for those who are exploring astral paths.” {NYT, 6/7/65, 33)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nine fellow aquanauts rose 205 ft. from Sealab II in a pressurized personnel transfer capsule. They would decompress on the support ship Berkone for about 30 hrs. before being exposed to atmospheric pressure. Carpenter had completed a record 29 days and 14 hrs. in the ocean-bottom laboratory; his associates had been below 15 days as had another team before them. A third team of ten men would complete the Navy’s 45-day experiment in underwater living and working. President Johnson phoned congratulations to Carpenter. [Wash. Post, 9/27/65)
Extravehicular equipment for Gemini vin. underwent two qualification tests in the 20-ft. vacuum chamber at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The Extravehicular Life Support System was combined with the Extravehicular Support Pack (Esp), a 92-lb. backpack in which the astronaut would carry his oxygen and maneuvering gas supply. First test evaluated capability of the oxygen bottle in the pack to supply the extravehicular astronaut with air at a high rate of flow. Second test was a propellant blowdown qualification in which the space gun was fired in 30-sec. bursts to exhaust the freon supply. A vacuum equal to 150,000-ft. altitudes existed in the chamber, and the walls of the thermal box had been cooled to —300° F to simulate the conditions of orbital night for both tests. (MSC Release 65-105)
Philadelphia’s Mayor James H. J. Tate, presenting a bronze medal to Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Cdr., usn), said: “I cannot imagine a more appropriate time to honor a space explorer than on the anniversary of the day back in 1492 when an Italian explorer named Christopher Columbus first set eyes on the New World and made a similar enormous contribution to history.” (NYT, 10/13/65, 47)
Four airmen emerged with high voices and a hunger for meat after five weeks of confinement in a simulated space cabin at the USAF School of Aerospace Medicine. Scientists were studying a helium-oxygen atmosphere for possible future space cabin work because it did not produce decompression sickness in astronauts and was less hazardous in terms of spacecraft fires. (Chic. Trib., 4/8/65; M&R, 4/12/65, 10)
The 2 million people of Melbourne, Australia, saluted Astronauts McDivitt and White as GEMINI iv passed overhead by turning on all the lights in the city. McDivitt said to the Carnarvon tracking station: “Tell them I thank them for lighting the night for me.” (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/7/65, A6; Houston Chron., 6/7/65)
Bodies of nasa Director of Space Medicine Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, his wife, and pilot were found near the wreckage of their two-engine aircraft about 40 mi. southeast of Aspen, Colo. Aircraft had been missing since Dec. 12. Coroner’s report later said that the cold and not injuries had apparently caused the deaths. A space medicine pioneer, Dr. Lovelace had parachuted from record 44,000-ft. altitude in 1944, had helped determine criteria for selection of Mercury astronauts, and had founded the famous Lovelace Clinic. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A18; Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A3; NYT, 12/16/65, 50; ap, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Editorial commentary in Washington Post on GEMINI VII-VI flight: “On the crowded globe beneath the soaring astronauts men were still fighting each other, cursing each other, starving each other and maltreating each other. Not yet have mortals risen above man’s inhumanity to man. Not yet have they surmounted the emotions that set at naught the generations of light and learning. Not yet are they wise enough to govern their passions. But hope soars aloft with the astronauts. The creatures who can do this, the beings who can defy gravity, disregard distance, conquer space, circumnavigate the planet and mingle with the stars, may yet make the larger conquests of mind and spirit that are necessary if human beings are to live together in peace.” (Wash. Post, 12/16/65, A20)
Scientists at Boeing Co., Seattle, had devised a “trampoline” bed designed to exercise the blood vessels in a weightless environment, it was reported. Compared in effect to a cocktail shaker, the device, by its to-and-fro motion, would send the blood surging from the head to the feet and back again. Some scientists had feared that days of inactivity in a weightless environment without exercising the blood vessels could result in death to an astronaut, (ap, Newport News Daily Press, 2/4/65; ap, Huntsville Times, 2/4/65; Orl. Sen., 2/4/65)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), carried two one-dollar bills during the GEMINI v mission to prove on landing that they were the same spacemen who were launched, upi reported. A representative of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale recorded the serial numbers on the bills before the launch and would check them after the landing. The Federation Aeronautique Internationale, with 54 member nations, is the agency that certifies world aviation and space records, (upi, NYT, 8/25/65, 1)
The White House announced that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., would leave Sept. 15 on a six-nation goodwill tour to Greece, Turkey, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Kenya, and Nigeria. The astronauts would be accompanied by their wives, Cooper’s daughters, Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts, and President Johnson’s Army aide, Maj. Hugh Robinson. (Pomfret, NYT, 9/12/65, 1, 33)
U.S. and Soviet astronauts had accumulated 19,610,000 accident-free miles—greatest total in the history of transportation—reported the National Geographic Society. A compilation released by the society showed that U.S. astronauts had traveled 10,692,000 mi. and Soviet astronauts, 8,918,000 mi. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/3/65)
The appropriateness of President Johnson’s comments on the achievements of Astronauts Cooper and Conrad during the GEMINI v spaceflight was discussed editorially in the New York Times: “He did not gloat over the evident Soviet discomfiture at the United States forging ahead in the space race. Nor did he follow the repeated Soviet practice of claiming that a particular achievement in the cosmos somehow ‘proved’ the superiority of one political system over another. Instead, he appealed to all nations to join together for the conquest of space, an arena in which cooperation could help ease world tensions. “. . . the President’s statement . . . should help to dispel . . . fears. He has made clearer than ever that this country sincerely wants full cooperation in space. If Gemini 5’s flight helps to bring that objective closer, its immediate political contribution will rival its enormous gains for science and for technology.” (NYT, 8/30/65, 24C)
Columbus Association of Genoa, Italy, announced that Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., had been selected to receive the 1965 Columbus Prize, (ap, Wash. Post, 9/25/65)
The Gemini 6 spacecraft underwent final checkout of all systems; its crew, Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas Stafford, received final briefings. NASA announced that Gemini VI would be launched December 12, one day ahead of schedule. (WSJ, 12/10/65, 1; Wilford, NYT, 12/11/65, 1, C54)
250 photos taken by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., during the GEMINI v spaceflight were released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 17)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman and James Lovell flew from the carrier Wasp to KSC where they had a brief reunion with GEMINI VI Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford, who were departing later in the day for msc for further medical debriefing, (ap, NYT, 12/20/65, 10C)
In a letter of explanation to Congress, NASA discussed priorities in the fy 1966 budget: “. . . As the President pointed out when he submitted the budget to the Congress, ‘It is a budget of priorities. It provides for what we must do, but not for all we would like to do.’ In assessing priorities and the most urgent national needs, the 260-inch solid propellant rocket program, the M-l liquid hydrogen-oxygen rocket engine capable of providing l1/^ million pounds of thrust, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power generating system to provide 35 kilowatts of electrical power in space could not be supported in the Fiscal Year 1966 budget. “. . . [nasa] is, therefore, preparing plans for reprogramming Fiscal Year 1965 funds so as to logically phase out these program activities in such a way as to obtain as much technical information as is possible for future use. . . . Every effort is being made to achieve the greatest possible benefit from the funds already invested.” (Text) *	Prof. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, discussing RANGER viii photographs in an interview with John Lear, World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., suggested that long, narrow rills and irregular depressions could be caused by moon’s surface collapsing into crevasses opened by the movement of a glacier hidden beneath lunar dust. He attributed gently rounded shapes to a shifting of small particles by electrical forces which, on earth, were inhibited by atmosphere. Concerning the manned expedition, Gold indicated: “The presence of ice oceans could give rise to many problems. But once these were solved, the ice itself could be mined and used to make hydrogen for fuel for rockets returning to Earth.” Referring to the electrically-charged particles: “Many particles would be dislodged mechanically by the landing of a spacecraft or the footstep of a man. Once loose, the dust would jump in response to electrical attraction or repulsion. If particles landed on the astronaut’s visor, brushing wouldn’t remove them but would instead intensify the electrical charges affecting their behavior.” Dr. Gold recommended more research on possible control of these electrical forces. (Lear, Houston Chron., 3/2/65; Ind. Star, 3/7/65; wbe Sci. Serv.)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham suffered a simple compression fracture of a neck vertebra during exercise unrelated to astronaut training. Cunningham would be grounded during the three months he would wear a neck brace but would continue other phases of astronaut training. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/65)
iTT-designed portable transmitter onboard the Wasp sent pictures of splash-down and recovery of Gemini vi Astronauts Schir-ra and Stafford to early bird i comsat which relayed them to the Andover, Me., ground station from which they were transmitted to major television networks in U.S. and Canada. It was the first time recovery of astronauts had been shown in real-time on television. (Gould, NYT, 12/17/65, 28)
On arrival at KSC, Astronauts Schirra and Stafford personally thanked the 400 men responsible for the successful GEMINI VI launching. The astronauts would undergo medical examinations and debriefings for three days and then fly to MSC for a reunion with their families, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/18/65, Al; upi, NYT, 12/18/65,16)
Pravda described Lt. Col. Leonov’s exit and return to VOSKHOD II in giving the first detailed description of the inside of the spacecraft. The airlock was apparently built into the place occupied by a third astronaut during the voskhod i flight Oct. 12. After Col. Leonov moved into the airlock, his companion, Col. Belyayev pressed a button that closed the inside door and created a vacuum inside the lock chamber. At the prescribed moment, Col. Belyayev pressed a second button that opened the hatch between the airlock and space, allowing Col. Leonov to climb out. The procedure was apparently reversed for the astronaut’s return, (ap, NYT, 3/30/65)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) and four aquanauts began a 45-day, USN-sponsored experiment in 12 x 58-ft. Sealab II to test how well man can function at 205-ft. depth in the Pacific under pressure six times that at the surface. Carpenter would try to stay down 30 days to set a record; the other aquanauts would remain below for varying periods. The group would collect and study marine specimens, map the ocean floor, and explore a deep marine canyon. (Wash. Post, 8/29/65)	•
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium, said in the Philadelphia Inquirer: “As of this moment, the Soviets have tentatively determined that the maximum ‘safe’ period of weightlessness is 24 hr. They hold that after this period, ‘irreversible physiological changes begin to occur in the human system which, if not corrected, will eventually lead to death’. . . . “The Soviets have also discovered a correlation between high accelerations and weightlessness. They believe that when an astronaut is subjected to high accelerations on launch he tends to overestimate or to overcompensate for his movements. Once the astronaut is weightless, then a radical reversal takes place in which the astronaut undercompensates and may suffer disorientation. . . . “The Soviets appear to have concluded that flight crews of the future will be selected as medical teams, and they will further be selected on the basis of biological and bacteriological compatibility. The crew will be concerned with developing means for forecasting their own health during the entire trip so as to preserve it.” (Phil. Inq., 1/17/65)
A Benedictine nun, Sister M. Margaret Bealmear, said she had declined an invitation to apply for astronaut training and that she assumed the letter from NASA Manned Spacecraft Center had been a mistake. Sister Bealmear, a candidate for a doctorate in biology from the Univ. of Notre Dame, said she had received the invitation in December 1964. Invitations had been extended by NASA to select names appearing on a list provided by the National Academy of Sciences. (ap, NYT, 3/16/65, 5; msc Historian)
Gemini astronaut parachute system for use in launch emergency failed to function properly during test at El Centro, Calif. When the jumper stepped from a c-130 aircraft at 23,000-ft. altitude, a “ballute” (combination balloon and parachute) device for stabilizing the fall failed to deploy; the chute was opened manually at 12,000 ft. (upi, Minneapolis Trib., 3/10/65)
The radar set that would guide Gemini astronauts on rendezvous missions in space, beginning with the August 19 Gemini v flight, was demonstrated by Westinghouse Corp.—working under an $18 million contract with	NASA—at	Friendship International Airport, Baltimore. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) would carry a self-contained Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) into orbit on the back end of their spacecraft. An Agena rendezvous radar transponder and flashing beacons would be packaged in the Rep along with batteries and antenna. Midway through the second revolution, at 2 hrs. 25 min. after liftoff, command pilot Cooper would yaw the Gemini 5 spacecraft 90° to the right. Explosive charges would eject the Rep from its canister northward at 5 fps. Gemini 5 would then maneuver away from the Rep to attain a position six miles below and 14 mi. behind the Rep. Subsequent phase adjustment would place Gemini 5 in a co-elliptical orbit—that is, the spacecraft would be at constant altitude below the Rep but reducing the trailing distance, since the spacecraft in its lowest orbit would be traveling faster than the Rep. Range and range-rate data would be displayed to the Gemini 5 crew by the rendezvous radar system. The radar system would continuously compute distance and angles from the spacecraft to the Pod, and calculate the maneuvers necessary to effect rendezvous. At five hours and 36 min. after liftoff, if the mission went as planned, Gemini 5 should be closing in on the Rep just north of the Carnarvon, Australia, tracking station. Gemini 5 would not physically dock with Rep; the experiment would simply provide training for Gemini VI and other rendezvous missions and evaluate the rendezvous radar hardware to be used on the Agena target vehicle in later missions. (Clark, NYT, 7/8/65, 12; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/8/65; Msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1, 2)
gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman completed the medical phase of their debriefing at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for MSC, said that “a quick look at data available . . . indicates man has fared extremely well in two weeks of space environment.” A detailed medical analysis would be available later, nasa released several terrain photographs taken by Astronaut Lovell during gemini vii’s spaceflight Dec. 4—18. (ap, NYT, 12/22/65, 14; ap, Wash. Post, 12/22/65, A3)
The world applauded the success of the GEMINI v mission: many leaders in Western Europe sent congratulatory cables to President Johnson, and newspapers in Great Britain, Malaysia, India, and Japan were among those giving the flight front-page coverage. The Soviet Union televised pictures of the astronauts and broadcast news reports of their landing. Only a few dissenting voices were heard— among them the Cuban newspaper Revolucion which described the flight as “cosmic espionage.” Communist China remained silent. {Wash. Post, 8/31/65, A3)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., visited Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie in the royal palace in Addis Ababa, then made the fourth stop of their goodwill tour—after Greece, Turkey, and Ethiopia—the Malagasy Republic. They were received cordially. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; upi, Miami Her., 9/22/65)
Prospecting for high-grade silver could be done, according to Thor H. Kiilsgaard, Chief of the Resources Research Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, by using an infrared system mounted on aircraft. He explained that deposits of silver in the earth were associated with hot water and that areas of heat flow could be detected by the infrared devices. If the heat zones conformed with mineral zones or faults, silver might be present. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 2/28/65, 64) During February: The prime and backup crews for the upcoming GT-3 three-orbital mission underwent parachute and egress training exercises. Parachute training, with the astronauts in space suits, was conducted in Galveston Bay, Tex. Egress training from a submerged Gemini boilerplate spacecraft was conducted in a large tank at Ellington, afb. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 2)
Gemini vii Astronauts Frank Borman (L/Col., usaf) and James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), passed their 5-hr. preflight physical examination at ksc. Dr. Charles Berry, Gemini medical director, said he could find no medical problem that might interfere with the scheduled launch of Gemini vii Dec. 4. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/65, A3; Wilford, NYT, 12/2/65, 22)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., received a warm welcome in Ankara, Turkey, in contrast to cool receptions in Izmir and Istanbul. President Cemal Gursel told the astronauts their flight of nearly eight days had demonstrated “great courage ... to your nation and to the whole world.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/20/65)
A temporary injunction was issued banning a steel fabricating firm from running internal combustion engines while GEMINI vu orbited over the Corpus Christi, Tex., area. The Government, in asking for the injunction, said machinery at Safety Steel Services, Inc., interfered with radio signals to the spacecraft and “threatened the safety of the astronauts.” (ap, Wash. Post, 12/9/65)
The successful Gemini vii-vi mission received extensive editorial comment. New York Times: “The exploits of astronauts Borman, Lovell, Schirra and Stafford and the extraordinary pictures they brought back from space have thrilled men everywhere. Admiration for their high achievements has—if only for the moment—overcome most of the usual division of this quarrelsome world. . . . “Borman and Lovell in Gemini 7 took the longest journey in history —more than five million miles. They showed that creatures of the earth’s surface can live and work effectively for fourteen days in a weightless environment, in which men must encapsulate themselves as in the womb and bring their own air, food and water to survive . . . they proved that a human organism is up to the task of staying in space long enough to fly to the moon, to do work there for several days, and then to return to this planet. “The unprecedented precision navigation feat of Schirra and Stafford in Gemini 6 was important primarily because, for the first time, it brought two spaceships close enough together to be joined. Their demonstration opens the way for construction in space and vastly expands the potentialities for human activity in that realm. . . .” (NYT, 12/19/65, 8E) Washington Sunday Star: “Now it is all over, but it will be remembered in history as one of man’s finer achievements. . . .” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/19/65, C2)
C. Leo De Orsey, financial advisor and attorney for the seven original astronauts and acting president of the Washington Redskins football team, died, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/65; ap, NYT, 5/2/65, 89)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief of medical operations at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, had said that new body sensor equipment developed for astronauts had “stretched the doctor’s stethoscope to reach 100 miles,” reported Norm Spray in an article in the Houston Chronicle: “This could open the door for new types of medical research and treatment potentially as important to the family physician as to space scientists, Dr. Berry believes.
Astronaut Walter Schirra said that he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had maneuvered the GEMINI VI spacecraft to within one foot of Gemini VII during their Dec. 15 rendezvous and that although they were backed up by an advanced type of computer, they probably could have effected rendezvous without it. Schirra and the three other astronauts involved in the GEMINI VII-VI flights gave reports on their missions at an msc news conference, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/31/65, Al; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff reported to the Medical Society of the State of New York at its annual convention that the semicircular canals of the inner ear had been demonstrated to play a key role in motion sickness that astronauts might experience in a rotating, orbiting spacecraft. Capt. Ashton Graybiel at the usn School of Aviation Medicine, Pensacola, expressed optimism that astronauts could be taught to overcome the effects of motion sickness. One way, he said, was to precondition selected persons by teaching them how to avoid movements that would invariably upset them. Another promising development, Dr. Graybiel said, was drug research. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/16/65)
It was reported that President Johnson was disappointed that the twoman Gemini-Titan 4 spacecraft scheduled for June 3 launching, had no cameras aboard for simultaneous TV transmission of the space walk. The President had hoped that at completion of the four-day flight by Astronauts McDivitt and White, the U.S. would have pictures similar to those released by the Soviet Union after VOSKHOD II flight. TV cameras had been sacrificed for experimental instruments. (Humphrey, Phil. Eve. Bull., 5/27/65)
“I certainly have seen nothing in the eight-day data that would lead me to be worried about a 14-day flight,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, chief physician for the astronauts, told reporters at a news briefing in Cocoa Beach. He said that the GEMINI V astronauts were in good physical condition and were returning to normal as quickly as had the pilots of the four-day Gemini GT-4 flight in June. Changes in such indicators as the heart rate and blood pressure characteristics seemed to reflect adaptation to the weightless space environment and, later, to the stress of returning to normal gravity of earth, Dr. Berry explained. Heart rates became lower in space and rose above normal on returning to earth. At first, on return to earth, blood pressure did not respond as promptly as normal to tilt-table tests designed to show how well the circulatory system copes with sudden changes from horizontal to nearly-vertical posture. Cooper and Conrad lost about TV2 and 8Y2 lbs. respectively, but had gained most of it back. This loss might have been a response to the space environment but was believed to be partly water loss after reentry while waiting in the sun to be rescued, Berry said. Both seemed to be less tired than their predecessors. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/1/65, 1, 15)
New York Times editorial: "Space historians will have to invent new superlatives to describe the contributions of Gemini 11 and astronauts Conrad and Gordon to man’s entry into the cosmos. From the link-up with the Agena in the very first orbit to the incredibly accurate automatic return to earth, the three-day flight demonstrated a new level of capability far surpassing that shown in any previous flight by any nation.” (NYT, 9/16/66, 34M)
The Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II received editorial comment. Washington Evening Star: "Yesterday’s tragedy is all the more shocking in that it needn’t have happened at all. . . . "It is assumed that Bassett was Togging flying time’. .. See, a civilian, was not eligible for flight pay but as an astronaut was encouraged to keep his hand as an airplane jockey, "It is difficult to see why it is necessary for military men on astronaut duty to fly airplanes to qualify for 'hazardous duty’ pay . . . "Let’s save our spacemen for space, and let’s make it a bit easier for them by amending the military pay act to give uniformed astronauts those fjew hundred extra dollars a month just for being astronauts.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A6) Houston Post: "There is ... an element of irony in the fact that two men preparing for a highly hazardous space mission should die in this prosaic manner, but actually, under the procedures that are followed in space flights, there are just as great risks on the surface of the earth and in its atmosphere as in space, and they probably are much more numerous. If air travel is safer than land travel today, space travel is probably even safer . . .” (Houston Post, 3/2/66) Missiles and Rockets: "By emphasizing the everyday risk taken by all the astronauts in the course of training, the deaths of Capt. Freeman, Mr. See and Maj. Bassett have almost certainly lessened the outcry against the space program in the event of similar losses during space operations. "Each time an astronaut steps into a military jet aircraft, he is running a risk perceptibly greater than that he takes in space. . . . [nasa] takes the greatest of care to assure that manned spacecraft launches are as safe as the best engineering talent in the nation can make them. A launch atop a Titan II, hazardous as it may be, cannot compare with the danger inherent in groping through low fog for an elusive runway in a jet aircraft.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/14/66, 54)
Gemini xii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., arrived at ksc to begin debriefing. Addressing some 700 workmen, Lovell said "everyone here has done an outstanding job to get us into space”; Aldrin described the four-day mission as a "treat to me as an individual that I would like to have shared with every person in the world.” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 11/17/66)
Tass told the Soviet people that gemini viii had achieved history’s first docking in space, and added: "But its program was carried out only partly. Its main elements—more practice in linking up, a lengthy stay by an astronaut outside his ship and the maneuvering of the ship and astronaut—remained unsolved.” (upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 41)
Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan held their first post-mission press conference. Cernan said that during his space walk he could not keep his feet from floating, was unable to use both hands while trying to don backpack containing maneuvering unit, and "had to work continually against the pressure suit. ... I was devoting 50 per cent of my work load just to maintain position.” This extra effort saturated the environmental control system and led to fogging of his faceplate so that he could not test the maneuvering unit. About the same time, he felt his back becoming "extremely hot.” It was later revealed some of the insulation had been ripped from his spacesuit. After recounting his adventures, Cernan said: "I found no new voodoo out there.... You’re at home out there ... I’m convinced we can do just about anything we want to do.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; NYT, 6/18/66, A10)
Gemini x spacecraft, its heatshield forward, aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. tions and drawings” for vehicles being proposed to transport astronauts on lunar surface, (msfc Release 66-157)
Prototype unfolding tool box containing 16 geological tools for astronauts to examine and obtain samples of lunar rock was delivered to msc by Martin Co. Box would also provide storage area for rock samples. Tools included battery-powered drill; dust scoop; sample-weighing device; hand-held magnifier designed for use through spacesuit visor; surveying instruments and rangefinder; and retriever to pick up small specimens of rock which pressure-suited astronaut could not reach, (msc Release 66-9)
U.S.S.R. was entering second phase of space medicine research, seeking the "why” of physiological changes, V. V. Parin, a Soviet physician-scientist with a major role in selecting and training cosmonauts, told Technology Week in a Moscow interview. In phase one "we merely made objective observations of animals ... we were interested in just keeping them alive, in generating the atmosphere, maintaining thermal control, humidity, pressure, and the rest,” Parin said. "Now we want to know the intimate details of animal adaptation” to space, because lower animals could be more intensively studied in space flights than man. Parin cited four areas in which improved medical technology could aid the study of physiology: measuring calcium loss in astronauts; analyzing process of water loss in astronauts; measuring muscle tone; and devising better telemetry. Parin said he was satisfied with the interchange of space-medical data between U.S.S.R. and U.S. (Beller, Tech. Wk., 7/4/66, 12, 13)
Soviet cosmonauts had not been troubled by perspiration, breathing difficulties, or high heartbeat rates as was Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Gemini xi mission, Soviet physician-cosmonaut Dr. Boris Yegorov said at press conference in Geneva. Probable reason was that cosmonauts worked in "completely normal” atmospheric conditions and breathed ordinary air, while astronauts used artificial air mixture containing more oxygen than normal, he said. Yegorov, one of three crew members in Oct. 12, 1964, voskhod i mission, was attending congress on space biology. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/66, A3)
gemini xi Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., arrived at ksc from recovery ship U.S.S. Guam to undergo physical examination and to begin debriefing. (Wilford, NYT, 9/17/66, 11)
U.S. domestic airlines flew 25 per cent more revenue passenger miles during first six months of 1966 than during comparable 1965 period, according to Air Transport Assn, report. Nearly 30.2 billion revenue passenger miles were flown during first half of 1966 by scheduled trunk, local service, and helicopter carriers compared with 24.1 billion revenue passenger miles during first half of 1965. (Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 40) During week of July 25: Patent was granted to Wolfgang G. Offik, senior staff engineer for Chrysler Corp., for escape system to rescue workers from booster-launch gantry in case of explosion or fire. Equipment included series of rescue cabins, each suspended in its own cable at a different level in front of gantry. In emergency, workers and astronauts still outside spacecraft would enter cabins and drop in them into underground shelter, protecting them from flames on gantry and on ground. (Jones, NYT, 7/30/66, 29)
NASA, to "allow a better time and motion evaluation of the workloads and stresses” experienced by an astronaut during extravehicular activity, had canceled plans to test usaf Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu) on Gemini XII mission. NASA and dod would study plans to reschedule experiment on later manned spaceflight, (nasa Release 66-258)
Sun had blinded Gemini ix Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan for more than two minutes of the critical liftoff period June 3, preventing them from reading control gauges or dials, ksc officials disclosed. As a result, NASA was considering fitting outside of spacecraft windows with tinted coverings on launchings when sun might be a serious problem. Coverings would be sprung free of windows when spacecraft had achieved orbit. Cernan’s suggestion of sunglasses would probably be rejected, NASA said, because it would be impossible to wear them under helmets. (NYT, 7/10/66, 45)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter said surgeons would have to remove a callus, formed on his left forearm after he broke it in a July 1964 motorcycle accident in Bermuda, before he could be considered for another spaceflight. Ability to rotate the arm properly was hampered. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/66, A2; AP, Chic, Trib., 1/25/66)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., met with Japanese space scientists in Tokyo and presented Japanese Premier Eisaku Sato with a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph of their gemini vii/vi rendezvous in space. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/66, Al; Wash. Post, 2/25/66)
Long-range HC-130H cargo aircraft equipped with Fulton Recovery System successfully snatched Capt. Gerald T. LyVere (usaf) from Rogers Dry Lake at afftc in first test of new ground-to-air recovery system for rescuing downed fliers and astronauts. At 400-ft. altitude aircraft clamped onto balloon-suspended nylon cable attached to harness dropped earlier by parachute, pulled Captain LyVere up behind aircraft, and reeled him over rear ramp. In later demonstration, Col. Allison Brooks (usaf) and A-3C Ronald Doll (usaf) were recovered simultaneously in side-by-side two-man pickup using double harness. Lockheed-built HC-130H, which would become operational June 30, could fly missions to more than 2,000 mi. from its base, loiter at sea level, and rescue up to five persons in multiple pickups from land or sea. For NASA projects, aircraft would carry complex uhf spacecraft reentry tracker equipment to locate reentering spacecraft, (afftc Release)
NASA reported that smudgy spacecraft windows and exposure problems had compromised quality of most of movie film taken by Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Richard F. Gordon, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Still pictures were all "of good quality” and showed earth’s curvature more clearly than on any other manmade photographs. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A8)
Soviet physicians, according to Tass, had reported that highlanders or people who had lived for a long time in mountain areas made the best astronaut candidates since they "spend the energy of their organism much more economically.” They used less oxygen when doing physical work; had approximately 30 per cent greater resistance to oxygen shortage; and possessed "heightened resistance to infrared, ultraviolet, and cosmic radiations.” (Tass, 9/29/66)
Speaking in Denver at Colorado Women’s College, Dr. Nancy G. Roman, NASA Chief of Astronomy Programs, ossa, said a primary reason for lack of women in space was that few had the scientific training. Even NASA’s 300 women professionals were few compared to their number in other agencies, she said. Young women interested in a career in space science were advised to concentrate first on the basics of their preferred area "because the fundamentals of the science used in space study are no different from those in more traditional fields. Equally important is to learn how to think, to face and solve problems and how to find the facts we need, not just remember them .... Space as a career depends on the individual who’s considering it. It is glamorous— and it’s also dirty work.” Dr. Roman said she was sure there would be women astronauts "if manned space flights continue as we expect them to.” (von Ende, Denver Post, 3/19/66)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), speaking at national convention of Naval Reserve Officers Assn, in Denver, described his astronaut-aquanaut occupation as a liaison between space and undersea exploration. He said there were plans to train astronauts under water to better withstand the tiring work of maneuvering outside spacecraft—a major problem of recent space flights. Models of spacecraft would be used; astronauts would wear spacesuits and would work without swim fins. Carpenter, who had volunteered in May 1964 for usn’s Project Sea Lab, said aquanauts could work in water until they became tired or hungry. (Denver Post, 10/9/66)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., gemini vi command pilot, received a tiny gold harmonica from the Italian National Union of Mouth Organists and Harmonica Musicians for being "the first mouth organist in outer space.” (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/26/66)
Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr. (Cdr., usnr), and Charles A. Bassett II (Maj., usaf), killed-Feb. 28 when their T-38 jet training plane crashed in St. Louis, were buried in Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors in two separate ceremonies. Fifteen astronauts attended, 12 of whom served as pallbearers. See and Bassett had been selected as prime crew for the Gemini IX mission scheduled for spring 1966. (Hoagland, Wash. Post, 3/5/66, Bl; AP, NYT, 3/5/66, 9)
usaf School of Aerospace Medicine had concluded 15-day test to evaluate effects of increased carbon dioxide on four airmen in spacecraft cabin simulator. One of a series of such experiments, the latest took the level of experience up to the 4% C02 mark, compared with normal ground level conditions of 0.033% C02. Aim was to assess problems astronauts might have to face with a partial failure of their life support system. (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 4)
Astronaut Scott Carpenter decided not to attend Second International Congress on Oceanography in Moscow after learning that the U.S. ocean research vessel U.S.S. Silas Bent had been denied permission to dock at Leningrad in connection with the conference. Carpenter, who had participated in the Sealab II experiment in living and working underwater, would have attended as an aquanaut and would have been the first astronaut to visit Moscow, nas had designated Silas Bent to respond to Soviet invitation for oceanographic ships to visit Soviet ports during Congress so delegates could visit them but Soviet Foreign Ministry had refused permission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/24/66)
Dr. Seibert Dudley of the Univ. of California’s Visibility Lab., San Diego, said test equipment on the ground and in the gemini v spacecraft had definitely demonstrated that Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had seen what they claimed they had seen below on earth during their Aug. 21-29, 1965, mission. On a one-man Project Mercury spaceflight May 15-16, 1963 (MA-9), Cooper had drawn skepticism for reporting he could see dust clouds, roads, and other small features. (AP, Houston Post, 1/6/66)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., passed their medical examinations for the Gemini XII mission, scheduled for launch from etr Nov. 9. (Wash. Post, 11/6/66, A17)
Gemini Astronauts Charles A. Bassett II and Elliot M. See, Jr., were killed when their T-38 aircraft overran St. Louis Municipal Airport in rain and fog and crashed into the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. building which housed Gemini 9 and 10 spacecraft. The jet, cleared for an instrument landing, was left of center in its approach to the runway when it turned toward the McDonnell complex 1,000 ft. from instrumented landing strip. It struck the roof of Building 101, bounced into an adjacent courtyard, and exploded. Several McDonnell employees in Building 101 were treated for minor injuries. See and Bassett, enroute to McDonnell for two weeks training in space simulator, were followed later by Gemini IX backup crew Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, who landed safely. NASA Hq. officials announced that the backup crew would fly the Gemini IX mission on schedule. (Wagner, Wash. Post, 3/1/66, Al, A4)
afsc had awarded Bell Aerospace Corp. a one-year study contract to develop Dual-purpose Maneuvering Unit (Dmu) that could be worn by astronaut or operated by remote radio and TV signals. Dmu would combine "best features” of Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)— which Astronaut Eugene Cernan was unable to test during Gemini ix-A flight—and Remote Maneuvering Unit (Rmu)—which had been tested in laboratory, (afsc Release 116.66)
nasa’s 31 veteran astronauts would lose over $6,000 annually from sale of their personal stories if 19 new astronauts joined them in contract with Time, Inc., and Field Enterprises Educational Corp., AP reported. Under terms of contract, Time, Inc., and Field paid $520,000 annually for equal division among "participating astronauts,” in return for exclusive rights to all unofficial personal stories and photos. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/1/66, N8)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan were greeted by their families on their arrival in Houston after four days of debriefing at ksc. (upi, NYT, 6/11/66, 62)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., began eight-nation good-will tour of Asia with four-day visit to Japan. (NYT, 2/23/66)
Astronauts Frank Borman and Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received rousing welcome on arrival at Seoul, South Korea. Many flag-waving schoolchildren had to be restrained by policemen during welcoming ceremonies at City Hall. (NYT, 2/27/66, 14; N.Y. J/Amer., 2/27/66, 28)
Gemini v spacecraft in which Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., orbited the earth Aug. 21-29, 1965, went on display at Buenos Aires (Argentina) Municipal Airport as part of a U.S.-sponsored exhibit on U.S. advances in space. (ITsia; Reuters, Wash. Post, 2/21/66, A6)	„	.	.
Oklahoma City welcomed home a favorite son, Gemini ix Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, and conferred honorary state citizenship on his crewmate Eugene A. Cernan. Both astronauts were inducted into the National Cowboy Hall of Fame, dedicated to the memory of Western frontiersmen. (AP, NYT, 7/9/66, 29)
Gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and Gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman were named joint winners of the 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for achieving the first rendezvous in space by two separately launched, maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. Award, established by late pioneer aviator and balloonist Col. Clifford B. Harmon (usaf) "for exceptional feats of pilotry,” would be conferred in fall 1966. (NYT, 8/7/66, 4; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/7/66, A18)
Astronaut James Lovell and nuclear submarine U.S.S. Benjamin Franklin’s crew exchanged mementos of a joint experiment conducted during Dec. 4-18 gemini vn mission. Benjamin Franklin, with two seconds to fire a Polaris missile so it could be seen by gemini vii Astronauts Lovell and Borman as they passed over Cape Kennedy, fired perfectly, enabling the astronauts to track the missile visually. In a ceremony aboard the submarine docked in Newport News, Va., Lovell was presented gas generator plate from the Polaris missile and crew received the NASA patch from Lovell’s gemini vii spacesuit. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/6/66)
NASA might not in future be able to order aircraft carriers and large ships for recovery of astronauts, Chicago Tribune sources reported, usn felt vessels could be put to better use to support or relieve forces in Vietnam, usaf had proposed to NASA use of new long-range helicopters. (Chic. Trib., 7/1/66)
Of 351 astronaut applicants, 192, including all 6 female candidates, failed to meet minimum requirements, an MSC spokesman reported. The successful 15 would be announced in May. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 3; AP, New Haven Register, 1/7/66)
Comparing earth to a "manned spaceship hurtling through the infinity of space,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address at San Fernando State College that exploration of space would bring home the fact that "earth is a mere speck in the universe.” He said it would seem increasingly absurd we had not better organized our living together on this planet: "Our experience in space can be a powerful stimulus to all of us, wherever we live, to move towards a world of law, a world without war. And may we find also in the space effort that 'moral equivalent of war’ for which philosophers have been searching over many centuries. Like war, it stretches our human capabilities to the utmost. It demands all that we possess of ingenuity, determination, persistence, and intelligence—and, on the part of our gallant astronauts, the highest degree of courage and resourcefulness in the face of danger. Space activities —even competition in space—can be a substitute for aggression, a bridge for mutual understanding and the identification of common interests with other nations, and a major tool of arms control and disarmament.” (Text)
15-lb. pigtailed monkey, connected to intricate battery of miniaturized instruments, would be launched into earth orbit in 1967 to provide U.S. scientists with 30-day study of his health, jpl announced. Monkey—an astronaut stand-in—would be part of the Biosatellite series projected by NASA. Particularly meaningful to NASA’s space biology program would be urinalysis tests, showing changes in calcium and other primate urine constituents, which should indicate how astronaut’s metabolism might vary during prolonged space flights. ARC was in charge of the program, (jpl Release)
usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) was "moving quietly but quickly toward its first test launch, now scheduled for Oct. 28 from Cape Kennedy,” Aviation Week reported. Operational Mol would consist of modified Gemini spacecraft connected to a "can-shaped” laboratory. usaf astronauts, while orbiting in space, would pass through door in spacecraft’s heatshield to reach laboratory. October test would show whether configuration would endanger astronauts in spacecraft during reentry. (Av. Wk., 7/18/66, 25)
Delays at major U.S. airports totaling 20 million minutes cost aircraft operators $63.6 million in 1965, faa reported in a staff study. One third of total delays was caused by air traffic controls, and the remainder by airport limitations such as weather conditions, ground congestion, and construction, (faa Release 66-68) Maneuvers were executed as planned, with docking of gemini x and gatv x occurring at 5:58 get. Only about 380 lbs. maneuvering fuel of 940 lbs. at liftoff were left, whereas a 680-lb. remainder had been expected. An out-of-plane error had necessitated a major correction, with excessive fuel consumption. Mated spacecraft, using gatv x’s primary propulsion system, attained 476-mi. (766-km.) record altitude for manned flight. Burn of gatv x’s secondary propulsion system at 22:38 get brought docked configuration into same orbit as gatv viii—launched March 16 for gemini viii mission—preparatory to later rendezvous. Standup Eva began at 23:27 get with Collins photographing stellar ultraviolet radiation through open hatch. Young orderea termination of Eva when both he and Collins experienced severe watering and irritation of eyes from an unidentified source. Separation of Gemini x-gatv x— which had remained docked 38 min. 42 sec.—occurred at 44:40 get. Series of maneuvers brought gemini x within 50 ft. of gatv viii. Umbilical Eva began at 48:08 get: Collins removed fairing from gatv viii and retrieved micrometeoroid detection experiment—completing first productive work ever accomplished on Eva mission. Collins lost Eva camera; photographic coverage was limited to pictures taken by Young from spacecraft. Eva was terminated after 28 min. to conserve maneuvering fuel; 50 lbs. had been used, as against 35 lbs. estimated consumption for planned 55 min. Third hatch opening of mission occurred when astronauts, cramped by unstowed equipment, jettisoned 12 items. Reentry July 21 after 70 hrs. 47 min. in space and 43 revolutions was normal. At 5:07 p.m. edt, gemini x splashed down in Atlantic Ocean 544 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than three miles off target and five miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Within minutes, usn pararescue team dropped from helicopters had attached flotation collar to spacecraft, and Young and Collins were transported by helicopter to recovery ship. gemini x had accomplished (1) two rendezvous, one involving longest docking yet achieved, the other a close approach to a passive satellite from which an object was retrieved; (2) two Eva exercises; (3) successful maneuvering by astronaut from one spacecraft to another and back; and (4) use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked spacecraft. (NASA Release 66-179; NASA Proj. Off.; Wilford, NYT, 7/19/66, 1; Hines, Wdfch. Eve. Star, 7/19/66, Al, A3; 7/20/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 7/20/66, 1; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 7/22/66, Al, A4; Av. Wk., 7/25/66, 26-30)	_
Gemini IX Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan passed their final major physical examinations at ksc. Mission review board confirmed May 17 launch date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/15/66, Al)
"Moonwalker”—device developed by Space General Corp. for astronauts to travel on the moon—had been adapted for crippled children. Built under fiew grant, 90-lb. machine, which walked on eight mechanical legs, could negotiate sand or mud, climb and descend stairs, step up a normal street curb, and climb grades of 15° or more. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/66, Al; Brevard Sentinel, 5/13/66)
President Johnson presented Harmon International Aviation Trophies for 1967 to Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (Capt., usn), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (l/c, usaf), and Alvin S. White, former naa test pilot. Lovell and Aldrin were cited for successful Gemini XII mission
NASA announced that primary mission objectives of Biosatellite II (launched Sept. 7) had been accomplished. Biological experiments had been conducted to investigate synergistic and antagonistic effects of weightlessness and controlled gamma radiation aboard attitude-controlled spacecraft. Spacecraft recovery—essential to success—had been completed as planned. Environmental control of capsule and experiment packages had kept organisms alive while radiation source was exposed for flight duration. Dr. Rudolph H. T. M^ttoni, principal investigator for bacteria experiment, said bacteria had increased 20 to 30% faster in weightless condition. He concluded “cellular turnover may be higher in man” during weightlessness and could be harmful to astronauts during long-duration space flights. He suggested that if further research proved growth of human cells to be faster in weightless state, future spacecraft might have to be equipped with some form of artificial gravity or astronauts might have to carry drugs to prevent too-rapid turnover of their body cells. Since the 45-hr experiment with bacteria equaled many years of human life, this would not be significant on flights of a few weeks or even a few months. The pepper plant experiment showed abnormal growth, indicating that plant leaves also depend on gravity. Other experiments did not show significant change and were still being analyzed, (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/15/67,46)
Illustrations of the predictive ability of the contemporary engineer were made by arc’s Simulation Sciences Div. chief, George A. Rathert, Jr., at Moffett Field Scholarship Night Banquet for Bay Area Joint Engineers Council: “. . . faa pilots were experiencing certain characteristics of the supersonic transport on simulators at the Ames Research Center 15 months before the FAA asked for bids on the design studies. You will recall Astronaut Gordon Cooper having to manually control the attitude of his space ship during a reentry retrofiring to successfully complete his mission. Engineering test pilots at Ames were studying problems of coping with manual control of a simulated spacecraft reentering with , partly failed control systems more than nine years ago.” (Text)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter would never be able to fly in space again because of an arm injury suffered in 1964 motorcycle accident, the Washington Evening Star reported. Surgery performed six months ago had failed to restore full mobility of the arm. (AP, W Star, 4/17/67, A6)
usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory Systems Program Office, Los Angeles, Calif., issued a $3.5-million initial increment to an $8.7-million fixed-price contract to Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for development, procurement, and support of astronaut pressure suit systems for the MOL program, usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization issued a $4-million increment to an $8.1-million definitive contract for engineering services in support of the Agena space vehicle program, (dod Release 912-67)
President Johnson appointed Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Special Consultant to the President for Physical Fitness, to replace Stan Musial who resigned in January. Lovell would assume the new position in addition to his regular duties as an astronaut. (PD, 6/12/67, 833—4*)
In its final 1967 session U.N. General Assembly unanimously endorsed new space rescue treaty, and urged signature by all countries. Primary provisions: (1) immediate notification when astronauts landed in other countries; (2) assistance to these astronauts, including rescue efforts on the high seas; (3) safe and prompt return of the astronauts; and (4)	notification and return of objects launched into outer space. Treaty would be open to all nations and would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. President Johnson, praising the agreement, said: “I hope that this agreement will help to ensure that nations will assist astronauts in the event of accidents or emergency. The agreement would carry forward the purpose of this administration to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/17/67, 1; Esta-brook, W Post, 12/20/67, A20; upi, NYT, 12/21/67, 29; SBD, 12/21/67,263; PD, 1/1/68,1763)
Selection of NASA’s sixth astronaut class [see Aug. 4] indicated that astronaut “glamour” grew with each new peril, Neal Stanford reported in Christian Science Monitor. “Scientists . . . compete more intensively for the few scientist-astronaut jobs open than do jet pilots in the military services for the pilot j obs available. “The glamour has not entirely gone out of space flying. What has happened is that its perils have become more apparent, its scientific opportunities more exciting, and its financial rewards less considerable. “There have been 6 selections of astronauts, 4 of flier astronauts, and 2 of science astronauts. In this sixth and latest selection 939 [sic] scientists applied for the 11 positions open. In the previous selection of pilot astronauts only 403 applied for 19 positions open. . . .” (Stanford, CSM, 8/15/67)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial on Dec. 8 death of Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., (usaf) : “[His death] deprives the Nation of another highly trained scientist who had been selected for future service in space. . . . “With the toll of astronauts now at nine victims, it is significant that not one has been lost in space itself. ... Our astronauts are not only men who have extensive educational qualifications but who have equally extensive experience as test pilots and similar extremely hazardous activities. . - “They may put their lives on the line willingly, but the Nation should strive to safeguard them as much in their non-space activities as ... in space.” (PInq, 12/11/67,10)
Field Enterprises Educational Corp. announced that it would not exercise its option to extend its rights for book and newspaper distribution of the personal stories of NASA astronauts and their families. Present four-year agreement, which paid the astronauts $320,000 annually for exclusive publishing rights and provided each astronaut with $50,000 life insurance policy, would expire Aug. 31. Field Enterprises president Bailey K. Howard said large number of astronauts now, compared with number four years ago, made continuation of the project impractical. (AP, NYT, 5/3/67,13; US News, 5/15/67)
Brian Todd O’Leary, one of NASA’s 12 new scientist-astronauts, was appointed assistant professor of Astronomy Dept., Univ. of Texas. Although flight training portion of astronaut’s program would continue for next two years, 30% of O’Leary’s time would be available for scientific activities. (AP, B Sun, 10/6/67)
nasa Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., tested space simulator at Martin Co.’s plant near Littleton, Colo. Unit, which provided 6° of freedom, was linked to computer that determined exertion forces on astronaut as he performed simple tasks in simulated weightless environment. {Denver Post, 1/19/67)
NASA had presented monetary awards totaling $4,200 to six inventors, all employed by industrial contractors, for advancements in space technology: Charles R. Peek and Lewis E. Boodley, RCA—$1,000 for new type of interconnector for satellite solar cells; G. Richard Blair, Hughes Aircraft Co.—$1,000 for passive heat protective coating used on Surveyor spacecraft; Kenneth A. Ruddock and Robert G. Rempel, Spectra-Physics, Inc.—$1,000 for magnetometer to measure earth’s magnetic field more precisely; and Paul A. Jensen, Hughes—$1,200 for low-noise antenna feed system used in all NASA Deep Space Network stations. (NASA Release 67-^2) During February: Space flights lasting one month or more should pose no new respiratory problems for astronauts, but additional research was necessary to ensure against respiratory problems that could arise from prolonged weightlessness and an artificial environment, nrc Space Science Board study concluded. Only serious effects of weightlessness on respiratory system anticipated were possibility that astronauts might inhale dust and other solid particles floating in the spacecraft and that muscles controlling the lungs might weaken because work was easier in weightless environment. Areas recommended for further study included: toleration limits for carbon dioxide in case spacecraft’s absorption system malfunctioned; problems of infection during long missions; possibility of intentionally filling astronauts’ lungs with a liquid to prevent collapse of blood vessels and tissues during acceleration greater than 15 g; and basic medical training and use of drugs for self-medication by crew during weightlessness. Committee also recommended efforts to improve methods to detect and extinguish spacecraft fires, and suggested that a two-gas system with nitrogen or helium be used until effective methods of fire control in 100% oxygen were developed. Report, to be released shortly by NAS, was the product of a June 26-July 9,1966, conference held at Woods Hole, Mass., at oart request. (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 2/67)
Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva reached provisional agreements on aiding and returning astronauts who landed in foreign countries and on payment of damages caused by space launches. Agreements would be submitted to full U.N. Committee for approval and then placed before U.N. General Assembly for final action, (dpi, P EB, 7/18/67; upi, W Post, 7/18/67, A3) Program Plans, OMSF Plans and Analysis Directorate, had been appointed Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Administration effective July 17; (2) R/Adm. Roderick 0. Middleton (usn), former Deputy Director of omsf Missions Operations Directorate, had been appointed Apollo Program Manager at ksc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18; (3) Stanley de Jongh Osborne, a general partner of Lazard Freres & Co. investment banking firm in New York, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Government-industry relations and on the impact of space technology on the national economy; and (4) Erskine E.	Harton, Jr., former Assistant Safety Director, had been appointed Acting Safety Director, replacing George D. McCauley who recently retired from Government service, (nasa Ann, 7/20/67; NASA Releases 67-189, 67-190)
nas had received 923 applications for 20-30 positions in NASA’s astronaut training program. Academy was expected to forward NASA a list of 60-75 recommended candidates in March for final selection. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/26/67)
Twenty-one U.S. astronauts began a week of training at usaf’s Tropical Survival School in Panama. Their first meeil was iguana thermidor and baked armadillo. (W News, 6/13/67; AP, C Trib, 6/14/67)
Dr. Heinz von Diringshofen, a German pioneer in flight and space medicine, died in Frankfurt, Germany, at age 67. Among the first to study the effects of weightlessness in vertical flight, Dr. Diringshofen recorded reactions of humans in weightless periods of up to eight seconds. He also developed systems currently used in the training of U.S. astronauts, including a centrifuge that produced 17 g’s pressure. (NYT, 5/9/67, 43)
Two-to-six percent weight loss in astronauts returning from space flights might reflect natural readjustment of body water content, not simple dehydration, Paul Webb of Webb Associates reported in Science. He based his theory on similar losses which had occurred during experiments in simulated weightlessness; blood normally pooled in the extremities returned to circulation, increasing central blood volume and causing excretion of water not replaced during space flights. Webb said it was not yet clear whether reduced water content during weightlessness has harmful effects. (Webb, Science, 2/3/67,558-9)
nas forwarded to NASA a list of 69 recommended candidates for 20-30 positions in nasa’s astronaut training program. A total of 923 applications had been evaluated. NASA was expected to make final selections before Aug. 15. (nas-nrc—nae News Report, 3/67, 3)
NASA published Earth Photographs from Gemini III, IV, and V, an atlas containing reproductions of 244 high-quality earth photos taken by Gemini astronauts. Pictures, which were taken with hand-held cameras from 100- to 215-mi altitudes as scientific, meteorological, and terrain experiments, showed major • natural features and some manmade ones in 50 countries around the world, (nasa SP-129; nasa Release 67—153)
U.S. astronauts would one day encounter “other living things” in outer space, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of ksc, told Rollins College audience. “This prospect cannot be dismissed as metaphysical speculation. ... It is much more a mathematical certainty than were the early theories expounded by scientists and philosophers whose observations and discoveries made possible many of our activities today.” (upi, NYT, 2/27/67,12)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, repeated his request that Congress reopen its investigation of NASA [see June 12]: “The Apollo hearings should be reconvened—not for the purpose of continuing further a technical discussion of possible technical causes for the Apollo fire—but to undertake a serious and far-ranging management review of the sort that would force NASA to take stock and develop sound management practices for the protection of the public’s investment in the space program. This is not to mention the safety of our astronauts. . . .” (CR, 7/17/67, H8750)
msc engineer Caldwell C. Johnson was granted patent for a cocoonlike escape device for orbiting astronauts. Device, which would be stored in an external compartment on the spacecraft, consisted of an insulated zippered nylon bag with a retrorocket. Astronaut would don his pressure suit with oxygen supply, seal himself in the bag, and fire retrorocket to thrust toward a landmark on earth. He would then inflate a bladder to shape the bag into a sphere for stability during reentry. Sphere would deflate during reentry, notifying astronaut when it was time to deploy parachute for safe landing. (U.S. Patent Off; msc Roundup, 7/7/67, 8; Jones, NYT, 7/15/67, 29)
usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was conducting research with 5-million-w arc heater to determine temperature and pressure limitations of ablative materials used to prevent military reentry vehicles from burning up on encountering earth’s atmosphere. Military reentry vehicles had to withstand conditions similar to high-speed reentry of interplanetary vehicles on return to earth, far more severe than those to be met by lunar astronauts. Data had been produced for civilian and military agencies, (afsc Release 117.68)
Dr. R. G. Mclver, head of aeromedical research at Holloman afb, N. Mex., said tests on chimpanzees had shown astronaut experiencing sudden decompression outside spacecraft might live at least three minutes in total vacuum, giving his companions time to get him inside pressurized cabin. Survival of astronauts in ruptured space cabin would depend on presence of one man wearing space suit and thus able to place other crewmen in suits after they lost consciousness. Earlier, scientists had predicted sudden death for astronauts experiencing space vacuum decompression. Revised estimates of life expectancy were based on simulated space capsule experiments with 150 chimpanzees. (AP, B Sun, 11/16/68, A4)
usaf denied decision had been made to cut back or cancel FB—111 production [see Nov. 15], Wall Street Journal said, but reports persisted that fewer than 253 would be purchased because of their high cost and indifferent performance. Aerospace Daily said its sources reported recommended cutback of more than 50% was “essentially accurate” and put figure at “about 100” to give usaf Unit Equipment force of 90 aircraft. (WSJ, 11/18/68,12; Aero Daily, 11/18/68) Air Transport Assn, of America reported that 15- to 19-mo use at three major airports had convinced airlines that runway surface grooving was “an effective aid in overcoming hydroplaning” during wet landings. Airline operation evaluation had “dispelled earlier fears that grooving might damage runways or aircraft.” (Text; NYT, 11/24/68, 84) Dr. Walton W. Jones, nasa Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference U.S. could keep astronauts in earth orbit a year within 10 yr if U.S. would allocate sufficient resources to project. arc experiments had shown rats subjected to gravitational pull 4.7 times above normal had increased life expectancy. He said after meeting that NASA planned experiments with rats at zero gravitation to determine if aging process was suspended while mem was free from gravitational pull. Dr. J. F. Kubis of Fordham Univ. emphasized importance of psychological factors in selecting space crews. On long flight, “lack of privacy, crowding, and continuous exposure to interaction will become sources of aggravating stress.” He recommended no more than one in crew with dominant personality. Soviet scientist Dr. N. N. Gurovsky said condition of two dogs after 22-day orbital flight (in Cosmos CX Feb. 22—March 16, 1966) had aroused forebodings on effect of year-long flights on astronauts. Loss of calcium in bones would make them prone to breaking. Both dogs had .developed liver and intestinal ailments including edemas. Human beings could expect same effects. Earlier reports had noted dogs suffered muscular reduction, dehydration, and confusion in adjusting to walking. Cal Tech Prof. Fritz Zwicky said some apparently unexplained deaths on earth each year could he due to blows from meteors or heavy nucleons in cosmic rays. (Hamilton, NYT, 11/20/68, 31; 11/21/68, 18; AP, B Sun, 11/22/68,1)
President Johnson proclaimed Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts, and the Return of Space Objects in effect with deposit in three capitals of instruments of ratification by U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. Ireland and Nepal had previously ratified treaty, which had been signed by 75 countries. Proclamation noted new agreement was essentially humanitarian. Its provisions “carry forward the goals qf international cooperation to which the United States has been dedicated since enactment of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and to which the United States renewed its commitment in the outer space treaty of 1967.” {PD, 12/9/68, 1658; AP, NYT, 12/5/68, 13; nasa Off of General Council)
Orbital workshop engineering mockup was readied for five-day crew station review Feb. 12—16 at msfc. It was second of three design reviews. First had been conducted Dec. 11—14, 1967. In mockup, recently returned to msfc from McDonnell Douglas Corp., astronauts would carry out tasks on ground that would later be done in orbit under zero gravity conditions, including experiment installation and operation, msfc announced that third and final critical review in July would precede production of flight model of orbital workshop. (msfc Release 68-18)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was announced winner of Kitty Hawk Memorial Trophy for distinguished achievement in aeronautics. Trophy would be presented at annual Wright Brothers memorial banquet in Beverly Hills, Calif., Dec. 6. (upi, W Star, 11/19/68, A2)
The space age, no doubt, will produce many future heroes and many other historic accomplishments, New York Times said, “but even now it is plain that yesterday Astronauts Borman, Lovell and Anders assured themselves of immortality as the first men literally to break the shackles of earth and travel successfully to another destination in this suddenly shrunken solar system.” (NYT, 12/25/68, 30)
usn announced selection of 54 men to serve as aquanauts in 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living, scheduled to begin in October. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), team leader for Sealab II (Aug. 28—Sept. 26, 1965), would serve as Senior Aquanaut. Ocean floor experiments would be conducted at 620-ft depth off San Clemente Island by 40 aquanauts in 5 teams serving 12 days each. Remaining 14 men would serve as alternates and backup surface support divers, (dod Release 579—68; Aero Daily, 6/26/68)
In 12-yr NASA-sponsored experiments with roosters spinning at 130 rpm up to 15 mo on double-deck centrifuge, Univ. of California’s Davis Chronic Acceleration Laboratory gravity experts had noted possible adverse effects of long-term weightlessness on astronauts. Without steps to counter effects, “man in space for long periods will find his body decalcified,” said Dr. Arthur H. Smith. “He will not be able to stand up without fracturing bones. All his muscles will shrivel up including those around his blood vessels. He will be overloaded with fat which he may not be able to use.” Among methods being developed to offset disturbances to human body in space were drugs which stabilized proper balance of red cells and steroids which helped maintain calcium metabolism. Roosters were used in tests since their upright posture, heart-to-head distance, and circulatory systems were similar to man’s. (Hillin-ger,W Post, 9/19/68, Gil)
nasa issued Management Instruction establishing Committee on ExtraVehicular Activities (eva), activities performed in space by astronaut outside space vehicle. Seven-member committee, serving for two-year period, would provide Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight with recommendations on overall NASA eva planning and development by: identifying eva capabilities which must be defined and developed to support manned space flight activities; identifying ground-based, orbital, and lunar surface experiments to establish required eva capabilities; providing recommendations on short- and long-term EVA program plans; reviewing proposed eva flight experiments and making recommendations; and maintaining awareness of EVA-related activities of organizations other than NASA, (nmi 1152.36)
usaf experiments in human reactions to extreme heat had indicated astronauts could survive reentry through earth’s atmosphere if their cabin cooling system failed. In tests at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, airmen were being subjected to 300°F and 400°F heat in four-foot-high oven three times daily. Some could stand up to 15 min at 300°F; limit at 400°F had been two or three minutes. (AP, LA Times, 8/6/68)
Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved space rescue treaty providing for rescue and recovery of astronauts down in foreign lands. U.S.S.R. had given final approval along with 73 other nations. (AP, NYT, 9/25/68, 17; WSJ, 9/25/68, 1; upi, W Post, 9/25/68, A6)
Senate unanimously approved space rescue treaty, providing for rescue and return of astronauts downed on foreign soil. It had been signed by '75 nations. (CR, 10/8/68, S12215-6; AP, B Sun, 10/9/68, A10)
Slide-wire escape way, 1,200-ft-long, from 215-ft level to ground at ksc Complex 34 was declared man-rated following tests by five dummies and five men. Slide wire was designed as last means of escape from ton of Saturn IB gantry for astronauts and close-out crews if emergency should shut off other routes. (Spaceport News, 9/12/68,1)
U.S.S.R. announced through Tass successful completion of experiment in which three researchers spent from Nov. 5, 1967, to Nov. 5, 1968, in isolated chamber consisting of living compartment and greenhouse linked to outside world by videotelephone. Purpose of experiment was to test man’s ability to live in isolation for year, using water and oxygen regenerated from waste products and dehydrated food supplemented by greenhouse-grown vegetables; study effects of various factors on human organism and establish optimum conditions for long isolation; and evaluate effectiveness of self-contained life-support systems based on regeneration of waste products. Daily requirements of astronauts on long voyage included 700 g of food, 2.4 kg of drinking water plus 5.5 kg of water for other purposes, and 800 g of oxygen, amounting to 11 tons of supplies for one-year space voyage. Report said there were no significant changes in body weight and temperature of experimenters except one lost eight to nine pounds before his weight stabilized in five to six months. Electrocardiogram remained unchanged and no dehydration was observed. Pulse and respiration rates had fluctuated before assuming lower level than at start of experiment. Researchers Gherman A. Manovtsev, Andrey N. Bozhko, and Boris N. Ulybshev were reported in good health at conclusion of experiment. (Shabad, NYT, 12/25/68, 38)
Dr. Charles A. Berry. Director of Medical Research and Operations, msc, was elected 1969 President of Aerospace Medical Assn, at 39th Annual Meeting in Bal Harbour, Fla. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin was named honorary member, (msc Roundup, 5/24/68,1)
NASA investigation board reported that primary cause of Oct. 5, 1967, crash of T—38 jet trainer near Tallahassee, Fla., was “a jam in the lateral control system (ailerons) from unknown source.” Accident had claimed life of pilot, Astronaut Clifton C. Williams. Board recommended improvement in T—38 inspection procedures, (nasa Release 68-102; upi, W Post, 6/7/68, A2; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 6/7/68, A3)
msfc awarded $49,985 nine-month study contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. to assess possible radiation damage to film used on atm to record solar activity and to consider radiation hazards to astronauts in Saturn I orbital workshop, (msfc Release 68—43)
Lunar module was “first manned spacecraft ever built that’s not tough enough to survive a return to earth,” said Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post. Vehicle from which two astronauts would descend to moon’s surface in summer 1969 was 23 ft high, weighed 8,000 lbs, and carried 12 tons of propellant. It contained 25 mi of electrical wiring and more than a million parts, most of which had been designed “from scratch,” held together by 216,000 “pins.” Pin bent more than five degrees out of shape would have to be replaced. NASA had contracted for 15 LMs at total cost of $1.9 billion from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., which had taken six years to get it from drawing board to launch pad. (W Post, 2/9/69, B2)
Investigating board headed by Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., reported primary cause of Dec. 8, 1968, crash of nasa’s lunar landing training vehicle (lltv) No. 1 was “that the vehicle entered a region of flight where aerodynamic moments overpowered the control system . . . such that attitude control was lost. The source of the control problem was not identified ... in time to add (use) a second control system which could have restored control capability.” Crash did not involve any malfunctions of systems. Adverse region of flight was entered because the aerodynamic limitations of lltv were not completely understood, wind conditions were insufficiently accounted for, and displays in lltv and support van Were inadequate for conditions. Board made 11 recommendations—including wind-tunnel tests to assess lltv aerodynamic characteristics—for improved safety, (nasa Release 69—87; AP, H Chron, 6/6/69)	.
At hearing on suit of atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair to ban broadcast of prayers by U.S. astronauts in space [see Aug. 16], U.S. Attorney Seagel Wheatley and NASA counsel asked dismissal of suit on grounds Mrs. O’Hair and her Society of Separationists lacked necessary legal standing to sue Government. Justice Dept. Attorney James Barnes said, “nasa has no plans to instruct astronauts what to say. The statements that the astronauts made are their own. . . . NASA has no intention of circumscribing . . . the astronauts’ rights in the free exercise of religion.” (upi, W Post, 11/25/69, A8)
Dept, of Interior announced grant of $100,225 for research into health, safety, and water pollution in coal mining operations. Island Creek Coal Co. would determine if miners equipped with self-contained breathing apparatus similar to astronauts’ could work efficiently in mines filled with nitrogen or other inert gas. (doi Release 17784-69)
msfc announced appointment of Saverio F. Morea, former manager of F—1 and J—2 engine projects, as manager of new lunar roving vehicle project. Small manned vehicle would weigh 400 lbs and would be carried on board lm in 1971 to provide lunar surface transportation for two astronauts, hand tools, lunar samples, and other equipment. (msfc Release 69-150) Explorer XLI was seventh in series of 10 IMP spacecraft planned by NASA. Two of six previously orbited satellites—Explorer XXXIII (imp—d), launched July 1, 1966, and Explorer XXXV (imp—e), launched July 19, 1967—were still providing scientific data, imp program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-89)
Associated Press said Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) would retire from usn July 1 to enter private business in oceanography field. He was second U.S. astronaut to orbit earth, during May 24, 1962, Mercury mission in Aurora 7. (W Post, 5/10/69, A3)
Former astronaut and aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter announced he would become President and Chief Executive of Sea Sciences Corp., private enterprise formed to develop underwater projects. Prince Bernhard of The Netherlands would be board chairman, (upi, W Star, 10/30/69, A16)
nasa announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. for $4-million, threeyear contract to design and develop life support and environmental control systems to sustain astronauts for long-duration earth orbital space flights. (WSJ, 6/5/69)
Senate Committee on Banking and Currency favorably reported S.J.R. 140 with amendments, providing for striking of medals honoring U.S. astronauts who had flown in outer space. (CR, 7/28/69, D681)
President Nixon approved H.J.R. 775, to authorize President to award Congressional Space Medals of Honor to astronauts [see Sept. 15]. (CR, 10/6/69, 1362)
Time-Life, Inc., would pay minimum of $400,000 for exclusive book rights of lunar landing story to the combine established by NASA astronauts in 1959, Don Kirkman said in Washington Daily News. Money would be split equally into 60 shares for 52 active astronauts and widows of 8 deceased. (W News, 7/2/69, 7)
NASA announced resignation of Astronaut F. Curtis Michel, effective Aug. 18. Dr. Michel, who had been on one-year leave of absence from NASA to do scientific research at Rice Univ. in Houston, said that—although he was reluctant to leave NASA and prospect of flight in space—he wanted to devote full time to research at Rice. Resignation reduced number of NASA astronauts to 48. (msc Release 69—55)
Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov told press conference at MSC they had declined invitation to visit Cape Kennedy because they could not reciprocate and invite U.S. astronauts to Soviet launch facilities. (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Senate passed H.J.R. 775, “to authorize the President to award, in the name of Congress, Congressional Space Medals of Honor to those astronauts whose particular efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind have been exceptionally meritorious.” (CR, 9/16/69, S10630)
At Leningrad news conference during U.S.S.R. tour, Astronaut Frank Borman said he hoped U.S. and Soviet spacemen would fly together in joint mission by mid-1970s. (Reuters, W Post, 7/4/69, A3)
Astronaut Anthony W. England suffered symptoms of bends while testing moon-walking equipment in vacuum chamber at MSC. NASA spokesman said cause of symptoms, which disappeared as soon as chamber was returned to full atmospheric pressure, was not known. England was placed under 24-hr observation, (upi, W Post, 10/9/69, A28)
U.S.S.R. had ordered 100 space pens developed for U.S. astronauts and 1,000 special pressurized ink cartridges which enabled pen to write in weightlessness according to pen’s inventor, Paul C. Fisher. When he presented models of pen to Soviet Cosmonaut Alexey Leonov at German trade fair in 1968, Leonov said Soviet cosmonauts were writing with grease pencils during space flights and incurring difficulty with their flaking, (upi, W Post, 2/13/69, D24)
Austin, Tex., District Judge Jack Roberts dismissed suit by atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair and Society of Separationists, Inc., to stop astronauts from saying prayers in space [see Nov. 25]. He ruled prayers were not NASA policy but individual decision by astronauts. If nasa had forbidden astronauts to pray in space it would have been unconstitutional abridgment of their rights. Mrs. O’Hair planned to appeal decision. (NYT, 12/3/69, 44)
House passed H.J.R. 775, to authorize President “to award appropriate medals honoring those astronauts whose particular efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind have been exceptionally meritorious.” (CR, 9/15/69, H7870—2)
Look published interview in which former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter announced that infarcts in lower thigh bones, indicating calcification, would terminate his career as active deep-sea diver. He would remain senior aquanaut on Sealab III project as deputy on-scene commander of Sealab III command ship Elk River. (Look, 1/21/69, 68-74)
Firemen in Evendale, Ohio, had worked two years to perfect new firefighting uniform of aluminum-beta glass, material used in astronauts space suits, UPI said. (W News, 4/20/70, 4)
msc Roundup described Skylab food system being developed “to compensate partially for astronauts’ long absence from the usual fare of Earthlings and the warmth and delight of home-cooked meals...Skylab food system would maintain caloric level between 2000 and 2800 calories per day and provide at least minimum dietary allowances recommended by nas. Meals would be selected from a variety of foods and cooked by each crewman on special food tray. Four kinds of food would be prepared: dehydrated, including scrambled eggs, beverages, and desserts; intermediate moisture, including peanuts and coohies; wetpack, including turkey with gravy and meatballs with sauce; and frozen, including filet mignon and lobster Newburg. (msc Roundup, 11/6/70, 1)
Heart-rate tachometer invented by msfc engineers James R. Currie and Ralph R. Kissel to monitor astronauts’ heart beat in space might have medical application on earth, msfc said. Device, which could measure heart rates between 40 and 200 beats per minute and furnish almost instantaneous rate after measuring only two heart beats, might be used to monitor heart rates of cardiac patients, (msfc Release 70-226)
Nine astronauts, headed by Richard H. Truly, began walk-through of Skylab Workshop tasks in week-long Saturn Workshop crew-station review at msfc. (MSFC Release 70-189)
Only medical side effect to astronauts found thus far from long periods spent in space was “some cardiovascular deterioration,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, told Los Angeles press conference. This was “normal response of the body to a less demanding environment.” But medical
faa announced publication of new taxiway system design standards to increase airport capacity by speeding ground movements of large aircraft, including Boeing 747, McDonnell Douglas DC-10, and Lockheed L-1011. (faa Release 70-100) November 16-20; eva critical design review was held at Skylab mock-up area and Neutral Buoyancy Simulator (NBS)at msfc. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart headed 10-astronaut team performing under normal earth gravity in Saturn Workshop mockup and nbs. (msfc Release 70-235)
Researchers at Ohio State Univ. headed by physiologist Dr. Harold S. Weiss had received grants totaling $452 975 to study artificial atmospheres inside space vehicles, upi reported. They were trying to eliminate undesirable side effects on astronauts from breathing pure oxygen. (NYT, 4/16/70, 30)
Atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair carried her suit to ban broadcast and telecast of prayers by astronauts in space to U.S. Supreme Court. She appealed Dec. 2, 1969, decision of U.S. District Court that prayers were individual decisions of astronauts. (AP, NYT, 2/ 17/70, C3)	.
Motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch perfected by space engineers was delivered to Texas Medical Center in Houston by msfc for evaluation. Second wheelchair would be delivered to Ron-cho Los Amigos Hospital in Downey, Calif., in November. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movement with his eyes and move easily without assistance. Switch had been developed to help astronauts in training operate essential equipment under extreme flight conditions. Manufacturer, Hayes International Corp., was extending application of switch as control device for handicapped, (msfc Release 70-218)
msc announced selection of Singer-General Precision, Inc., Link Div. to receive $4-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract to design, develop, install, and support Skylab simulator for astronaut and ground crew training at msc. (msc Release 70-101)
Responding to question on astronaut pay, Washington Daily News columnist Hy Gardner quoted NASA as saying astronauts received no supplemental allowance for flying space missions. During last weeks before mission launch, they were on temporary duty assignment at KSC where they resided at Government expense. Status continued until they returned home to Houston after mission. During temporary duty period, military astronauts received allotment of $2 per day and civilian astronauts, $3.20 per day. (W News, 3/26/70, 40)
msc had accepted delivery of three of eight new supersonic Northrop T-38 trainers for astronauts, purchased at $800 000 each, Washington Post reported. Two-engine aircraft would replace 10 Lockheed subsonic, single-engine T-33s in NASA service for past 10 yrs. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/29/70)
Visiting Soviet SoyuzlX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov took turns with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., flying Boeing 747. They were accompanied by Boeing test pilot during flight from Boeing facility near Seattle, Wash. (AP, B Sun, 10/28/70)
Newspaper editorials marked lunar landing anniversary: New York Times: “. . .the Eagle’s landing was one of mankind’s finest hours. The scientific dividends from the new era of lunar exploration have already been very rich, and they will be even more abundant in the future when numerous astronauts from many nations will work on the lunar surface. Men now inhabit the earth-moon system, not earth alone, and much in tomorrow’s history will be shaped by the developments that will follow the Eagle’s triumph.” {NYT, 7/20/70,26) Washington Post: “The basic issue involved in NASA’s appropriations this year, as it will be in the next year and for many years to come, is whether this country should give up something it has done and which is going well, something that has brought it great international prestige and internal pride, and something that we believe may well hold the key to man’s future.” (WPost, 7/20/70)
Walker G. Bennett, newly appointed President of Augustana Hospital in Chicago, said at Chicago dinner that he hoped to reduce patient costs by 5% to 10% by equipment and techniques for space industry. Bennett was formally introduced by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, who later said sensors developed to monitor astronauts were being used to monitor patients at Augustana and other hospitals. (C Trib, 12/6/70)
MSC announced award of $3 000000 NASA contract to Garrett Corp. AiResearch Manufacturing Co. Div. for portable astronaut life support assembly (alsa) to support extravehicular and intravehicular activity in Skylab program. (MSCRelease 70-43)
Dynalectron Corp. announced it had been awarded $3 805 000 NASA contract for maintaining and servicing lunar landing training vehicles and aircraft used by astronauts and management at msc. Contract was one-year renewal of agreement under which Dynalectron had carried out management, maintenance, engineering, technical, and logistic functions in support of aircraft at MSC. (Dynalectron Release)
nas released Infectious Disease in Manned Spaceflight: Probabilities and Countermeasures. Report of nas-nrc Space Science Board recommended biological precautions taken after lunar flights be taken before flights as well. Preflight quarantine period should be instituted to permit acute disease to express itself, prevent contact and infection of astronauts by general population, and permit crosscontact of flora and exchange of microorganisms among spacecraft crew. During last two weeks before launch, astronauts’ contacts should be limited to essential technical crew held under same isolation regulations.	. Report called for extensive and periodic screening of astronauts by immunological tests and “microbiological surveillance” of astronauts’ families and close associates before and after missions. Astronauts with even minor respiratory infections should be barred from mission because they might “result in greatly accelerated clinical responses under space-cabin conditions if transmitted to other astronauts.” (Text)
Series of reviews to select flight design of Saturn Workshop, part of Skylab program, was announced by msfc. Government engineers, astronauts, and industry representatives would determine any changes necessary before final approval of Workshop scheduled for 1972 launch into earth orbit. In Sept. 9-10 review at msfc, astronauts would study Workshop procedures in mockup. Sept. 14-18 critical design review at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Huntington Beach, Calif., facility would be attended by more than 200. At Workshop crew station review Sept. 21-24 at msfc, astronaut crewmen would “walk through” Skylab tests. Results of reviews would be considered during preliminary review at Huntington Beach Sept. 28-29 and at Workshop Critical Review Board meeting at Huntington Beach Oct. 2. (msfc Release 70-181)
Hospital in Sydney, Australia, was using blankets coated with aluminum foil and lined with polyester film to keep infants warm, Chicago Tribune said. Both substances, used in astronauts’ spacesuits, had high-heat-retention properties. (CTrib, 3/16/70)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., received Honorary Knight of St. Patrick Award from College of Engineering, Univ. of Missouri at Columbia, Mo. (NASA Activities, 4/15/71, 61)
More than 15 astronauts were taste-testing three meals daily for five days in msc experiment to evaluate proposed food items for 28- and 56-day Skylab missions in 1973, msc announced. Tests would determine astronauts’ preferences and each astronaut’s energy requirements. They were coordinated by Technology, Inc., and conducted in msc Life Systems Laboratory. (Msc Release 71—74)
Miniature analytical clinical laboratory to monitor astronauts’ health on spacecraft was being developed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, aec announced. “Gravity-Zero” system would permit astronauts to perform quickly and automatically 16 parallel chemical tests on samples of plasma or serum, based on colorimetric determinations. Test results would be automatically radioed to ground control, which would recommend action to astronauts, (aec Release 0—51)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was named Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC. Veteran of four space flights totaling nearly 30 days in space, Lovell would assist in overall management of Science and Applications Directorate, (nasa Special Release; msc Release 71-34)
NASA board investigating Jan. 23 helicopter crash in Indian River near ksc—in which pilot, Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, escaped injury— had named misjudgment in estimating altitude as primary cause, nasa announced. Mitigating factors were lack of familiar objects on Indian River surface to help pilot judge altitude, possible visual focusing on false water surface because of water’s smoothness, change in sun reflection on water caused by change in course, and possibility that Ceman’s experience with high-speed aircraft might have contributed to altitude misjudgment in slower craft. Board said Cer-nan’s survival training as astronaut and naval aviator was major factor in his escape from submerged wreckage and burning fuel. (nasa Release 71-206)
Washington Post editorial commented on NASA’s public information policy: “There is something strange about the decision ... to bring in a New York lawyer, Paul Sawyer, as a consultant on its public affairs policies. NASA has had, for a decade now, what seems to us and to most journalists to be the most effective and most honest public information program in government. It is hard to see why public monies should be spent to study it, particularly when the man chosen to make the study has represented the astronauts in recent months in negotiating private contracts for the stories of their activities.” (W Post, 3/27/71, A18)
U.S. Dept, of Justice asked Supreme Court to deny atheist Mrs. Madalyn Murray O’Hair’s request that U.S. astronauts be prohibited from undertaking religious activities during lunar missions. Solicitor Gen. Erwin Griswold said astronauts carried only personal religious items which improved their morale and contributed “to the success of the flight.” (upi, H Post, 2/17/71)
Dangers inherent in separation of science and government were discussed in New York Times article by Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Prizewinning Hungarian biochemist at Marine Biological Laboratories in Woods Hole, Mass. “Among our 450 representatives in Washington there is not a single scientist, so they do not know that problems are like equations which cannot be solved by trickery, blows or bombs, not even atomic bombs.” With different assumptions different selfconsistent systems could be constructed; each seemingly logical. “Ptolemy placed the earth at the center of the universe, Copernius the sun. Each system is perfectly logical and self-contained. Copernicus himself never dared to give preference to his own. The only way to decide between the two is to see where they lead. An astronaut basing his calculation on Ptolemy would end in the nowhere. Our present political system leads to poverty, inflation, unemployment, crime, drugs, war and the neglect of our priorities toward a final catastrophe. The solution is not separating science from politics . . . but making it penetrate into politics.” (NYT, 10/23/71, 33)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 11487 for himself and cosponsors. Bill would authorize sale of up to seven acres of unimproved land adjacent to ksc Visitor Information Center to Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc. Organization was nonprofit Florida corporation interested in constructing and operating nonsectarian chapel on property, No federal funds were involved in proposed transaction. (Text; H Rpt92-600)
Former astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had also been aquanaut in USN’s Sealab Project, testified before Senate Committee on Commerce’s Subcommittee on Oceans and Atmosphere. Carpenter, president of Sea Sciences Corp., said man must explore ocean floor if he is to understand it, just as he had to explore lunar surface to understand it. Subcommittee was examining ocean pollution. (CR, 10/18/71, D1039; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/19/71, Al)
New York attorney Paul Sawyer, who had joined nasa to evaluate agency’s public relations efforts on March 22, had taken 30-day leave from law firm in which he represented astronauts in negotiating exclusive rights to their stories for magazines, Washington Post reported. Sawyer had said he would not be representing astronauts during NASA assignment. (W Post, 3/26/71, A3)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on “ambiguous” announcement of progress in NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings to develop compatible space docking system [see Dec. 3]: “The first interpretation was that agreement soon would be reached on a joint mission involving astronauts of the two countries in an orbital linkup. In hasty clarification, NASA explained that the mooted accord covered only the technical matters which could make such a mission possible. . . . Either way, the conclusion is obvious: The two space powers are moving at last, and seriously, toward the sort of shared space planning that logic and economics have long indicated but which competition and secretiveness have prevented.” (KC Times, 12/8/71)
Sleep analyzer developed for nasa by Dr. James D. Frost of Baylor Univ. and built by sci Electronics, Inc., Div. of sci Systems, Inc., as Skylab experiment had been made available as research device to U.S. medical institutions, NASA announced. Device would record quality of sleep of Skylab astronaut during 28-day stay in space by combining and evaluating inputs of electro-encephalogram and electro-occulogram. Medical application of device could be to treat insomniacs and other patients experiencing “sleep neuroses.” faa doctors were considering study of sleeping patterns of air controllers and pilots after stressful duty. (NASA Special Release)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, named to five-man board chaired by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., to investigate Jan. 23 crash of NASA helicopter piloted by Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan. (msc Release 71-03)
Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York Univ. Medical Center had accepted for evaluation and testing motorized wheelchair controlled by sight-switch, NASA announced. Switch, worn on head, enabled user to open and close circuit controlling chair’s wheel movements with his eyes. It had been developed under NASA direction to help astronauts in training to operate equipment under extreme flight conditions. Institute’s director, Dr. Howard A. Rusk, had estimated that more than 100 000 quadriplegics—persons with no use of arms or legs—could achieve mobility if chair could be made available, (nasa Release 71-122; A&A 1970)
House passed and sent to Senate H.R. 11487, bill to permit sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. {CR, 11/15/71, H10998, D1171)
Skylab astronauts would begin extravehicular training in pressurized suits in msfc Neutral Buoyancy Space Simulator later in year. Mockups of Skylab space laboratory modules had been submerged in water tank 12 m (40 ft) deep and 23 m (75 ft) wide, which simulated weightlessness of space environment, (nasa Release 71—205)
aec announced it was developing plutonium-fueled water recovery and waste management system for crew on extended space flights. Device converted liquid wastes into sterile drinking water by high-temperature processing and disposed of nonmetallic cabin wastes by incineration. System would meet needs of four astronauts for up to 180 days, (aec Release 0-47)
Ashes of Soyuz 11 Cosmonauts Georgy T. Dobrovolsky, Vladislav N.	Volkov, and Viktor I. Patsayev, killed during reentry from June 6— 30 mission, were buried in Kremlin Wall in Moscow’s Red Square. Military funeral, climaxing national day of mourning, was watched by millions of TV viewers and attended by leading Soviet and foreign officials and thousands of other onlookers. Condolences were sent by world leaders. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford represented President Nixon at funeral. Eulogy at funeral was presented by Andrey P. Kirilenko, head of funeral commission: “On a small island of the motherland traveling at a fantastic speed across the expanses of the universe they were filled with courage and the conviction that the tasks of the party and people would be fulfilled; and they fulfilled these tasks, successfully completing a complex and varied program of scientific research and technical experiments. The results of their observations are invaluable for science, for the future of space technology, for mankind. For 24 days we saw the valorous cosmonauts on the television screens and listened to their voices. With unbated attention we followed their work. Millions of people, as it were, became intimately linked with the heroes of the cosmos. We all impatiently awaited the cosmonauts’ safe return to home territory. Their lives tragically came to an end when the long cosmic journey was close to completion.” Letter from 19 surviving cosmonauts printed in Pravda said: “Today we are paying the last tribute to our talented and courageous comrades. There is not only grief in our hearts, but also pride for what they have done for the homeland in outer space. We know that our road is a difficult and thorny one, but we never doubted the correctness of our choice and were always ready for any difficult flight. We express firm confidence that what happened cannot stop the further development and perfection of space engineering and man’s striving for space, striving for knowledge of the mysteries of the universe.” (fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI; Kingston, Canada, Whig-Standard, 7/2/71,1; AP, W Star, 7/1/71, A2)
NASA test pilots Stuart M. Present, age 41, and Mark C. Heath, age 37, were killed when their T-38 aircraft crashed on landing at Matagorda Island off coast of Texas. Radar contact was lost during third instrument approach to landing strip while fog bank was moving in. Pilots were checking out T—38 for use by astronauts to maintain flight proficiency. (msc Release 72-20)
Washington Evening Star article cited results of “intolerable pressure” on astronauts’ domestic life. Of 73 original astronauts, 2 had remained bachelors and 6 had received divorces. Astronauts were away from families on average three out of four weeks. As mission time approached they were away continuously. Danger in training and “almost constant cross-country flying” added to pressures; 8 married astronauts had died in accidents. (Recer, W Star, 4/18/72, Cl)
Large storage battery at Manned Spacecraft Center exploded, killing one man and seriously injuring another. Battery was near underwater tank where astronauts trained in simulated weightlessness. Training Supervisor Kirby C. Dupree, who was killed, and James E. Scott—both employed by Brown & Root-Northrop—apparently had been performing routine maintenance on the 240-cu-m (64 000-gal) tank. No astronauts were in the huilding. (W Post, 3/1/72, A4; Reuters, NYT, 3/1/72, 24)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced it was negotiating parallel contracts for space-walk studies with ltv Aerospace Corp. and Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. Contracts were to investigate emergency, contingency, and normal extravehicular and intravehicular activities by astronauts and protective equipment required. Firm-fixed-fee con' tracts would amount to $126 000 for ltv and $98 511 for Hamilton Standard, (msc Release 73-78)
French scientist Michel Siffre emerged from cave beneath Edwards Plateau near Del Rio, Tex., after six-month experiment to determine whether human time cycle was product of planetary system or of man’s physiology. Results of experiment sponsored by NASA, French Speleological Institute, and French Defense Ministry would be used to serve astronauts on long-duration missions, jet pilots crossing time zones, and nuclear submarine crews on long cruises. Siffre told news conference that he had achieved 48-hr-day cycle twice, though average daily cycle underground had been 25 hrs. (Anderson, W Post, 9/5/72, A3)
Germ-control and dust-purging techniques developed for spacecraft sterilization were being used in St. Luke’s Hospital in Denver, Colo. Below, a surgery team performed a hip-joint replacement in a new clean-room facility that could be folded for storage when not in use. Air was forced in a gentle breeze from the rear of the room to the open front. Team members “'upwind” of the patient wore astronaut helmets and garments impermeable by bacteria, while air around the downwind team members was carried away from the patient. Application of the technique was developed for NASA by the Martin Marietta Corporation’s Denver Division. System ordered materials classified Top Secret, Secret, or Confidential only if their unauthorized disclosure “could reasonably be expected” to cause exceptionally grave damage, serious damage, or damage to national security. NASA, Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Defense, and United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency were among Government departments whose heads and their senior deputies were empowered by order to classify material or information as Top Secret. (PD, 3/13/72, 542-50)
Achievements of U.S.-U.S.S.R. summit meetings in Moscow to date were summarized in New York Times article by Max Frankel. U.S. and Soviet officials had “duly signed the agreements that had been specially packaged for the occasion. Some, on cooperative ventures in health research, environmental control, scientific cooperation and a link-up of astronauts in space, had been merely rewritten or upgraded from earlier agreements, to add to the cumulative sense of achievement. One of the accords, to avoid naval harassment and incidents at sea, had been negotiated under the deadline of the summit.” Another, on trade, had become “too complicated to resolve” and was “earmarked for energetic followup this summer.” Agreement to limit construction of defensive and offensive nuclear weapons “was finally finished in a whirlwind round of all-night sessions.” Main premises behind summit meeting were “that the two superpowers are now truly strategic equals, that they both have enough invulnerable weapons to deter nuclear attack, that they need to stop adding more weapons before they can reduce the number of weapons, that they both can use the money they might eventually have for better purposes, that they must avert even indirect conflicts that might draw them into war, and that they must collaborate more broadly in other fields to avoid the intrusions of inevitable conflicts of interest and conflicts among smaller nations.” (NYT, 5/28/72, 4:1)
Issuance of requests for proposals for new astronaut space suit was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Companies were asked to develop prototype space suit that would weigh less than 18 kg (40 lbs), be fully mobile with high degree of hand dexterity while pressurized at 55 200 newtons per sq m (8 psi), give trouble-free service in earth orbit for up to one year with 50, six-hour extravehicular activity (eva) periods, and be repairable in space, (msc Release 72-152)
The Skylab Saturn IB/Apollo rescue vehicle, readied for rescue of Skylab 4 astronauts (launched Nov. 16), was rolled out from Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B. By Dec. 19 the vehicle would complete flight readiness tests, the two-day final overall test of spacecraft systems and ground support equipment, and a simulated launch. On Dec. 21 the rescue vehicle would he within nine days of launch readiness and would hold at that point Until needed in an emergency or returned to the vab at the end of the mission. The rescue command module was equipped with two additional crew couches and additional life support and communications connections to permit it to return the three Skylab 4 crewmen and the two rescue crew members, Vance D. Brand and Dr. Don L. Lind, (ksc Release 283—73)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 2 astronaut Cdr. Paul J. Weitz, Jr. (usn), for permanent promotion to the grade of captain. (CR, 7/20/73, S14273)
Soviet journalist Victor Louis discussed U.S.S.R. plans for the Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft in a New York Times article. The aircraft was scheduled to go into regular passenger service in 1975, when it was expected to begin carrying 120 million passengers annually. Soviet territory was so sparsely populated that “fewer people will be troubled by noise than in Europe or the United States.” Soviet statistics showed 3500 internal airfields in the U.S.S.R. Soviet aircraft flew to 63 major cities throughout the world—operating between Moscow and Santiago, Chile, and eastward between Moscow and Jakarta. SST watchers had calculated that the U.S.S.R. would not sell more than 20 Tu-144s initially. “Ten are estimated to be sufficient to satisfy [Soviet national airline] Aeroflot’s demands for its internal and international European, African and Asian routes, and perhaps a further ten would be taken up by the Czechs . . . and other countries of Eastern Europe.” Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev—who had taken over Tu-144 planning after the death of his father, Tu-144 designer Andrey N. Tupolev—had predicted 50 times more air passengers by the year 2000 and talked of aircraft that would cruise in the stratosphere and carry 1000 persons at speeds of 10 060 km (6250 mi) per hr. (NYT, 6/2/73, 31) June 3:	The Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft exploded and disintegrated in mid-air over the French village of Goussainville near Le Bourget Airport on the final day of the Paris Air Show, killing 13 persons [see May 24-June 3], (Randal, W Post, 6/4/73, Al) June 4:	NASA was “fighting for its political life,” a Detroit News editorial said as the Skylab 2 astronauts considered ways to release a stuck solar wing on the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14: “Its funds have been cut drastically since the moon landings were accomplished. Skylab itself is a vehicle costing $295 million. If it has to be abandoned the people will demand more expenditures be cut. So NASA is trying to prove that man really is boss of the machines he produces, that money is not being thrown away. There is a limit, however, to what NASA can devise and the astronauts accomplish. That limit must not be overstepped.” (D News, 6/4/73)
Newspaper editorials commented on the success of the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission. New York Times: “This first group of astronauts did much more . . . than demonstrate man’s biological capability to live and work in space for four weeks. They proved that men in space can do what machines cannot do, they can repair their vehicle.” It was conceivable that “when all the Skylab data are available, the field of solar astronomy may be advanced as radically as lunar astronomy has been in recent years.” At Skylab’s completion “a strong economic and scientific case will doubtless have been made for creating one or more permanent manned stations in space. Any such orbiting laboratories should surely be United Nations ventures in international cooperation, not new instruments for senseless and expensive national rivalries.” (NYT, 6/24/73) The Philadelphia Inquirer: It had been shown that “enterprising spacemen can do more than routine work for long periods of time. They can deal with the unexpected, correct serious malfunctions and adjust routine to changed circumstances. In space, as on earth, things do not always go well. There, as here, adversity is the true test of men. The Skylab pioneers have met that test with distinction.” (P Inq, 6/24/73)
A Baltimore Sun editorial commented on the plight of Skylab 3 as the astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched
A St. Louis Post Dispatch editorial commented on the repair of the Skylab 1 Workshop [see May 14-June 22] as its Skylab 2 astronaut crew surveyed the U.S. heartland from space: “Now that Skylab is operating under something approaching full power, scientists will be able to judge how well man can exist for prolonged periods of weightlessness and whether experiments they carry out cannot be duplicated or outperformed by machines. The Skylab astronauts have managed to establish conditions under which the mission may receive a fair test and that is of paramount importance, for had they failed, the manned space program, for budgetary reasons, might have come to a halt.” (St. Louis P-D, 6/10/73) June 11:	Skylab 3’s Saturn IB launch vehicle and Apollo command module were moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for the July 27 launch of the second Skylab crew—Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. The astronauts would join the Skylab Workshop (orbited May 14) for 56 days of experiments and observations, (ksc Release 124-73; W Post, 6/12/73, A13)
Skylab’s contribution to better understanding of solar processes, leading to possible generation and control of solar energy for earth use, was described by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers in a speech before the Poor Richard Club in Philadelphia: The sun was the “original model of nuclear energy,” understanding of which could lead to fusion control and its efficient use for power generation. “The Skylab investigators are concerned with this and also with explaining how solar events affect the Earth, particularly solar flares that trigger auroras and disrupt radio transmission. Because sunspot activity correlates with temperature and density variations in the Earth’s upper atmosphere, it is conceivable that the injection of energy into the atmosphere by solar particles may trigger world-wide weather phenomena. Our astronauts saw flares shooting up 100 000 miles [160 000 kilometers] above the surface and they watched giant snakelike clouds erupting in the corona that disturbed radio transmissions here on Earth. Two massive flares exploded on the Sun, producing auroral lights on Earth; . . . each one could supply the world’s energy needs for the next 500 years.” (Text)
A Chicago Tribune editorial commented on “the brave men of Skylab” as the Skylab 2 astronauts (launched May 25 as the first crew to man the Skylab 1 Workshop launched May 14) continued to conduct experiments in space: In repairing the Workshop’s protective shield they had “behaved with such matter-of-fact competence, tinged with homely humor and flashes of exasperation when things refused to go right, that one almost overlooked the fact that this was an act of incredible sustained bravery.” (C Trib, 6/11/73)
The Univ. of California at Davis successfully completed a 15-wk, NASAsponsored study to determine how astronauts on extended space missions would cope with isolation [see May 18]. Six male students, in groups of three, lived in 3- by 5-m (11- by 17-ft) rooms with bathrooms and closets. Interior lighting was controlled to interchange day-night cycles and provide long periods of uninterrupted light barely bright enough to read by. Each room was monitored by closed-circuit TV. The students, selected from 100 volunteers, were paid $1600 each to participate. Dr. Don A. Rockwell, codirector of the study, said it had proved that, while space explorers should be able to live without sex for extended periods, they needed someone outside their spacecraft to whom “they could blow their tops” from time to time. (AP, W Post, 6/27/73)
NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved results of the Feb. 26-March 3 Moscow meeting of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine, NASA announced. The Group had agreed on common medical procedures to permit comparison of pre- and postflight data on astronaut and cosmonaut body functions. (NASA Release 73-79)
The Space Science Board of the National Research Council released HZEParticle Effects in Manned Spaceflight. The report, prepared for NASA by the Board’s Radiobiological Advisory Panel to the Committee on Space Biology and Medicine, concluded that the high-energy, heavy-ion irradiation encountered by astronauts outside the earth’s magnetosphere or in high-inclination earth orbits would have negligible biological effects for periods of less than two years in space, (nrc Release)
A New York Times editorial commented on the manned Skylab 2 launch: “The possibility of repairing a damaged spaceship, now brought to the fore by the last two weeks’ developments, points up one of the advantages of man’s presence in space. If something goes awry with an unmanned spaceship, and there are no arrangements for bringing repair men to it, it is more probable than not that little can be done to save the mission. Now the world is faced with a major effort to overcome unexpected difficulties by assigning additional duties to the astronauts originally involved. The success or failure of these repair efforts in the period immediately ahead will provide important evidence for the future debates between the advocates of manned and unmanned efforts to explore space.” (NYT, 5/25/73, 32)
The Senate confirmed Skylab 3 Astronaut Jack R. Lousma to be a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps. He had held the rank of major. {CR, 10/20/73, S20947)
Newspaper editorials commented on the successful conclusion of Skylab 2 the day after splashdown. Baltimore Sun: “The Skylab experience, it is said, shows once again the value of man over computer, or rather of man-plus-computer over computer alone, in the exploration of space; and that may be one of its lessons. The larger lesson is that human curiosity and human intelligence are still operating in regions of concern beyond the day-by-day, and will keep on so operating.” (B Sun, 6/23/73) New York Daily News: “The venture proved . . . that man is needed in space to repair and regulate equipment when something goes wrong. But for the skill, coolness and courage of astronauts Conrad, Kerwin and Weitz, the entire Skylab project would have wound up as an expensive washout.” (NY News, 6/23/73)
A New York Times editorial criticized the inclusion in the FY 1974 Federal budget of $5.8 million for further studies of the supersonic transport’s possible effect on the stratosphere: “While there may be no harm in pursuing a scientific study of the question, the Government’s intent clearly goes beyond pure research or the problem raised by foreign and military supersonic planes. A high Administration official has bluntly stated that the study would be ‘prefatory to possible introduction of an SST program at a later date.’ The option ‘is held open.’ With an array of fiscal, political and scientific factors against it, the case for the SST at this late date would seem to rest solely on the advantage to a tiny handful of people crossing the oceans in three or four hours instead of six or seven—scarcely a reason for reviving a discredited project which is still being liquidated at public expense.” (NYT, 4/17/73, 39) April 18:	nasa released a preliminary timeline of the Skylab missions scheduled to begin with the Skylab 1 launch of the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm EDT May 14 from Kennedy Space Center. The Skylab 2 mission, carrying the first three crewmen, would leave the pad at 1:00 pm EDT May 15 and dock with the orbiting laboratory at 8:40 pm edt. At 8:30 am May 16 the tunnel would be pressurized and the astronauts would enter Skylab. On the 28th day, at 8:46 am June 12, the crew would reenter the command module, undock, and return for splashdown at 1:44 pm, 1300 km (800 mi) southwest of San Diego. Skylab was to operate for eight months in earth orbit, occupied at intervals by three-men crews who would make scientific and technical investigations and observations related to such areas as earth resources, physiological effects of long-duration weightlessness, solar phenomena, and metal processing in zero-g conditions. (NASA Release 73—78)
Photographs and visual observations made by astronauts aboard the Skylab Orbital Workshop had revealed eddies embedded in warm-water currents flowing poleward from equatorial oceans, Robert E. Stevenson of the Office of Naval Research reported in a Nature article. Observations from Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973-8 Feb. 1974) over four ocean areas had confirmed initial evidence from Caribbean photographs taken on Sky-lab 2 and 3 (25 May-22 June, 28 July—25 Sept. 1973) that eddies with vortices of 5500- to 37 000-m dia were present wherever other conditions were suitable, regardless of water temperature. Findings were also confirmed by the Navy’s Weather Reconnaissance Squadron Four with bathythermographs. Formerly, turbulence had been difficult to document because of limited oceanographic techniques, insufficient information about such features, and the lack of photos from orbital platforms which enhanced the ocean and atmosphere manifestations of the eddies. (Nature, 23 Aug 74, 638-40)
Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Jack R. Lousma, launched
The unexplained loss of calcium by astronauts during prolonged manned missions “seems to be a slow persistent loss,” Dr. David L. Winter, NASA Director for Life Sciences, said during a press briefing. Data indicated calcium had been lost in space at the rate of 0.5% a month, a rate that showed “no evidence of leveling off.” Bones tended to lose calcium at varying rates, weakening selective bones. Scientists were studying various ways, including diet management, to compensate for the calcium loss. Dr. Winter said that the observed decrease in red blood cells during the Skylab missions was not because of red-cell destruction but rather a slowdown of the red-cell production. “We seem to have stumbled on a way in which red blood cell production is suppressed.” This mechanism, unknown before, would be a very interesting and important process to study. ' Physical criteria for the selection of astronauts for the Space Shuttle would vary according to function, Dr. Winter said. Pilots would be selected using very rigid criteria; these would not be imposed upon astronauts, i.e. mission specialists, whose function would be primarily scientific. Because the objective for Shuttle missions would be to get the best qualified scientists, it would be impossible to predict what size, shape, age, or sex these scientists would be. The purpose of the Shuttle was to permit anyone with a legitimate need to go into space; therefore, NASA’s approach would be to broaden the selection criteria as much as possible. (Transcript)
The long-secret site of USSR space launches—previously identified by U.S space experts as Tyuratam, for the name of the local railway station—was identified in the newspaper Kazakhstanskaya Pravda as “Leninsk,” in a dispatch on construction of electric power-transmission lines. The dispatch, stating that the Leninsk area had been connected to the Central Asian power grid, was believed to be the first in which the name appeared in a Soviet publication. U.S. astronauts who visited the space complex last year during Apollo-Soyuz mission preparations had reported that a city of about 50 O0O population was associated with the launch complex, and was known as Leninsk. Publication of the name—which had not appeared on Soviet maps or reference books—was considered either an oversight by the censor or a decision to make the name public. (ATT, 15 Feb 76, 12)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz, Captain, USN, would retire from military service
Correlations between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion sickness on the ground and his susceptibility in space were the subject of studies by JSC scientists, based on data from U.S. and Soviet manned space flights and on data from tests aboard a zero-gravity training aircraft. Motion sickness had been difficult to study because of the variety of separate sensory inputs to the brain. The three major components of human balance and posture were generally accepted to be visual input, defining the local vertical component; vestibular input from the semicircular canals and otoliths in the inner ear, sensing angular and linear acceleration and the presence or absence of gravity; and muscle sensors, monitoring posture. These interrelated inputs normally function to keep the body balanced; in an earth-normal gravity, balance would be reflexive, and persons would not be conscious of the body-movement patterns that kept them upright. In a moving vehicle, the inputs to the brain might produce contradictory information resulting in a feeling of discomfort; “motion sickness” is not an adaptive response and does not improve the situation, as coughing would do to relieve a throat blockage. Persons without sight can experience motion sickness, but persons without their vestibular functions intact apparently do not. Although little was known about the interactions among the three sensory systems, motion sickness seemed to be more related to vestibular input. During Skylab missions, in the relatively large areas of living space, much vestibular relearning apparently occurred in the first 2 wk of spaceflight, after which all crewmen became very resistant to motion sickness. No correlation was apparent between an astronaut’s susceptibility to motion sickness on the ground and his susceptibiity in space. The studies postulated that the otolith (chalky concretion in the inner ear) was the receptor affording the most direct information on gravity, and therefore was the source of many of the inputs causing disequilibrium or motion sickness. (JSC Release 76-67)
NASA was negligent in the 1972 death of Kirby Dupree, supervisor of a support unit for astronauts, a federal judge ruled in awarding $575 000 to the widow and a 4-yr-old daughter. When a battery box exploded in an astronaut training facility at JSC, Dupree and James E. Scott were assisting with water experiments used to simulate space flights. Scott won $100 000 for injuries suffered in the accident. Both Dupree and Scott were employees of a contractor at the facility. (ATT, 25 Nov 76, 20)
NASA announced that a fourth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report to JSC Sept. 19 for a week of physical examinations and individual interviews. All of this group were pilot applicants, one a civilian. Of the others, 12 were USAF; 4, U.S Navy; 3, U.S Marine Corps. A final group would report to JSC in mid-Nov. (NASA Release 77-192)
JSC announced that the second group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Aug. 15 for individual interviews and physical examinations. Like the first group, all those in the second group had applied for pilot positions. The second group included 11 USAF applicants, 7 Navy, 1 Marine, and 1 civilian. (NASA Release 77-171; JSC Release 77-44)
MSFC reported that astronaut Paul Weitz had arrived on center to check out a procedure developed for jettisoning a jammed-open outer door of the Shuttle scientific airlock while on a space mission. Weitz would wear a pressurized space suit for the task, to be carried out in MSFC’s neutral buoyancy simulator. The 75ft-diameter tank filled with water 40ft deep would duplicate movement of people or hardware almost as if weightless in space. Engineers and technicians could design instruments and procedures to handle almost any foreseeable problems before actual spaceflight, and unforeseen problems (such as solar array failure on Skylab) could be solved during a space mission. Center workers had been devising a way to remove the outer door of the airlock in case it could not be closed at the end of a mission, using a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle cargo bay in the simulator. Underwater TV cameras would record the astronaut’s movements on control room monitors, and both video and voice communications would be recorded for later study. Scuba divers in the simulator would help as needed. (MSFC Release 77-158, 77-166)
NASA reported that JSC had produced a compact medical kit containing most of the instrumentation of a well-equipped physician’s office, using techniques and tools developed to monitor astronauts’ vital signs during spaceflight. The NASA “black bag,” weighing less than 14kg and fitting into a case 18cm by 56cm by 36cm, would contain electronic equipment, drugs, bandages, and instruments needed to diagnose and treat many kinds of illnesses or accidents; electronic tools included an electrocardiograph and electroencephalograph, plus either a strip-chart recorder or a cassette tape recorder, with a coupler built in to transmit data over a standard telephone line. The package would improve the treatment possible on emergency or house calls and provide more complete data before hospital admission. (NASA Actv, Nov 77, 24) •
The Congressional Record, at the request of Congressman Olin D. Teague (D-Tex), reported the remarks of Dr. Robert A. Frosch, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, who introduced the President at the KSC ceremony, presenting for the first time the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to six astronauts. Dr. Frosch said in part: “NASA people have been privileged, not only to continue and to advance the 20th century transportation revolution in aeronautics, but to participate in laying the foundations of the future human adventure in and use of space. . . . The true marks and memories of a civilization are found not only in its physical creations, and how it cares for itself and its people, but in the progress it has contributed toward liberation of the mind from the constraining horizons of the past. One major force has been the growth of scientific knowledge through the exercise of human reason. “The spirit of man aspires to the stars. Every generation has looked out at the universe in search of faith, of hope, of beauty, of adventure, and of the power of knowledge. In our generation, a very few have taken the first brave steps out there to begin the great human adventure of using and understanding the universe beyond the earth. To honor those recent accomplishments, and to lead our way into America’s next decades of space, it is my privilege to introduce the President of the United States.” (CR, Oct 4/78, E 5400)
NASA announced that 35 new astronaut candidates would report to JSC July 10 to begin 2yr of training and evaluation, including life-support and ejection-seat training for the T-38 aircraft, aircraft physiological training, and T-38 aircraft systems and operations. In Aug., the candidates would take the standard USAF water-survival course at Homestead AFB in Fla., and would attend lectures on spaceflight history, technical-assignment methods and procedures in the astronaut office, manned-spacecraft engineering, Space Shuttle program, aerodynamics, flight operations, and the many disciplines associated with preparing and operating vehicles in space. Astronauts, engineers, and JSC management and support contractors would be instructors and lecturers. (NASA Release 78-98; JSC Roundup, July 7/78, 1; Marshall Star, July 19/78, 2)
Control of motion sickness might be learned as one learns to balance or to ride a bicycle, according to ARC’s Dr. Patricia Cov/ings. Half of all astronauts exposed to the weightless environment of space had symptoms of motion sickness; young athletes were often the persons most sensitive to motion. Cowings and her team had taught about 50 volunteers to suppress illness when subjected to a chair spinning ever faster; another 60 subjects were studied without the training. Of the trained subjects, 85% improved their ability to withstand effects of motion, 65% being able to suppress their symptoms completely. The other 20% took significant increase in rpms before becoming ill. In the control group of 60 subjects who received no training, no one showed any significant improvement with time. The trained subjects monitored their own respiration and heartbeat during the tests, biological feedback long used by researchers and known to produce positive results. After the subjects were trained to detect the onset of sickness, 65 % were able to suppress the symptoms by using the feedback. Biofeedback was preferred to conventional treatment, which is use of drugs, because it had no side effects, such as sleepiness. The success of the theory led Cowings to propose a life-science experiment tentatively accepted for a Spacelab flight on which two trained crew persons would wear a harness feeding eight channels of a small data recorder collecting information on heart rate and other factors and providing the subjects with a feedback display. A subject feeling ill would consciously use the feedback training for a maximum 30 minutes. When subjects succumbed to motion sickness, they would mark the point where they became ill so the researchers could learn which responses led to the sickness. So far Cowings had found no sex differences in susceptibility to motion sickness; also, of a group aged 18 to 45, older subjects appeared less likely to suffer. (NASA Release 80-57; ARC Release 80-32)
JSC reported that the third group of 20 astronaut applicants from the 3,122 received in the fall of 1979 would report March 24 for interviews and physical exams. This group included 9 pilot and 11 mission-specialist applicants; 5 of them were women. (JSC Release 80-017)
ARC reported that eight men aged 35 to 50 would participate in a study of weightlessness to help NASA learn why spaceflight dehydrates humans. Dr. Joan Vernikos-Danielis of ARC’s biomedical research division would use a head-down method in prolonged bed rest for the study; the rush of blood to the head in the first exposure to zero gravity might trigger the body mechanism that eliminated fluids and salts. The Soviets for some time had been using bed rest with head down 6° from the horizontal to simulate weightlessness. Usable measurements were not obtainable during actual spaceflight because of the heavy demands on astronauts in the first stages of a mission. (ARC Release 80-68; NASA Release 80-131)
LaRC said that it was studying a possible “assembly line in space” that would allow astronauts to build large platforms or antennas in Earth orbit from the shuttle. A mobile work station would position a pair of pressure-suited astronauts so that they could move horizontally and vertically within a prescribed area to set up structures too large or complex to fold up and transport inside the shuttle. The work station would be located inside the or-biter’s cargo bay or would be a free-flyer operating near the shuttle. LaRC was testing a large-scale model to detect possible problems in space and identify ways to improve astronaut productivity: foot restraints to leave hands free, for instance, and electrically operated work platforms. (LaRC Release 81-50; NASA Release 81-104; MSFC Release 81-93)
“A clever bit of rewiring. . .with the skill of an automobile thief’ enabled the astronauts aboard Columbia (STS-4) [see June 27] to bypass a defective circuit and turn on the power for part of its payload called the “getaway special.” The University of Utah students sponsoring the experiment had given up hope but now planned to accomplish nearly all of their objectives. A thank-you message from the students said, “One small switch for NASA, a giant turn-on for us.” Engineers at JSC and GSFC had transmitted 10 possible corrective measures after figuring out that a cable from a control panel was faulty; on the first try, everything began to work, and the conclusion was that launch vibrations could have loosened a connection. A more serious problem arose when the clamshell doors of the payload bay refused to shut snugly after exposure to the heat and cold of space had expanded and contracted the aluminum fuselage and graphite epoxy doors. A similar problem on the preceding flight was solved by putting Columbia into a slow roll (the so-called barbecue mode), turning the surface toward and away from the Sun to equalize temperatures around the ship. Columbia had been circling the Earth for most of the last two days with its underside facing the Sun, as a means of baking out moisture trapped in the insulating tiles from a hail storm the night before liftoff. Harold Draughon, a flight director, said that data from the flight showed that all the tiles had baked dry. (NASA MOR MR-004, 3; NY Times, July 1/82, B-8)
Astronaut Robert F. Overmyer announced that he planned to leave NASA, on June 1, and retire from the Marine Corps. His past accomplishments include piloting the November 1982 Columbia mission and serving as commander of the April 1985 Challenger flight. Colonel Overmyer joined NASA in September 1969. (NASA Release 8648)
Astronaut Frederick H. Hauck, former Navy Captain, was appointed Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations. He was commander of STS51A and pilot for STS7, as well as a member of the support crew for STS1 and reentry capsule communicator on the support crew for STS2. In midOctober, Kenneth S. Pedersen would become the Deputy Associate Administrator, upon his return from Georgetown University. Since 1979, he had been Director, International Affairs Division and Assistant Associate Administrator for External Affairs. Hauck's duties included policy level management and direction and coordination of the Agency's relationships with public and private organizations. (NASA Release 86130)
Evidence revealed the Challenger crew cabin did not explode with the midair accident, but remained intact until it struck the water. The cabin, said engineers, was seven times stronger than other parts of the Shuttle because it had to maintain an Earthlike atmosphere while in space. All seven astronauts, however, were probably killed instantly by shock from the initial blast, sudden depressurization of the cabin, or the tumbling ninemile descent. (W Post, Apr 10/86; NY Times, Apr 10/86; W Times, Apr 10/86; CSM, Apr 10/86; USA Today, Apr 10/86; C Trib, Apr 10/86)
NASA announced the creation of an Office of Exploration, responsible for coordinating the Agency's missions to "expand the human presence beyond the Earth." Dr. Sally K. Ride, who had been in charge of a NASA study group to determine U.S. goals in space, was named the Acting Assistant Administrator until midAugust 1987. h)(NASA Release 8787; H Post, June 2/87)h)0*0*0*June 3: An Information Science Division was established at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to conduct research in artificial intelligence for applications to space exploration. It was expected that artificial intelligence would be used to develop automated systems for all phases of space missions, from launch to mission control and for onboard operations. Artificial intelligence technology would also be used to advance spacecraft performance and safety, and would free astronauts from routine chores. Research in artificial intelligence and the development of automated system would be a joint effort between the Information Science Division, other NASA Centers, private industry, and academic institutions. (NASA Release 8789)
NASA selected 23 new astronaut candidates from a list of 1,945 qualified applicants for one year of training and evaluation that was to begin in July 1990. Of 11 civilians and 12 military officers, 7 were selected as pilots and the other 16 as mission specialists. (NASA Release 907)
Extensive coverage was given to the launch of Columbia on June 5 and the astronauts' biomedical studies. (B Sun, Jun 6/91; P Inq, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; W Post, Jun 6/91; W Times, Jun 6/91; C Trin, Jun 6/91; LA Times, Jun 6/91; AP, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
The media reported that Discovery astronauts had succeeded in getting data from three scientific instruments to the ground by splicing wires and rearranging cables in a complicated operation. In this way they bypassed the nonfunctioning recorders, based on procedures worked out from the ground. The astronauts earlier had performed additional tests involving fuel canisters hurled from the Shuttle. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91; NY Times, May 4/91; C Trin, May 4/91; LA Times, May 4/91; NY Times, May 5/91; P Inq, May 5/91; W Post, May 5/91; CSM, May 6/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that Mae Jemison, the first black female astronaut, who was scheduled to be a member of the crew of Endeavour in August 1992, had received an honorary doctor of science degree from Lincoln University. (P Inq, May 6/91)
NASA announced the naming of two additional NASA astronauts and three payload specialists to the crew for the Spacelab Life  Sciences-2 mission, set for launch in mid 1993. (NASA Release 91-201)
The Philadelphia Inquirer described the Temple University Hospital study on behalf of NASA to determine whether amino acid supplements could retard muscle loss. If so, astronauts on long space flights might not need to devote so many hours to exercise. Eighteen volunteers were being cycled through the six-day bed rest program, in groups of three. (P Inq, Dec 31/91)
A feature article in the Los Angeles Times discussed the changing qualifications for astronauts. In the early days of NASA they were tough, independent male test pilots. More recently, they became better educated and diverse in backgrounds, men and women and different ethnic origins. A second article described Mae Jemison, NASA's only black female astronaut. (LA Times, Oct 13/91)
Astronaut Guion Bluford Jr., in a commencement speech at Drexel University's 100th anniversary, called for a new national commitment to "scientific literacy."
The media covered the final countdown preparations of the astronauts for the scheduled launch of Atlantis on July 24. Mission managers were satisfied with the completion of all necessary repairs. Then a storm on July 23 threatened to delay the blastoff, followed by the discovery early the morning of July 24 of trouble with a critical main engine computer. The discovery forced launch cancellation and postponement of the flight by at least one week to install a new unit. UPI reported on repair efforts and attempts to discover the source of the problem. (AP, Jul 22/91; C Trin, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91; AP, Jul 23/91; UPI, Jul 23/91; NY Times, Jul 24/91; USA Today, Jul 24/91; W Post, Jul 24/91; W Times, Jul 24/91; AP, Jul 24/91; LA Times, Jul 24/91; CSM, Jul 24/91; UPI, Jul 24/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; AP, 25 Jul/91; UPI, 25 Jul 91)
NASA announced that astronaut Bryan D. O'Connor would leave NASA July 29 to become Commander of the Marine Air Detachment at the Naval Air Test Center, Patuxent River, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-101; UPI, Jun 28/91)
The press reported that NASA was considering having two astronauts engage in a spacewalk to fix a cargo-door seal of Columbia that could prevent a safe return to Earth. The seal apparently shook loose during launch. It was later reported that NASA ground personnel determined the seal posed no re-entry problems so no spacewalk was needed. This allowed the astronauts more time to pursue their scientific experiments and medical research. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 8/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; W Post, Jun 8/91; AP, Jun 8/91; UPI, Jun 8/91; NY Times, Jun 9/91; W Post, Jun 9/91; C Trin, Jun 10/91; LA Times, Jun 10/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reviewed The Steel Albatross, a novel about an underwater craft undetectable by sonar,just published by NASA astronaut Scott Carpenter. Concurrently, it reviewed Aurora 7, an account of the way in which various actual and fictional people were affected by Carpenter's flight in the Aurora 7 space capsule. (P Inq, Feb 10/91; W Post, Feb 17/91)
The press reported that the panels of the astronaut memorial monument that developed jagged cracks, which are being investigated. (AP, May 21/91; USA Today, May 22/91; LA Times, May 22/91)
According to the media, the Columbia astronauts were ahead of schedule on their experiments after spending 16- to 18-hour days working and planned to ease off and enjoy space more. On June 12 and 13, the press reported the continuing scientific experiments of the astronauts, culminating in efforts to fix two malfunctioning freezers in order to preserve experiment samples prior to final preparations for a landing on June 14. (P Inq, Jun 11/91; NY Times, Jun 11/91; B Sun, Jun 11/91; W Post, Jun 11/91; USA Today, Jun 11/91; UPI, Jun 11/91; USA Today, Jun 13/91; W Post, Jun 13/91; AP, Jun 13/91; UPI, Jun 13/91; LA Times, June 13/91; P Inq, Jun 14/91; NY Times, Jun 14/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; W Times, Jun 14/91; B Sun, Jun 14/91; Fla Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91; UPI, Jun 14/91)
Brief biographies appeared of each Atlantis astronaut. (UPI, Apr 5/91)
Launch Box - Your TV Connection to Outer Space, a new 14-episode program, is an educational series created by teachers for classroom use. NASA, Nickelodeon, and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation joined to fund the series, whose first segment was scheduled to appear on May 9. The series includes footage of actual NASA missions as well as lesson plans for teachers. (Business Wire, Mar 18/91)
A space-for-rent company unveiled its first Shuttle module, which is scheduled to fly aboard Atlantis in the spring of 1993. The Spacehab module, which consists of up to 61 lockers for experiments, would be the first privately owned and operated space facility that can be tended by astronauts in orbit. (AP, Apr 3/92)
Discovery's astronauts dimmed the Shuttle lights to conserve energy as NASA considered extending the weeklong research mission by a day to collect extra scientific data. (P Inq, Jan 27/92; W Times, Jan 27/92)
A NASA "aquanaut" set an endurance record of 69 days, 20 minutes underwater after spending time in a scuba divers' lodge submerged in a Florida Keys Lagoon. Richard Presley began the habitation May 6 as part of an experiment by NASA on conditions astronauts would face during long space missions. (W Times, Jul 15/92; USA Today 15/92; AP, Jul 15/92)
Shuttle Endeavour's astronauts reported abnormal behavior for tadpoles hatched aboard the shuttle. Oriental hornets similarly displayed confused, disoriented behavior, seemingly unable to build nests in a weightless environment. The tadpoles and hornets were part of 43 experiments in weightless conditions being carried out on the Shuttle. (UPI, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 16/92; UPI, Sept 16/92; AP, Sept 16/92)
Atlantis's astronauts reported the loss of a second scientific instrument, a telescope probing galaxies millions of light years away. Controllers spent hours trying to restore the telescope but to no avail. The telescope, the only astronomical instrument abroad, accomplished 19 observations before the fuse blew. More than 34 were planned for the nine-day mission. (W Post, Mar 31/92; USA Today, Mar 31/92; W Times, Mar 31/92; B Sun, Mar 31/92; NY Times, Mar 31/92)
NASA announced that astronaut James P. Bagian, M.D., P.E., was taking a leave of absence from NASA to work as Vice-President of Corporate Development and Medical Affairs at Somanetics Corporation, Troy, Michigan.  Bagian was scheduled to head up the company's clinical research activities. (NASA Release 93-139)
The European Space Agency in the Netherlands invented new shoes for astronauts to use in orbit. The new shoes, which look like ordinary sneakers, have small suction cups on the bottom of each shoe. The suction cups grip floor, wall, and ceiling and allow the astronauts to walk around in the weightless Shuttle. Up until now, in order to get around astronauts have had to stick their feet into loops placed around the Shuttle. (AP, Jan 22/93)
NASA announced that Nasa technology developed to keep astronauts cool on the lunar surface and a NASA patient-monitoring device, originally designed for astronaut heart rate transmittal, were scheduled to be inducted into the U.S. Space Foundation's Technology Hall of Fame on April 16. (NASA Release 93-069)
NASA rewarded the Columbia astronaut's energy-conservation efforts by adding a day to the Space Shuttle's mission. The extra day would allow scientists to meet and possibly exceed mission goals, which had been jeopardized by equipment problems.
Shuttle astronaut Mae Jemison was scheduled to make a guest appearance on a "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode during the week of May 31. Very much in demand as a speaker when she was with NASA, Jemison also has had a school named after her in Detroit. (Ap, Apr 4/93, Apr 19/93, May 24/93, May 26/93)
People with temperature disorders have benefitted from suits developed by NASA for use by astronauts in very hot temperatures.  The suits have been modified for people who need help in keeping their body temperature down in hot weather.  The suits for children are vests stuffed with detachable "cold packs," much like those used to keep food cold in picnic coolers.  Other suits are powered by battery packs and fitted with tubes that circulate coolant. The suits are made of a material known as Thinsulate. (Fairfax County Journal, Aug 31/93)
A first formal industrial test of a system that uses computer-set lights to adjust a person's sleep patterns got underway in January at a San Diego Gas and Electric Company plant. The system may prove useful in keeping astronauts and night workers alert, easing jet lag, helping older people sleep, and helping teens get out of bed. NASA started using the system in 1991 to adapt astronauts to night launches and shift work.
The media reported that Columbia's astronauts were attempting to find a slight air leak that NASA said posed no danger to the crew. The leak had been detected the previous evening. According to NASA sources, the leak would not affect the duration of the space mission. (AP, Apr 30/93)
Guion Bluford Jr., America's first African-American astronaut in space, was scheduled to leave NASA in July to join NYMA, Inc., a Greenbelt, Maryland, engineering and computer software company. (USA Today, June 16/93; NASA Release, 93-113)
NASA's inspector general in a report published in February indicated that an audit showed that astronauts flew two-seater supersonic training jets, T-38 Talons, to Colorado Springs on weekends during ski season as well as to New Orleans and Fort Lauderdale, Florida. NASA required astronauts to log 15 hours of proficiency flying each month. Steve Holly, NASA Deputy Director for Flight Crew Operations, said although flying 10 to 12 hours a day was efficient in a time management sense, improved proficiency was gained through more shorter flights. (NY Times, Apr 24/94; B Sun, Apr 24/94; UP, Apr 25/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Charles F. Bolden Jr. was leaving NASA after 14 years to return to the Marine Corps to serve as Deputy Commandant of Midshipmen at the Naval Academy. (NASA Release 94-97; W Times, Jun 19/94)
In connection with the November 21 field hearing in Spokane, Washington, of the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, the media featured articles on tests performed on 131 prison inmates in Oregon and Washington from 1963 to 1971. The tests were sponsored by the Atomic Energy Commission in order to help determine how much radiation U.S. astronauts could safely bear during spaceflights. The testicles of inmate volunteers were irradiated in return for a small stipend. Classified documents dealing with the project were only made available recently. (W Post, Nov 20/94; USA Today, Nov 21/94; AP, Dec 5/94)
Japanese Prime Minister Tustomu Hata's Space Activities Commission announced that Japan's first woman astronaut, Chiaki Mukai, a medical researcher, was to take part in NASA's Columbia flight set for launch July 8. The flight was to conduct some 80 experiments under the second International Microgravity Laboratory Project, of which Japan is a member. (UP, May 11/94)
Lieutenant Colonel Tom Akers, an astronaut, presented NASA's $500,000 check to the state of Arkansas's Aerospace Education Center. (Arkansas Democrat Gazette, Apr 6/94; Fla Today, Apr 17/94)
NASA announced that the six astronauts who recently returned from Endeavour's mission would be available for interviews as time permits during their debriefing schedule. (NASA Release 94-67)
Thomas D. Jones was one of the astronauts scheduled to fly on the Endeavour. Since boyhood he always wanted both to fly and to study science. (B Sun, Mar 30/94)
NASA and Loma Linda University in California announced that NASA planned to use the University's Proton Treatment Center to find ways to protect astronauts in space. The University had the nation's only hospital-based proton treatment center for cancer. The program did not involve experiments on human subjects. (NASA Release N94-83; Sun, Nov 30/94)
Astronaut Tom Jones was featured in a telephone interview in which he described his thrill with the experience of weightlessness, the spectacular views from the air, especially of the oceans and the distinctiveness of the various continents, the beauty of the United States, and the difficulty of readjusting physically to Earth's atmosphere. (B Sun, May 2/94)
Six astronauts went through a countdown drill aboard Shuttle Endeavour, and NASA set the date of April 7 for the spaceship's launch on an environmental research mission. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
Astronaut Richard J. Hieb will leave NASA to join Allied Signal Technical Services Corp.�s Civilian Space Business Enterprise as senior engineering advisor. (NASA Release 95-36)
The 1995 Astronaut Class, which begins in March, will include two international candidates. They are Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, Ph.D., and Canadian astronaut David S. Williams, M.D. Their selection as mission specialists brings the class size to 21. (NASA Release 95-3)
NASA announced completion of the exterior of the U.S. modules constructed to house the astronauts aboard the ISS, as well as more than 80,000 pounds (36,000 kilograms) of flight hardware for the station. With the completion of the modules, the United States successfully attained the first benchmark in the long and expensive process to complete its part of the ISS. Boeing workers had completed the project at MSFC. NASA planned to launch the first node of the ISS in December 1997.(NASA, “Exterior of US Space Station Modules Completed; Flight Hardware on Track for Launch in 1997,” news release 96-17, 30 January 1996; NASA, “United States’ Space Station Modules Are Right on Track,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 3; The Boeing Company, “Exterior of U.S. Space Station Modules Completed Flight Hardware on Track; First Launch in 1997,” news release, 5 February 1996.)
Horowitz, the first Shuttle pilot with a PhD, captained STS-75. NASA astronauts Andrew M.
Allen, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz; Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier; and
two Italian astronauts, Umberto Guidoni and Maurizio Cheli, made up the crew. One of the
NASA announced that new smart software, with more realistic landing simulations for Shuttle pilots, would become an integral part of astronaut flight training. Hamid Berenji, Ping-Wei Chang, and Steven R. Swanson of JSC engineered the software, which used “adaptive fuzzy logic,” allowing the program to learn from experience and to function in a manner closer to human thinking than that of previous software. The software team predicted that the program would help not only Shuttle pilots, but also commercial pilots and even people learning to use machinery unrelated to aviation. Berenji predicted that, because the new training system would be easier to use than previous programs, new pilots would feel much more confident than before.(H. R. Berenji et al., “Refining the Shuttle Training Aircraft Controller,” Fuzzy Systems, 1997: Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Conference 2 (1−5 July 1997): pp. 677−682; NASA, “Shuttle Landing Simulations To Improve with Smart Software,” news release 97-229, 14 October 1997.)
Raytheon Systems Company’s training unit, formerly known as Hughes Training, appointed former astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield Jr. as Managing Director for the company’s NASA support business. In this position, Hartsfield was to manage the development of simulators for the ISS program.(David Welch for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Raytheon Systems Names Chief of NASA Deals,” 30 January 1998.)
Sally K. Ride, the first female astronaut from the United States to travel into space, resigned her position as President of Space.com to concentrate on her education career. She had worked with Space.com founder Lou Dobbs, former host of CNN’s Moneyline, since the company’s start-up in June 1999 and had been the company’s president for the past year. Ride would continue her leave of absence from the University of California at San Diego where she is a physics professor throughout the remainder of the fall academic term.(Bloomberg News, “Ride Leaves Space.com Top Post⎯For 1st U.S. Female Astronaut in Space, It’s Back to Education,” 27 September 2000.)
By conserving fuel throughout their mission, the astronauts aboard Shuttle Endeavour were able to prolong their time in space by one extra day, allowing the crew to map the Earth’s terrain, covering several million square miles more than they had originally estimated possible. The extra 9 hours and 10 minutes of mapping allowed the radar flown from Endeavour to survey Australia in detail, making up for time lost when a Shuttle thruster had failed.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Squeezes in Extra Mapping Day,” 21 February 2000.)
Members of the astronaut crew who had flown aboard NASA’s historic 100th Space Shuttle flight, Mission STS-92, visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility to present Silver Snoopy awards, “the highest accolade that the astronauts corps gives to people who build flight hardware,” to the Lockheed Martin employees who had built the Shuttle’s super-lightweight tank and liquid-oxygen tank. NASA had named the Silver Snoopy award after the Peanuts character, the dog that imagined he was a fighter pilot.(New Orleans Time-Picayune, “Astronauts Thank Lockheed Workers: Company Makes Shuttle Components,” 17 December 2000.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off in Mission STS-99, planning to use new radar technology to map Earth’s terrain. Crew included astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Dominic L. P. Gorie, Janet L. Kavandi, Janice E. Voss, Mamoru Mohri, and Gerhard P. J. Thiele. The astronauts planned to extend the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission antenna from Endeavour’s cargo bay. The 197- foot (60-meter) antenna would gather mapping data necessary to create the most comprehensive map of Earth ever drawn. NASA collaborated with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency in planning the mission and hoped to cover more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface during the 11-day mission.(Associated Press, “Endeavour on Mission To Get Best Map of Earth,” 12 February 2000.)
Astronauts Jeffrey N. Williams and James S. Voss conducted a 6-hour spacewalk to make repairs to the ISS. The pair successfully repaired the station’s construction crane, replaced a failed antenna, and began installing a much larger, Russian-built crane, designed to aid workers in adding the final modules to the ISS. NASA officials highlighted the exercise as a precursor of the maintenance schedule to come: “This spacewalk was a good example of what future spacewalks are going to look like, where we will need to perform maintenance on the space station.” The spacewalk occurred after Atlantis had docked at the space station, but while the hatch doors between the two spacecraft remained shut.(Washington Post, “Spacewalkers Begin Repairs on Orbiting Station; Wobbly Crane Is Secured; Another Awaits Completion,” 22 May 2000; Associated Press, “Outside Repairs Finished, Astronauts Ready To Head Inside Space Station,” 22 May 2000.)
NASA announced that it had renamed the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft, already orbiting asteroid 433 (Eros), after Eugene M. Shoemaker, an expert in the study of asteroid craters and their origins who died in 1997. Shoemaker’s work on Meteor Crater in Arizona, during the 1960s, had set the standard for crater investigation. Shoemaker had worked for NASA teaching astronauts about meteors and craters. He died in the Australian outback while researching asteroid-impact craters.(NASA, “NASA Renames NEAR Spacecraft for Planetary Science Pioneer Gene Shoemaker,” news release 14, March 2000.)
Astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms conducted the longest spacewalk in NASA historynearly 9 hours. After working to install hardware and equipment, the pair had to remain outside the ISS until NASA flight controllers had determined that the Italian module filled with supplies had found an ISS docking port. Voss and Helms spent 8 hours and 56 minutes on their spacewalk, eclipsing the record of 8 hours and 29 minutes set in 1992. The U.S astronauts conducted complex work, involving a series of slow, deliberate maneuvers. NASA’s flight director commented that the lengthy endeavor required stamina, remarking that the spacewalk pushed the two astronauts “right to the edge” of what they could handle. Early in the spacewalk, Voss and Helms each mishandled pieces of equipment, causing one device to float off into space and slowing the process by about 1 hour.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “A Record Job, with Some Butterfingers,” 13 March 2001; CNN.com, “Astronauts Set Out-of-This-World Record,” http://archives.cnn.com/2001/TECH/space/03/11/ space.shuttle.02/ (accessed 18 July 2008); Associated Press, “2 Astronauts Walk in Space Almost 9 Hours,” 12 March 2001; Agence France-Presse, “Discovery Astronauts End Marathon Spacewalk To Add Leonardo to ISS Canvas,” 12 March 2001. 32 NASA, “Deepest X-rays Ever Reveal Universe Teeming with Black Holes,” news release 01-37, 13 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Young Cosmos Was Full of Black Holes,” Washington Post, 14 March 2001; Associated Press, “X- ray Telescope Finds Heavens Brimming with Black Holes,” 14 March 2001.)
During the first spacewalk for Mission STS-105, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick F. Forrester affixed an ammonia coolant canister and two boxes containing hundreds of samples of prospective spacecraft materials to the exterior of the ISS. The ammonia canister would function as a backup coolant system in the event of a problem with the ISS’s primary coolant system. The samples, part of the MISSE experiment, would remain attached to the ISS for almost two years, so that scientists could examine how the materials performed during prolonged exposure to solar storms, cosmic radiation, and other aspects of the space environment. The experiment was a cooperative research effort of Boeing Phantom Works, the Materials Laboratory at the U.S. Air Force Research Library, and several NASA centers.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalking Astronauts Attach Ammonia Canister, Science Experiments to Space Station,” Associated Press, 16 August 2001; NASA, “Materials International Space Station Experiment: Introduction,” http://misseone.larc.nasa.gov/ (accessed 13 November 2008).)
During the second spacewalk for Mission STS-105, astronauts Daniel T. Barry and Patrick G. Forrester attached two 45-foot (13.7-meter) power cables and two handrails to the exterior of the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The cables would provide a secondary power supply for a 44- foot (13.4-meter) external truss, scheduled for installation in 2002. The truss, which would contain a satellite navigation system and other electronic components, would be the first of several parts of the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, which would support new components, such as solar arrays.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-105,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-105.html (accessed 13 November 2008); Mark Carreau, “Discovery Astronauts Connect Power Flow During Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2001.)
The General Services Administration (GSA) presented the Federal Aviation Award to the Aircraft Operations Division (AOD) of NASA’s JSC. The AOD, which provided astronauts with spaceflight training, had an exemplary safety record. In addition, GSA gave Chief of AOD Robert J. Naughton an Honorable Mention for the Federal Aviation Professional Award. GSA’s awards recognized effectiveness, efficiency, and safety in federal aviation operations, in the hope that honoring outstanding federal aviation programs and professionals would promote excellence in government aviation.(NASA JSC, “JSC’s Aircraft Operations Division Wins Top Federal Aviation Award,” news release J02-93, 19 September 2002.)
NASA released the first four images taken by the HST’s newly installed Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS). During Mission STS-109 in March 2002, astronauts had installed the ACS, capable of providing images with double the area and resolution of those provided by the Wide Field Planetary Camera 2, which the ACS had replaced. The ACS had captured images of a turbulent galaxy, which scientists called Tadpole because of its long tail of stars; of two colliding spiral galaxies known as the Mice; of the Cone Nebula, which looks like a red volcano; and of the M17 Swan Nebula, a richly colored, cloudy-looking nebula containing newly forming planetary systems.(NASA, “Hubble’s New Camera Delivers Breathtaking Views of the Universe,” news release 02-74, 30 April 2002; Warren E. Leary, “Telescope Opens Window on Dawn of the Universe,” New York Times, 1 May 2002.)
ESA announced that an international group of astronauts would attend a training session at the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany, to prepare for missions to the ISS. The specific objective of the training was to prepare the astronauts for the tasks they would need to accomplish when a Japanese experiment module and ESA’s Columbus laboratory docked with the ISS. Upon completing the training, the international ISS partners planned to assign the astronauts to specific, long-duration ISS missions. The training session, scheduled to last from 26 August to 6 September, would include ESA astronauts Pedro Duque, Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, and Thomas Reiter; Japan’s NASDA astronauts Takao Doi, Satoshi Furukawa, Aikihiko Hoshide, and Koichi Wakata; and NASA astronauts Nicole Passonno Stott and Stephanie D. Wilson.(ESA, “Ten Astronauts Train in Europe for the International Space Station,” ESA news release 56-2002, 19 August 2002.)
At the Mojave Airport in California, aircraft designer Burt Rutan unveiled for the first time his White Knight launch system and SpaceShipOne spacecraft, which he had built in secret. Rutan had designed the White Knight, a type of aircraft, to carry the spacecraft to 50,000 feet, where the White Knight would release SpaceShipOne to launch like an aircraft into a steep climb. Rutan had begun testing the launch platform at lower altitudes in August 2002, also testing on the ground the release mechanism between the spacecraft and the launch platform. In the public unveiling, Rutan flew the White Knight only. The craft flew to an altitude of 9,000 feet (2,734 meters) before spiraling down to make a soft but extremely short landing. Rutan demonstrated SpaceShipOne’s systems, explaining that the craft should land in the same manner as the launch system. The flight profile of the system allowed SpaceShipOne to reach 54 nautical miles (62 miles or 99.8 kilometers) maximum altitude over a flight patch of 35 miles (56.3 kilometers). NASA designated anyone flying at an altitude of over 50 miles (80.4 kilometers) as an astronaut. If Rutan’s system succeeded in flights outside the atmosphere, it would become the first private human spaceflight program.(Jon Bonne, “Private Manned Space Plane Unveiled,” MSNBC.com, 19 April 2003.)
NASA announced appointments to the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), formed to conduct an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s recommendations. On 13 June, NASA had initially announced the formation of the SCTG to oversee an independent assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement the CAIB’s recommendations. Cochaired by veteran astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, NASA had selected the SCTG’s members from experts in industry, academia, and government, active in fields relevant to spaceflight safety. NASA had organized the SCTG pursuant to the Federal Advisory Committee Act, selecting only non-NASA employees as members, as well as one nonvoting, ex officio NASA representativethe Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “NASA Names Return to Flight Task Group Members,” news release 03-248, 25 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03248_SCTG_Named.html (accessed 23 December 2003).)
NASA and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) commissioned the US$34 million NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at the DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, where NASA biologists and physicists would perform thousands of experiments to measure the hazards of space radiation and to develop countermeasures to protect astronauts. Construction of the facility had begun in 1998. NASA and the DOE had cooperated in building the NSRL, which housed an accelerator producing beams of protons or heavy ions, like those that the Sun and other cosmic sources typically produce. The beams moved through a 328-foot (100-meter) transport tunnel to a 400-square-foot (37-square-meter) target hall, to hit a target composed either of a biological sample or of shielding material. Scientists planned to measure the interaction of specific particles with targets to determine the effectiveness of various materials in shielding against radiation and to develop and to test new materials. An NSRL health team would perform tests with biological samples to learn how radiation damages cells, how to predict risks, and to develop countermeasures to mitigate radiation effects.(NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Help Protect Space Crews from Radiation,” news release 03-326, 14 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03326_new_facility.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
NASA announced the selection of 11 individuals for the astronaut class of 2004the first astronaut trainees since 2000. In June 2004, the new class would begin training at NASA’s JSC as educator astronauts, engineers, pilots, and scientists, eventually working on NASA’s next- generation space vehicle and other projects. The trainees for the class of 2004 included Joseph M. Acaba, Richard R. Arnold II, Randolph J. Bresnik, Christopher J. Cassidy, James P. Dutton Jr., José M. Hernández, Robert S. Kimbrough, Thomas H. Marshburn, Dorothy M. Metcalf- Lindenburger, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Shannon Walker.(NASA, “NASA Introduces the Next Generation of Explorers,” news release 04-152, 6 May 2004; Patty Reinert, “11 Space Hopefuls Get NASA’s Good News,” Houston Chronicle, 7 May 2004.)
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and Sunita L. Williams conducted the third spacewalk for Mission STS-116, rearranging electrical channels on the station’s exterior. The completion of that task finalized preparations for the planned additions of European and Japanese laboratory modules to the ISS. During the lengthy 7.5-hour spacewalk, Curbeam and Williams also made some progress on retracting a solar array, although they were unable to fold the device completely. NASA planned for a fourth spacewalk to continue work on the array.
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang conducted a fourth spacewalk for Mission STS-116. The goal of the 6.5-hour spacewalk was to retract the troublesome solar arrays on the P6 truss, located on the ISS’s exterior. It constituted Curbeam’s fourth spacewalk for STS-116, making him the first astronaut to conduct four spacewalks during a single mission. The retraction of the array would enable the astronauts to move the power-producing array to another location on the ISS and to install a permanent electrical grid for the orbiting station.(Michael Cabbage, “Spacewalkers Retract Solar Array,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 December 2006; NASA, “STS-116 Delivers Permanent Power.”)
Discovery crew members used the orbiter’s robotic arm to check Discovery’s wing for damages. This marked the first time that astronauts had used an orbiter’s robotic arm to conduct such an inspection. NASA believed that Discovery might have sustained damage during its docking at the ISS and wanted to assess the orbiter before its scheduled return to Earth the following day.89 The inspection revealed no obvious damage to protective material on the spacecraft’s exterior.
Astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and A. Christer Fuglesang conducted a second spacewalk for Mission STS-116, the 75th in the history of the ISS. During the near 6-hour excursion, the spacewalkers completed the first phase of the reconfiguration of the station’s electrical system, a complex task that required the astronauts to plug in and unplug various cables, while simultaneously coping with the harsh environment of space. The second phase of the power reconfiguration would take place on 16 December. The rewiring was part of an extensive project to switch the ISS from its temporarily configured power system to a permanent arrangement. For the previous six years, the ISS had drawn its electrical power from one array of solar panels, but under the planned permanent configuration, the station would draw power from another set of solar arrays, which would rotate to face the Sun as the ISS orbited Earth.
Atlantis crew members Daniel C. Burbank and Steven G. MacLean performed the second spacewalk for Mission STS-115. During the spacewalk, which lasted nearly 7 hours, the two astronauts further prepared the P3/P4 truss for installation, releasing locks on an automobile- sized component of the truss that would enable the ISS’s solar arrays to track the Sun. The purpose of the locks was to secure the truss during launch.(NASA, “STS-115.”)
Astronauts Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the second EVA of STS-118, to install the 600-pound (272-kilogram) CMG on the Z1 segment of the ISS’s truss, and to remove and replace the gyroscope that had failed in late 2006. The defective gyroscope was one of four such devices controlling the ISS’s position. NASA announced it had added a new computer program, the Inductive Monitoring System, to assist in monitoring these four gyroscopes. NASA had begun using the system earlier in 2007. David L. Iverson, the computer scientist at NASA’s ARC who had led the five-year effort to develop the new system, explained that the purpose of the software was to alert ground controllers to anomalies, so that they could analyze the situation immediately and take any necessary preventive measures. During the test phase, the new software had identified problems with the gyroscopes long before the previous system would have flagged anomalies. Engineers had also used the software program in F-18 fighter planes and in the Space Shuttle’s leading-edge impact-detection system, as well as in monitoring electric-power plants and water quality.(NASA, “New NASA Software Monitors Space Station Gyroscopes,” news release 07-201, 13 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07201_ISS_Gyro_Software.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Traci Watson, “Endeavour Astronauts Replace Faulty Gyroscope,” USA Today, 14 August 2007.)
NASA announced the winner of the first Astronaut Glove Challenge, one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$200,000 for his design of a glove that performed better overall than those his competitors had created, according to tests rating the glove’s strength, flexibility, and comfort. NASA stated that Homer had made innovations in finger dexterity that could enhance the gloves created for NASA’s astronauts in the future.(NASA, “Peter Homer Wins NASA’s Challenges for Improved Astronaut Gloves,” news release 07-101, 3 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07101_Winner_of_Astronaut_Glove_ Challenge.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
NASA released safety-review findings that showed no evidence of astronauts using alcohol improperly before spaceflight. NASA Chief of Safety and Mission Assurance Bryan D. O’Connor had conducted the review to evaluate allegations included in the Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s report, released in late July. For the safety review, which covered the past 20 years of spaceflight, NASA had interviewed approximately 90 participants in and witnesses to the activities that had occurred during the last few days before Shuttle and Soyuz launches. In addition, NASA had reviewed more than 40,000 records, from as far back as 1984, including reports of mishaps and close calls, anonymous safety reports, safety-hotline reports, and alcohol- and drug-related disciplinary actions, as well as NASA’s relevant policies and procedures. The review had also included an inspection of crew quarters at NASA’s JSC in Houston and NASA’s KSC in Florida. O’Connor remarked that the investigation had been much more exhaustive than NASA’s usual response to an anonymous allegation concerning a matter of safety; therefore, he expressed confidence that NASA had sufficient safeguards to prevent an impaired crew member from participating in spaceflight.(NASA, “NASA Safety Review Finds No Evidence of Improper Alcohol Use by Astronauts Before Space Flight,” news release 07-184, 29 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07184_oconnor_alcohol_ study.html (accessed 14 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “No Evidence of Drunken Astronauts, NASA Says,” New York Times, 30 August 2007.)
NASA issued a statement regarding the status of astronaut Lisa M. Nowak, the U.S. Navy captain charged with attempted kidnapping and related charges. Under a mutual agreement with the U.S. Navy, NASA was terminating Nowak’s detail as an astronaut, effective 8 March. Nowak, the first astronaut ever dismissed by NASA, had begun her detail with NASA following her selection as a member of the astronaut class of 1996. She had flown on her only mission, STS-121, in 2006. NASA had requested the U.S. Navy’s agreement to terminate Nowak’s detail because NASA lacked the administrative authority to address the criminal charges pending against Nowak. Because Nowak was a naval officer assigned to NASA, rather than a NASA civil servant, she was not subject to administrative action by NASA. NASA further stated that the decision to terminate Nowak’s detail did not indicate that NASA had taken a position on the criminal charges against her.(NASA, “Statement Regarding the Status of Lisa Nowak,” news release 07-26, 7 March 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/mar/HQ_07026_Nowak_Status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Lianne Hart, “NASA Fires Astronaut Charged in Assault on Rival,” Los Angeles Times, 8 March 2007.)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted a spacewalk to connect power and heater cables, as well as the coolant lines that would carry ammonia between the Harmony module and the ISS. The astronauts took turns carrying the 18.5-foot (5.6 - meter), 300-pound (136-kilogram) tray containing the coolant lines to Harmony, where they bolted the tray to the adjacent lab module. After securing the tray, Whitson and Tani worked ahead of schedule, routing the coolant lines and other cables. The spacewalk lasted 7 hours and 16 minutes.
Mission Specialists Richard A. Mastracchio and Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams undertook the first EVA of STS-118, marking the first time that either astronaut had spacewalked. Over the course of 6 hours and 17 minutes, the pair worked to install and activate the 1.58-ton (1.4-tonne or 1,433-kilogram), 11-by-14-foot (3.33-by-4.3-meter) S5-truss segment and to retract the forward heat-rejecting radiator from the P6 truss. NASA planned to relocate the forward heat-rejecting radiator to the end of the port truss during the upcoming STS-120. Pilot Charles O. Hobaugh assisted Williams and Mastracchio from inside the ISS, operating the ISS’s robotic arm, which held the truss.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Begin Spacewalk as NASA Analyzes Shuttle Damage.”)
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani conducted their third spacewalk in 15 days, to connect a second set of ammonia-coolant lines to the Harmony module, to finish reconnecting the station-to-Shuttle power-transfer system, and to carry out a second inspection of the ISS’s right-side SARJ. According to ISS Flight Director J. Derek Hassmann, the SARJ inspection revealed significant and widespread “race ring damage and particulate that was consistent with the damage Daniel M. Tani observed” in late October. The astronauts also prepared Harmony’s right-side port for the upcoming attachment of the Columbus laboratory. On the ground, JSC flight controllers checked out electrical- and cooling-system connections in preparation for fully activating Harmony.(William Harwood, “Successful Spacewalk Ends as Harmony Activation Proceeds,” Spaceflight Now, 26 November 2007.)
Timothy Shank, a researcher on board the Alvin submersible, located 2.5 kilometers (1.5 miles) deep in the Pacific Ocean, placed a telephone call to Sunita L. Williams, a NASA astronaut
Over a period of 6 hours and 56 minutes, Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the 100th spacewalk for ISS construction. The astronauts focused on inspecting two devices related to the power-generating solar arrays—the SARJ and the beta gimbal assembly (BGA) on the starboard side. Both devices had malfunctioned. The spacewalk, a so-called fact-finding mission, sought to determine what had caused the SARJ to shed metal filings and the BGA to trip circuit breakers. Whitson and Tani found widespread contamination inside the gear that rotates the SARJ. They also retrieved a set of bearings—one of 12 on the joint—suspected of being a source of the contamination. They used orange Kempton tape to take samples of the metal filings. The astronauts found no damage to the cables and other hardware on the BGA joint, which had suffered triple electrical failures on 8 December. During this EVA, Whitson, who had already made history as the first female commander of the ISS, surpassed Sunita L. William’s spacewalking record to set a new record for women in space, at 32 hours and 36 minutes.
2,423.09 kilograms) two Solar Alpha Rotary Joints that allow the ISS’s solar arrays to follow the Sun. Although an astronaut had lost an untethered tool belt during the first spacewalk, the repairs appeared to have been successful. Astronaut Gregory E. Chamitoff, who had been aboard the ISS for over five months, had returned to Earth on board Endeavour. Sandra H. Magnus had replaced Chamitoff on the ISS. She expected to stay until February 2009.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Endeavour Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 08-315, 30 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-315_Endeavour_lands.html (accessed 22 August 2011); Robert Z. Pearlman, “Space Shuttle Endeavour Lands Safely in California,” Space.com, 30 November 2008, http://www.space.com/6180-space-shuttle-endeavour-lands-safely-california.html (accessed 22 August 2011); James Dean, “Endeavour Voyage Ends in California,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2008.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a sole-source contract to Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International of Windsor Locks, Connecticut, to provide a water-production system aboard the ISS. Under the terms of the contract, Hamilton Sundstrand would provide equipment that would use excess carbon dioxide and hydrogen on the ISS to produce water and methane, using a chemical process called a Sabatier reaction. The ISS’s waste-water system would treat the water produced in this process, so that the astronauts could use it for drinking, washing, preparing food, generating oxygen, and cooling electronic equipment. NASA planned to send the equipment to the ISS aboard mission STS-130, scheduled for launch in 2009. Officials hoped that the water-production system would pave the way for other new technologies that NASA could use in future missions traveling too far from the Earth for routine resupply. The contract represented a change in NASA’s business arrangements. Instead of purchasing the hardware for water production, NASA had contracted only for the production of services. The contractor had agreed to be responsible for all system development and performance. The contract, which 47 would extend through 30 September 2014, could reach a value of as much as US$65 million.
NASA announced that Armadillo Aerospace of Rockwell, Texas, had won a US$350,000 prize during the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander Challenge in Las Cruces, New Mexico. Sponsored by NASA’s Centennial Challenges program and managed by the X Prize Foundation, the Lunar Lander Challenge was a two-level competition to foster innovation in commercial space technology. Armadillo had won the first level with a vehicle demonstrating some of the technologies that a lunar lander would require to transport payloads or astronauts between lunar orbit and the lunar surface. Armadillo’s vehicle had risen to a height of 50 meters (164.04 feet); traveled to a landing pad 100 meters (328.08 feet) away, while staying in the air for at least 90 seconds; landed; and later repeated the flight. Armadillo’s attempt at Level Two, which was more challenging, had not succeeded, leaving US$1.65 million in unawarded prize money that NASA would make available for future competitions. In the past, the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander Challenge had been a key event at the X Prize Cup; however, the X Prize Foundation had dramatically scaled back X Prize Cup events in 2008, because of budgetary constraints and scheduling conflicts.(NASA, “NASA $350,000 Prize Goes to Armadillo Aerospace in Lunar Challenge,” new release 08-271, 27 October 2008; http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-271_Armadillo_Challenge.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Jose L. Medina, “X Prize Cup Shrinks,” Las Cruces Sun News (NM), 17 October 2008.)
NASA announced the selection of nine candidates, from among 3,500 applicants, to form the 2009 astronaut candidate class. The six men and three women made up the first group of astronaut recruits in five years and the twentieth class since the selection of the original Mercury astronauts in 1959. With ages ranging from 30 to 43, the group represented a mix of military and civilian recruits, including a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) technical intelligence officer, two NASA flight surgeons, a space station flight controller, a molecular biologist, two Navy test pilots, a U.S. Air Force test pilot, and the special assistant to the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon. NASA had scheduled the start of the class’s two-year training for August 2009. With the SSP slated to end in 2010, the likelihood that any member of the 2009 class would fly aboard the Shuttle was extremely low. Therefore, the new astronauts would likely train only for ISS missions and for flight aboard the Russian Soyuz vehicles, as well as aboard the Shuttle’s replacement spacecraft.(NASA, “NASA Selects Nine New Astronauts for Future Space Exploration,” news release 09-149, 29 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-149_New_Astronauts.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA Unveils Astronaut Class that Will Never Fly on Shuttle,” Space.com, 26 June 2009, http://www. space.com/6900-nasa-unveils-astronaut-class-fly-shuttle.html (accessed 25 July 2011).)
Using two robotic arms, astronauts moved a 1.2-ton (1.09-tonne, or 1,088-kilogram) experiment carrier, the Japanese Experiment Logistics (JEL) Module Exposed Section known as Jelly, from Endeavour’s cargo bay to the JAXA Kibo laboratory’s new porch, known as JEF. STS-127 crew members used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to remove Jelly from the cargo bay, handing it to the ISS robotic arm for installation on Kibo. The platform was a temporary addition. NASA had scheduled astronauts to move the experiments from the platform to JEF later in the week, using Kibo’s robotic arm. JAXA needed to ship its first experiments to the ISS on a separate carrier because the Kibo’s porch would have been too wide to fit into Endeavour’s cargo bay if the porch had shipped with the experiments attached to its side.(Tariq Malik, “Astronauts Tackle Tricky Crane Work in Space,” Space.com, 21 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7023-astronauts-tackle-tricky-crane-work-space.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
NASA announced that its Centennial Challenges program had awarded US$350,000 to a pair of designers who had won first and second place for the designs they had entered in the 2009 Astronaut Glove Challenge. Peter K. Homer of Southwest Harbor, Maine, won US$250,000 for his design, and Ted Southern of Brooklyn, New York, won US$100,000 for his. The 2009 competition required that gloves meet all the basic requirements of NASA’s current spacesuit gloves but exceed NASA’s flexibility requirements. NASA had asked all teams to develop a complete glove, including the outer, thermal-micrometeoroid-protection layer and the inner, pressure-restraining layer. Homer and Southern had tied in several categories, but Homer, who had won US$200,000 in the first Astronaut Glove Challenge in 2007, won first prize again by outscoring his rival in the joint-flexibility and pressure tests. The joint-flexibility tests involved 30 minutes of pinching and gripping tests, as well as other tests requiring finger flexing and the manipulation of small objects. The pressure test involved filling the glove with air in a tank of water until it burst. Homer’s glove had held out without bursting until pressure reached 20 pounds per square inch (9 kilograms per square centimeter), whereas Southern’s glove had made it to 17 pounds per square inch (7.7 kilograms per square centimeter). Engineers from NASA’s JSC and KSC, as well as NASA’s spacesuit manufacturer ILC Dover of Dover, Delaware, had measured and evaluated the designs.(NASA, “NASA Awards $350,000 to Winning Astronaut Glove Designers,” news release 09-277, 20 November 2009; Nicholos Wethington, “Astronaut Glove Challenge Winners Announced,” Universe Today, 20 November 2009.)
Five hours into the third of five scheduled spacewalks, Mission Control instructed STS-127 crew members Christopher J. Cassidy and David A. Wolf to return to the inside of the ISS, after a canister for removing carbon dioxide from Cassidy’s suit apparently stopped functioning properly. Because of the curtailed spacewalk, the astronauts had to leave two of four new, uninstalled batteries outside the station. When Mission Control told them to stop work, the two astronauts were behind schedule because they had been unable to remove some stubborn bolts. They had removed three of the nine-year-old batteries, which NASA had installed in 2000, and had plugged in two new ones. The large nickel hydrogen batteries stored the power that the ISS solar wings had collected. NASA had designed the batteries to last six-and-a-half years and wanted to replace them before they stopped working. Mission Control planned to complete work on the batteries during one of the next two spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Cut Spacewalk Short Due To Suit Trouble,” 23 July 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Add New Batteries to Space Station,” Space.com, 24 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7051- spacewalkers-add-batteries-space-station.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
NASA announced the award of an interim letter contract to Oceaneering International of Houston, to begin designing, developing, and producing a new spacesuit system for the Constellation Program. The interim contract required Oceaneering International to begin work on the basic period of performance, while NASA and the company negotiated the final terms. The interim contract, valued at US$9.6 million, would be in effect from 2 March 2009 until NASA and Oceaneering had defined the full contract—no later than 29 August 2009. NASA had initially awarded this contract to Oceaneering International and to five subcontractors in June 2008. However, a losing bidder, Exploration Systems and Technology, had protested the award. Exploration Systems and Technology was a joint venture between Connecticut-based Hamilton Sundstrand and Delaware-based ILC Dover, the two companies that had developed the spacesuits worn by NASA’s Shuttle and ISS astronauts. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) had evaluated the protest, which had led to the termination of NASA’s contract with Oceaneering International in August 2008. NASA had reopened the competition in November 2008, at which time Hamilton Sundstrand and ILC Dover had joined Oceaneering International to submit a single proposal.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Constellation Spacesuit for the Moon,” news release C09-008, 27 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-008_Constellation_Spacesuit_ Contract_Letter.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Mark Carreau, “Houston’s Oceaneering International Inc. Wins Once Disputed NASA Space Suit Contract,” Houston Chronicle, 2 March 2009.)
NASA announced that it had begun the process for testing in water a full-scale mockup of its Orion crew module, under simulated- and real-landing weather conditions. On 23 March, at the Naval Surface Warfare Center’s Carderock Division in West Bethesda, Maryland, NASA had begun the Post-Landing Orion Recovery Test (PORT), its goal to determine the types of motions the astronaut crew could expect to experience after landing, as well as conditions the recovery team could face outside at the landing site. The Carderock facility provided a controlled environment in which crew recovery personnel could familiarize themselves with the capsule before commencing with tests in the uncontrolled waters of the Atlantic Ocean off the Florida coast on 6 April. NASA expected that PORT would help in the design of landing recovery operations, including equipment, ship, and crew necessities.(NASA, “NASA’s Constellation Program Tests Orion Recovery Procedures,” news release 09-068, 25 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-068_Orion_PORT_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011). 47 NASA, “King Retires as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-071, 26 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-071_MSFC_King_Retires.html (accessed 4 May 2011). 48 NASA, “New Astronaut Crew Launches to International Space Station,” news release 09-069, 26 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-069_Exp19_Launch.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
The astronauts of STS-119 unfurled the 115-foot (35-meter) blue and gold solar panels from the US$298 million girder they had attached to the ISS on 19 March, encountering none of the problems that had challenged previous missions when unfolding the solar arrays. For example, in 2007, the last time NASA had unfurled solar panels, one wing had caught on a guide wire and had ripped, requiring additional spacewalks to make emergency repairs. To avoid similar problems, NASA had instructed the crew to unfold the wings in stages. The crew opened each wing halfway and then waited nearly an hour before proceeding. They allowed the partially opened wings to soak up sunlight, thereby rendering them less likely to jam. The array, which stretched 240 feet (73 meters), from tip to tip, brought full electrical power to the space station and doubled the amount of power available to perform scientific experiments, from 15 kilowatts to 30 kilowatts.(Robert Block, “Space Station’s New Solar Wings Unfurl,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 21 March 2009; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Station’s New Solar Wings Open Easily,” 21 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “Panels Unfold Without Incident,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 2009.)
