USAF-USN-NASA X-15 flown to 108,600 feet and a record speed of 3,900 miles per hour, piloted by Joseph Walker at Edwards, Calif.
U.S.S.R. announced that Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had successfully orbited the Earth in a 108-minute flight in a 5-ton Vostok (East), the first man to make a successful orbital flight through space.
May Day parade in Red Square, Moscow, reviewed by Maj. Yuri Gagarin beside Premier Khrushchev.
NASA Office for the United Nations Conference headed bjr Dr. John P. Hagen was closed, effective this date. Continued uncertainty of arrangements for a conference on the peaceful uses of outer space within the United Nations made such a move necessary. Sustained NASA responsibility in this regard was assigned to the Office of International Programs.
15 (No. 1) flown to 49,780 feet by John B. McKay, NASA test pilot, at Edwards, Calif.
National Aeronautic Association announced selection of Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., to receive the Robert J. Collier trophy for his direction of the Polaris missile program.
leading Istanbul newspaper, Milliyet, reported Turkish newsmen’s reactions after seeing movies of both the Shepard and Gagarin space flights: “When the film was over the journalists asked the Soviet consul general: ‘In the Shepard film we followed all phases of his space flight, but in yours we followed only Khrushchev. * * * Why don’t you show your space flight too?’ The Tass correspondent on behalf of the consul general answered: * * We are mainly interested in people’s excitement and reaction. This is what we wanted you to see.’ Gagarin may have gone into space, but this is not the impression of the journalists who saw both films: Shepard really went into space, not Gagarin, and in front of the whole world, too.”
Yuri Gagarin reported in Pravda that “I was in the center of a whirl of flames” when his Vostok spacecraft reentered the atmosphere on April 12. His book, “Road to Outer Space,” was being serialized in Pravda.
President Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy to Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., who had directed the development to the Polaris IRBM.
Soviet Academy of Sciences revealed that the pulse rate of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had risen to 158 beats a minute in his Vostok flight, according to a report circulated by Tass.
In an interview with C. L. Sulzberger, Premier Khrushchev reviewed the world crisis in detail. “In a strange Darwinian interpretation of the advance of nations,” Sulzberger reported, “Mr. Khrushchev jokingly considers that the United States is still in the stage of ‘jumping’ while the Soviet Union has learned how to ‘fly.’ This refers to the Earth-orbiting successes of the Soviet spacemen, Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin and Maj. Gherman S. Titov.”
In article in New York Times, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “In my view, we [the United States] do not have a division between peaceful and nonpeaceful objectives for space. Rather, we have space missions to help keep the peace and space missions to enable us to live better in peace.”
