usaf B-58 Hustler bomber claimed 3 transcontinental speed records after a Los Angeles-to-New York-to-Los Angeles nonstop flight: round trip, 4 hrs. 42 min. 12 sec.; west-to-east, 2 hrs. 1 min. 39 sec.; east-to-west, 2 hrs. 15 min. 12 sec. Flying most of the way at 50,000 ft. and at an average speed of 1,044.3 mph, the B-58 trailed a 40-mile-wide sonic boom along the ground in its wake. Crew was: Capt. Robert Sowers, pilot; Capt. Robert MacDonald, navigator; and Capt. John Walton, defense systems operator.
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to 197,000-ft. altitude and 3,784 mph speed (mach 5.13), in 9-min. flight near Delamar Lake, Nev., to evaluate new re-entry technique. Automatic roll damper ceased operating at 100,000-ft. during descent, causing X-15 to go into a simultaneous rolling and yawing motion. Pilot Walker regained stability with manual control and landed safely.
Dr. John F. Clark was appointed Associate Director and Chief Scientist for nasa Office of Space Sciences. He was formerly Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs.
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller told 1962 conference of upi editors and publishers that recent U.S. nuclear tests in the Pacific had “not been quite satisfactory” and that it was his guess “that the Russians are ahead of us in the nuclear race today.”
Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee opened hearings to determine whether the U.S. has paid “unnecessary and excessive profits” to companies working on dod contracts. Sen. John L. McClellan, chairman of the committee, announced 40 that investigation would begin with the Army's family of Nike missiles, to be followed by the usaf’s Atlas.
usaf named first two test pilots of the mach three RS-70: Lt. Col. Joseph F. Cotton, of Rushville, Ind.; and Maj. Fitzhugh Flliton, of Talladega, Ala.
John Jay Ide, European representative of naca (1921-40, 1946-50) and U.S. representative at numerous international air law and commerce conventions, died in New York. He was a founder and fellow of the ias, a board member of the naa, and an honorary member of the Royal Aeronautical Society. Mr. Ide had contributed to world aviation in making known the results of naca research and in acquiring information on European progress, as well as helping the establishment of transatlantic commercial air routes.
Congressman John J. Rhodes (Ariz.) polled his district, receiving 5,000	replies to a series of current questions. To the question— “Are you in favor of United States-Kussian space cooperation?”— the response was: 19% said “Yes”; and, 70% said “No.”
X-15 No. 2, piloted by nasa’s John B. McKay, was flown to 129,000-ft. altitude (24.4 mi.) and 3,716-mph speed (mach 5) in test of aircraft’s performance without its electronic flight-control system and without its ventral fin. Pilot McKay induced the most severe yawing motion thus far in tests to check the craft’s re-entry stability under severe strain. Although pilot McKay later reported “the whole airplane shook for about three minutes,” the stability test was considered very successful. Altitude and speed were greatest ever achieved in X-15 flights without the lower tail-fin.
U.S. Army claimed a new world speed record for helicopters, when Capt. William F. Gurley (usa) flew a YHU-lD Iroquois helicopter over a closed-circuit course near Fort Worth, Texas, at 133.9 mph, shattering a two-year-old Soviet mark of 88 mph.
Representative Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.), speaking at House Education Subcommittee hearing, criticized nasa’s hopes to recruit 1,000 graduate students into space research each year during this decade: “That’sj25 per cent of our production of Ph.D.’s in the space-oriented sciences. That’s an incredible share of our brainpower to concentrate on one agency.” John F. Clark, Associate Director and Chief Scientist, nasa Office of Space Sciences, defended nasa aim as being commensurate with nasa’s share of total Government expenditures for research.
aec announced Dr. Edward Teller would be awarded the Enrico Fermi Award at ceremony on Dec. 3. Citation accompanying the award would praise Dr. Teller “for contributions to chemical and nuclear physics, for his leadership in thermonuclear research, and for efforts to strengthen the national security.” Dr. Teller, now a professor at University of California, is most noted for his role in development of thermonuclear bomb.
National Aeronautic Association announced John Stack, former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, would receive 1962 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Stack was cited for his major contributions to aeronautical research and for “his leadership and vision” during 34 years with naca and nasa.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, was awarded the Arnold Air Society’s trophy as the civilian who had made the most outstanding contribution to aerospace science and national security in 1961.
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., visited the White House at the invitation of the President.
President Kennedy presented aec’s Enrico Fermi Award for 1962, carrying a $50,000 prize, to nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller, the citation reading: “For contributions to chemical and nuclear physics, for his leadership in the thermonuclear research and for efforts to strengthen national security.”
House of Representatives passed a resolution declaring February 20 to be John Glenn Day, sent it to the Senate.
X-15 made its 50th successful flight from Edwards afb, Calif., with nasa's Joseph A. Walker as pilot. The X-15 No. 1, testing an emergency flight control system, reached a speed of 3,920 mph (mach 5.84) and an altitude of 150,000 ft.
President John F. Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy, aviation’s most distinguished award, to four X-15 pilots: Major Robert M. White (usaf), A. Scott Crossfield (naa), Joseph A. Walker (nasa), and Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen (usn). Following the White House ceremony, the pilots received personal miniatures of the Collier Trophy at a luncheon co-sponsored by the Aero Club of Washington and the National Aeronautic Association.
Two usn pilots, in separate flights, officially claimed two world flying records held by U.S.S.R. since 1940. LCdr. Fred A. W. Franke reached 27,380-ft. altitude in UF-2G Albatross amphibian with 4,410-lb. load; LCdr. Donald E. Moore reached 29,460-ft. altitude in same aircraft with 2,205-lb. load. Both flights were made from New York nas, Floyd Bennett Field.
In ejection capsule test, brown bear “Big John” rode in capsule ejected from B-58 at 1,060 mph and 45,000 ft. and parachuted to earth near Edwards afb, Calif.
John Stack, former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research and naca aerodynamicist, was awarded Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy—sterling silver model of Wright Brothers’ Kitty Hawk airplane—at Wright Memorial Dinner, Washington. Earlier in the day, ceremonies at Kill Devil Hills near Batty Hawk, N.C., commemorated 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ historic flight.
In emergency landing of X-15 No. 2, piloted by nasa’s John McKay, it went out of control when nosewheel broke off, the craft skidding nose down and sideways, then stopping in upside-down position. McKay sustained only superficial injuries; X-15 nose gear, wings, and tail were damaged. Flight was supposed to have reached 120,000-ft. altitude in test of stability during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere, but engine failed to develop power when X-15 was released from B-52 mother ship at 45,000 ft. and McKay glided to emergency landing at Mud Lake, Nev. Flight was 31st made in X-15 No. 2, seventh in X-15 by McKay, and first X-15 flight involving any injury to personnel.
U.S.S.R. submitted information on 16 Soviet space flights for inclusion in the U.N. public registry on space launchings. Included were the manned orbital flights by Majs. Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov. U.S. submitted a similar list to the U.N. on March 5, covering U.S. space launchings to Feb. 15, 1962, that were still in orbit.
Joseph A. Walker (nasa) flew Xyl5 No. 3 in test of the research aircraft’s ability to automatically correct undesired yaw. In nine-minute flight, the X-15 reached maximum altitude of 147,000 ft. and speed of 3,445 mph (mach 4.99).
usaf announced selection of seven usaf officers and one usn officer for the second class in the usaf’s space pilot school. The class, to begin on June 18 at Edwards afb, Calif., would include LCdr. Lloyd N. Hoover (usn), Majs. Donald M. Sorlie and Byron F. Knole (usaf), and Capts. Albert H. Crews, Jr., Charles C. Bock, Jr., William T. Twin ting, Robert W. Smith, and Robert H. McIntosh (usaf).
Mr. John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, nasa, speaking before the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences in New York, advocated a variable-wing, variable-fuselage configuration for the nation’s supersonic transport aircraft. Not only were these practicable for the state of the art but the only way he saw to gain the necessary subsonic vs. sonic flight characteristics and load flexibility to make the aircraft economically usable.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, stated that the U.S. program for peaceful development of space was not inconsistent with military space development, in a speech before the National Capitol Section of the ars. “The true mission of our military strength is to protect the peace,” he said. “If we do not take adequate care of our national defense, we will not have a chance to do any of the other things in space—at least as free men.”
Soviet Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov and Yuri A. Gagarin hinted in a press interview that the U.S.S.R. would attempt prolonged manned orbital flight some time during 1962. Colonel Gararin remarked: “Recently in Japan I said that new flights through space are not far off and expressed confidence that they wollid certainly take place this year.” Major Titov then added: “I also am of the same opinion and want to add that the time already is past when the length of cosmic flights wlli be only hundreds of thousands of kilometers. I think that flights of future cosmonauts wlli be more prolonged and the route of their cosmic ships wlli measure mlliions of kilometers.”
John A. Johnson, General Counsel of nasa, testifying before the Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, stated that as of Feb. 28, 1962, a total of 297 inventions had been reported by nasa contractors under the patent provisions of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. Of these, 268 had been determined to be Government property, 29 had been or are being considered for waivers.
Federal District Judge Joseph Lieb signed injunction against International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 267, ordering the union to stop allegedly unfair labor practices—refusing to operate cranes unloading heavy equipment at Cape Canaveral missile launch complex.
The Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) received the Edward Warner Award granted every second year by the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao) Council, for “outstanding contributions to the development of international civil aviation.”
Dr. John P. Meehan of the University of Southern California reported that “Enos,” 37-lb chimpanzee who orbited the earth in MA-5 on November 29, 1961, developed temporary hypertension during flight due to frustration and confusion caused by equipment malfunction.
Pope John XXIII, addressing diplomats gathered in Consistorial Hall of the Vatican, called upon men of all nations to join in cooperative and peaceful exploration of outer space. “The church applauds man’s growing mastery over the forces of nature. Thanks to those men who harbor thoughts of peace, mankind could dedicate itself, in noble rivalry, not only to the great economic and social tasks which confront it but to the continuing exploration of space and to the bold achievements of modern technology . . .”
X-15 No. 2 was flown by nasa pilot John B. McKay in a relatively low-level flight to obtain information on aerodynamic heating. Maximum speed was 3,204 mph (mach 4.85) at 73,000 ft.; maximum altitude was 82,000 ft.
In interview at Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet physicist Dr. Sergei N. Vernov stated he believed particle acceleration accounts for outer radiation belt of the earth. Deep-space probes have not detected enough high-energy particles to prove the outer belt is replenished by high-energy particles ejected from the sun. Dr. Vernov believes the particles acquire their energy within the belt—through some as yet unknown accelerating mechanism. He believes there are two such means of acceleration, one sustaining the day-to-day energy level and the other accounting for its increases when a cloud of erupted solar gas reaches vicinity of earth, causing magnetic storms. Dr. Vernov suggested inner belt is sustained by protons formed by neutrons which decay upon bombardment by cosmic rays; some of the high-energy protons are trapped by earth’s magnetism to become the inner radiation belt.
National holiday in the Soviet Union, the anniversary of orbital flight of Yuri Gagarin. In ceremony in the Kremlin’s Congress Hall, Cosmonaut Gagarin declared: “We are on the threshold of more new space launchings. When these space ships return to earth, the Soviet people will have more holidays to celebrate.” Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev and Cosmonaut Titov also made short speeches, while Matislav Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, made the major address.
jpl scientists reported that Venus-bound mariner ii was successfully transmitting data from nearly two million mi. in space. John W. Thatcher, staff engineer of jpl’s Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (dsif), said, “We fully expect that we will be able to track it and follow it well beyond Venus.” Signals were reported coming in relatively “loud and clear” at receiving stations in Goldstone, Calif.; Johannesburg, So. Africa; and Woomera, Australia.
nasa announced contract award for research in communications between man and dolphins, results of which could apply if man encounters other species on distant planets. The $80,800, one-year contract was awarded to Communication Institute of St. Thomas, V.I., directed by Dr. John C. Lilly. Dr. Lilly’s research had already determined that dolphins communicate with each other and that they could be taught to mimic human speech.
President Kennedy presented 1961 Harmon International Aviation Trophies to four pilots: Lt. Col. William R. Payne (usaf); Jacqueline Cochran; and Cdr. Malcolm R. Ross (usnr) and Lt. Cdr. Victor E. Prather (usn) (posthumously).
nasa announced the appointment of Dr. Richard B. Morrison as Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Programs, Office of Space Sciences, in nasa Hq., succeeding Col. Donald Heaton (usaf). Dr. Morrison was previously professor of aeronautical engineering and supervisor of the Aircraft Propulsion Laboratory at the University of Michigan.
nasa’s Associate Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., moderated a panel discussion on “Reliabllity—The Key to Space Operations,” at the 8th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control in Washington. Panelists John H. Rubel, Assistant Secretary of Defense; Dr. C. Stark Draper, Head of the Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, mit; Dr. Simon Ramo, Exec. VP of Thompson Ramo Wooldridge, Inc.; and Dr. Jack A. Morton, VP Device Development, Bell Telephone Laboratories discussed means of comprehensive, planned efforts to increase the Nation’s percentage of success in space launchings and operations.
Reported from Cairo, Egypt, that Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin has said that the United States “eventually” would orbit a man around the earth.
Three fliers were credited with breaking two Soviet world records by flying their B-58 Hustler supersonic bomber to 85,360-ft. altitude with cargo of 11,023 lbs., dod announced. Fliers were: Maj. Fitzhugh L. Fulton (usaf), pilot; Charles R. Haines, civilian flight test engineer; and Capt. William R. Payne (usaf), navigator.
Project Stargazer balloon landed after 18'(-hr. trip to 82,000-ft. altitude, in southwestern New Mexico, by Capt. Joseph A. Kittinger, Jr. (usaf), and William C. White, astronomer from U.S. Naval Test Station at China Lake. White had clearest view of heavens of any astronomer in history by using telescope mounted on top of gondola. J. Allen Hynek, director of usaf oar’s Project Stargazer, predicted great future for balloon astronomy.
X-15 No. 2 was flown by nasa pilot John B. McKay in longest engine run to date (127 sec.), the craft reaching 67,000-ft. altitude and 2,693-mph speed (mach 4.08) in successful 9-min. flight near Edwards afb, Calif. Flight tested heat transfer rates over X-15’s skin, craft’s stability without its ventral fin, and newly designed windshield’s resistance to heat.
The Boys Clubs of America honored Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., for his example of good citizenship to youth, presenting him with the “Man and Boy Award” at Alexandria, Va.
Department of Defense has issued a directive providing for closer and more effective cooperation between dod and nasa, dod’s Deputy Director of Research and Engineering John H. Rubel told the Senate Aeronautical and Space Committee. The directive gave the usaf authority to work with nasa on all levels for purposes of coordinating efforts and exchanging technical information but reserved to dod the responsibility for establishing new programs and assigning mllitary support to nasa.
Royal Aeronautical Society announced that John C. Wimpenny had made first extended manned flight under his own power in his pedal-powered Puffin. A design engineer, Wimpenny flew 993 yards at an average speed of 19K mph and an altitude of 5 to 8 feet.
usaf B-52H claimed a world record for nonstop, non-refueled distance flight over a closed circuit, having flown 11,400 miles in 22 hours, 38 minutes, 41.8 seconds, with an average speed of 510 mph. The closed-circuit course ran from Seymour Johnston afb, N.C., to Bermuda; Sondrestrom, Greenland; Anchorage, Alaska; Los Angeles, Calif.; Key West, Fla.; and back to Seymour Johnson. Pilot was Capt. William M. Stevenson (usaf) ; copilot was Capt. Floyd J. Schoendiest (usaf). Present record is held by Lt. Col. J. R. Grissom (usaf), who on December 14, 1960, flew a B-52G a distance of 10,078.84 miles.
Michael Friedlander, associate professor of physics at Washington University, St. Louis, was preparing to send up a series of huge balloons for cosmic ray experiments, beginning about August 15, from Calvina, South Africa.
X-15 No. 1 flown to 107,000 feet at speeds up to 3,733 mph by Joseph A. Walker, in series of seven “roller-coaster dips” in test of the alternate stability augmentation system.
nasa test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 2 in sustained heat test, reaching peak altitude of 84,500 feet and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 5.11) in flight which created an estimated temperature on the leading edge of the wings of 1,100° F for more than a minute, and 1,290° F for a few seconds when leaving and re-entering the atmosphere.
Relationship between very low frequency (vlf) hiss and aurora australis (Southern lights) was confirmed after six months of research by two scientists, it was reported. Ward Helms and John Turtle, working at Byrd Station, Antarctica, believe they have confirmed the theory of Henry Morozumi, Stanford Univ. scientist, when they found peaks of auroral display and vlf hiss were identical in intensity and coincided repeatedly. Helms said he was “not certain that vlf hiss is part of the aurora, per se, but I’m sure that since the aurora and hiss peaks are simultaneous there is reason to think the same particles generating the aurora also generate the hiss.”
Dr. Frank E. Bothwell, Chief Scientist of the Center of Naval Analysis, Franklin Institute, received the Navy’s highest civilian award, the Distinguished Civllian Service Award, for his work on design and development of the Polaris ballistic missile. June 27: X-15 No. 1 flown to unprogramed but record speed of 4,159 mph (mach 6.09) by nasa’s Joseph A. Walker at Edwards, Calif. Record speed was achieved at 96,000 ft. on climb to an altitude of 120,000 ft. In test of X-15 re-entry stabllity, Walker glided in at 23-degree angle of attack, highest angle flown to date, and placed X-15 into 80-degree bank.
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin in Tokyo said: “The U.S.S.R. is at present constructing a giant spaceship which cannot be compared to those I and Titov rode in size.”
X-15 (No. 3) piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) reached 3,886 mph and 157,000-ft. altitude in test of re-entry stability without the craft’s ventral fin. Walker said high climbing speed (186 mph faster than planned) was attained because sun’s glare temporarily prevented his reading instrument panel; thus, re-entry after engine shut-off was faster than planned. Test was seventh in series without X-15’s ventral fin.
National Academy of Sciences announced that the John J. Carty Medal would be awarded Provost Charles H. Townes of mit for his pioneering work in the development of the maser (microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation). Dr. Townes was credited with the conception of the idea for the maser in 1951, which was subsequently used in radio astronomy in recording and charting minute radio signals emanating from celestial bodies and to receive echoes of a radar signal reflected from the planet Venus.
Soviet Navy Day, Admiral of the Fleet Sergei G. Gorshkov declaring in article in Pravda that rocket-firing atomic submarines are the backbone of the Soviet Navy; “The Soviet fleet is now more modern than the navy of any capitalist country.”
