Dr. John R. Dunning, Dean of Columbia Univ. Faculty of Engineering, said in address before Design Engineering Conference^ of American Society of Mechanical Engineers, ntc, that “if the engineers do not aggressively claim the positions of leadership” in space effort and in exploitation of atomic energy, “this nation will pay an intolerable price for amateur improvisation.” Today’s engineers need knowledge of conventional engineering techniques as well as current developments in science; and some engineering schools are graduating “imitation physicists” and “disguised mathematicians” instead of men trained in the “great art” of systems design. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/63, 35)
Speaking at Symposium on Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery at Edwards afb, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said: “. . . It is worth keeping in mind that irrefutable facts and events demonstrate that the Soviets are conducting a vigorous space effort, and the evidence is strong that this program includes a manned lunar trip. “Let me emphasize that we should be making a vigorous effort to go to the moon and that we should continue to do so even if the Russians delete such an objective from their space program.” Dr. Welsh listed some major reasons for manned lunar project: “ (1) There is no other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “(2) Such a clear objective as that of the lunar project gives impetus, order, and efficiency to the program . . . .” Other outstanding reasons he listed were national prestige, economic spin-off, defense spin-off, and scientific advancement. (Text)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to 209,400ft. altitude at speeds up to 3,488 mph (mach 4.73), in nine-minute flight from Mud Lake, Nev. Instrumentation mounted on aircraft’s tail measured radiation in ultraviolet and infrared spectra. Secondary purpose of flight was evaluation of air flow over X-15’s surface conducted at high angles of attack, (frc Release)
X-15 No. 1 flown by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) to 226,400-ft. altitude and 3,631-mph speed (mach 5.07), the X-15 engine burning for 84 sec. Mounted in aircraft’s fuselage was traversing probe, retracting every four sec. and measuring air pressures at varying distances from aircraft skin, (frc Release; frc X-15 Flight Log; nasa Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.i said on the Senate floor that “we can and should dedicate America’s great resources to the magnificent challenge of space” but charged nasa with waste and inefficiency. He inserted in the Congressional Record an article of his in which he recommended (1) nasa build into its organization more effective safeguards against waste, duplication, and other “leakage” of funds; (2) Congress acquire skilled investigators to analyze the space program in depth; and (3) “Private individuals and groups should apply their concern about excessive and unnecessary Government spending to the space program.” (CR, 11/5/63,19990-91)
Report by Legislative Drafting Research Fund of Columbia Univ., for National Security Industrial Association, was made public, the report examining statutes covering Federal compensation for deaths, injuries, and property losses caused by defense and space-related accidents. Research found victims of accidents arising from aec activities were almost completely protected under existing laws, but that this was not the case for dod and nasa programs. Accidents in these programs would probably be infrequent but might be “catastrophic,” report said. Entitled “Financial Protection Against Rislrs of Major Harm in Government Programs,” study was prepared under general direction of John M. Kemochan, Director of the Fund. (NYT, 4/15/63)
Donald T. Gregory, Technical Assistant to D Spacecraft Center, addressed nearly 1,000 Dade County educators at workshop for new teachers in Miami, Fla. Noting U.S. requires about 60,000 engineers yearly—while only 33,700 graduated in 1963—Gregory emphasized the importance of teaching all children about scientific and technological events of the space age and stimulating their interest and knowledge in science and engineering at an early age. (msc Release 63-139) August 24: usaf sac crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1174-63)
usaf oar announced formation of Scientific Advisory Group, composed of 12 leading U.S. scientists: Dr. Joseph Kaplan, chairman; Dr. Oliver G. Haywood, Jr.; Prof. Robert J. Havighurst; Prof. Henry Houghton; Dr. John P. Howe; Dr. Mark Kac; Dr. Carl Kaplan; Dr. Nathan L. Krisberg; Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper; Dr. David B. Langmuir; Prof. Leonard Schieff; and Prof. Frederick Seitz. Group would serve as advisory body to oar Commander, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, (oar Release 7-03—4)
26 persons associated with Project Mercury were presented the John J. Montgomery Award by the San Diego Chapter of the National Society of Aerospace Professionals. Recipients from nasa were Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter, L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., John H. Glenn, Jr., Virgil I. Grissom, Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Donald K. Slayton, and Walter M. Schirra; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; Dr. Walter C. Williams, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator; Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Project Mercury Manager; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Project Mercury Flight Operations Director; Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director of Engineering and Development; Dr. Charles A. Berry, Medical Operations Chief; and Lt. Col. John A. Powers (usaf) Mercury Public Affairs Officer. (San Diego Union, 12/6/63)
President Kennedy witnessed successful firings of six Army missiles at White Sands Missile Range: Honest John, Little John, Sergeant, Hawk, Nike-Hercules, and Nike-Zeus. (M&R, 6/10/63, 12)
X-15 No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) reached 3,856-mph speed (mach 5.57) and 124,200-ft. altitude, 156 mph faster and 26,200 ft. higher than planned because of one-degree error in flight angle. Aircraft was equipped with traversing probe, device that extends itself about three inches from X-15 surface every four seconds, to measure air flow, (fkc Release; NYT, 5/17/63, 19 j	_
Postmaster General J. Edward Day, speaking at a luncheon in Washington honoring the 25th anniversary of the cab, said: “Today, the 11 domestic trunkline carriers serve more than 600 points over routes in excess of 185,000 miles in length. Twenty-four smaller carriers provide service to some 900 smaller communities over routes m excess of 88,000 miles. Three carriers provide domestic all-cargo service to 38 points over routes in excess of 14,000 miles and another 15 carriers are licensed to provide supplemental services. Fifteen carriers are authorized to provide service to a total of 428 points outside the United States over routes in excess of 320,000 miles.” (CR, 6/27/63, A4098)
Dr. Joseph Kaplan, U.S. Chairman of International Geophysical Year, declared greatest success of igy was in preparing the way for other international research. Such studies would increasingly fall within scope of United Nations, he said. Dr. Kaplan was speaking before joint meeting of Peninsula Engineers Club and Institute of Aerospace Sciences in Newport News, Va. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/21/63)
10-day injunction by U.S. District Court Judge William J. Lindberg halted threatened iam strike against Boeing Co. President Kennedy, after receiving report from special board of inquiry, had ordered Justice Dept, to seek the injunction on grounds that such a strike would endanger national security. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/63)
Balloon flight with instrumented payload to study oxygen conditions in stratosphere was conducted successfully from Palestine, Tex., John Sparkman, manager of National Center for Atmospheric Research’s Balloon Flight Station, announced. Balloon rose to 108,000 ft.; its 680-lb. instrument package was recovered in good condition 40 mi. north of San Angelo, Tex. Three similar attempts had failed when balloon split on two occasions and weather forced postponement on a third. Project was sponsored by Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (Houston Post, 8/24/63) ; to Director of nasa Manned
nasa $150 awards to Dr. Karlheinz Thom and Joseph Norwood, Jr., for invention of plasma accelerator, were announced. Accelerator is capable of controlled ignition under very low gas pressures. (nasa Release 63-137)
In speech before Public Relations Society of America luncheon meeting in Washington, msc Public Affairs Officer Lt. Col. John H. Powers (usaf) said preparations for Project Mercury flight MA-9 were proceeding on schedule. Flight was scheduled for mid-May. (AP, Birmingham, Post-Herald, 4/10/63)
James T. Koppenhaver resigned as Director, Office of Reliability and Quality Assurance, nasa. Deputy Director John E. Condon was appointed Acting Director of the Office, (nasa Announcement 63-198)	...	.
X-15 No. 3 flown to 92,500-ft. altitude at speed of 3,770 mph (mach 5.51) by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker in test to investigate heat transfer rates and unusual air flow over certain parts or the aircraft. More than 400 heat-measuring devices and 25 presssure-measuring devices were mounted on the aircraft to determine how heat caused by air friction is transmitted to aircraft’s surfaces and to record information concerning air flow, (frc Release; upi, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/19/63 ; M&R, 4/29/63,10)
In White House ceremony, President Lyndon B. Johnson awarded 31 Presidential Medals of Freedom, then added additional awards to the late President John F. Kennedy and the late Pope John XXIII. Among those receiving this new award, created by President Kennedy, were Dr. Alan T. Waterman, Robert A. Lovett, Edwin H. Land, and Mark S. Watson. (Wash,. Poet, 12/7/63, A8)
Dr. John Billingham, British aerospace medicine specialist, was appointed assistant to Dr. George Smith of Environmental Physiology Branch in Crew Systems Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Appointment of Billingham was first direct foreign appointment to msc. (msc Release 63-35)
Yuri Marinin, Soviet space writer, wrote in article translated by U.S. Dept, of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services that “earth-orbit rendezvous” method of manned lunar flight “is regarded as the most practical.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A5)
British scientist Dr. John F. Kerridge of Univ. of London reported at the cosmic dust conference in New York sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences that he had found material in meteorites that closely resembled the kinds of clays formed by water action on earth. This would argue that the meteorites were once part of a body large enough to have its own atmosphere and hence its own weather. This supported previous findings by Dr. Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham Univ., who also claims to have found fossil-like objects in meteorites. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/22/63, 32)
Dr. Eugene Fubini succeeded John H. Rubel as Deputy Director, dod Research and Engineering. Rubel resigned to return to private industry. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,25)
X-15 No. 1 flown by pilot John McKay to 105,500-ft. altiude at maximum speed of 3,654 (mach 5.32) mph in test to measure distortion of photographs at extreme speeds. Camera was recessed in underside of aircraft’s nose. (AP, Chic. Trib., 4/26/63)
nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, Julian Scheer, said Lt. Col. John A. Powers, former Public Affairs Officer at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, would become technical consultant to nasa’s exhibits program at Hq., effective Sept. 1. Colonel Powers would supervise construction of spacecraft models used in nasa exhibits. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/18/63)
nasa announced Albert F. Siepert, Director of Administration since formation of nasa in October 1958, had been appointed to new post of Deputy Director, nasa Launch Operations Center, effective about April 1. He would be succeeded by John D. Young, nasa Deputy Director of Administration since 1961. Don D. Cadle, Director of Resource Programming in nasa Office of Programs since 1961, was appointed Deputy Director of Administration to succeed John D. Young, (nasa Release 63-33)
Discovery of new atomic particle, Phi-meson, was reported in Physical Review Letters by the two groups of researchers— Brookhaven National Laboratory, Long Island, and Univ. of California’s Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Berkeley. New particle had been predicted by Dr. Jim John Sakurai last December, based on research by team from these two institutions and on speculation by nuclear theorist Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, Prof, of Physics at CalTech. (NYT, 4/15/63,1,14)
X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,286 mph (mach 4.75) and 90,800-ft. altitude by Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), his second X-15 flight. The X-15 was put through two sharp rolling turns to test aircraft stability at high speeds and as part of the pilot’s familiarization training. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 11/15/63; X-15 Project Office)
In March issue of Physical Review, John Linsley of mit’s Laboratory for Nuclear Science reported that an atom of high energy, presumably from some galaxy outside our own Milky Way, penetrated our solar system and crashed into the earth’s atmosphere, setting off a cosmic-ray shower over New Mexico during February. Source of the atomic nucleus was reasoned because of its enormous power as the resultant cosmic-ray shower covered an area of several square miles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63)
usaf announced it was establishing three-man Gemini liaison and support office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Under Col. William A. Stellenwerf, office would deal primarily with Titan II launch vehicle for Gemini and recovery requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/15/63, 31; A-N-AF Journ. <& Reg., 7/13/63, 16)
In lecture on “The Practical and Impractical Uses of Space” at Catholic University, Dr. Edward Teller supported the U.S. lunar program but parried questions on the reasons. “I just don’t know why ... I wanted to go to the moon before Sputnik.” Teller stated that he believed that water could be drawn from lunar rocks by underground nuclear explosions: “One hundred tons of water on the moon would be the equivalent of 100 tons of gold here.” He said that contamination of the water would not be a problem as the U.S. had already developed “clean” bombs and that even cleaner bombs are possible. (Ayres, Wash. Post, 11/9/63, C14) 741-023 O—64-28
Addressing the Southwest Conference on Arms Control at the University of Oklahoma, William C. Foster, Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, discussed the complex relationship between national strategy, military security, and arms control in a thermonuclear world.
During prelaunch preparations at Holloman afb, N.M., Project Stargazer balloon broke loose and soared away, finally landing 120-mi. east of Holloman. Balloon was to have carried gondola with two men, Capt. Joseph Kittinger (usaf) and astronomer William White, and their 12.5-in. telescope to study stars from above most of earth’s atmosphere, usaf spokesman said sudden wind blew the moored balloon from side to side, creating static electricity which triggered a safety mechanism to release the balloon. Damaged balloon would require repairs by manufacturer before it could be re-used. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Sen. Edward V. Long (D.-Mo.) and 13 other Senators proposed “freedom of information” bill to require Government agencies to publish in Federal Register all policy statements, rules, and procedures, and to make available for inspection all final opinions, statements, and interpretations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/63)
Donald Wills Douglas, founder, board chairman, and chief executive officer of Douglas Aircraft Co., was presented 1963 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at Aero Club of Washington’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet, (naa Release)
In letter to fcc Chairman E. William Henry, ComSatCorp Chairman Leo D. Welch said ComSat directors agreed that stock be issued to the public “at the earliest practicable date” and were planning stock issuance not later than early 1964. Replying to fco contention that stockholders should have voice in ComSat policy making (see July 26), Welch asserted that fcc was invading management functions of the directors and argued that the corporation’s initial studies were necessary to give potential investors “a responsible presentation of material facts in compliance with the applicable Federal and state securities laws.” (N. Y. Herald Tnb., 8/8/63; Clayton, Wash. Post, 8/8/63)
Marcel Nicolet of the Belgium National Space Research Committee was the winner of the Guggenheim International Astronautics Award at the banquet of the International Astronautics Federation in Paris. Nicolet had, in early 1961, suggested the existence of the helium layer between the oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere and the hydrogen upper atmosphere, later confirmed independently by R. E. Bourdeau, E. C. Whipple, P. C. Donnelly, and S. J. Bauer, using explorer vm ion trap data. Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin attended the XIVth iaf banquet dressed in civilian domes. (Cf. R. Jastrow, “Results . . . ,”
Cosmic-ray shower caused by atomic nucleus so powerful that it must have come from another galaxy was reported in Physical Review Letters. Cosmic-ray shower was detected at Volcano Ranch recording station near Albuquerque by John Linsley of mit Laboratory for Nuclear Science. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63, A2)
X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker (nasa) was presented 1963 Pilot of the Year award by National Pilots Association in Miami. Award was made in recognition of Walker’s contribution to aeronautical research and the general advancement of aviation. Participating in the X-15 program since its inception, Walker has flown the X-15 25 times, more than any other man; he has flown it to record speed of 4,104 mph and has attained record altitude, 354,200 ft. (frc Release 36-63)
Gen. Lucius D. Clay (usa, Ret.) named recipient of 1964 John Fritz Medal, citing him for “his distinguished service to the engineering profession, the nation, and to the world.” {NYT, 7/19/63)
Experiments to determine behavior of dust on moon’s surface described by Dr. John W. Salisbury of afcrl Space Physics Laboratory in OAR Research Review. Conducted in lunar simulation chamber in which effects of low pressure, radiation, and temperature on physical properties of probable lunar surface materials were studied, experiment demonstrated for first time that silicate powders, like metals, adhere to one another in ultrahigh vacuums. Particles also adhere to glass and metal surfaces. Experiment director Salisbury concluded “properly designed vehicles will not sink away into a sea of lunar dust, should one exist. The tendency of dust particles to stick to all metal and glass surfaces will, however, provide an unusual difficulty in the operation of camera lenses, portholes and mirrors.” (OAR Research Review, 8/12/63, 3-4)
President of Boeing Co. William M. Allen testified in closed hearings before Senate Investigations Subcommittee that Boeing’s bid to build 23 tfx aircraft was $148,000,000 less than that of General Dynamics Corp., “yet we were downgraded by reason of our lower price. It was most disillusioning and discouraging to discover that one of the principal reasons Boeing lost the award was because our fixed-price bid was too low .... It has been stated that our cost estimates were unrealistic, demonstrating that we did not appreciate the complexities of developing the tfx . . . .” He said Boeing developed its bid on basis of careful calculations and was fully prepared to fulfill contract commitments at quoted price of $482,000,000. (AP, NYT, 5/3/63,1,14)
Joseph A. Walker, nasa’s senior X-15 pilot and holder of the world altitude and speed records for research aircraft, was awarded the Christopher Columbus International Prize for Communication. The award is made by the city of Genoa, Italy, each year on Columbus Day. U.S. Ambassador G. Frederick Reinhardt accepted the award on behalf of Mr. Walker, (nasa Release 63-229; AP, NTT, 10/14/63, 9)
Award of patent for manned orbital spacecraft designed to glide into land or water landing wa9 reported in New York Times. Patent was obtained for nasa by Alan B. Kehlet, Dennis F. Hasson, and William W. Petynia. (NYT, 5/25/63,13,18)
Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of at&t, was cited by Saturday Review as “Businessman of the Year” (1962). Mr. Kappel spearheaded at&t’s $50-million commitment to Telstar ever since it was envisioned by Bell Labs scientist, Dr. John R. Pierce, in 1954. Saturday Review called Telstar “more than a triumph of the modem technology of space communications. It was also a symbol wise men could approve, of a new era in human communications, a work of peace that sought only to bring men together, not to destroy them. Finally, it was the product of a promising new teamwork in space between government and industry, in this case the largest private enterprise venture in the world . . . .” (Sat. Review, 1/12/63, 46)
B-58 with usaf crew flew nonstop from Tokyo to London, completing the 8,028-mi. flight in 8 hrs. 35 min. for an average speed of 938 mph. The B-58 was refueled in midair five times. Previous record of 17 hrs. 42 min. was set in 1957 by U.K.’s W. Hoy, who flew a Canberra at an average speed of 335.7 mph. Crew members on the B-58 were Mai. Sidney G. Kubesch, Capt. Gerald R. Williamson, and Maj. John O. Barrett. (Av. TF&., 10/21/63; _ NYTX10/22/63,8) p ^ ^
X-15 No. 1 was flown by nasa pilot Joseph Walker to 3,911 mph (mach 5.51) and 111,800 ft. at Edwards afb, Calif. During the flight a new measuring instrument, the traversing probe, popped in and out of the wing, measuring the whole profile of boundary layer over surface of the X-15. Surface temperature rose to 1,000° during the flight, the 86th for the X-15. (upi, Chic. Tnb., 6/26/63; nasa Hq.)
Maj. Robert S. Sowers (usaf), Capt. Robert MacDonald (usaf), and Capt. John T. Walton (usaf) named by General Curtis E. LeMay (usaf) as recipients of 1962 MacKay Trophy “for the most meritorious flight of the year.” The fliers established new transcontinental speed records on March 5, 1962, in B-58 Hustler, (dod Release 724^63)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) announced renaming of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy “will not be official unless it is acted on by the Florida Legislature.” Gurney quoted Arthur Baker, Chairman of Board of Geographic Names, as saying name change will apply only to federal maps and documents, is not compulsory for the people of Florida. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/13/63)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) reported that Soviet cosmonauts are undergoing intensive training for “more complicated tasks.” Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, promoted to full colonel, is directingnew program of training the other veteran space flyers. ( upi, Wash. Post, 12/9/63)
John Hawkinson, president of Television Shares Management Corp., said in St. Louis that electronics and aerospace industries provided more favorable investment prospects than any segment of U.S. business, (upi, Chic. Trib., 2/20/63)
Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Chancellor Edward H. Litchfield announced plans for $30-million space research and coordination center. Center would be used for study in natural and social sciences and engineering and health areas connected with aerospace activities. (upi, Wash. Post, 1/12/63,1)
Concluding its two-week meeting at Berkeley, Calif., International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics elected as president Joseph Kaplan, physicist of ucj,a, to succeed Vladimir V. Beloussov, Soviet seismologist. During the meeting, the 3,000 delegates laid plans for Upper Mantle Project to explore rock layer of the earth and for International Hydrological Decade (1965-1975) to study earth’s water resources and for projects during International Quiet Sun Year. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/2/63) During August:	Mockup model of Gemini two-man spacecraft shipped from McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to nasa Launch Operations Center, Cape Canaveral, for tests of ground support equipment at the launch complex. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/22/63)
Reacting to President Johnson’s Thanksgiving Day message announcing he had “acted ... to change the name of Cape Canaveral . . . [to] Cape Kennedy,” the City Council of Cape Canaveral and the Cocoa Chamber of Commerce adopted resolutions opposing changing the name of Cape Canaveral. Florida’s Governor Farris Bryant defended President Johnson’s decision, in a Tallahassee press conference: “. . . the people of Florida, in the year 2063, will look back and understand what President Johnson has done and will approve.” Arthur A. Baker, chairman of the Domestic Names Committee of the U.S. Board of Geographic Names, said he regarded the name change as an accomplished fact. Edward P. Cliff, chairman of the Board, also said he regarded the change as fact. Official name changing awaited action by the Board, which was scheduled to meet next Jan. 21. (AP, Was A Post, 12/6/63; un, N.Y. Herald Trib., 12/6/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor with regard to various aid-to-education bills before the Senate, asserted a connection between excellence of education and loss of jobs to automation. As a case in point he inserted in the Congressional Record two New York Times articles on nasa’s findings of careless or inadequate workmanship in Project Mercury. “In both articles,” the Senator said, “the point is made that workmen on the projects do not have the necessary technical skill to complete them, in many instances, without the defects which resulted not only in serious failures of the end product but also in running up a substantial expense to the Government.” (CR, 10/7/63, 17847)
Study by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell reported that lack of “timely guidance” by dod was largely responsible for failure of nuclear-powered aircraft project. Conceived in 1946 and declared technically feasible in 1951, project was canceled by President Kennedy in 1961 after dod and aec had spent more than $1 billion on the project, which did not reach the prototype stage. gao’s report said that dod “agrees that the program suffered considerably from lack of prompt decisions and from frequent changes in emphasis and goals.” (Wash. Post, 3/9/63; Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 25)
Weather conditions forced postponement of nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker’s 68-mi. altitude flight in X-15. Flight was made Aug. 22. (upi, ATT7,8/7/63)
ComSatCorp announced that John A. Johnson, nasa General Counsel since nasa was formed in 1958, would become its Director of International Arrangements, nasa in turn announced that Mr. Johnson would be succeeded as General Counsel by Walter D. Sohier, Deputy General Counsel. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/63; ComSatCorp Release; nasa Release 63-259)
Sen. Mike Mansfield (D.-Mont.) paid tribute to X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker and his record flight of July 19, and said that “there can be no question that Mr. Walker and all the members of the X-15 team are pioneers of the space age. The solid contributions of the X-15 program have been many and valuable. They include information on aerodynamic heating, the behavior of the boundary layer, the effect of noise levels on aircraft structures, measurement of friction drag on aircraft skin, new control systems, new piloting techniques, new landing gear designs and new ways of measuring landing gear loads, better instrument displays, and many other improvements to ‘performance, efficiency, or safety of air and space vehicles.’ In addition, during the current series of tests, the X-15 is being used to carry scientific experiments into space. One of these experiments will use a camera which may give us the first meaningful photographs of stars taken from outside the earth’s atmosphere. Speed and altitude records may be the incidental contributions of the remarkable X-15 program. More significant in the long run is the information and experience it has provided and continues to provide about this strange new sea of space upon which man has embarked . . . .” (CA, 7/22/63,12354)
Edward M. Shafer, nasa Attorney-Adviser since September 1959, was appointed nasa Assistant General Counsel. (nasa Announcement 63-275)
Establishment of Div. of Space Sciences and Applied Physics in Catholic University’s School of Engineering and Architecture was announced by Rt. Rev. William J. McDonald, Rector of the Univ. {Wash. Post, 5/11/63)
Donald K. Slayton was sworn into his Civil Service appointment as Assistant Director for Flight Crew operations, msc. His resignation from the usaf had become effective the previous day. (msc Release 63-242)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker attained record altitude of 347,800 ft. (65.9 mi.) and speed of 3,710 mph (mach 5.50). Flight was planned as 315,000-ft. altitude build-up for pilot Walker in preparation for later 350,000-ft. attempt, but X-15’s engine burned 85 sec. instead of planned 83 sec. Nitrogen-filled balloon was to have ejected from X-15’s tail during ascent to obtain altitude density measurements, but electrical ejection signal did not function properly. This was 90th flight of X-15. (frc Release 25-63; frc X-15 Flight Log; nasa Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.; nasa Release 63-160)
usaf Project Stargazer balloon flight from Alamogordo, N.M., canceled because of high surface winds. Balloon was equipped with small aluminum gondola for pilot, Capt. Joseph Kittinger, Jr. (usaf), and civilian astronomer, William C. White, for a 24-hour observation with 12.5-inch gyroscopic telescope above 90 per cent of the earth’s atmosphere, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 3/26/63)
First award of the recently established Burroughs International Test Pilot Award was made to Joseph T. Tymczyszym, Chief of faa’s West Coast Supersonic Transport Office. The award presented by faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby at the Wings Club in New York was established by United Aircraft Corp. in honor of Richard H. Burroughs, Chance Vought test pilot who was killed when he stayed with his disabled experimental aircraft to guide it away from an inhabited area. Award would be administered by Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., of New York, (faa Release 63-96)
