Rep. Roman C. Pueinski (D.—111.) called attention to an article in the Chicago Sun-Times on the Midwest’s dissatisfaction with the distribution of Federal R&D projects. President’s science adviser Dr. Donald F. Hornig said two Congressional committees were investigating whether research contract funds had been concentrated in too few areas of the country to the detriment of other regions. Dr. Hornig also said that this investigation showed that science can no longer ignore the political process. (CR, 6/10/64, A3138)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) included in Congressional Record a resolution by Florida Library and Historical Commission appealing to the President, the Florida Governor, and the U.S. Board of Geographic Names “to carefully consider the possibility of retaining the name, Cape Canaveral, as the geographic designation only of the easternmost tip of the land formation known as Cape Canaveral (that tip upon which no portion of the missile complex is located) thereby detracting none whatever from the widespread desire to honor our late President John F. Kennedy.” (CR, 1/21/64, A214)
Yuri Gagarin, Soviet cosmonaut and first man to fly in space, said in Izvestia interview that Engr. Col. Vladimir Mikhailovitch Komarov, member of voskhod i crew, had once been disqualified for cosmonaut training because of heart-beat irregularity, but had been reinstated when a heart specialist declared his heart to be sound. (Loory, N.Y. Her., Trib., 10/13/64)
Attempted flight of X-15 No. 3, with Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) as pilot, was aborted 10 min. before scheduled launch from B-52 mother craft because of problems with cabin pressure, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) spoke on the Senate floor on general aviation (“all aviation activity except the airlines and the military”): “Three observations about general aviation are worth sharing. “General aviation has greatly expanded our horizons for recreation, commerce, and government for a relatively small but potent and influential number of people. It can do so for many more. “General aviation has sharply increased the pace of business and political competition. By reducing the unproductive travel time of costly personnel, the airplane, particularly in general aviation, has acted as a labor creator rather than as a labor saver. By making it 766-598 O—65--22 possible to do more things, the airplane has forced people to do more things to keep ahead of the competition. “General aviation in the rest of the world suffers under an oppressive load of regulatory restriction to so great an extent that it barely exists. We must guard against burdening U.S. general aviation with similar controls producing the same result.” (CR, 9/28/64, 22241-43)
Picket lines were set up at the entrances to Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) by United Plant Guards Workers of America. The union charged that Wackenhut Corp., subcontractor to twa at the Saturn/Apollo site, was employing nonunion guards. 1,886 of 2,597 construction workers at the Saturn V complex refused to cross the picket lines, and about 700 of 2,500 workers at the USAF Titan III site were absent. William Simkin, vice chairman of the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, requested that the 'building trades unions return to work, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/2/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/2/64; upi, NYT, 4/3/64)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), speaking at Midwest Governors’ Conference in Minneapolis, recommended establishment of a national technology commission to award Federal research projects to promote nationwide economic development. Rep. Karth said concentration of Government R&D contracts to industries and universities on East and West coasts showed that “the broad national economic development is not being served.” (Higgins, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/11/64)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.~Wis.) said GAO study showed that usaf could save more than $1 million a year in administrative costs at AMR through consolidation of supply management functions. (AP, Houston Chron., 4/3/64)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), received his colonelcy from President Johnson in White House ceremony. Since the Senate had not gotten to the promotion list prior to adjournment, the President, after consultation with members of Congress, had made a recess appointment for Glenn, (upi, NYT, 10/28/64, 38; Balt. Sun, 10/28/64)
X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John B. McKay (nasa) to 86,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,000 mph (mach 4.54). The flight continued checkout of the revised landing gear system on the No. 2 aircraft and checked modifications made to prevent nose gear from coming down prematurely. Total engine bum time was 76 sec. and tests performed were successful, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
ComSatCorp announced that six persons had been nominated by its board of directors for election to the new board by public stockholders. They were: Leo D. Welch, Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, David M. Kennedy, George L. Killion, Leonard H. Marks, and Bruce G. Sundlun. The corporation announced that the first annual meeting of the shareholders was tentatively planned for Sept. 17 in Washington. (ComSatCorp Release, 7/8/64; NYT, 7/9/64, 43C, 45C)
Nuclear “breeder” reactor using thorium fuel, pioneered by Vice Adm. Hyman G. Rickover, was under consideration by aec and Calif. Dept, of Water Resources for a nuclear power plant, according to recent letter from aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg to Sen. John 0. Pastore, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Built around the “seed-and-blanket” design developed by the Rickover team, the thorium-fueled reactor appeared to have “unusual potential for generating economic nuclear power and for breeding.” If successful, Dr. Seaborg said, the concept would “represent a major advance in reactor technology and an important milestone in our national objective of conserving nuclear fuel resources.” (Finney, NYT, 2/2/64,1,30)
Dr. Edward Teller, nuclear physicist, testified before House Select Committee on Government Research on the Federal Government’s role in research. Dr. Teller criticized DOD’s secrecy in scientific developments, saying practice had been to keep them secret unless it could be proved without a doubt that making them public would be in the national interest. “I think the burden of proof should be on the other side,” Dr. Teller stated. “I am pretty well convinced that the Russians have all our secrets and I am even afraid they have the secrets we are going to discover in the next two years. Our industry and our citizens don’t have those secrets.” (nasa LAR III/ll; AP, NYT, 1/23/64, 9)
London betting house of William Hill Ltd., announced odds of 100-to-l against manned lunar landing by U.S.S.R. before Jan. 1, 1971 and 150-to-l against manned lunar landing by U.S. before same date. Several weeks later the firm improved their odds by changing date to Jan. 1, 1968. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/27/64; SBD, 11/12/64)
USAf’s Vice Chief of Staff General William F. McKee was presented his third Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson. Retiring after 35 years in the armed forces, General McKee was joining NASA Sept. 1, as Assistant Administrator for Management Development. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/28/64; AP, NYT, 7/31/64, 5)
The Boeing Co. was awarded the annual Missiles and Rockets New Product of the Year Award for its development of a microminiature welder. The award was presented to Boeing officials by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Awards of Honor went to Kollmorgen Corp. (for compact pointing interferometer), and to Control Data Corp. (for its 6600 computer). (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (NASA) in planned captive flight, (nasa X—15 Proj. Off.)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) was appointed to newly established position of Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div. In this capacity he would be responsible for all aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (SBD, 3/13/64,399; M&R, 3/23/64, 9)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) inserted into the Congressional Record an editorial from the Wall Street Journal concerning Government participation in financing the supersonic transport: “. . . The question, as we see it, is not whether there will eventually be operational supersonic airlines, or even whether the Government has any business in that business. Rather, it is a question whether the Government is trying to rush the thing before its economic time, with too few charts and too little knowledge. “A more cautious flight into the unknown could well make for speedier progress in the end—not to mention sounder investments.” (CR, 3/3/ 64, 4067)
William J. Schulte, Assistant Administrator for General Aviation, faa, was named 1964 winner of National Business Aircraft Association Award for meritorious service to aviation. (Av. Wk., 9/14/64, 23)
Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.-Ill.), Chairman of House Subcommittee on National Research Data Processing and Information Retrieval Center, wrote in Washington Daily News article: “The greatest challenge in this changing world is the solution of the problem of handling scientific and technical information. “I am deeply concerned with the staggering acceleration of scientific and technical information which is the life-blood in the heart of our research and development effort. ... “I am convinced somewhere in the mountainous scientific literature there is a cure for cancer, a solution for harnessing limitless energy from nuclear fusion and a way to solve the food requirement of a growing world population.” (Wash. Daily News, 4/21/64) April21: Rep. John Brademas (D.-Ind.) inserted in Congressional Record an editorial on Rep. J. Edward Roush’s proposal that NASA establish a Midwestern office, broadcast by station WOWO: “. . . . We agree with Congressman Roush that if it is in the best interests of NASA to operate liaison offices to aid potential contractors in securing NASA business, then every area of the United States should qualify for this aid. . . .” (CR, 4/21/64, A1998-99)
General Creighton W. Abrams, Jr. <USA), presented the Distinguished Flying Cross to four of five Army pilots who recently broke ten world records for helicopters, including two records previously held by the Russians. The recipients were: Capt. William A. Welter, Jr.; Capt. Michael N. Antoniou; cwo Emery E. Nelson; and cwo Joseph C. Watts. The fifth pilot, Maj. John A. Johnston, was absent on an overseas assignment. The records were for speed, distance, and time-to-climb in class E-l, E-ID, and E-IE helicopters. With official recognition of the new records, the U.S. would hold 26 marks (52%), the U.S.S.R. 14 (28%), France 9 (18%), and Czechoslovakia 1 (2%). (dod Releases 793-64 and 824-64; NYT, 11/7/64,53)
Roscoe Drummond, in his Washington Post column, said success of Saturn I SA-5 “. . . means that the major advantage which the Soviets have had so long and which has yielded them their principal space spectaculars—the long Russian lead in rocket power—is now a thing of the past. ... “There should be no minimizing what the Soviets have already done. . . . “But the United States accomplishments have been more diverse. We have put almost four times as many spacecraft into orbit as the Soviets. We have made far more progress in the application of space technology in communications, weather, and navigation. We both have compiled a large volume of scientific data about outer space and neither is significantly ahead. “As Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, puts it, ‘the space race continues and it will be a long one.’” (Drummond, Wash. Post, 2/1/64, in CR, 2/1/64, A44I)
Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board of AT&T, was named recipient of the 1965 John Fritz Medal by United Engineering Trustees, Inc., for “leadership in the pioneering of space communications. . . .” (Av. Wk., 9/14/64, 23)
U.S. Army announced that the Lockheed-California Co.’s XH-51A compound helicopter (a helicopter having wings as well as rotor blades) had flown 242 mph—“the fastest known speed of any rotor craft in the world.” The flight was made by a test pilot, Donald Segner, off the Southern California coast. (AP, NYT, 12/14/64, 32)
Retiring science editor of New York Times William L. Laurence was honored at dinner in New York by wide range of scientific societies. Laurence was science journalist for 34 years, winner of two Pulitzer Prizes. (NYT, 1/21/64,1)
Balloon launched from Holloman AFB, Tex., carried telescope and instrumentation to 86,000-ft. altitude, where it focused on the planet Venus for more than three hours. Financed by usaf contract, the experiment was second such study of Venus this year by Johns Hopkins Univ. team headed by Dr. John Strong. Scientific results would be ahinounced later this year (see Dec. 7). (Fenton, Balt. Sun, 12/7/64; Sullivan, NYT, 12/8/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) told Aviation/Space Writers’ Association that usaf would seek bids for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory i(mol) by Dec. 1. dod had released $6 million for the project May 1, opening the door to preliminary study. Under present schedule, he said, hardware development could begin in about a year, with first unmanned flight late in 1967 or early 1968. (Benedict, AP, 5/27/64)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by John B. McKay (NASA) to altitude of 87,000	ft. and speed of 3,716 mph (mach 5.58), in flight near Edwards, Calif. During the flight, heat transfer and noise level measurements were made on the aircraft’s skin. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 8/27/64)
Sen. John Stennis (D.-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, said he had directed his staff “to up-date and review the current information and data relating to the reliability and dependability of the Nation’s long range ballistic missiles as soon as possible.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64; Raymond, NYT, 1/17/64, 13)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., left the hospital and returned home to Seabrook, Tex., where he would convalesce from inflammation of his inner ear. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/4/64)
Lt. Col. John D. Peters (usaf), engineer at Arnold Engineering Development Center, said in San Antonio that the four-legged landing gear designed for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module (lem) was “needlessly risky” and should be replaced by an inflatable “doughnut” to cushion the lem’s landing. Tube at lem’s base could be inflated just before landing, would allow a safe landing even if exact nature of lunar surface is unknown. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/64; SBD, 10/22/64,283)
Dr. John P. Meehan, physiologist at Univ. of Southern California, announced he would begin experiment in which 15 young men would lie flat on their backs for 30 days, then be put in a centrifuge and be subjected to forces eight times normal gravity while attempting to operate simulated space capsule controls. Purpose of the experiment was to duplicate effect of long periods of weightlessness in space on body’s heart-blood system and to devise ways of overcoming it. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/9/64)
In White House Ceremony, President Johnson awarded 1963 National Medal of Science to the recipients: Drs. Jerome B. Wiesner, Cornelius B. van Neil, Luis W. Alvarez, Vannevar Bush, John R. Pierce, and Norbert Wiener. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/14/64)
Chief engineer of Air Transport Association’s Supersonic Advisory Committee, John T. Dyment, estimated it would cost half-again as much as the $1 billion estimated by the Government to develop the U.S. supersonic transport and test it adequately. He criticized plans to take steps toward manufacturing before prototype testing was completed: “We must have supersonic transports built and flying for a year or so to gain the experience and the reliability before we even start a production line. This is essential. . . .” Detailed findings of the committee’s two-day meeting in New York would be reported to iata Technical Committee May 5. (Clark, NYT, 3/25/64,65)
With nuclear explosives new sea-level canal could be built across Isthmus of Panama for $500 million or less, according to Lawrence Radiation Laboratory’s Gerald W. Johnson, Director of AEC Project Plowshare. Technical and economic feasibility of such a project was discussed in letter from Johnson to Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.-R.I.), Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Use of nuclear explosives to dig new Panama canal had been under study since 1958, when Panama Canal Co. requested Lawrence Radiation Laboratory for preliminary feasibility study of the project. (Finney, NYT, 1/21/64, 1°) .
Navy Secretary Paul H. Nitze formally approved the retirement of Marine Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. The retirement was set for Jan. 1. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 11/5/64; NYT, 11/5/64,11)
None of the supersonic transport bidders was willing to assume the prescribed share of cost of the joint Government—industry-funded sst program, John P. MacKenzie reported in Washington Post. Under plan presented by President Kennedy, sst would cost $1 billion, with Government paying 75% of the cost and manufacturers paying remaining 25%. MacKenzie said none of the six bidding manufacturers had met the 25% participation challenge, and “some manufacturers said the plane could not be developed for $1 billion.” Officials were reported to be studying independent report by Eugene R. Black, former president of the World Bank, which unnamed sources said recommended Government finance 90% of the development cost. Report also was said to have proposed transferring sst program from faa to an independent agency, slowing pace of the sst development and avoiding international “race” with U.K.-France Concorde development. (MacKenzie, Wash. Post, 2/11/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/13/64; Newsweek, 2/17/64)
Col. John C. Nickerson (USA), 47, a key figure in USA-USAF Thor-Jupiter controversy, died in automobile accident in Alamagordo, N. Mex. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/3/64, A2)
X—15 No. 3 flown by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) to 97,000-ft. altitude and 3,820-mph speed (mach 5.69) from Edwards afb, Calif. During the flight, a new protective coating on underside of plane’s tail was tested for aerodynamic heating, for possible future application in X-15 No. 2. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/29/64; M&R, 10/5/64,11)
X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) in planned captive flight. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
Controller General Joseph Campbell said that the Federal Government could have saved $60 million by buying rather than leasing electronic data-processing systems for use on Government contracts. He recommended that a central management office be set up with authority to decide on the least expensive methods of obtaining data-processing equipment. (NYT, 11/4/64)	_
Five surviving men among the eight Army Air Service pilots who took part in the first flight around the world 40 years ago were honored by Explorers Club at dinner in Beverly Hills, Calif. A week later, the men were honored in ceremonies at afsc Hq., which also honored Donald W. Douglas, Sr., designer and builder of the four Douglas World Cruiser open-cockpit biplanes. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/21/64)
Soviet military newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) announced that Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin had been assigned head of its new “Cosmonauts’ Desk” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/9/64)
Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev had replaced Col. Yuri A. Gagarin as head of Soviet cosmonauts, Krasnaya Zvezda reported, (upi, NYT, 2/22/(A, 10) . .
Dr. John Strong, Director of Johns Hopkins Astrophysics and Physical Meteorology Laboratory, announced definite evidence of water vapor around and on the planet Venus. His determination was made as the result of a Feb. 21 daytime balloon flight to study Venus by means of a unique robot telescope system. The study was made under research grant for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories. “Since it is known that carbon dioxide exists on Venus, proof of water vapor forces us to re-examine every previous calculation made concerning the possibility of some sort of life existing on the planet,” Dr. Strong said. Amount of water vapor in the air above the Venusian cloud level was established with a relative precision of 5%. Launched from Holloman AFB, N. Mex., the balloon carried the telescope to altitude of 87,000 ft. (oar Release 4-64-2)
President of the Delaware Academy of Science, John S. Seney, reported experiments he hoped would lead man to fly under his own power, like a bird. He had captured a turkey buzzard which he hoped to put through a series of tests in a wind-tunnel in the basement of his home. “If we’re going to fly, the only way to do it is to find out what this bird’s got . . . and then put all this together in relation to what modern materials are available. Then maybe we’ll come up with some sort of flying suit.” {NYT, 12/28/64,51)
Dr. John Peter Minton of the National Cancer Institute confirmed that infrared laser rays had killed certain malignant tumors in mice. Dr. Minton had conducted several months of experiments in conjunction with engineers of the U.S. Army Missile Command engaged in laser research, (dod Release 237-64)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) addressed the National Space Club in “The great promise for the future of the space and defense industry is to turn some of the tremendous imagination, some of the talents and energies of your management, your scientists and engineers, to the major social and economic problems of our country. “Your industries, I submit, are eminently qualified to cooperate in this entirely different kind of takeoff because of your unique experience in solving inter-disciplinary problems through the technique of systems analysis. . . .” Emphasizing’that “space is not a WPA program,” he said he would not support accelerated space expenditures merely to stimulate the economy depressed by reduction in defense spending because of disarmament. (nsc Release)
Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin said in Moscow press conference that he and other Soviet cosmonauts were training for new space flights. “When we go and who will go—that we do not know. We will wait and see.” (AP, NYT, 4/8/64,10; AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/64, C6)
One of U.S.S.R.’s top test pilots, Col. Sergei G. Brovtsev, was killed in accident while testing helicopter. (Av. Wk., 8/3/64, 15)
Soviet scientist Sergei Vernon said at Moscow press conference that the zond I space probe was launched to study radiation hazards in space. The probe would “provide information about more remote areas of space we know little about.” (Balt. Sun, 4/8/64)
John Driscoll, Chairman of Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, met with James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, “to assure him we are ready, willing, and able to discuss with him and to negotiate with NASA for our turnpike location [of NASA' Electronics Research Center in Cambridge] in the event the Kendall-Sq. site is not selected.” After the meeting Mr. Webb repeated that the Kendall-Sq. location “better meets the requirements” of NASA than any other proposal. Meanwhile, in Boston, Dr. John J. Brennan, Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, said in press conference that the committee would use every available legal means to prevent location of the NASA center in Kendall Sq. (Boston Globe, 10/2/64)
X—15 No. 1 was piloted by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) to 112,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,500 (mach 5.11) mph to test scientific instruments (a densitron and daytime sky background experiments) carried in pods recently installed on the craft’s wing tips and to sample density of upper atmosphere. The flight also served as a checkout of the newly installed Honeywell inertial guidance system. (NASA X—15 Proj.Off.; NYT, 12/11/64,25)
Dr. William A. Mrazek, Director of MSFC Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory since 1956, was appointed chief engineer of Saturn launch vehicle project in MSFC Industrial Operations. (Marshall Star, 3/18/64,1)
X—15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot John B. McKay near Edwards afb with a microphone embedded in the X—15’s side to record noise of turbulent air sweeping over the surface, to help in prediction of metal fatigue. The X—15 reached maximum speed of 3,239 mph (mach 4.91) and peak altitude of 76,000 ft. This was 102nd flight of the X-15. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Wash. Post, 3/14/64; upi, NYT, 3/14/64, 39)
Amendment to $17 billion military procurement and r&d authorization bill to cut $52 million for development of new manned bomber was offered by Senators George McGovern (D.-S. Dak.), Gaylord Nelson (D. Wis.), and William Proxmire (D.—Wis.). Senator McGovern quoted minority report by the dissenting members of the House Armed Services Committee which pointed out that “the $52 million is just the beginning of a program which will cost close to $5 billion before it is completed,” said his amendment would “reduce the bomber funds to the $5 million level requested by the President and the Secretary of Defense.” (CR, 2/26/64,3602-04)
Michael V. LighthiU, director of British laboratory involved in developing Anglo-French supersonic airliner Concorde and reputable expert on sonic booms, spoke optimistically in interview about outcome of recent U.S. sonic boom experiments. Lighthill said that although there was not yet enough information from the Oklahoma City studies, preliminary reports were “very encouraging.” Damage from sonic booms was apparently less than many experts had feared. (Simons, Wash. Post, 8/8/64)
Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy voted $14 million in aec’s FY 1965 budget for flight test of Snap-lOA reactor. This action followed Budget Bureau letter to the Committee acknowledging that “reasonable and well informed men can differ” on such issues as the Snap flight test and stating that the Administration would conduct flight test if Congress authorized the funds, as long as the Administration’s $2,651,542,000 request for aec was not exceeded. Late last year the Administration had canceled orbital flight-test because of lack of specific mission for the Snap; leaders of the Joint Congressional Committee, Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.—R.I.) and Rep. Chet Holifield (D.— Calif.), had protested the decision, urging President Johnson to approve the flight test. (NYT, 3/26/64,24)
Gen. Thomas S. Power (usaf) retired as Commander-in-Chief of the Strategic Air Command (sac) . He was succeeded by Lt. Gen. John D. Ryan, formerly sac Vice Commander-in-Chief. Ryan would be made a four-star general. (NYT, 12/1/64, 46)
