XB-70a experimental supersonic bomber broke world aviation weight and speed endurance records during a one-hour 40 min. flight. It took off weighing 500,000 lbs., the heaviest at which any aircraft had been flown, and flew at continuous supersonic speeds for 80 min., longer than any other aircraft had. It cruised at a top speed of 1,400 mph and was piloted by A1 White and Van Shepard, (ap, Wash. Post, 3/25/65; NYT, 3/25/65; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/65)
Rep. William S. Moorhead (D-Pa.) spoke on the floor of the House on the problem of collecting and using information for decision-making in government and industry: “Experts say that the human mind has difficulty in considering more than 10 or' 20 factors at the same time in making decisions. Yet, the unsolved problems of our society may require thousands or hundreds of thousands of factors or subfactors to be considered. Industry has learned to simulate mathematically a given environment. By varying the input assumptions or by varying subdecisions the decision maker can be given rational basis on which to make alternative decisions.” (CR, 9/21/65, 23755)
Death-ray use of the laser was impractical, the 72nd annual meeting of the Association of Military Surgeons of the U.S. was told by Dr. Donald H. Glew, Jr., George Washington Univ. surgeon who had conducted laser research for the Armed Forces. Dr. Glew said that, with present sources of laser beams at least, such rays would be impractical as weapons because the necessary equipment would be “far too massive for field use.” (ap, Wash. Post, 11/16/65, C5)
xc-142a V/Stol, flown by Ling-Temco-Vought test pilots John Konrad and Stuart Madison, made a flawless first transition flight. The transport aircraft took off like a helicopter, adjusted its wings for conventional flight, and then circled the field, reversed the process, and made a vertical landing. The xc-142a’s first transition flight came only six flights after its initial hover flight on Dec. 29, 1964. It was the Nation’s first V/Stol built for operational evaluation rather than research, (ap, CSM, 1/13/65)
John F. Mason outlined in Electronics the dramatic changes underway in U.S. tracking and communications stations around the world. “Before the end of the year, 85% of the telemetry gear on the Atlantic missile range will be replaced. Everywhere, new communications equipment is going in, new pulse radars are being installed and continuous-wave radar networks are being expanded. Slowly, the separate ranges are becoming an integrated global network. . . . “Besides the work going on at the ranges, research and development effort for programs of the future continues at an active pace at the various government and industry centers throughout the United States. “The reason for this general overhaul of the missile ranges is to support Apollo, the manned lunar mission, and approximately 70 other ambitious missile and space programs already under way. . . .” (Electronics, 2/22/65, 94—105)
Aerospace Corp.’s $22 million expenditure to construct buildings in California when space was available in nearby U.S. facilities was criticized by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell in his testimony before the House Armed Services Special Investigations Subcommittee investigating Aerospace. Campbell said that Aerospace had also incurred “certain questionable costs which appear to be of interest.” (ap, NYT, 5/5/65)
First observance of Robert H. Goddard Day. On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) spoke of Dr. Goddard’s achievements as summarized by G. Edward Pendray in Technology and Culture (Fall 1963) : “Dr. Goddard— “Was the first to develop a rocket motor using liquid propellants (liquid oxygen and gasoline) during the years 1920-25. “Was first to design, construct, and launch successfully a liquid-fuel rocket—the event we mark today. “First developed a gyrostabilization apparatus for rockets in 1932. “First used deflector vanes in the blast of a rocket motor as a means of stabilizing and guiding rockets, also in 1932. “Obtained the first U.S. patent on the idea of multistage rockets, in 1914. “First explored mathematically the practicality of using rocket power to reach high altitude and escape velocity, in 1912. “Was first to publish in the United States a basic mathematical theory underlying rocket propulsion and rocket flight, in 1919. “First proved experimentally that a rocket would provide thrust in a vacuum, in 1915. “Developed and demonstrated the basic idea of the bazooka near the end of World War I, although his plans lay unused until finally put to use in World War ii. “First developed self-cooling rocket motors, variable thrust rocket motors, practical rocket landing devices, pumps suitable for liquid rocket fuels. “Forecast jet-driven airplanes, and travel in space.”	(CR, 3/16/65,
x-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), reached maximum speed of 3,550 mph (mach 5.20) and a maximum altitude of 271,000 ft. The purpose of the flight was to obtain data on the boundary layer noise, and reentry maneuvering techniques. (NASA x—15 Proj. Off.; X—15 Flight Log)
U.S.S.R. dominated the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France, with premiere showing of 11-62 186-passenger jetliner, powered by four turbofan engines, each developing 23,100 lbs. thrust, and display of the M—110 crane helicopter reported to have set an unofficial world’s record last month by hoisting 25 tons more than 8,000 ft. into the air. Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin answered questions in the Soviet pavilion. (upi, Miami Her., 6/11/65)
At a press conference, Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and LCdr. John W. Young (usn) described the three-orbit gt-3 flight of Mar. 23, as busy, exhilarating, near-perfect, and short on surprises. They said it was highly significant for future flight in space since it proved that a spacecraft could be maneuvered precisely, at will, and more independently of the ground than before. They said it also proved that man can eat and safely dispose of wastes as they will need to do on long flights. Major Grissom suggested two possible reasons that the “Molly Brown” had undershot the target landing area: one was that something might have gone wrong during the final orbit change or when subsequently the braking rockets were fired to start the spacecraft’s descent; the other was that there might have been a miscalculation of the craft’s center of gravity, (nasa Transcript)
Col. John H. Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was guest of honor and elected to membership at the 148th annual dinner of the New York Academy of Sciences. He said that 100 yrs. from now “space travel will not be a form of international competition, nor will it have political implications; it will be the beginning of the greatest exploration period in world history.” (NYT, 12/3/65,42)
usaf and NASA were finishing plans for joint lifting-body tests, reported William Normyle in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He said a joint usaf-nasa Flight Test Group was being formed at Edwards afb and would include NASA and usaf pilots who would flight-test three lifting-body configurations in a program to be monitored by NASA. Two configurations, the m-2 and the hl-10, were NASA designs built by Northrop Corp’s Norair Div. Third configuration, usaf’s sv-5, was developed by Martin Co. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 6/28/65, 19)
House voted to allow Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) to serve as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency and retain his military status. Effect of the legislation, if it were to become law, would be to let McKee draw reduced military retirement pay of $8,404 annually in addition to the Administrator’s salary of $30,000. Without the bill, he would have to give up his military status and retirement benefits. (CR, 6/3/65, 11961; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65)
More than 250 scholars and theologians met in New York to discuss means of attaining world peace and “to lay groundwork for a theology for the dawning age of cybernation.” Moral and technological implications of Pope John xxm’s encyclical Pacem in Terris were studied. Meeting was sponsored by Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions and the Fellowship of Reconciliation. (NYT, 3/2/65, 28; NYT, 3/3/65, 24)
Highlights of report by Civil Service Commission Chairman John W. Macy, Jr., to President Johnson on Government savings during FY 1965 resulting from employee suggestions showed that one of the top suggestion awards went to NASA personnel. The $1,400 award to msfc aerospace technologists Emmett L. Martz, John L. Burch, and William L. Kimmons was for their design which reduced by $133,438 the cost of certain bearings in Saturn launch vehicle’s guidance system. NASA was among the five nondefense Government agencies that exceeded the million-dollar mark in savings from adopted suggestions. (Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 335)
Robert V. Reynolds was named Assistant FAA Administrator for General Aviation Affairs by faa Administrator William F. McKee. Reynolds would serve the growing needs of general aviation which had more than 88,700 out of a total of 90,935 active civil aircraft. FAA had forecast that the general aviation fleet would grow to 105,000 by 1969.	( faa Release 65-58)
Dr. Thomas F. Bates, professor of mineralogy and director of the Science and Engineering Institute at Pennsylvania State Univ., had been named science advisor to Interior Secretary Stewart L. Udall, it was announced. He would succeed Dr. John C. Calhoun, Jr., who was returning to his post at Texas a&m. ( upi, NYT, 3/16/65, 4)
William E. Simkin, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, reported that “some progress” had been made in efforts to settle the I am strike against McDonnell Aircraft Corp. which began Nov. 18. Union had demanded changes in job specifications and was dissatisfied with machinery for filing grievances against management. McDonnell was prime contractor for the Gemini spacecraft at Cape Kennedy. (Jones, NYT, 11/21/65, 43)
Passage of bills concerned with freedom of information was urged by William J. Coughlin in an editorial in Missiles and Rockets: “Intent of the bills is to establish a Federal public records law and to permit court enforcement of the people’s right to know the facts of government. Providing for sensible exceptions in the case of sensitive and classified information, the proposed law would require every agency of the government to make all its records promptly available to any person. . . . “The onus for restrictive news management usually falls on the Dept, of Defense, and rightly so, but there are a number of individuals in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration who are inclined to regard the agency as a preserve which should be off limits to the press. It is to the credit of Administrator James E. Webb that he has a consistent record of correcting abuses of press freedom that are called to his attention. The same cannot be said of his counterpart in the Defense Department.” (M&R, 4/25/65)
Groundbreaking ceremony for Univ. of Maryland’s $1.5-million Space Science Building was held at the College Park, Md., campus. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Edward F. Holter, Vice Chairman of the Univ. of Maryland Regents, shoveled the first spadefuls of dirt. (Wash. Post, 4/27/65, A12)
U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) one of the ten outstanding young men of 1964. Captain Engle, the youngest of the X-15 pilots, had logged nine flights in the X-15. Awardees would be honored at an awards congress Jan. 15—16 in Santa Monica, Calif, (ap, Des Moines Register, 1/12/65)
x-15 No. 3 was flown by Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) 3,136 mph (mach 4.62) to 94,400-ft. altitude for pilot checkout, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, was named to succeed Najeeb E. Halaby as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency. (Wash. Post, 4/28/65)
Sen. William Proxmire | D-Wis.) spoke on the floor of the Senate on potential dangers to universities from Federal research programs and advocated giving more decision-making responsibility on allocation of funds to the universities. (CR, 7/13/65, 16075-77)
Senate defeated by 61-to-16 the proposed Proxmire amendment to make an across-the-board reduction of 5% in the NASA appropriations bill. This left the Senate bill, still to receive its final vote, at $5.19 billion. The House had passed a $5.16 billion appropriation. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) had contended that the manned lunar landing program constituted an “excessive waste.” Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.) had felt the problem was not one of waste or inefficiency but felt that more of the nation’s resources should be put into education, housing, pollution abatement, and other urban problems. Sen. Wayne Morse (D-Ore.) had supported the reduction but had proposed that the cut be 25 c/ or 50%. “The American people have been thoroughly taken in by a TV spectacular,” he said and charged that the space program “is all for the purpose of gratifying our national ego.” Senator Morse had indicated that no other single agency conducted programs “with such vague objectives with such little return to the national Government.” Proxmire had charged that NASA was the prime example of an agency whose expenditures Congress had difficulty in controlling, that certain project costs within the NASA program could be reduced, and that NASA used too great a proportion of our monetary, material, and manpower resources. The 16 Senators voting for the Proxmire amendment were Boggs, Clark, Cooper, Douglas, Fullbright, Gruening, Kennedy (N.Y.), McGovern Miller, Morse, Morton, Mundt, Nelson, Proxmire, Williams (N.J.), and Williams (Del.). {CR, 7/12/65, 15927-40)
The Gold Hodgkins Medal for pioneer work in space age science, plus a cash award, was presented to three scientists during the second week of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s 75th anniversary observance in Cambridge, Mass.: Prof. Marcel Nicolet, National Center for Space Research, Brussels; Dr. Joseph Kaplan, UCLA; and Dr. Sydney Chapman, Geophysical Institute, Univ. of Alaska, (ap, Houston, Chron., 8/18/65)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as Federal Aviation Agency Administrator—less than 24 hrs. after confirmation by the Senate—in a White House ceremony. President Johnson, presiding, announced that General McKee’s primary task would be development of a supersonic transport (Sst). Mr. Johnson had approved five recommendations of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport: “Those five recommendations . . . are: first, the next phase of design covering an 18-month period beginning about August 1, 1965; second, the four manufacturers—Boeing Company, Lockheed Aircraft Company, General Electric Company, Pratt & Whitney Division of United Aircraft—be invited to continue this phase of the program; third, the FAA Administrator be authorized to enter into contracts with the airframe manufacturers to undertake detailed airframe design work and test them over the next 18 months; fourth, the FAA Administrator be authorized to enter into contracts with the engine manufacturers to construct and test over the next 18 months demonstrator engines to prove the basic features of the engines; and five, and finally—and very importantly—that the Congress be requested to appropriate—Senator Magnuson—the necessary funds to initiate the next phase of the program. And for this purpose I shall request an appropriation of $140 million.” Ira C. Eaker commented in the San Antonio Express: “When McKee succeeds in his SST mission, as I believe he will, any citizen will be able to buy a $50 ticket for a flight from Washington to Los Angeles in 55 minutes, or purchase for $55 air passage from New York to Paris in one hour. Of course, there will be cynics who will ask: ‘Who wants to fly to Paris in an hour?’ The answer is: Most of the people who want to go to Paris. “There is one predictable human trait. People will always go for the fastest transport. Not long after man got on a train, he took his freight out of the covered wagons and off the oxcarts forever. When people took up with automobiles, they soon put their produce, their pigs and their poultry on trucks. “There is also some algebraic or arithmetic relation between the speed of travel and the number of people who travel. About 10 times as many people fly the Atlantic now in five hours as crossed when the trip took five days. No doubt 10 times more people will cross the ocean when they can do it in an hour.” (White House Release; Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/8/65, 14)
U.S. suspended practice firing of Little John missiles in the foothills of Mt. Fuji at the request of the Japanese government to avoid clashes with about 2,000 farmers demonstrating near the target area. The farmers claimed that practice firing of the Little John, capable of carrying nuclear warheads, would lead to nuclear armament of Japan and would involve Japan in the Vietnam war. Little John was a short range, Army battlefield support missile,	(ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/65, A21; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/65, A13)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc, Ret.), would make a three-week goodwill trip to Western Europe in October, the White House announced, (upi, Wash. Post, 9/18/65)
Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) flew x-15 No. 3 to 98,200 ft. altitude and a maximum speed of 3,886 mph (mach 5.7) in a test to determine how ablative material reacted to intense heat. (NASA X-15 Proi. Off.: upi, Wash. Post, 2/3/65; X—15 Flight Log)
William C. Foster, Director of U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, said in testimony before House Foreign Affairs Committee that radioactive leakage from Soviet underground nuclear test Jan. 15 was apparently accidental. The radioactive fallout apparently did not violate the intent of the 1963 nuclear test-ban treaty.	(FonF, 1965, 61) . .
A system for the docking and sealing together of two orbiting spacecraft, designed to allow men and tools to be moved back and forth between the two vehicles while they were joined, was granted a patent. Invented by John P. Dunn, Martin Co. engineer, the equipment was being built in full scale for tests in Martin’s rendezvous and docking simulator (Jones, NYT, 8/21/65, 25)
In an editorial in Missiles and Rockets, William J. Coughlin said: “A start on a correct mol public information program should be made immediately by taking samos off the dirty-word list and bringing it back out in the open. To do otherwise is to keep the U.S. in the position of accepting reconnaissance as something offensive, in the most literal sense. It is not. The U.S. conducts reconnaissance over the Soviet Union for its own protection against a closed society. It should not be afraid to acknowledge that fact.” (M&R, 11/22/65, 46)
Dr. John T. F. Kuo, associate professor at Columbia Univ. Henry Krumb School of Mines, was studying the earth’s gravity from each of the Empire State Building’s 102 floors. Kuo was using a gravimeter sensitive to weight differences of one-billionth of a pound to measure gravitational acceleration on each floor. He felt that extrapolations from his figures might help in the “design of instrument measuring the gravitational acceleration on space vehicles as they hurtle through the universe.” (NYT, 3/15/65, 29)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) flew x-15 No. 1 to 266,500-ft. altitude at 3,580 mph (mach 5.08). The flight carried a slightly modified horizon scanner and device for measuring microscopic atmospheric pressure, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander (Manned Systems) of afsc Space Systems Div. and head of the Titan iii-c program, and project leaders Cols. David V. Miller (usaf) and Otto C. Ledford (usaf) were honored by Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk (usaf) for the success of the Titan-m program. General Bleymaier’s commendation for the Legion of Merit was for “outstanding service to the United States.” Colonels Miller and Ledford were awarded Commendation Medals. The ceremony was conducted at Eastern Test Range one hour after launch of Titan m-c-1. (Clark, NYT, 6/19/65, 1, 11)
During May 7 flight of usaf-naa xb-70a No. 1, Michael L. Yaffee reported in Aviation Week and Space Technology, five of the experimental bomber’s six General Electric yj93 engines were damaged when the wing apex, a steel honeycomb structure, tore apart and scattered pieces of steel into both sides of the aircraft’s divided, rectangular air intake beneath the wing. The No. 5 engine was most heavily damaged, a post-flight examination had shown, but it was the only engine on the right side of the aircraft operating during the half-hour flight back to Edwards afb. When the apex broke, the xb-70a was flying at mach 2.56. About 30 min. later, naa test pilot Alvin S. White landed the aircraft with all left-hand engines (1, 2, and 3) operating at full power and engine No. 5 at 90% power. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 64-65, 67)
Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor told a White House Cabinet meeting that Government scientists wanted to undertake a national weather-control program to determine whether fog could be dispelled, hail suppressed, hurricanes diverted, and rain made, reported Howard Simons in the Washington Post. Connor’s report represented a change of view in the scientific community, heretofore reticent about weather modification. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/14/65, A9)
x-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 102,100 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,541 mph (mach 5.17) to obtain data for stability and control evaluation, star tracker checkout, advanced X-15 landing dynamics, and landing gear modification checkout. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Wright Brothers Medal for 1964 was presented to three NASA LaRC scientists—Marion 0. McKinney, Jr., Richard E. Kuhn, and John P. Reeder —at the meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers in Los Angeles. Cited “for meritorious contribution to aeronautic engineering,” the scientists were selected for their paper “Aerodynamics and Flying Qualities of Jet/Vertical Takeoff-Landing and Short TakeoffLanding Airplanes,” presented in 1964 at the SAE-American Society of Mechanical Engineers meeting in New York. (LaRC Release)
Pilot John B. McKay (nasa) flew x-15 No. 3 to maximum altitude of 239,000	ft. at maximum speed of 3,545 mph (mach 5.03) to obtain data on pilot altitude buildup, (nasa x—15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight
usaf scientist Dr. John W. Evans received DOD’s Distinguished Civilian Service Award for his research on the physical processes of solar magnetic fields, mass motions of the solar photosphere, and growth and development of solar flares, (oar Release 5-65-1)
President Johnson nominated Gen. William F. McKee to be Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency. He made the appointment after signing a bill that exempted General McKee (usaf, Ret.) from the requirement that the faa administrator be a civilian, (ap, NYT, 6/25/65)
At NASA Industry Briefing on Computer Procurement, held at Hq., NASA briefed representatives of 14 leading companies in the automatic data processing industry on NASA’s present and future plans and policies for the procurement of large-scale computing systems. William Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, pointed out that NASA’s principal purpose in future Adp procurements would be to increase competition throughout the computer industry. Citing the growing concern in recent years over expanding Adp inventories and increasing dollar expenditures for computers throughout Government, Rieke outlined a three-point plan to improve the exchange of information between NASA and the computer industry: (1) NASA would hold annual industry briefings to inform computer firms of its long-range plans, problems, needs for improved system technology, and projected procurements with the first to be held next May; (2) individual computer manufacturers would be given an opportunity to conduct annual briefing for NASA’s personnel to inform NASA of their plans, problems, and developments; (3) in connection with large or unusual Adp procurements with restrictive requirements, NASA would hold prespecification briefings for interested companies in advance of issuing requests for proposals. Edmond C. Buckley, director of NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, outlined NASA’s methods for long-range planning on computer acquisition and utilization, and emphasized that the agency’s future Adp procurements would be for computing systems rather than just hardware. nasa Administrator James E. Webb traced the cooperative history of the NASA-Industry-University “team” in contributing to NASA’s accomplishments since 1958. He emphasized the importance of the computer industry’s contribution to the space effort, in particular, and solicited the industry’s continued cooperation in carrying out NASA’s mission, (nasa Release 65-391)
Edward L. Hays, chief of crew systems at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced that the crew of the Gemini GT-4 flight would wear the qualified Extravehicular Activity (Eva) spacesuit during their flight. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/19/65; M&R, 4/26/65, 7)
Speaking on safety in the Space Age, John L. Sloop, NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the 22nd Annual Greater Akron Safety Conference that “for the past ten years, the naca and NASA have had a frequency rate (injuries per million man hours work) ranging from 3.2 to 2.1. The national industrial frequency average, I am told, is 6.12 for 1963 and the average for all of Federal government is 7.9.” (Text)
Dr. William R. Lucas, chief of the Materials Div. of the Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, msfc, received the Hermann Oberth Award from the Alabama Section of the aiaa for his “outstanding individual scientific achievements in the field of astronautics and for the promotion and advancement of the aeronautical sciences.” (msfc Release 65—279)
x-15 No. 1 was flown by Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) to an altitude of 76,000 ft., at a speed of 2,761 mph (mach 4.06). (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
x-15 No. 1 was flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 153,600-ft. altitude at a maximum speed of 3,750 mph (mach 5.40). Purpose was to check out landing gear revised recently, give pilot experience at higher altitude, and get apparatus data, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
NASA Hq. announced appointment of William C. Schneider as Deputy Director, Mission Operations and Gemini Mission Director, effective immediately. Schneider, formerly Deputy Director of the Gemini Program, was replaced by LeRoy E. Day, who became acting Deputy Director of the Gemini Program. (NASA Release 65—331)
Lunar Landing Research Vehicle flight by Joseph 'Walker at Edwards. by Rep. Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Karth committee summarized the most serious reasons for Surveyor’s delay: 1) the failure to do adequate preliminary work; 2) a series of major modifications; 3) inadequate staffing by jPL in the first three years; 4) too rapid expansion of personnel at a later date; 5) poor management on the part of Hughes; 6) a resistance on the part of Hughes to making management changes; 7) an improperly conducted testing program by Hughes; 8) management weaknesses in NASA; and 9) a lack of vigorous centralized control by NASA. To describe the magnitude of the Surveyor problems, the Congressional investigators highlighted a NASA press release of January 1961, which outlined Project Surveyor as costing about $50 million, consisting of seven spacecraft, each weighing 2,500 lbs., capable of placing over 200 lbs. of scientific payload on the lunar surface, with launches scheduled during the 1963-66 time period. The Subcommittee then noted that the first launch had been delayed about two and a half years, payload capability had been reduced to only a TV camera on the first four spacecraft and only 114 lbs. on the next three operational models, with total costs so far of nearly $350 million for the spacecraft R&D alone. The investigation concluded that the responsibility for the Surveyor situation could be found in the inadequate preparation for the project, the performance of JPL, the performance of Hughes Aircraft, and the performance of NASA Headquarters. “A serious mistake” was made at the very beginning of the Surveyor project when insufficient preliminary work was done to identify serious technical problems, judge feasibility, consider alternatives, and more accurately estimate costs. The investigation concluded further that this was “the inevitable result of a poorly defined project.” (House Rpt.)
The Senate, in a 46-20 vote, gave final Congressional approval to a bill waiving the restriction barring military men from the post of Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency, clearing the way for President Johnson to appoint Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) of nasa. (CR, 6/17/65, 13541; WSJ, 6/18/65, 8)
Commenting on the Project Surveyor report of Rep. Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) Subcommittee on nasa Oversight [see Oct. 8], William J. Coughlin said:	“. . . the really amazing thing is that what the Karth report calls the ‘stormy dV-j-year history’ of the project has not been stormier. Given a limited budget to accomplish the impossible, anyone will have difficulties. . . . “The Karth report, in fact, acknowledges this when it states: ‘In essence, insufficient preliminary work was done prior to the decision to go ahead with the project, and the award of a contract for development of the Surveyor spacecraft.’” (Coughlin, M&R, 11/1/65, 46)
Commenting on budgetary considerations as they might affect the Titan iii-C, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: “If the economy ax falls on the Titan 3C program in the wake of an unsuccessful launching Tuesday, it will be sad indeed. The program is one of the few major space efforts in recent memory to have gone along so far on schedule, close to budget limits, and with a reasonably high degree of success.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/24/65, A3)
X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 155,900 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,938 mph (mach 5.64) to obtain data on star tracking cameras, landing gear modification checkout, stability and control and advanced X-15 landing dynamics. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; X—15 Flight Log)
XB-70a research aircraft No. 2 made its sixth flight, reaching a speed of mach 2.23 (about 1,460 mph) and altitude of 54,000 ft. During the one-hour-and 44-minute flight (32 min. of which were at supersonic speeds), several studies were conducted: runway noise-levels were studied, sonic-boom tests conducted, experiments related to supersonic transport program made, and aircraft’s air-inlet control system was operated. Pilots were A1 White, chief test pilot, and Van Shepard, co-pilot, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/1/65, 1)
NASA officially confirmed the six scientist-astronauts named in the Nation’s press June 27. They were Owen K. Garriott; Edward G. Gibson; Duane E. Graveline; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn) ; Frank Curtis Michel; and Harrison Schmitt. (NASA Release 65-212)
usaf xb-70a research bomber was flown from Edwards Afb by naa pilot Van A. Shepard for 155 min.—10 min. longer than on any of its previous 28 test flights, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/23/65, A3)
x-15 No. 2 was flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 92,600-ft. altitude at a maximum speed of 3,260 mph (mach 4.80) to obtain data on the landing gear modification and on stability and control. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; FRC Release)
Test model of the I.nnar Landing Research Vehicle designed to simulated lunar landing was flown by former nasa x-15 pilot Joseph Walker to 300-ft. altitude. Built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under contract to Nasa, the research craft had a jet engine that supported five-sixths of its weight; the pilot manipulated solid-fuel lift rockets that supported the remaining one-sixth. The craft’s attitude was controlled with jets of hydrogen peroxide. ( Wash. Post, 10/9/65, AT; ap, Houston Chron., 10/9/65)
In its 150th flight, the X-15 (No. 3) was flown to 295,600-ft. altitude and top speed of 3,682 mph (mach 5.33) by NASA research pilot John B. McKay. Altitude marked the fourth highest reached by the X-15, Purpose of flight was to measure boundary layer noise; test a horizon scanner; and measure aerodynamic and structural loads on the horizontal tail surfaces. (NASA Release 65-310; X-15 Flight Log) *	Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (LCdr,. usn), after a record 30 days 205 ft. below the surface of the Pacific, said he was convinced “men can Sepfem&er 28: John B. McKay, pilot of 150th flight, in front of X-15 No. 3. live forever—any length of time they wish—beneath the surface of the ocean.” He told a news conference of the beauty, pain, and hard manual labor and added: “The ocean is a much more hostile environment than space. I worked much harder in Sealab 2 than in the Mercury capsule. More energy is required just to stay warm, because of the 50-degree cold. But the real key is the isolation. I think men can live as long in underwater habitats as they can in dewline stations or any place else where they are isolated.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/29/65)
Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, Director of NASA Office of Grants and Research Contracts, was temporarily assigned as Special Assistant to Administrator James E. Webb. He would be concerned with examining, in depth, the progress made in the development and conduct of university activities. Dr. John T. Holloway would serve as the Acting Director of the Office of Grants and Research Contracts, (nasa Ann.)
The Soviet Union, with its May 9 display of missile and space might, has dealt a major blow to the complacency of those persons in the United States who consistently have underestimated the competence of the Russians in these fields,” wrote William J. Coughlin in an editorial in Missiles and Rockets. He continued: “The appearance of Soviet solid-fuel missiles of a type similar to the U.S. Minuteman ICBM indicates that the Soviets finally have overcome the chemical roadblock which until now has made possible the U.S. lead in solids. . . . “In a film which the Moscow correspondent of the New York Times estimated to be at least three years old, the Soviets also displayed launchings from an underground silo. The combination of these events suggests the Soviets now are in a position to rapidly close the missile gap with the United States to tbe point where it is of no consequence in military calculations. . . . “In the film release, the Russians for the first time showed their anti-missile missile in action. One sequence was of intercept of an ICBM. . . . “The increasing Soviet confidence also is indicated in the space field. The Soviets let it be known more than a month in advance that their next space spectacular could be expected May 9. . . . The launch of LUNIK v obviously was right on schedule. The acknowledgement after launch but in advance of impact that its goal was a lunar soft landing also is a more realistic approach to space developments than previously shown. “This shift toward a franker attitude is supported by the open admission of the Zond II Mars probe failure by Soviet scientists attending the Space Exploration Symposium in Chicago on May 4. “At the same time, the Russians released more information on the Soviet space program at the Chicago meeting than heretofore. “All of this points toward greater maturity in both Soviet missile programs and Soviet space programs. The competition therefore is far keener than many persons in the U.S. have been willing to admit. “The conclusion is clear. The U.S. cannot afford to let down or it will be far outdistanced in areas which will continue to be vital in its national security and well-being for many, many years.” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/17/65, 74)
X-15 No. 2, piloted by John B. McKay (nasa), reached 239,000-ft. altitude and 3,511-mph speed (mach 5.16) in a flight to obtain information on the reaction augmentation system, to check out star-tracking ultra-violet stellar photography experiment, and to gain information on advanced x-15 landing dynamics and pilot altitude buildup, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
usaf’s xc-142a V/Stol, designed and built by Ling-Temco-Vought, made its first public flight at Grand Prairie, Tex. piloted by John Konrad. Designed to take off and land vertically, the experimental aircraft had a wing that could be moved in flight from the normal horizontal position to a vertical position, enabling it to hover, fly backwards, sideways, and rotate 360° in either direction over the same spot. It could fly forward as slowly as 25 mph without stalling and could be flown at maximum speed of 425 mph; cruising speed was 250 mph. Five of the airplanes would be delivered to Edwards afb for further tests. (Wash. Post, 2/5/65; Clark, Houston Post, 2/5/65; A&A, 4/65, 8)
U.S. would put a supersonic airliner into the skies no later than 1974, William F. McKee, Federal Aviation Administrator, told the Aero Club of Washington. He said faa had a target date of no later than 1974 for finishing all tests before regular passenger flights, (upi, NYT, 10/27/65,95)
x-15 No. 3 flown by pilot Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) to 244,700 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,404 mph (mach 4.66) to measure ultraviolet radiation and noise intensity of the boundary layer of air. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Sir John Eccles, professor of physiology at Australian National University, cautioned Australia and New Zealand against overconcentration of scientific energy on space. At a scientific congress in New Zealand, he warned: “. . . we are spending too much of our resources, especially our intellectual resources, on the exploration of space when we have the much more important problem of life, and of man and his brain.” (NYT, 2/21/65, 9)
USAF has come up with something for NASA to reckon with, commented William Hines, concerning the Titan iii-c success, in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “It is the Air Force position—which NASA will now be forced to try to disprove—that anything Saturn IB can do, Titan m-c can do better. “The Air Force, for its part, must now try to prove Titan m-c’s reliability over the long haul . . . Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier Jr., head of the Titan m-c program, said it is his goal to make every one of the 12 shots in the Titan ill—C development series a 100% success. “Equally important with reliability is cost. Bleymaier says the Titan iii-c can be produced in quantity for $12.8 million, or just a little more than half the $22 million it is estimated nasa’s Saturn IB will cost. Titan m-c’s $800 million development cost is but a fraction of what NASA will have spent to get the first Saturn IB off the ground.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/19/65)
Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins Univ. told the Fifth Annual Space Conference at vpi that Venus was almost as hot on the side facing away from the sun as on the side facing the sun because the entire planet was kept warm by snowfalls. An instrumented balloon launched in 1964 had identified ice crystals in the Venusian atmosphere. Strong speculated that a 120-mph wind on the surface of the planet dragged the ice crystals around to the back side where they presumably became a “warming snowfall.” Dr. Strong, who intended to launch another instrumented balloon during 1965, said that an automated, unmanned balloon was preferable to a manned vehicle, (ap, Wash. Post. 8/24/65)
nasa pilot William Dana flew x—15 No. 1 to 80,200-ft. altitude at 2,795 mph (mach 4.22) in a pilot-checkout flight which also carried a slightly modified horizon scanner and device for measuring microscopic atmospheric pressure, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA by Administrator James E. Webb. His duties would include taking part in conferences, making speeches in the U.S. and abroad, and checking on projects under way. (nasa Release 65-67)
x—15 No. 2 piloted by nasa research pilot John ti. McKay attained a speed up to 3,659 mph (mach 5.19) and an altitude of 212,600 ft., photographed Gamma Cassiopeia with four 35-mm. cameras. Purpose was to verify theoretical data on the physical composition of the stars, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
The Sofar (Sound Fixing and Ranging Device), used to locate ICBm’s through a small explosive charge set off as the missile sank, would be transformed into a rescue device for aircraft and ships in the Pacific, Capt. John M. Waters, Jr. (uscg), told a U.S. Coast Guard-sponsored North Atlantic Search and Rescue Seminar in New York. A pressure switch mechanism would fire the explosive at 2,500 ft. below the surface—depth at which sound waves encountered least resistance; sound of the explosion would be picked up by four hydrophone listening stations and the exact disaster site plotted. Capt. Waters said the device was “practically foolproof” and had been endorsed by the Naval Aviation Center. Each Sofar locator would cost about $75. (Bamberger, NYT, 5/14/65, 65)
Thirty-six msfc employees received a variety of awards, including a Presidental Citation and six inventions awards, in a local ceremony observing NASA’s seventh anniversary. Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of MSFC, addressed the gathering and William Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, presented the invention awards, (msfc Release 65-273)
Roy William Johnson, first director of DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (arpa) in 1958 died at the age of 59. Johnson said at the time of his appointment: “Space will tax the imagination of the whole world for the next 100 years.” He retired in 1959. (JPash. Post, 7/23/65, B8)
Soviet aircraft designer Oleg K. Antonov provided technical and performance specifications of the large An-22 aircraft during an interview conducted by J. Marmain for Wehr und Wirtschaft (W. Germany) : first flight was made in February 1965; aircraft shown at International Air Show, Paris, was transport model; considerable rebuilding, including 15-m. extension of the tail, would be required for the craft to accommodate 720 passengers. Antonov said his design office was not concerned with development of a passenger version of the An-22, a new version of the An-24 for 64 passengers, and a smaller special purpose aircraft. (Marmain, Wehr und Wirtschaft, 7/65, 390-91) During July: Paul Tillich, Protestant theologian, commenting upon the “Pacem in Terris” of Pope John xxm, wrote: “A . . . genuine hope for peace is the technical union of mankind by the conquest of space. Of course, nearness can intensify hostility; and the fact that the first manifestations of the technical oneness of the world were two world wars proves this possibility. But nearness can also have the opposite effect. It can change the image of the other as strange and dangerous; it can reduce self-affirmation and effect openness for other possibilities of human existence and—particularly as in the encounter of religions— of other possibilities of genuine faith.” (Tillich, “The Limits of Peace,” Chicago Today, Summary 1965, 2-5)
In an article discussing preparations for the Gemini VI flight, William Hines noted in the Washington Evening Star: “Total propellant load of a ready-to-go Titan 2 consists of 13,700 gallons of a fuel called aero-zine-50 and 15,900 gallons of an oxidizer, nitrogen tetroxide. Their principal combustion product is nitric acid.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/11/65, A2)
