Carl B. Squier, U.S.’s 13th Federally licensed pilot and one of its earliest air daredevils, died at Burbank, Calif. Born in Decatur, Mich., he had worked since 1929 for Lockheed Aircraft Corp., becoming president in charge of sales and working as consultant beyond his retirement. He was a friend of such notables in U.S. aviation as Wiley Post, Charles A. Lindbergh, and Capt. Edward Rickenbacker. (NYT, 11/7/67, 41)
In February and March testimony released by Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on Disarmament, Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., indicated that U.S. was developing a new type of nuclear warhead designed to destroy enemy missiles with high-intensity x-rays. X-ray method, which would be used with three-stage Spartan missile, could destroy enemy missile by (1) disrupting avionic circuits used for guidance and detonation; (2) heating warhead to such high temperatures that it would ablate prematurely and burn up during reentry; or (3) triggering the warhead and causing premature detonation. (Committee Off; Av Wk, 5/15/67, 22; upi, P Inq, 5/11/67, 3; Finney, NYT, 5/10/67, 1)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.), member of Senate Foreign Relations Committee, on Senate floor called proposed Nike-X ABM system “a very expensive flying ‘erector set’ ” and said that Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was following an unwise course, “militarily, economically, and diplomatically. . . . Even if we were to spend forty billion dollars or more on a so-called massive system, the resulting increase in our security would be zero. . . . The result would he a waste of a great deal of money . . at a critical time. He cited three flaws in arguments supporting abm system: (1) justification based on approaching threat of Communist Chinese nuclear tipped missiles (“We have the capacity to devastate China many times over . . . and the Chinese know that,” he said); (2) assumption that a thin abm system would be effective against Communist China for any appreciable period; and (3) assumption that during so-called safe period in Chinese nuclear development, U.S., behind an abm defense, would be genuinely safe from nuclear attack. “The inevitable conclusion,” Senator Clark noted, “is that the proposed . . . system simply will not do the job which its proponents say it will do.” (Text; CR, 10/9/67, S14413-27)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 3,409 mph (mach 5.10) and 90,000-ft altitude in first flight with a new ablative coating and seeder designed to permit eiircraft to fly at mach 7.4 without basic airframe modification. Flight also tested: (1) stability and control with dummy ramjet and ablative; (2) Hycom phase-II camera (KA-51A); (3) ramjet local flow; (4) ramjet separation characteristics; and (5) wing tip accelerometer, (nasa Proj Off; Av Wk, 8/28/67, 33)
Michael E. Gluhareff, Russian-born engineer and associate of helicopter pioneer Igor I. Sikorsky, died in Bridgeport, Conn., at 74. Gluhareff was engineering manager of Sikorsky Aircraft, a division of United Aircraft. His many patents had included a dart-shaped plane, sailplane (glider), tail-less airplane with rear-mounted propeller, and device to use exhaust gases of engines to increase the speed and load of the plane (co-inventor) . (AP, W Post, 9/6/67, B8)
William Markowitz, physics professor at Marquette Univ., summarized his study of the reported flight dynamics of UFOs (unidentified flying objects) in Science. Study was made because of letter in Oct. 21, 1966, Science by Dr. J. Allen fiynek, consultant to usaf’s Project Blue Book, urging investigation of residue of puzzling UFO cases by physical and social scientists. Markowitz’s findings: (1) the control of reported ufos by extraterrestrial beings is contrary to the known laws of physics and (2) the data published do not justify the holding of investigations. He added that he would not believe that earth had ever been visited by any extraterrestrial until he was shown such a visitor. (Markowitz, Science, 9/15/67,1274^-79)
NASA X—15 (No. 3) crashed in Mojave Desert when the aircraft “exceeded its structural limitations during the final portions of the reentry maneuver,” X—15 Accident Investigating Board suspected. X— 15’s pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams, did not use ejection system and was killed, the first fatality in the 191 flights since the three X—15s started their flight operations, June 8, 1959. Usual flight plan called for aircraft to ascend at a sharp angle after being dropped by B—52 aircraft. After engine burnout, plan called for coasting up into high thin air, then dropping back in pancake style into thicker air for reentry. According to a NASA spokesman, the aircraft had risen to about 260,000 ft and encountered trouble on the way down. “There apparently was some sort of control malfunction as the pilot attempted to pull out of his descent,” spokesman said. Radar and telemetry data received during flight were excellent, data being received down to an altitude of 60,000 ft. Speed and altitude records for winged aircraft—4,534 mph, by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf), and 354,200 ft, by nasa’s Joseph A. Walker (who had since died in crash of XB-70 No. 2 and F—104 aircraft) — had been set by X—15s. Two crash landings of X—15 aircraft had occurred; pilots had survived and aircraft had been restored to flight status. X-15 No. 3 pilot, Maj. Adams, 37, had finished usaf training in 1952, flown in combat in Korea, and graduated with honors from Aerospace Research Pilots School. Although assigned to mol program, he had requested transfer to X-15 operations. Board was continuing attempt to determine the probable cause. (fRC Release 26-67; AP, AIT, 11/16/67,15)
afsc’s Ballistic Systems Div. (bsd) and Space Systems Div. (ssd) were combined to form new Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) with headquarters in Los Angeles. New organization would be commanded by m/g John W. O’Neill, former Commander of Electronic Systems Div. m/g John L. McCoy, former BSD Commander, was named Deputy Commander for Missiles; m/g Paul T. Cooper, former SSD Commander, was appointed Deputy Commander for Space, (afsc Release 101.67; ssd Release 67-207)
Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf), pilot, and L/Col. Emil Sturmthal (usaf), copilot, flew XB-70 No. 1 to 59,700-ft altitude and 1,510 mph (mach 2.3) in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: longitudinal stability and control and handling qualities checkout; throat unstart checkout; variable nose ramp functional test; radar airspeed calibration; and handling qualities approach sidestep maneuvers. Flight was successful except for lost radar contact. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Senate, approving (71-1) dot’s FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 11456), accepted figures of its Appropriations Committee, where special attention had been given to air and highway safety programs [see Sept. 28]. Despite persistent efforts of Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wisc.), who would have allowed only $1 million for SST development, amount was fixed at $142 million. Senate-approved bill was sent to conference committee. (CR, 10/5/67, S14299-333)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 167,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.32) to provide pilot experience at high altitude and check out horizon scanner, horizontal stabilizer alpha, 3rd landing skid, and electrical loads. (X-15 Proj Off)
William S. Aiken, Jr., former Chief of Operations Research Branch, OART, was appointed Deputy Director, Aeronautical Vehicles Div., oart. (NASA Ann, 8/15/67)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 1 to 3,205 mph (mach 4.84) and 71,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: (1) pcm system checkout; (2) measurement of coldwall heat transfer; (3) measurement of step panel heat transfer; (4) boost guidance checkout; (5)	energy management checkout; (6) check of tip-pod accelerometer; (7)	sonic boom study; and (8) study of horizontal tail loads. (X—15 Proj Off)
Changes in NASA staff alignment: Harold R. Finger, Manager of nasaaec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo) since its formation in 1960, was named to new NASA position of Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. He was succeeded in snpo by his deputy, Milton Klein. Reporting to Associate Administrator Finger would be Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly; Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs Dr. Rernhardt L. Dorman; Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Dr. Richard L. Lesher; and former LaRC Assistant Director Francis R. Smith in new post of Assistant Administrator for University Affairs. University Affairs Office would integrate, coordinate, and guide nasa’s relationships with colleges and universities; manage the Sustaining University Program; and assume other duties previously assigned to ossa’s Office of Grants and Research Contracts. Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, formerly Director of Grants and Research Contracts, was appointed Special Assistant to the Administrator on NASA—NAS and nasa-nae relationships. Other changes: DeMarquis D. Wyatt became Assistant Administrator for Program Plans and Analysis and David Williamson was appointed as his deputy. Rudget and programming functions previously under Wyatt were transferred to the Office of Administration, where they would be integrated into a NASA-wide system for resources management, including programming, budgeting, personnel management, and financial reporting. Rreene M. Kerr, Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis, resigned to return to private industry but would continue to serve as part-time consultant to NASA; Gen. Jacob M. Smart (usaf, Ret.) succeeded Kerr in addition to continuing to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator; William E. Lilly, Director of Program Control, omsf, became Assistant Administrator for Administration, replacing General Smart; and John Biggs, Deputy Executive Secretary, became Executive Secretary, replacing Col. L. W. Vogel (usa) , who returned to his previous assignment as Executive Officer, (nasa Releases 67-47, 67-49, 67-50)
NASA test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald Mallick flew XB-70 No. 1 to mach 2.27 and 58,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb to check out: (1) three pacer airspeed calibration points; (2) photos of the tufted right upper canard; (3) boundary layer noise data; (4) stability, control, and handling qualities; (5) bypass close unstart of left inlet; (6) nose ramp flutter data; and (7) radar airspeed calibration, (nasa Proj
Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and naa test pilot Van Shepard flew XB-70 No. 1 to mach 1.43 and 42,200-ft altitude during two-hour performance evaluation flight at Edwards afb. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Informed U.S. military sources said U.S.S.R. had now been convinced the aircraft carrier would be vital to international conflicts of today, and was even now building its first aircraft carrier, a “baby flattop,” reported UPI. Adm. Ephraim P. Holmes, Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, and his chief of staff, v/A William E. Ellis, said little was known of specifications but he believed it would have long-range capabilities. (Oestreicher, upi, W Post, 10/23/67, A3)
Addressing the House on means for a terminal-phase missile interception Systran, Rep. William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.) called for a sea-based antiballistic missile intercept system (sabmis). Pointing to the popular estimate that Red China would have a ballistic missile delivery capability in the early 1970s, the Congressman stated: “. . . deployment of a sabmis unit would place in the seas close to an adversary’s homeland and across his ‘launch trajectory window,’ a mobile, partly submerged screen of antimissile forces.” (CR, 9/19/67, H12137)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X—15 No. 2 to 96,000-ft altitude and 3,239 mph (mach 4.8) in flight at Edwards afb to check stabilization and control with dummy ramjet and check out thermalcouple system. Flight was successful except for break of dummy ramjet chute cable during landing sequence. (X-15 Proj Off)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) urged that Congress cut $9 billion from President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget to avoid tax increase. Interviewed on “Youth Wants to Know” television program, Proxmire suggested that $5-7 billion be cut from public works, $1 billion from space, and $1 billion from U.S. forces in Europe. (AP, W Post, 2/12/67)
Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, presented Distinguished Service Medal for outstanding service to m/g John L. Zoeckler, his Deputy C/S Systems. Ferguson cited Zoeckler’s “strategic use of management techniques to eliminate serious scheduling problems inherent in the F-lll program.” Zoeckler had managed System Program for F-lll aircraft system at asd, Wright-Patterson afb, from Oct. 14, 1963, until Sept. 1, 1967. (afsc Release 209.67)
First nonstop helicopter crossing of the Atlantic was successfully completed when two usaf HH-3E helicopters landed at Le Bourget Airport, opposite the U.S. pavilion at the Paris International Air and Space Show, following 30-hr 48-min flight from New York [see May 26-31]. Helicopters, which followed the route taken by Charles Lindbergh in 1927 when he became first man to fly the Atlantic nonstop alone, traveled 4,160 mi and made nine refuelings in flight. First flight crew was commanded by Maj. Herbert B. Zehnder (usaf) ; second by Maj. Donald B. Maurras (usaf). Both crews were submitting claims to Federation Aeronautique Internationale for new speed records from New York to London and New York to Paris, (upi, P EB, 6/1/67, 1; NYT, 6/2/67,17)
Paul E. Cotton, Director of Management Operations, in NASA’s omsf, was appointed director of oart’s Programs and Resources Div. Cotton would replace William E. Hanna, Jr., who had been named Director of the Bureau of Data Processing and Accounts in the Social Security Administration. (NASA Release 67-304)
Decrease in worldwide air temperature since the 1940’s might be due to emission of man-made pollutants into the atmosphere, National Center for Air Pollution scientists Robert A. McCormick and John H. Ludwig suggested in Science. Increasing amount of solid material made atmosphere more turbid and thus reduced amount of solar radiation reaching earth. Although excessive amount of carbon dioxide in atmosphere as a result of prolonged coal and oil burning should have made earth warmer, the authors noted, its effect had been offset by the turbidity caused by the pollutants. (McCormick, Ludwig, Science, 6/9/67, 1358-9)
jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering appointed William H. Bayley, General Manager of Deep Space Network (dsn), as Assistant Laboratory Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition. In new post, Bayley would direct worldwide dsn which jpl had operated for nasa. Bayley succeeded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, who had taken leave of absence from jpl to accept post of Director of DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency. (jpl Release 461/11-67)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana made successful emergency landing of X—15 No. 3 at Edwards afb after low pressure developed in fuel pump. (AP,B Sun, 4/27/67)
Busts of Wilbur and Orville Wright were unveiled in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans at New York Univ.’s Bronx campus. They were among 93 people named to the Hall of Fame since its opening in 1900. (NYT, 4/2/67,24) During week of May 7: Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, N.J., announced plans for what was believed to be the Nation’s first academic center for the study of cryogenics—a branch of physics related to the production and effects of very low temperatures. Dr. John G. Daunt was named to direct the new center. Stevens President Dr. Jess H. Davis said center would have two major objectives: “to help meet the pressing need for scientists and engineers who have substantial training and experience in this developing science,” and “to conduct basic research, which seeks to extend man’s knowledge of cryogenics into areas as yet unexplored.” (Bird, NYT, 5/14/67,63)
U.S.S.R. and Great Britain planned to sign a joint technological agreement shortly as result of British government and industry team visit to Moscow during September, reported Aviation Week. Agreement would cover automatic landing, aircraft engine technology and reliability, engine noise, and sonic boom research, Minister of State John Stone-house, team leader, stated. Britain had substantial lead over U.S.S.R. in these fields, but Stonehouse contended sharing of information would lead to new export markets for British hardware in Soviet and Soviet-bloc countries. (Av Wk, 10/2/67,16)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory, under construction at msc, would provide scientists with an unparalleled opportunity to examine extraterrestrial materials under controlled conditions, msc staff members James C. McLane, Jr., Elbert A. King, Jr., Donald A. Flory, Keith A. Richardson, James P. Dawson, Walter W. Kemmerer, and Bennie C. Wooley declared in Science. The laboratory would have four major functions: “(i) distribution of lunar samples to the scientific community for detailed investigations after a period of biologic quarantine; (ii) performance of scientific investigations of samples that are time-critical and must be accomplished within the quarantine period; (iii) permanent storage Under vacuum of a portion of each sample; and (iv) quarantining and testing of the lunar samples, spacecraft, and astronauts for unlikely, but potentially harmful, back-contamination (contamination of extraterrestrial origin).” (Science, 2/3/67, 525-9)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., appointed Apollo 204 Review Board to investigate Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee: Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of LaRC, Chairman; Astronaut Frank Borman, msc; Maxime Faget, msc; E. Barton Geer, LaRC; George Jeffs, North American Aviation, Inc.; Dr. Frank A. Long, Cornell Univ.; Col. Charles F. Strang, Norton afb, Calif.; George C. White, Jr., nasa Hq.; and John Williams, ksc. Three advisory members were added later: Charles W. Mathews, Director of Saturn/Apollo Applications, nasa Hq. omsf; John Yardley, McDonnell Co. executive; and L/Col. William D. Baxter (usaf) . LaRC Chief Counsel George Mallay would serve as counsel to the board, (nasa Release 67—16; Wilford, NYT, 1/30/67, 2)
Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton made successful emergency landing of XB-70 No. 1 at Edwards afb after crew entry door opened on takeoff and main landing gear malfunctioned. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Joseph J. Tymczyszyn, a senior faa test pilot and chief of faa’s West Coast Supersonic Transport Development Field Office, had emerged as the test pilot most likely to certify the sst, Mitchell Gordon disclosed in the Wall Street Journal. Tymczyszyn, certifier of both the Boeing 707 and the Douglas DC-8 jetliners for U.S. service, had already spent four years familiarizing himself with sst operation, and had logged more than 1,000 hrs in sst simulators. (Gordon, WSJ, 1/3/67,1)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor, urged President Johnson to appoint a commission to study the need for construction and deployment of an antiballistic missile (abm) system. “. . . the ABM question is of such a magnitude that it is essential to have a careful and objective evaluation of the course the United States should follow. I do not believe . . . that the military-industrial complex is objective enough to advise the United States Congress or the President on how we should proceed. This being the case, I strongly suggest that a temporary blue ribbon commission drawn from all sectors of national life is the best way to bring a thorough- inquiry into the issues. “Our very national survival may be at issue in the ABM controversy. It is time we put the best minds in the country to work.” (CR, 7/27/67, S10364-6)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown at ftc by usaf pilots Col. Joseph Cotton and L/c Emil Strumthal, reached mach 2.52 and 63,500-ft altitude in flight to test stability control and handling qualities. Other test objectives included: handling qualities at mach 1.2 and 40,000-ft altitude; unstarts; radar air speed calibration at mach 1.9 down to 1.2 and 45,000-ft altitude; nose ramp flutter function at mach 1.2 'and 32,000-ft altitude, and at mach 2.55 and 64,000-ft altitude. (NASA Proj Off)
DOD officials were concerned about serious mechanical problems that had “undermined the readiness” of the Minuteman II icbm, William Beecher reported in the New York Times. “As recently as this spring, reliable sources say, nearly 100 missiles—about 40 per cent of all the advanced Minuteman 2 missiles and 10 per cent of the entire 1,000-missile Minute-man force—were out of action because of trouble with the weapon’s guidance and control system.” Although DOD’s “more or less official view” was that the problem was “worrisome hut well in hand,” many officials “while observing that mechanical problems will always group up in any complex electronics system and can be corrected, cite the Minuteman 2 trouble in questioning the wisdom of the near total reliance that Mr. McNamara places on intercontinental ballistic missiles in the strategic field.” [See July 28.] (Beecher, NYT, 7/28/67, 1, 2)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell became NASA Associate Administrator. His appointment had been announced Aug. 25. Dr. Newell would be replaced as Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Sciences) by Dr. John E. Naugle. (nasa Release 67-228; NASA Ann, 10/20/67; Hines, W Star, 10/3/67, A4)
A 59-lb, $350,000 computer used on Gemini V mission had been reconditioned and was being used by USN in tests of new airborne weapons system designed to locate and destroy enemy radar, AP reported. USN declined to name the aircraft or reveal where the tests were being conducted. (AP, Denver Post, 5/14/67) Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, discussed NASA’s attempts to solve the increasing problem of aircraft noise. Efforts included: (1) active participation in the interagency task force established by President Johnson to study aircraft noise [see Feb. 1], (2) study of methods to reduce noise of conventional aircraft engines, (3) investigation of the use of steeper descent angles during approach to landing and steeper climb on takeoff to reduce noise by moving the source farther from the ground, and (4) research on a new turbine engine with low noise as a basic requirement. (Text; NNews, 5/16/67) Former afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) charged that the Johnson Administration was not “pushing technology” and suggested that $400-700 million more should have been spent annually on exploratory and advanced development during the past four or five years. He was particularly critical of the “arbitrary separation of space activities into peaceful and military. ... It simply serves to emphasize, by comparison, the straightforwardness of the Soviet program. Their single-purpose program seeks only to attain a versatile technological superiority which, once attained, will serve the political purpose they choose regardless of what kind of a space program we have or how we categorize it. . . .” (Text) Anglo-French Concorde supersonic aircraft, scheduled to enter commercial service in 1971, would pioneer three markets, monopolizing the first two until “pushed away” by U.S. SST, scheduled to enter passenger service in 1974-5, W. J. Jakimiuk, president of Sud-Aviation, predicted. Concorde would dominate the North Atlantic market where SSTs would first be used; however, “as soon as the U.S. sst penetration of the North Atlantic pushes away the Concordes, they will be introduced on the major other markets, where a position of monopoly again will be found,” Jakimiuk said. When U.S. SST “pushes” Concorde away from these routes, it would then move to a new series of routes where traffic density would be so low that “there will be no sst competition.” (NYT, 5/21/67, 88) Director of FAA sst Development b/'g J. C. Maxwell, referring to report by Institute for Defense Analyses (ida) which suggested that sst program could seriously weaken the Nation’s balance of payments [see May 16], said that “our balance of payments will continue to benefit if American and foreign airlines continue to buy and operate American aircraft in the upcoming supersonic area.” General Maxwell said faa estimated that 1990 market for SSTs, if operations were limited by sonic boom considerations, would be 500 aircraft, improving balance of payments position by $17 billion. If sonic boom did not limit operations, 1,200	aircraft would be sold, improving balance of payments position by $32billion. (Text; Lardner, W Post, 5/Y1/61, Cl) Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, responded to criticism that U.S. was losing its strategic superiority. “For many years, the Soviet Union apparently had been following our lead in every important strategic system technical development. . .. This is still the case. We are following their activities with great care. We see no evidence that our planned strategic capabilities will be endangered by recent Soviet technological actions. . . .” Dr. Foster announced that first MOL would be launched by USAF in 1970, confirming rumors that program was two years behind schedule. (Av Wk, 5/22/67,11) Awards presented included: (1) Monsanto Aviation Safety Award for the “most significant and lasting contribution to air safety” in 1966 to faa Deputy Administrator David D. Thomas, who was recognized as “the principal architect of the U.S. air traffic control system”; and (2)	1967 Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for distinguished and meritorious aerospace writing to Howard Benedict, AP senior aerospace writer, for series of articles from Aue. 8-Sept. 19, 1966, on Gemini XI mission. (Editor & Publisher, 5/13/67; faa Release 67-7)
U.K., France, and West Germany would develop a short-to-medium-distance aircraft designed to reduce cost of air travel by the early 1970s, John Stonehouse of the British Ministry of Technology told a London news conference. Known as the European Airbus Project, plan called for a 300-passenger twin-engine aircraft with a 1,931-km (1,200-mi) to 2,253km (1,400-mi) range to begin commercial service by 1973. Expected to cost $532 million, Airbus would be designed jointly by Sud-Aviation of France, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Arbeitsgemeinschaft Airbus of West Germany. (NYT, 7/26/67, 61M)
nasa test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald L. Maffick flew XB-70 No. 1 to 58,000-ft altitude and 1,581 mph (mach 2.43) in flight at Edwards afb. Purpose of test was to check lateral-directional stability, control, and handling qualities at mach 2.35 and 55,000 ft; inlet unstart at mach 2.4 and 57,500 ft; variable nose ramp functional test at mach 1.6 and 38,000 ft, and at mach 1.4 and 32,000 ft. Flight was successful. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, suggested that SST program was progressing too rapidly. “. . . it is not clear why the United States is so anxious to rush into a costly program of SST development involving many unsolved problems and great economic risk on the strength of a nebulous national prestige. It may well be that our prestige will lose a great deal more if we show ourselves to be a nation whose commitments and investments are based largely on a hysteria about our ‘image’—largely and simply because the British and French are building the Concorde—unable to wait and learn from their experience—and unable to take the advice of a multitude of technical and economic experts within our own country as to the inadvisability of this effort. . . .” {CR, 7/20/67, H9128)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) warned the Senate that U.S. deficit could reach $30 billion unless drastic cuts were made in Federal spending. He suggested that a $5-billion reduction in proposed FY 1968 spending be made by: (1) postponing public works programs such as highway construction until economic and military demands were lowered; (2) foregoing the “expensive frill” of sst development; (3) curtailing military costs by further reducing U.S. troop strength in Europe; and (4) cutting NASA’s post-Apollo funds by over $1 billion by postponing “such projects as a soft-landing on Mars, which has nothing to do with our present goal of a moon landing. “The situation that we face in fiscal 1968 involves an economy dominated by a heavy Federal budget, no matter how it is measured. If these circumstances materialize, there is no question about the immediate urgency of substantial expenditure reductions. . . . We may need a tax increase too, but first priority by all means should go to the reduction of spending.” (Text)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X-15 No. 1 to 3,570 mph (mach 5) and 227,000-ft altitude in test to build up pilot altitude and check out horizon scanner and horizontal stabilizer. (X-15 Proj Off)
Rep. John J. Rhodes (R-Ariz.), speaking in the House on behalf of .the Republican Policy Committee, urged that House/Senate Conference Committee on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill accept key Republican amendments adopted by the House. Amendments would reduce nasa’s FY 1968 budget request by $201.4 million, establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and require nasa to keep Congress fully and currently informed of problems. (CR, 7/19/67, H9045)
Dr. Donald E. Guss, project scientist for gsfc’s Solar Particle Intensity and Composition Experiment, died in Cleveland after a heart attack. (W Post, 2/8/67)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) set new winged aircraft speed record when be flew X—15 No. 2 to 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) and 99,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb to: (1) test Martin ablative coating and ramjet
Senate passed $2.6-billion AEC FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 10918) which included $7.3 million for a new proton accelerator in Weston, 111. Amendment by Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.) to delay approval of the Weston site until' the community or the state passed open-housing laws which would enable Negro employees to find suitable housing near the plant was defeated. (CR, 1/13/61, S9484-521) The New York Times later commented: “. . . credit goes to Senators . . . who exposed the real issues at stake, and who won a moral victory when the vote margin in Weston’s favor proved much narrower than had been expected. . . . “But there is an even more basic objection to any commitments or expenditures for this expensive research tool at this time. That objection is simply the irrelevance of a 200 billion electron volt accelerator to any real present national problem. . . . The budget cutters are now in full cry demanding reductions in already inadequate expenditures for human needs. It is a distortion of the national priorities to commit many millions now to this interesting but unnecessary scientific luxury.” (NYT, 7/16/67,12)
Senate Appropriations Committee activities were listed by Wall Street Journal: voted $142 million for this year’s development of the sst; doubled the House-approved $20 million for highway safety grants; added $50 million to FAA’s budget for improved air safety (versus the $7 million requested by the Administration) ; and, in all, voted nearly $1.7 billion for the Department of Transportation’s FY 1968 budget. Sponsor for the improved air safety figure of $50 million had been Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.), chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee that handled faa’s budget, who proposed $20 million for operation of air control towers and overtime payment for their crews, plus another $30 million for such new safety equipment as airport ground lighting and improved radar. Sen. Stennis had stated his hope that someday air safety projects could be financed partly with special user charges. (WSJ, 9/28/67,3)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) and Sen. Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.) were assigned to vacancies on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences created by the resignations of Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (D-Va.), and Sen. George D. Aiken (R-Vt.). (Senate Comm.)
Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.), Chairman of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, speaking at launching of Navy’s latest nuclear submarine, the Narwhal, in Groton, Conn., called for “full speed ahead” on building an abm system. (Av Wk, 9/18/67; jCR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
Citizens League Against the Sonic Boom, an organization with 230 members in 18 states, had started a campaign to stop the construction of a U.S. sst, New York Times reported. Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. William A. Shurcliff, director of the campaign, said in a Cambridge, Mass., interview that the League would attack the sst program in Congress. “The amount of money provided thus far by Congress is less than one-quarter of what is needed to get a prototype in the air. The government must put about $1.1 billion together, and to date Congress has only supplied $200-million or $299-million. “I think our chances of stopping the program are good.” {NYT, 6/18/67, 60)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 3,818 mph (mach 5.68) and 135,000-ft altitude during nine-min flight at Edwards afb to: (1) provide pilot experience at high altitudes; (2) record stabilizer flow angle of attack; (3) test electrical loads; (4) check out 3rd landing skid; (4) check out pressure attitude indicator; (5) record data from X-15 sonic boom; and (6) check out ablative coatings on stabilizer. (nasa X—15 Proj Off)
President Johnson appointed Paul R. Ignatius, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), as Secretary of the Navy, succeeding Paul H. Nitze, who became Deputy Secretary of Defense July 1. John T. McNaughton, who had been nominated and confirmed as Nitze’s successor in June, was killed in an aircraft crash July 19. The President approved reassignment of Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower), to replace Ignatius. {PD, 8/7/67, 1100)
A national information system for assuring the availability of every significant scientific or technical document, regardless of its origin, was “inevitable,” Edward J. Brunenkant, director of AEc’s Division of Technical Information, predicted at New York meeting of the Special Libraries Assn. Noting that over 1 million scientific articles were being printed annually in 35,000 journals, Brunenkant conceded that the establishment of a national system would be “extraordinarily complex,” but said the need for it was “urgent.” (NYT, 6/1/67, 33)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 3 to 82,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.52) in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: (1)	cold-wall heat transfer; (2) step-panel heat transfer; (3) boost guidance checkout; (4) sonic boom study; and (5) pcm checkout. (nasa Proj Off)
jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering announced appointment of Fred H. Felberg, Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions, to the new position of Assistant Laboratory Director for Plans and Programs. He would be succeeded by Jack N. James, Deputy Assistant Director for Flight Projects. In his new position Felberg would be responsible for “planning jpl’s total program, including . . . effective distribution of manpower and resources.” (jpl Release 460)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was piloted by Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton to mach 2.54 and 60,200-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb for national sonic boom program. (nasa Pro j Off)
Lewis Research Center’s Quiet Engine Program should produce a significant reduction in jet-engine noise and reverse the rising noise levels which had created serious problems at major airports, Michael L. Yaffee reported in Aviation Week. Expected to cost $50 million, program was seeking to develop a new turbofan demonstrator engine that would show a reduction of 15 PNdb (perceived noise in decibels) on takeoff and 20 PNdb on landing, below noise of current transport engines. Definition phase of Quiet Engine Program began under $458,000 contract LeRC awarded United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div., July 13. Remaining $750,000 allotted to program for FY 1967 was being used to purchase supporting services and hardware. (Yaffee Av Wk, 8/21/67, 38-9)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of ost and science advisor to the President, addressing science writers’ seminar in St. Louis, doubted value of scientists’ becoming part-time politicians to promote greater public support of scientific activity. He said a scientist who used his skill in explaining complex subjects to laymen was “a much better politician than anyone trying to be an amateur on serious political matters.” Noting that rate of growth of Federal support of science activities had slowed in recent years, Hornig said $17 billion was still being spent annually on science activities, including $1.8 billion on academic science in universities. (AP, NYT, 11/19/67, 2; Federal Support for Academic Sciences and Other Educational Activities in Univ. and Col., July 67)
FAA met with 11 U.S. airlines and one leasing company to discuss financing of sst. Following conference, faa Administrator William F. McKee announced that airline representatives had “indicated general agreement with the concept of assisting with financing of the prototype development phase.” (faa Release 67-11)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) to mach 1.35 and 37,000-ft altitude to conduct stability and control maneuvers, (nasa Proj Off)
William M. Magruder, Lockheed Aircraft Corp,, had been selected to receive Flight Safety Foundation’s 1967 Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award, Aviation Week reported. (Av Wk, \/9/61, 13)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, discussed importance of defense R&D and problem of choosing among new technological developments available. Speaking before the Dallas Chapter of the Assn, of the U.S. Army and the Dallas Council on World Affairs, he noted that over 80% of all the scientists and engineers who had ever lived were alive today; scientific and technical manpower had increased 400%, compared to 50% for labor force; and % of aU U.S. R&D supported national defense. Current defense R&D funding was $8 billion. Discussing selection of proposed projects, he described a new tool and procedure called the Development Concept Paper, “a short, single document . . . [which] requires that . . . parties agree to a common document that states the issues, the assumptions, the alternative courses of action available, the pros and cons for each.” With this type of presentation, he said, the Secretary of Defense could more easily and more objectively decide whether to approve or reject a project, and if approved, the paper could be transmitted to project’s implementers as a guide. This new tool, he indicated, would be used in future to avoid repetition of past inappropriate decisions in which precious resources were wasted, such as air-launched Skybolt missile and B-70 aircraft which proved too vulnerable after $2 billion had been spent on their development; and C5-A subsonic transport aircraft, currently being produced for operation in 1969, whose production had been delayed since late 1950’s pending development of a system to utilize it. From such cases, Dr. Foster noted, “we have repeatedly learned that money is not enough. That enthusiasm is not enough. That technical innovation is not enough. We need critical analysis of purposes, missions, threats, and requirements. We also need realistic tested advanced alternatives produced by our investment in research. And to gain wise management decisions, we must join these together in constructive confrontation.” (Text)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) made successful emergency landing of X—15 No. 1 at Edwards afb 59 sec after takeoff because of an electrical power failure. (X—15 Proj Off)
William H. Woodward was promoted from Deputy Director to Director of oart’s Space Power and Electric Propulsion Div.—formerly Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div.—succeeding Harold B. Finger, who became NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management March 15. Woodward would be responsible for planning, managing, and coordinating advanced research and technology programs in the area of space power, including solar, chemical, nuclear, and electric propulsion, (nasa Release 67-78)
William Tier, Deputy Manager of Operations in mfsc’s Saturn I/IB Program Office, was named Manager to replace Lee B. James. Tier’s former position would be filled by William F. LaHatte. (msfc Release 67-62)
USN had selected six companies to compete for six-month study contract to design ship-based antimissile missile system which could support Nike-X, William Beecher reported in New York Times. Companies were Hughes Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., Boeing Co., Aerojet-General Corp., McDonnell Douglas Co., and Raytheon Co. Code-named Seaborne AntiBallistic Missile Intercept System (sabmis), it would be deployed on submarines and warships stationed in international waters off Communist China and U.S.S.R. to intercept long-range missiles launched from those countries. A USA Nike-X official commented: “The Navy system is both feasible and attractive. It could intercept enemy ICBm’s before they can deploy most of their penetration aids; it would reduce the number of missiles Nike-X would have to contend with; and it would tremendously increase the enemy’s technology problems by forcing him to become very sophisticated indeed if he wants to stand any chance of getting his icbm’s past both the mid-course and terminal phase defenses.” (Beecher, NYT, 7/4/67,1, 2)
37,000-ft altitude over Canada. His theory conflicted with one set forth in 1966 by Johns Hopkins Univ. astrophysicists Drs. William Plummer and John Strong that surface temperatures of Venus were low enough to support life in certain areas. (Lyons, NYT, 5/28/67, 21) • The frontier of space is limited only by man’s “ability to maintain individual freedom and yet join many minds in concerted action,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the Celebration of The Prelude to Independence in Williamsburg, Va. “It is the essential requirement for each of us to do what we can as individuals and as groups to make our system of representative government work, and then work better. More and more this means that each of us must find a way to reach through complexity and organized prejudice to trusted sources of information and organized facts. We must not do less than to make sure we understand the fundamentals in the many important disciplines of human activity. Without this understanding of at least the fundamentals . . . today’s citizen cannot play the role only he can play in representative society, cannot bridge the gap from the old to the new, from one discipline to another. Without this capability, a citizen today cannot be a fully effective participant in a free society. Indeed, without this basic understanding on a large scale at all levels our nation is likely to forfeit the capability of collectively responsible action, and with it, the basis for an effective free society. . . .” (Text)
Nasa personnel changes: (1) John S. Brown, Division Director in the Office of Legislative Affairs, NASA Hq., became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs; (2) John P. Jewett, Assistant Chief for Administration, Nevada Extension of aec/nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo—n), became Chief of snpo-n. (nasa Ann, 7/2/67, 7/25/67)
Michael Getler, in Aerospace Technology editorial, cited U.K.’s lack of “willingness to invest at home in the pursuit of new technology needed to compete and to grow,” as a maj or reason for devaluation of the British pound [see Nov. 18]. Comparing French and U.K. economies Getler noted that France had invested heavily in her own industry to support a large-scale military buildup and an expensive national space program. “In contrast to French willingness to pay for the cost of [r&d], the British have tended to treat their big companies solely as manufacturers. . . . “While the British have purchased [U.S.] Polaris missiles ... the French have built their own. The British . . . now are buying U.S.-built F-4s and F-llls, while the French continue to design and build newer versions of their own Mirage family, and are now exporting them. . . . “The British national space program is virtually non-existent despite a growing realization . . . [by] Parliament that investment in a properly scaled effort can be of great importance in developing [British] technology. . . . There is no suggestion that the British take on a multibillion dollar effort, but there certainly are grounds to support investment in a $100 million program . . . that would be directed at developing satellites with some obvious commercial applications.” Although U.K.’s purchases of U.S. goods were “good business for American industry,” Getler noted, “the long range risk to this country is that an old and comparably faithful ally will be weakened in the process. Eventually, the British will tire of buying U.S. weapons . . . [but will have] no R&D base ... to fall back. . . .” (Getler, Aero Tech, 12/4/67,58)
nasa test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald Mallick flew X-70 No. 1 to mach 1.8 and 55,000-ft altitude in test to check out stability and control of handling qualities, by-pass airflow calibration, and nose ramp flutter. (XB-70 Proj Off)
