In press interview Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe said he favored building SST. “I certainly don’t want to see our country play second fiddle . . . and if this is feasible and economical to build and operate and the economy of the nation budget-wise will permit it, I probably would like to see it go ahead.” (upi, W Star, 3/16/69, All)
nasa’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, reached 78,000-ft altitude and mach 1.55 after air launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of flight, 23rd in series, was to obtain data on performance, stability, and control—especially roll control, (nasa Proj Off)
Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.), for himself and Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.), introduced S.J.R. 133 “to redesignate the area in the state of Florida known as Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral.” Measure was referred to Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 7/10/69, S7819)
Where the Legend Starts,” film depicting life of late Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, was being prepared in U.S.S.R., Tass announced. Gagarin, first man in space on Vostok I April 12, 1961, died in aircraft crash March 27, 1968. (AP, C Trib, 4/9/69)
President Nixon would ask Congress to appropriate $662 million over five years to assist in SST development, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. Federal Government would spend estimated $761 million through FT 1974, including $99 million in funds already appropriated, to construct and flight-test two prototype Boeing sst models. Total development cost was estimated $1.5 billion, with $1.3-billion Government participation to be repaid from sale of approximately 300 aircraft capable of carrying 300 passengers each at maximum 1,800-mph speeds, (dot Release 21069)
Project Tektite Aquanauts Richard A. Waller, Conrad V. W. Mahnken, John G. Van Derwalker, and H. Edward Clifton were brought to surface and placed in decompression chamber for 19 hrs, after recordbreaking 59 days on ocean floor off St. John, Virgin Islands. They had submerged Feb. 15 in successful experiment to determine how men functioned for extended periods underwater. At news conference later, aquanauts revealed they had spent 25—40 hrs outside underwater habitat during first two weeks, moving no farther than 300 ft; later they averaged 70 hrs per week, swimming up to 3,000 ft from habitat to study marine life, ocean currents, and geology. (Lyons, NYT, 4/14/69, 17; AP, W Star, 4/15/69, Bll; W Post, 4/16/69, A9; 4/17/69; 4/19/69, A6)
President Nixon received report of 10-member ad hoc committee appointed Feb. 7 to review all aspects of SST program. Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs, chairman, said no votes were taken by committee on recommendations to President; each member had submitted his suggestions to Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe and they were included in report, (upi, W Post, 3/29/69, A2)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 60,500-ft altitude and mach 1.6—vehicle’s fastest speed to date—after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of flight, 27th in HL—10 series and 14th with power, was to obtain stability and control data at transonic speeds. (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/29/69, 12)
Congressional sources quoted by John Finney in New York Times said White House had ordered cancellation of DOD’s mol program [see June 10] over dod and usaf objections and in response to mounting congressional pressure to hold down military spending. (NYT, 6/12/69, 1)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached 54,000-ft altitude and 724 mph (mach 1.1)—first supersonic flight by HL—10—after 45,000-ft-altitude air-launch from B—52 aircraft. Primary purpose of 17th flight, made north of Four Corners, Calif., was to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on proposals made at aaas meeting in Dallas, Tex., Dec. 26—31, 1968, for agency to establish priorities for Federal spending in research, education, technology, weapon development, and science. Dr. James V. Shannon, former nih director, had proposed creation of top-level council equal in stature to National Security Council and Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Science Adviser, had recommended adding Secretary of Science to Presidential Cabinet. Star said, “There will be strong opposition to both of these proposals. The cry of centralization will be raised.” However: “What is proposed . . . is a body of. informed advisers, whose duty it is to suggest ... to instruct the President, the Congress and public on the potentialities for good and evil that could result if a given path were followed. The President would still have to make the executive decisions. Congress would still control the purse. The public would still have the final verdict of the ballot. But all of them could use some responsible, expert guidance through the awesome and fantastic new world that lies just ahead.” (W Star, 1/5/69, Gl)
Senate, by vote of 58 to 22, rejected amendment submitted by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to strike from H.R. 14794, dot FY 1970 appropriations bill, $80 million for SST development. (CR, 12/17/69, S17003, S17005—48)
NASA and DOT award of $165,908 contract to Booz-Allen Applied Research Inc. for six-month study of total U.S. investment in aeronautical r&d since 1945 was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Joint effort was to develop methods of assessing national benefits which accrued from R&D development expenditures, (dot Release 22269)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced new faa regulation establishing maximum noise level for new subsonic transport aircraft at 93—108 effective perceived noise decibels—up to 10 epndbs less than those for noisiest aircraft already in service. Regulation would be effective Dec. 1, but aircraft like Boeing 747 with high-bypass-ratio engines for which application for type certificate was made before Jan. 7, 1967, would be granted additional time to comply, (dot Release 69-124)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer announced allocations of $34,144,479 to construct and improve 177 U.S. airports under FY 1970 Federal-aid Airport Program. Appropriations, based on $30 million authorized by Congress and carryover funds from previous years, represented last year of funding authorized under current Federal Airport Act. Program stressed preservation and expansion of facilities at existing airports to accommodate high-performance, sophisticated aircraft; increasing airport capacity; relieving congestion; and continuing construction of airports initiated under earlier programs, (faa Release 69-59)
National Aeronautic Assn, conferred title “Elder Statesman of Aviation” on Adm. Joseph J. Clark (usn, Ret.), Katherine Stinson Oteroo, and William A. Patterson, retired President of United Air Lines. (W Star, 11/15/69, A3)
Scientist-astronaut Dr. William E. Thornton, who had been grounded in spring, received usaf clearance to continue jet pilot training. Thornton had had difficulty landing because of distortion of vision called aniseikonia, which reduced hi§ depth perception. Vision had been corrected with special glasses, (upi, W Star, 8/26/69, A3; W Post, 8/26/69, A9)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 66,000-ft altitude and mach 1.6 in powered flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objectives of flight, 29th in series, were to obtain stability and control data and airspeed calibration, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 15th flight. Primary objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.9 and to determine control characteristics at mach 0.9. Vehicle was air-launched from B—52 aircraft north of Four Comers, Calif., at 45,000-ft altitude and mach 0.7. Manke ignited three chambers of XLR—11 engine, rotated vehicle, climbed to 55.000-	ft altitude, and sustained flight at mach 0.9 for 100 secs. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 81,000-ft altitude and mach 1.42 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Primary objective of flight, 24th in series and first with new engine, was to obtain stability, control, and engine data, (nasa Proj Off)
sst economics were discussed by FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer before Long Island Assn, of Commerce and Industry in Manhasset, N.Y. Study of simulated sst operation in 1980s, with comparison of sst and subsonic jets based on total operating cost rather than direct operating cost and using 1969 values, had shown “sst beats the 707 substantially and comes much nearer to equaling the impressively low 747 costs.” Elements of ground support and overhead costs gained advantage of sst’s greater productivity in seat-miles per hour. “The 2707—300 [sst] is two thirds as big as the 747 and it flies three times as fast, so it will do twice as much as the 747 (and 4% times the 707 or DC—8) in the same time period.” By 1978, sst introduction date, aircraft’s total operating cost “comes within one-tenth of a cent per seat-mile of matching the 440-seat economy version of the 747.” (Text)
Dr. John M. DeNoyer, former Assistant Director for Research at U.S. Geological Survey, became Director of Earth Observations Programs in nasa Office of Space Science and Applications, (nasa Hq WB, 1/5/70)	_ _	_	_
usaf released three-volume Scientific Study of Unidentified Flying Objects, report of Univ. of Colorado scientists directed by Dr. Edward U. Condon. It concluded that “nothing has come from the study of UFOs in the past 21 years that has added to scientific knowledge. . . . Further extensive study of UFOs probably cannot be justified in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” Scientists felt “the reason that there has been very little scientific study of the subject is that those scientists who are most directly concerned, astronomers, atmospheric physicists, chemists, and psychologists, having had ample opportunity to look into the matter, have individually decided that UFO phenomena do not offer a fruitful field in which to look for major scientific discoveries.” In review of study, nas special review panel had concluded, “On the basis of present knowledge the least likely explanation of UFOs is the hypothesis of extraterrestrial visitations by intelligent beings.” Condon report recommended dod handle UFO sighting reports in normal surveillance operations and found no basis for contention that ufo data were “shrouded in official secrecy.” Report stated, “The history of the past 21 years has repeatedly led Air Force officers to the conclusion that none of the things seen, or thought to have been seen . . . constituted any hazard or threat to national security.” Report of two-year study, commissioned by USAF for $500,000, had been approved by nas panel. (Text; Sullivan, NYT, 1/8/69, 1; 1/10/69, 32; Boffer, Science, 1/17/69, 260—2)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced faa plans to issue proposal to control emission of aircraft smoke in flight in effort to combat air pollution, (faa Release 69—129)
Intelligence briefings to high dod officials had indicated U.S.S.R. missile defense was three-quarters complete and had been slowed in recent months to improve its radar system, said William Beecher in New York Times. Briefings also indicated that antimissile system around Moscow, even when finished, would not alter balance of power between U.S.S.R. and U.S. or undermine U.S. retaliatory power. (NYT, 2/13/69, 1)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, was air-launched from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude and glided to successful landing. Purpose of flight, 16th in series at frc, was pilot checkout, (nasa Proj Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced selection of Robert P.	Selfridge, Director of Greater Rockford (111.) Airport, to receive faa Award for Distinguished Service for his “contribution in developing and promoting the cause of General Aviation” and for his “constructive suggestions, imagination, dedication and service to the aviation users, above and beyond the role of an Airport Director.” (faa Release 69-67)
Florida Legislature passed concurrent resolution asking President Nixon and Congress to restore name “Cape Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy, subject to agreement by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), brother of late President John F. Kennedy. Original Spanish name meant “plantation of cane.” (AP, W Star, 6/7/69, Al)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached 79,000-ft altitude and mach 1.39 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose of flight, 25th in series and 12th using engine, was to obtain stability and control data at various angles of attack in speed range around mach 1.2. (nasa Proj Off)
NASA’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, reached mach 0.6 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 40,000-ft altitude over South Rogers Lake Bed, Calif. Objectives of unpowered flight, sixth in series, were to check out new pilot, evaluate handling characteristics with 30° upper flap, and evaluate handling qualities at various roll gain settings of stability augmentation systems (SAS). (NASA Proj Off)	'
NASA was developing novel technique for photographing faint x-ray sources, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Testifying on supporting research and technology program, he said technique would reduce required exposure time 1/10 to 1/1000 and was “likely to revolutionize x-ray observations where telescopes are not usable.” Based on Princeton Univ. development and laser image-enhancement technique, it was “major technological advance as an outgrowth of the space program and should find applications in all fields of x-ray science.” gsfc was developing advanced gamma-ray telescope to observe center of galaxy and other celestial objects. Univ. of Colorado was developing advanced coronagraph to observe solar corona from earth orbit six months instead of the few minutes per year possible during solar total eclipse by ground-based observation. (Testimony)
President Nixon announced selection of Gerard C. Smith, former Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning, as Director of Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Adrian S. Fisher had been acting director since resignation of William C. Foster. {PD, 2/3/69, 188)
President Nixon accepted pro forma resignation of Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. Appointed by President Kennedy 'in 1961, Dr. Welsh had been Council’s first and only appointed executive secretary. (W Post, 2/5/69, A7; AP, W Star, 2/5/69, 1)
In Washington Post review of Contact! The Story of the Early Birds by Henry Serrano Villard, John Osgood said: “Despite the technical complexities of the recent translunar injection, the mystique of flight remains undiminished 65 years after Orville Wright managed his mere 120 feet of powered flight. Mystique or no, it is still difficult to comprehend what drove the early aeronauts to attempt feats which most often won them the contempt and ridicule of their countrymen.” (W Post, 2/18/69, B4)
First royalty-bearing license under NASA’s foreign patent program had been granted to Nippon Electric Co., Ltd. in Tokyo, NASA announced. Invention bearing NASA-owned patent No. 484,436 and made by gsfc’s Joseph G. Haynos, was concerned with connections between solar cells that permitted flexibility and low weight. Company had made initial payment to NASA for exclusive manufacturing rights in Japan and agreed to continue royalty payments for duration of license. (nasa Release 69—40)
Liverworts grown in lunar soil at LRL had reached three-inch height and were “green and happy,” Washington Post said, while controls, grown in earth soil, were “puny—not even an inch high—and pale.” Difference in plants, commonly found on rocks and in forests and among first to grow in volcanic areas, had been considered small when first noted in August. However, LRL Chief of Preventive Medicine, Dr. William Kemmerer, now called difference “one of the really unexpected results of the lunar mission.” Plant tests had been conducted to see if lunar material caused harm to earth plants. Control plants had been grown in desert soil. Tobacco cells and soy bean cells in culture with lunar soil had done better than controls in earth soil; ferns were growing “more spectacularly” than some grown in earth soil. Man’s knowledge of trace mineral requirements in plants and animals was “very, very limited,” Dr. Kemmerer had said. “I don’t think we’ll find something going on in lunar nutrition that we don’t find on the earth, I do think important questions have been raised.” (Cohn, W Post, 11/14/69)
In Physical Review Letters, Univ. of Maryland physicist Dr. Joseph Weber described detection.of gravity waves from unknown source but in two places simultaneously. Coincidences were observed on gravitational-radiation detectors over 1,000-km base line at Argonne National Laboratory and at Univ. of Maryland. Probability that coincidences were accidental was “incredibly small.” NSF-supported study provided first real evidence of existence of gravity waves postulated by Prof. Albert Einstein more than 50 yrs ago. (Physical Review Letters, 6/16/69, 1320—24; Lannan, W Star, 6/15/69, A25)
In Nature, Stanford Univ. astronomer Dr. Edward K. Conklin reported recording earth’s motion using background radiation believed to have been produced at early stage in universe’s expansion. If theory was correct, radiation defined extremely distant reference frame for measurement of earth’s motion. Recording showed 100-mi-per-sec movement in direction midway between direction of Big Dipper and star Arcturus. (Nature, 6/7/69, 971—2)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 21st flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objectives were to obtain stability, control, and performance data at speeds up to mach 1.35. (nasa Proj Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $200,000 faa contract to Univ. of Tennessee at Knoxville for two-year study of methods of reducing sonic boom, to help faa establish certification standards for new aircraft, (faa Release 69—127)
NASA announced appointment of John A. Whitney as Assistant General Counsel for Procurement Matters, (nasa Release 69—167)
faa announced it had amended its Dec. 3 rule intended to ease congestion at five of Nation’s busiest airports. Amendments provided for extra sections of scheduled air carrier flights without regard to established quotas at all airports except John F. Kennedy, increase in flight quotas at Kennedy between 5:00 pm and 8:00 pm, effective date June 1 instead of April 27, and termination date of Dec. 31. (faa Release 69—23)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) delivered Landon Lecture at Kansas State Univ.: “With this new generation of weapons [mirvs] about to sprout from the arsenals of the Soviet Union and the United States, I have been joined by almost half the Senate and a sizable number of House members in calling for a joint moratorium on flight tests of the so-called mirv systems.” (Text)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers told Senate Foreign Relations Committee during hearings on nonproliferation treaty that he hoped U.S.—U.S.S.R. missile talks would be under way before it became necessary for U.S. to start deployment of proposed Sentinel abm system. He said U.S. would have obligation under treaty to enter into strategic arms talks with U.S.S.R. and expressed hope such talks could begin within six months. (Transcript, 377—8)
Successful results of seeding hurricane Debbie on Aug. 18 and 20 were announced by Secretary of Commerce Maurice H. Stans and Secretary of the Navy John H. Chafee at Washington, D. C., press conference. Analysis of silver iodide seeding had suggested storm was weakened by intervention. While scientists could not state absolutely that hurricanes could be modified, Secretaries pledged their departments to intensified effort in Project Stormfury, joint venture of essa and usn. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/5/69, 90)
Senate considered H.R. 12307, FY 1970 Independent Offices and hud bill which contained $3,715 billion NASA appropriation. It rejected by 22 to 46 amendment by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that would have reduced FY 1970 NASA funds by $100 million. Conference report accompanying bill noted considerable concern about “future of funding for manned lunar programs because of budget constraints . . . and a question of National priorities.” Conferees suggested Congress, NASA, and Administration review manned lunar program policy for future “and decide and determine policy” and that Committees on Appropriations be “advised at earliest possible date.” (CR, 10/11/69, D1046, S13989, S14010-6, S14025-50, S14053; House Conf Rpt 91-649)
Senate adopted S.R. 13 establishing numerical size of Senate standing committees for 91st Congress and adopted S.R. 14 and S.R. 15 electing majority and minority standing committee membership. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences was reduced from 16 to 15 members, with Republican Sens. Len B. Jordan (R-Idaho) and Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) dropping off. Senate also approved appointment of Sens. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.), Charles McC. Mathias, Jr. (R-Md.), and William B. Saxbe (R-Ohio) to committee. Democratic assignments on committee remained unchanged. (CR, 1/14/69, S152-87)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 19th flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude north of Four Corners, Calif. Manke fired engine at full power for 66 secs and at half power for 40 secs, reaching 64,500-ft altitude. Objectives—expansion of flight envelope to mach 1.2 and collection of stability, control, and performance data —were met. (nasa Proj Off; UPl, W Star, 5/29/69, A16; SBD, 6/4/69, 152)
Flying magazine issued special report on F—111, including “The People vs. the F—111” by John Fricker and “The F—111—a Pilot’s Verdict” by Richard B. Weeghman. Fricker called F—111 “not guilty” of charges that concept of commonality was invalid, that selection of General Dynamics Corp. instead of Boeing Co. as prime contractor was result of “political consideration,” that F—111 suffered from excessive flight restrictions, that it was unsafe, and that it was “operational flop.” To charge that cost escalation of F—111 program had been excessive, Fricker delivered verdict “Guilty, with mitigating circumstances”—factory, engineering, and research costs had risen twice as much as originally estimated. (Flying, 5/69)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Secor D. Browne to be member of Civil Aeronautics Board for remainder of term expiring Dec. 31, 1974. He would replace John H. Crooker, who had resigned effective Sept. 30. Browne would also be designated cab Chairman. (PD, 9/15/69, 1249)
Flaws in F—Ills produced to date were detailed by l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of afsc, and l/g George S. Boylan, Jr., Deputy Chief of Staff, Programs and Resources, usaf Hq., in testimony before Senate Committee on Appropriations. Aircraft were seriously short in engine power for nonnuclear missions. Their weight had grown without commensurate engine power increase and thus acceleration time was now four minutes. Outlay of $80 million was necessary to overhaul 450 F—Ills to correct serious flaw in wing boxes. (Testimony)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 50,000-ft altitude and mach 0.9 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude north of Four Corners, Calif. Flight objectives were to complete pilot checkout and to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
ERc announced it had developed and successfully flight-tested “Flying Baton,” simple, low-cost device to provide eye-level artificial horizon for pilots. Developed by Center’s William J. O’Keefe, device could contribute to more “head-up” flying, be used for precision attitude flying, and allow pilot more time to look outside aircraft, (erc Release 69-19)
dot and hud announced $166,734 project for studies to recommend short- and long-term relief from aircraft noises at John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York; O’Hare International Airport, Chicago; Bradley International Airport, Hartford, Conn.; and Cape Kennedy Regional Airport, Fla. Studies were to define noise problems, to identify activities affecting problems, to identify approaches to land
Senate Interior Committee held hearing on July 10 S.J.R. 133 by Sens. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) to return original name, “Cape Canaveral,” to Cape Kennedy. Sen. Gurney said name “Canaveral” “may well be the oldest geographical point in the United States, certainly on the east coast, recorded even before the ancient names of Cape Cod and Jamestown.” ksc would retain late President John F. Kennedy’s name. Witnesses suggested . name change had been made “with high emotions” and without proper legal proceedings. Cape had been renamed for late President by executive order from President Lyndon B. Johnson Nov. 29, 1963. (Greider, W Post, 11/25/69, A3)
British Aircraft Corp. chief test pilot Brian Trubshaw flew Anglo-French Concorde 002 supersonic airliner on successful 24-min maiden flight from Filton Airfield, near Bristol. Aircraft, built to reach 1,400-mph speed, flew at 300 mph during flight, which copilot John Cochran termed “marvelous.” French version Concorde 001 made maiden flight March 2. (W Star, 4/10/69, A13; AP, W Post, 4/10/69, A12)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.), for 37 cosponsors, introduced on Senate floor S.R. 211, “sense of the Senate” resolution urging President Nixon to propose to U.S.S.R. immediate suspension by U.S. and U.S.S.R. of flight test of multiple missile warheads and strongly supporting prompt negotiations with U.S.S.R. on weapon issues. (CR, 6/17/69, S6538)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) presented to House petition by 729 scientists, engineers, and students in these fields, submitted by Scientists for Social and Political Action, care of Dr. Martin L. Perl of Stanford Univ. It called for open Congressional hearings to review substance and direction of entire military R&D program including abm system. (CR, 4/30/69, H3220) During April: nas—nrc Space Science Board published Sounding Rockets: Their Role in Space Research, report by Committee on Rocket Research recommending that NASA increase annual expenditures on rocket research to $27 million by 1971 and thereafter restore its earlier policy of increasing support 12% per year; that nsf, Naval Research Laboratory, and usaf immediately increase their support by 36%, and then maintain an annual 12% increase until 1975; and, additionally, that support for rocket research be increased by appropriate ratio to compensate for any reduction in satellite support. Report noted sounding rockets were responsible for dozens of major scientific discoveries, including discovery of solar x-rays emanating from millionth-degree corona of sun; for mapping of solar spectrum and structure of earth’s atmosphere; and for existence of three new branches of astronomy—uv, x-ray, and gamma-ray. Greatest single advantage of sounding rockets for studying upper atmosphere was unique ability to obtain direct, vertical profiles at altitudes of 24.8 to 124.3 mi (40 to 200 km), (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 4/69, 2; nas pio)
Defense Secretary-designate Melvin R. Laird announced retention of Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., as Director of Defense Research and Engineering. (Kelly, W Star, 1/13/69, A5; upi, W Star, 1/14/69, A6)
Senate adopted by 85—0 vote amendment offered by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to S. 2546, FY 1970 military procurement authorization, which would require study and review by Comptroller General of profits made by Government agencies, including NASA, on contracts for which there had been no formally advertised competitive bidding. {CR, 9/17/69, S10743—52)
In letter to Attorney General, Sen. William F. Proxmire (D-Wis.) asked that Justice Dept, investigate possible violations of Federal law in handling of Government’s contract with Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for production of C—5A aircraft and urged that dod immediately freeze funding for C—5A. (Proxmire Off; Nossiter, W Post, 5/6/69, A3)
In Senate, Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) called for at least temporary halt in usaf plans to purchase Lockheed C—5A cargo aircraft while U.S. Comptroller General studied aircraft’s costs and value to be gained from further purchases. (CR, 8/13/69, S9972-8)
jpl Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, announced appointment of Dr. Clarence R. Gates as manager of JPl’s newly established Mission Analysis Div. New division would incorporate Systems Analysis section, Systems Analysis Research section, and jpl Navigation Program which Dr. Gates had headed since 1968. (jpl Release 524)
National Academy of Engineering announced election of 44 U.S. engineers to membership. Included were Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, honored for “technological leadership in defense research and engineering,” and Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, for “major contributions to the design of military submarines and other underwater equipment,” fNAE Release)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said June 10 cancellation of usaf mol program would eliminate “wasteful, ill-conceived and costly project set in motion four years ago principally to still the clamoring of aerospace lobbyists for ‘military presence in space,’ whatever that might mean.” Longer term effect would be “inevitable blurring of a meaningless and arbitrary—but still restrictive—line separating U.S. civilian and military space activities.” (W Star, 6/22/69, C4)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. founder Allan H. Lockheed died in Tucson, Ariz., at age 80. He had begun career at 16 as auto mechanic, taught himself to fly, and in 1915 established aircraft manufacturing firm with brother Malcolm. In 1926 he formed partnership with John K. Northrop which developed into Lockheed Aircraft Corp. They pooled resources to produce Lockheed Vega aircraft, which set 27 records from 1928 to 1932. Lockheed resigned in 1929 but served as adviser to several aviation companies. (UPI, W Star, 5/28/69, B7; W Post, 5/28/69, CIO)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloting by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 68,000-ft altitude and mach 1.2 during 22nd flight west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose was to obtain performance, stability, and control data. (NASA Proj Off)
Australian Prime Minister John G. Gorton announced in Canberra that Australian government had accepted U.S. proposals for “a joint United States-Australian defense space communications facility” at Woomera, South Australia, site of Australian Weapons Research Establishment. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/24/69, Al)
In Washington Evening Star, William Hines said, “If a successful farmer suddenly started economizing on seed, his neighbors and family would begin to doubt his judgment, if not his sanity. Yet this is precisely what Uncle Sam is doing in cutting back the financing of scientific research. Despite denials from budget officials in the past weeks, federal support of science in fiscal 1970 continues on an alarming down-trend that has been apparent for several years. It has been said that in an advanced economy like ours, research expenditures are ‘seed money’ and the analogy is apt. Like individual seeds in a field, not every research dollar germinates, and not all those that do mature. But total return is vastly greater than outlay—and that is the story of science as well as of agriculture.” (W Star, 1/26/69, C4)
President Nixon submitted following nominations to Senate: Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) to be usaf Chief of Staff, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn) to be Chief of Naval Operations for additional two-year period, and Gen. Earle G. Wheeler (usa) for reappointment as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, for additional one-year term. {PD, 6/16/69, 845)
If jpl were taxed as business it would bring in estimated $840,000 and reduce property tax rate in La Canada-Flintridge, Calif., district from $4.20 to $2.56, according to La Canada School Superintendent, Dr. Donald Ziehl. Instead, he told School Board, district would receive $85,000 from Government under fixed-amount system used in lieu of property tax on Federal facilities. (Michals, Glendale News-Press, 3/19/69)
m/g James T. Stewart, former Vice Director of usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, had been named afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems, Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, announced. Gen. Stewart would replace m/g John L. Zoeckler, who retired from usaf July 31. (afsc Release 130.69)
Dr. William D. McElroy, nsf Director, announced 36-mo extension of Deep Sea Drilling Project, which was nearing end of 18-mo contract period. To date, holes up to 3,231 ft deep had been drilled at more than 66 sites in Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, in water depths up to 20,140 ft, to retrieve sediment samples that had rained onto ocean floor for millions of years. Project sought data on inner space—history and origins of ocean basins and continents. Contract extension—from June 30, 1970, to June 30, 1973—covered additional drilling during 15 two-month cruises of drilling ship Glomar Challenger, (nsf Release 69-144)
Project Tektite, multiagency-industry program to determine ability of men to perform scientific research mission while living isolated on ocean floor under saturated diving conditions for long period, began at St. John, Virgin Islands. Four U.S. aquanauts, Richard A. Waller, H. Edward Clifton, John G. Van Derwalker, and Conrad V. W. Mahnken jumped into sea at Beehive Cove and swam to “habitat,” underwater capsule moored 42 ft below sea level for 60-day experiments. Tektite program was jointly sponsored by usn, NASA, and Dept, of the Interior, with participation by U.S. Coast Guard. Prime contractor, General Electric Co., furnished undersea habitat. NASA and usn behavioral and biomedical teams would observe aquanauts continuously to identify psychological and physiological reactions to long-term mission performed in hostile and isolated environment common to undersea and space missions, (nasa OMSF pao; Lannan, W Star, 2/16/69, A3; 2/17/69, A6)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) released report on Safeguard ABM system prepared at his request by Harvard law professor Abram Chayes and MIT provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner and scientists George W. Rathjens and Steven Weinberg. It said that “the Sentinel/Safeguard anti-ballistic missile system should not be deployed at this time.” Recommendation was based on conclusions system was unlikely to perform according to specifications under nuclear attack, was susceptible to penetration, and was not well adapted to perform missions assigned to it. Deployment would probably start “new round in the arms race” and “seriously impede the conclusion of an arms control agreement.” (Kelly, W Star, 5/7/69, A8; Chapman, W Post, 5/7/69, Al)
