Nixon Administration policy toward Federal graduate aid was discussed in Science by John Walsh: There were signs “the Administration is veering away from a policy'of changing the primary form of direct federal support to graduate education from fellowships and training grants to guaranteed loans. For those who feared that the prevailing system of federal grants was to be supplanted there is some consolation that the grants are headed down but not out.” While NASA had liquidated sustaining university programs, agency would still provide indirect support of graduate students through research assistantships financed under $75 million in research grants to universities approved in past budgets. (Science, 6/26/70,1559-61)
dod proposal to save Lockheed Aircraft Corp. from bankruptcy by adding $1.45 billion to Government payments on four Lockheed contracts was outlined by David M. Packard, Deputy Secretary of Defense, in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Forces Committee, (dod Release 1057-70; Text)
Robert H. Gray, Director, Unmanned Launch Operations at KSC, became Deputy Director of KSC Launch Operations. John J. Neilon, Deputy Director, Unmanned Launch Operations, assumed post of Acting Director, Unmanned Launch Operations. (KSC Ann)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate William D. Ruckelshaus as Administrator of Environmental Protection Agency. Agency would bring together major Federal pollution control programs, effective Dec. 2. Nomination was submitted to Senate Nov. 16. (PD, 11/9/70, 1545-6; 11/23/70,1583)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 14th flight from frc. Vehicle was launched from B-52 aircraft at 12 800-m (42 000-ft) altitude and reached 19 800 m (65 000 ft) and mach 0.95. Data on lateral directional derivatives at mach 0.9 and longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio were obtained. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.	Dana, successfully completed 35th flight after air launch from B:52 aircraft at FRC. Purposes of powered flight were to obtain data with speed brakes open at supersonic speed and to obtain additional stability and control data at supersonic speeds. If data were satisfactory XLR-11 engine would be replaced by hydrogen-peroxide landing engines for powered approach and landing phase of program. (NASA Proj Off)
l/g John W. O’Neill (usaf), afsc Vice Commander, testified on status of F-lll aircraft before Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. USAF investigation of Dec. 22, 1969, crash that had killed two pilots near Nellis afb, Nev., had shown “structural failure of the left wing occurred at very low altitude, during a normal dive recovery after a routine delivery of air-to-ground ordnance. Although the aircrew escape module performed as it was designed, time between ejection and ground impact did not allow the recovery chute to open.” Metallurgical flaw, “somewhat like an ultra-thin hairline crack, existed in the lower plate of the wing pivot fitting.” In addition to usaf investigations, special ad hoc committee of Air Force Scientific Advisory Board had reviewed findings and technical data. “We have concluded that the flaw was introduced at a subcontractor facility at some point during the manufacture of the lower plate. ...” No modifications to present structure were planned but structural inspections of all F-llls would “utilize improved ultrasonic inspection techniques and procedures developed as a direct result of this problem.” Program would cost estimated $31.2 million. First aircraft were to be completed and returned to flight status in June 1970. All aircraft should be restored by shortly after first of year. (Testimony)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced appointment of Rolf Eliassen, and reappointment of Howard G. Vesper and William Webster, as members of General Advisory Committee to aec for terms expiring Aug. 1,1976. (PD, 8/3/70, 998)
faa air traffic controllers would delay final descent for landing of turbojet aircraft until close to their destination airport and climb aircraft out as rapidly as possible after takeoff, in program announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe to increase safety and reduce noise at U.S. airports, (faa Release 70-94)
MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton, on behalf of himself and msc Flight Crew Operations staff, received 1969 IEEE Reliability Award in Los Angeles for exceptional contributions to field of reliability. (NASA Hq Reliability & Quality Assurance Newsletter, 3/70, 2)
afsc announced reassignment of m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, Vice Commander of Aeronautical Systems Div., Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, to become Deputy Chief of Staff for procurement and production at afsc Hq. Aug. 1. He would be succeeded at Wright-Patterson by M/G John B. Hudson, (asfc Release 180.70)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Rudolph A. Peterson, Chairman of Executive Committee of Bank of America, to succeed William A. Hagerty as member of ComSatCorp Board of Directors until 1973. (PD, 7/27/70,969, 986)
John D. Hodge, Manager of msc Advanced Missions Program Office, left NASA to become Director of Transportation Systems Concepts for DOT’S Transportation Systems Center at Cambridge, Mass. Hodge had received NASA Medal for Exceptional Service twice during 10-yr NASA service, (msc Release 70-60)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe appointed Herbert W. Richardson, professor of mechanical engineering at MIT, as dot Chief Scientist, (dot Release 17670)
Milky Way galaxy was losing gravitational energy at rate equivalent to mass of 1000 suns annually, Maryland Univ. physicist Dr. Joseph Weber said during third Cambridge Conference on Relativity at Institute for Space Studies in New York. Dr. Weber had measured flow of gravitational energy and computed energy being lost from source of waves in galaxy’s center. Results indicated that eventually a star like the sun, at galaxy’s edges, would break free of weakening gravity and fly off into space. One estimate had placed event at hundreds of millions of years in future. (AP, B Sun, 6/10/70, A3)
Intention to create separate faa office to deal with total air transportation security problems, including aircraft hijacking, was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release 70-57)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced that Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va., would be site of June 1972 U.S. International Aeronautical Exposition. One million visitors were expected to view more than 500 exhibits. (DOT Release 16670)
R/A Donald B. MacMillan (usn, Ret.), last survivor of 1909 Peary expedition that discovered North Pole, died at age 95. (NYT, 9/9/70, 48)
U.S. Court of Appeals was studying suit to force disclosure of SST report prepared by panel headed by physicist Richard L. Garwin at President Nixon’s request, Washington Evening Star said. Suit, filed by conservationist Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth, had been dismissed Aug. 21 by U.S. District Court Judge John H. Pratt on grounds report was covered by doctrine of executive privilege. (W Star, 12/8/70, A3)
LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin announced appointment of G. Mervin Ault as Assistant Director of Power and Materials Directorate, Dr. Bernard Lubarsky as Assistant Director for Aeronautics, and Edward F. Baehr as Technical Consultant to the Director. (LeRC Release 70-51)
New York Times editorial commented on appointment of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., to succeed Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as President’s Science Adviser: “Not surprisingly for one who has been engaged in industrial research for many years, Dr. David has indicated he is most concerned with applied areas such as health-care delivery, transportation, housing and defense. But he is certainly aware that the long-term scientific and technological health of the nation depends on the vitality of its basic research enterprise. Even the best medical organization in the world will be able to do little to conquer cancer. . .until molecular biologists and other basic scientists understand why cells grow out of control and how to prevent them from doing so. As science adviser, Dr. David will have to help assure that basic research is not sacrificed to the urgent demands for solving society’s immediate problems.” (NYT, 8/21/70)
FAA issuance of advance notice of proposed aircraft engine emission standards, soliciting comments, was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Studies had shown that one percent of total U.S. air pollution might be attributed to aircraft emissions. (faa Release 70-28)
Dr. Donald G. Rea, former NASA Deputy Director for Planetary Programs in ossa, would become jpl Assistant Laboratory Director for Science March 16, NASA announced. In newly created post Dr. Rea would be responsible for managing jpl’s total science program and would act as jpl’s chief scientist. (NASA Release 70-37)
William T. Piper, founder of Piper Aircraft Corp.—one of world’s largest light-aircraft corporations—died at age 89. Piper, known as “the Henry Ford of aviation,” had built more aircraft than anyone else in the world, including durable, inexpensive Piper Cub. (Krebs, NYT, 1/17/70,31)
faa announced formation of interagency committee including representatives of NASA, DOD, and dot to prepare five-year national plan for development and implementation of new microwave-scanning-beam instrument landing system for civil-military use. System was major recommendation of dot’s Air Traffic Control Advisory Committee in March 5 report to Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release T 70-32)
Discovery (through infrared radiometric observations) of local temperature in Jupiter’s North Equatorial Belt far in excess of those at level of solid ammonia clouds and (through visual observations) of orange-brown coloration within belt were described in Science by MIT astronomers John S. Lewis and Ronald G. Prinn. Astronomers concluded that high-resolution spectroscopic examination of spots might result in detection of water vapor in Jupiter’s atmosphere. “In the design of Jupiter flyby and orbiter missions for the 1970’s, the possibility of conducting related experiments in the immediate vicinity of the planet should be considered.” Data could reduce uncertainties in design parameters of entry probes. Astronomers also suggested that, in multilayer cloud model, solar uv photolysis of hydrogen sulfide in regions where ammonia clouds were sparse or absent should lead to production of inorganic chromophores—molecular coloring agents. (Science, 7/31/70,472-3)
faa study had shown that if rush-hour commuters traveled from suburban areas to downtown business sections by aircraft, they would generate one eighth of air pollution emitted by private automobiles, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said. Study completed by Center of Transportation at Rutgers Univ. had found from research in Connecticut-New York-New Jersey area that 36 metric tons (40 short tons) of pollutants emitted in morning and evening by commuter automobiles could be reduced to 4.5 metric tons (5 short tons) if aircraft were used instead. Number of commuters who would voluntarily change to aircraft, if available, had been determined at approximately 30%. (faa Release 70-78)
Joint dod-dot test program to determine value of helicopters in providing medical assistance to automobile accident victims and others requiring emergency medical care was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Program would use UH-1 helicopters of Army’s 507th Air Ambulance Corps at Fort Sam Houston, Tex., in San Antonio area July 15 through Dec. 31. (dod Release 577-70)
Delays caused by sun’s gravity in return of radio signals by Mariner spacecraft had verified Einstein theory of relativity, jpl astronomer Dr. John D. Anderson said in report to Conference on Experimental Tests of Gravitational Theories at Cal Tech. In tests begun April 30, Anderson and team including Dr. Duane O. Muhle-man of Cal Tech and Dr. Pasquale B. Esposito and Warren L. Martin of JPL had taken several hundred radio measurements of Mariner VI and VII in wide-range solar orbit using precise distance-measuring system and 64-m (210-ft) Goldstone antenna. Experiments tested validity of theory that velocity of light was slower in gravitational field near sun than in interplanetary space where gravitational fields were weaker. “Our experiments to date show that Einstein’s predictions are right, to within 2 to 4 per cent. The best measurements we have thus far indicate a maximum delay of about 204 microseconds for Mariner VI, as compared with an expected 200 microseconds using Einstein’s theory.” Findings cast doubt on more recent theories of Dr. Charles Brans and Dr. Robert H. Dicke that Einstein’s formulations could be incorrect by 1% “If the Brans-Dicke theory were correct, the time delay would be much less. . .perhaps about 186 microseconds. .. .if the much older Newtonian theory were correct, there would have been no time delay at all.” (nasa Release 70-200)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 26 800-m (88 000-ft) altitude and mach , 1.4 during powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose of flight, 33rd in series, was to obtain stability and control data at various mach numbers and angles of attack. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached mach 0.98 at 20 000-m (66 000-ft) altitude after air launch from B-52 aircraft from FRC. Objectives of powered flight, 16th mission in X-24A series, were to evaluate handling qualities at 5° angle of attack at mach 0.95, determine lateral directional derivatives at mach 0.94 with 40° upper-flap deflection, and determine longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag data with 40° upper flap. (NASA Proj Off)
Astronautical Multilingual Dictionary of the International Academy of Astronautics, conceived by the late Dr. Theodore von Karman, was published by Academia Publishing House of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences in Prague. Executive editor was Ing. J. Vlachy and scientific editor Prof. R. Pes'ek. U.S. coeditors were Dr. Woodford A. Heflin of usaf’s Air University Aerospace Studies Institute and William H. Allen of NASA. Other coeditors were in U.S.S.R., Germany, France, Italy, Argentina, and Czechoslovakia. (Text; Air University Dispatch, 4/10/70,18)
NASA announced appointment of Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs in OSSA since 1967, as GSFC Deputy Director, effective April 6. Hearth had joined NASA in 1962 as Manager of Advanced Programs and Technology. In 1966 he became Assistant Director for Planetary Flight Programs and was Deputy Director of Voyager Program in 1967. (NASA Release 70-35)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed third flight from frc. Captive portion—usually conducted on separate flight—was completed at 9100-km (30 000-ft) altitude to verify B-52/adapter/heavy-weight M2-F3 compatibility, check out propellant system, and check out jettison system. Flight portion followed air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude to expand launch envelope, study transonic configuration, investigate lateral phugoid present on M2-F2, check out reaction control system, and evaluate nose window requirements. (NASA Proj Off)
New standards for certification of transport aircraft over 5670 kg (12 500 lbs), effective May 8, were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Standards included warning system to alert pilots to failing power-operated control system; operating procedures for flight in turbulence; design of airframe for dynamic loads from continuous turbulence, with flight load measurements required for new aircraft with unreliable methods of predicting load intensities; system for preventing condensation on inside of windshield during flight and taxiing; greater redundancy in control system designs; flight tests to demonstrate freedom from flutter through transonic speed range; protection of empennage from bird strikes; more comprehensive airframe lightning protection criteria; additional fire protection for powerplant; dual locking for all critical removable fasteners; protection of fuel system components in event of gear-up landing; design precautions to minimize hazards of turbine rotor failure; fail-safe criteria for aircraft systems; changes in design standards to accommodate modern instrumentation and to require basic flight and navigation instrument at each pilot station; and improvements in reliability of hydraulic systems, (faa Release 70-35)
Grand Tour” of outer solar system was discussed by William Hines in Chicago Sun-Times: “The grand tour idea came out of Caltech several years ago after a graduate student in Prof. Homer J. Stewart’s aeronautical engineering department calculated the added energy that could be imparted to a spacecraft by the massive gravitational fields of various planets. This information, together with the unusual configuration of outer planets in the 1980s, was patched together by Stewart into the grand tour concept. Theoretically, Stewart calculated, it should be possible to fire a spacecraft into a near-miss trajectory toward Jupiter and then let that planet, biggest in the solar system, take over. Jupiter would add energy, and hence velocity, to the spacecraft.... This would send the craft toward Saturn, where more energy would be borrowed from the ringed planet’s gravitational field, and then on to Uranus for more of the same, Neptune and finally Pluto.” (C Sun-Times, 3/9/70)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.	Dana, successfully reached mach 0.7 after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude. Objectives of glide flight— first in M2-F3 series—were to check out pilot, evaluate center-fin modification, determine aileron characteristics, evaluate stability augmentation system modifications, and evaluate speed brakes. (NASA Proj Off)
Transfer of sst program from faa to Office of Secretary of Transportation and appointment of William M. Magruder, Deputy Director of Commercial Engineering at Lockheed California Co., as Director of Supersonic Transport Development Program were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (dot Release 7670)
Univ. of Maryland astronomer Dr. Joseph Weber had located source of gravity waves that permeated universe in concentrated area near constellation Sagittarius at center of Milky Way, New York Times reported. (NYT, 2/22/70, F4)
usaf Chief of Staff, Gen. John D. Ryan, approved flights of seven heavily instrumented F-llls needed in r&d programs. Remaining 226 F-llls continued to be grounded pending final determination of test and inspection procedures to ensure against repetition of manufacturing defect that led to fatal Dec. 22, 1969, crash. (AP, NYT. 2/12/70, C9)
Sen. John L. McClellan (D-Ark.) on Senate floor accused NASA of secretly altering low bid of Fairchild Hiller in competition for $50-million contract for ats-f and G spacecraft and of permitting General Electric Co. to reduce overhead costs in its final offer so that total was below that of Fairchild Hiller Corp. He compared procurement project with dodtfx competition and contract awards. “I believe that a thorough review of the phased procurement source selection system should be undertaken. . .in order to determine whether the system should be modified, changed, or eliminated.” (CR, 7/9/70, S10974-5)
President Nixon announced appointment of new members of President’s Science Advisory Committee: Dr. Solomon J. Buchsbaum, Vice President of Research, Sandia Laboratories; Dr. Theodore L. Cairns, Assistant Director, Central Research Dept., E. I. du Pontde Nemours & Co.; Dr. James S. Coleman, Dept, of Social Relations, Johns Hopkins Univ.; Dr. Val L. Fitch, Princeton Univ. physicist; and Dr. Lloyd H. Smith, Jr., Chairman of Dept, of Medicine, Univ. of California, San Francisco Medical Center. New members would serve until Dec. 31, 1973. They succeeded William R. Hewlett, who had resigned, and Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Dr. Sidney D. Drell, Dr. Charles P. Slichter, and Dr. Charles H. Townes, whose terms had expired. (PD, 3/16/70, 357-8)
Nomination of Thomas W. Moore as member of Board of Directors of Corp. for Public Broadcasting for term expiring March 26, 1976, was submitted to Senate. Term of John D. Rockefeller III had expired. (PD, 8/31/70, 1116)
National Transportation Safety Board released contents of its letter to faa recommending safety measures to protect Boeing 747 passengers. And Reuben B. Robertson III ot Ralph Nader’s Center for Study of Responsive Law, in letter to Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe, charged faa with suppressing news of “near tragedies” aboard 747s. Later Washington Post said both actions stemmed from Sept. 17 and 18 incidents in which 747 engines had disintegrated in flight. There had been no injuries. (Hoffman, W Post, 10/2/70, A3)	.
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed captive flight from frc to verify compatibility of B-52 aircraft, adapter, and vehicle; check out systems; and verify check list, (nasa Proj Off)
Senate rejected, by vote of 43 to 22, amendment to H.R. 17123, $19.3billion FY 1971 military procurement authorization, to ensure that weapon systems and subsystems were thoroughly tested before production was begun. Amendment, proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), had been called “fly-before-you-buy.” (CR, 8/17/70, SI3529-44; SBD, 8/17/70, 202)
dod announced appointment of Dr. James W. Mar, professor of aeronautics and astronautics at MIT, as USAF Chief Scientist, effective Sept. 14. Dr. Mar would succeed John J. Welch, Jr., who would return to ltv, Inc. (dod Release 740-70)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate four assistant directors of NSF: Edward C. Creutz to be Assistant Director for Research; Lloyd E. Humphreys to be Assistant Director for Education; Lewis Levin to be Assistant Director for Institutional Programs; and Thomas B. Owen to be Assistant Director for National and International Programs. Nominations were submitted to Senate March 31, 1970. (PD, 3/30/70, 444; 4/6/70, 475)
Expansion of Project mast (military assistance for safety in traffic), joint test program to determine value of helicopters in providing medical assistance in emergencies [see July 15], was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Program would be expanded to area surrounding Colorado Springs, Colo., and Seattle, Wash, (dod Release 634-70)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Adm. Willard J. Smith (uscg, Ret.) to be Assistant Secretary of Transportation, replacing Walter L. Mazan, who had resigned. Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe established Office of Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Safety and Consumer Affairs and announced nomination of Adm. Smith to new post. (PD, 8/10/70, 1033; dot Release 17070)
In Science, Project Tektite I scientific team—Dr. H. Edward Clifton, Conrad V. W. Mahnken, John G. Vanderwalker, and Richard A. Waller—discussed results of February-April 1969 experiment sponsored by NASA, USN, Dept, of Interior, and General Electric Co. to provide data for behavioral, biomedical, and engineering studies and marine sciences program. Between 10% and 20% of waking time had been devoted to psychological tests for biomedical studies. Minor external ear infections contracted by*all divers was only health problem to affect scientific program. Experiments had demonstrated advantages of underwater habitation and saturation diving for biological and geological research: opportunity for continuous monitoring of organisms or processes and for more research time in water. (Science, 5/8/70,659-63)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $97 880 cost-sharing contract to Northern Research and Engineering Corp. to establish design criteria for control and reduction of oxides of nitrogen emitted from jet aircraft engines, (faa Release 70-65)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig—Vice President and Director of Eastman Kodak Co., professor at Univ. of Rochester, and former Presidential Science Adviser—was named President of Brown Univ. in Providence, R.I., effective June 1. (W Star, 3/14/70, A2; Science, 3/20/70, 1597)
New York State Attorney-General Louis J. Lefkowitz had filed suit against 58 domestic and foreign airlines using John F. Kennedy International and LaGuardia Airports to require improved noise abatement devices on jet aircraft, Washington Post said. (W Post, 7/4/70, A4)
Introduction to the Solar Wind by John C. Brandt was reviewed in Science by Roger A. Kopp of National Center for Atmospheric Research. In 1958 it had been argued that sun’s 995 800 K (1 000000°F) corona must expand continuously into space with supersonic velocities near earth’s orbit. Subject had remained in controversy until 1962 observations from Mariner II indicated plasma outflow from sun with 400-km-per-sec (249-mps) velocities and mean particle density of about 10 per cc (0.06 cu in) at orbit of earth. “The obvious place to begin a discussion of the solar wind is at the sun, and the author sets the stage by summarizing current knowledge of classical solar physics.” (Science, 9/18/70, 1195-6)
John L. Steele, Senior Correspondent of Time-Life News Service, praised James E. Webb’s book Space Age Management in speech at Time-Life and Kaiser Corp. luncheon to direct attention to need for pollution control. Former NASA Administrator Webb had written that space accomplishments could “usher in new era of great advances for us and for mankind. . .because our accomplishments indicate a fundamental improvement in man’s ability to find and use new knowledge.” These included new ways in which large-scale organized efforts were managed; encouragement of multidisciplinary efforts using science, engineering, and management; new techniques and tools for research in social and physical sciences; and “creative manner in which these are applied to the solution of age-old problems.” With these accomplishments U.S. had shown, Webb had written, “that we can perform the most difficult and challenging tasks without departing from or damaging our fundamental values or our democratic institutions.” (CR, 5/28/70, S8008-9)
Armed Forces Management editorial by Michael Getler said nuclear test ban treaty “came only after the Soviets unilaterally broke a testing moratorium to gather what they needed to know in the vital area of weapons effects, and the ink was barely dry on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Treaty when the Pentagon announced the Russians were testing a new Fractional Orbital Bombardment System that was certainly a spiritual, if not technical, violation of that pact.” (AFM, 5/70, 13)
Federal financing of sst would be “complete misplacement of national priorities,” Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York said in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Transportation. “I am prepared to do all in my power to prevent any sst from landing at New York’s airports until it is proven safe both to our environment and to the health of our citizens.” (upi, W Star, 9/4/70, A5)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, completed fourth flight—and first powered flight—from frc. Objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.8, check out engine operation, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, investigate lateral phugoid present on second flight but not on third, check reaction control operation, and investigate landing visibility. Engine shut down prematurely, after launch from B-52 aircraft, precluding completion of all planned maneuvers. Investigation was under way. (NASA Proj Off)
First charting of exact locations of six continental land masses as they drifted across globe for millions of years at rate of about 10 cm (4 in) annually was reported by ESSA marine geologists Dr. Robert S. Dietz and John C. Holden in Journal of Geophysical Research. Calculations, made by using geological landmarks to plot maps, showed that original “supercontinent” of Pangaea had split midway through Triassic geological period, about 200 million yrs ago, into land masses of Laurasia (now North America, Europe, and Asia) and Gond-wana (now Africa, South America, Australia, Antarctica, and India) through sea floor’s spreading, welling up of molten material called magma from earth’s mantle through rift in ocean bed. Subsequent spreading had separated continents. (Journ of Geophysical Research, 9/10/70,4939-55)	_
Appointment of L/G Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. {usaf, Ret.), as Director of Civil Aviation Security for dot was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (dot Release 20370)
Edward C. Polhamus of LaRC Stability and Performance Branch testified before Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations during F-lll hearings. Extensive wind-tunnel tests of F-lll during aircraft’s development stage had led LaRC engineers in 1963 to conclude F-lll would not meet USAF specification for primary mission dash requirement; aircraft would not develop maneuver capability at supersonic speeds specified by contractor; and aircraft’s directional stability was extremely low at supersonic speeds. Primary mission shortcoming had been “associated with a high drag level which required significant design changes to solve.” Polhamus said contractor, General Dynamics Corp., had insisted F-lll would exceed primary mission requirement “and did little in the way of airframe modification.” (Testimony; PInq, 4/8/70, 2)
USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke in joint program, successfully completed 18th flight, reaching mach 1.15 after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000ft) altitude from frc. Objectives of powered flight—first at supersonic speed—were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.1, obtain lateral directional derivatives at mach numbers greater than 1.0, obtain longitudinal-trim and lift-to-drag-ratio data with 40° upper flap, obtain longitudinal derivatives, and make 270 knots-indicated-air-speed approach, (nasa Proj Off; upi, WPost, 10/15/70, A4)
Establishment of faa Office of Air Transportation Security to cope with criminal acts against aircraft and airports was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would replace FAA Office of Investigations and Security and would emphasize deterrence of aircraft hijacking. Carl F. Maisch, Director of Office of Investigations and Security and former FBI agent, had been named director of new office, (faa Release 70-81)
Holt, Rinehart and Winston published Operation Overflight, in which author Francis Gary Powers said information supplied by Lee Harvey Oswald, identified by Warren Commission as assassin of President John F. Kennedy, might have enabled Russians to shoot down his U-2 espionage aircraft in 1960. Powers believed Oswald had supplied U.S.S.R. with data on MPS-16 height-finding radar equipment. (AP, B Sun, 4/20/70, 6)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $3million dot contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design 480-km-per-hr (300-mph) tracked air-cushion research vehicle (tacrv). (dot Release 6370)
International participation in erts program was discussed in Astronautics A Aeronautics by John Hanessian, Jr., and John M. Logsdon, of George Washington Univ.: “Broad participation in erts. . .makes sense only if a global operational Earth-resources-survey system follows. The design and institutionalization of such a system will test the ingenuity of national and international policy makers, and any steps which may make their task less complex are desirable. Widespread international involvement in the ERTS program would be such a step. And it would.. .serve [both] the needs of many nations of the world and the national interest of the U.S. Many constraints on broad participation in erts stem from the level of funding and the pace now planned for the program. Thus it falls within the power of the U.S, to eliminate them. This we should do.” (AAA, 8/70, 56-63)
Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received Society of Manufacturing Engineers Interprofessional Cooperation Award at dinner in Detroit, Mich., for giving U.S. “through his work in jet propulsion, missilery, and telemetry ... a viable defense system while contributing substantially to her pre-eminence in the investigation of outer space.” (Pasadena Star-News, 4/2/70)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke reached 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude and mach0.85 during second powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 200-m (40 000-ft) altitude from frc. Purpose of flight—11th in X-24A series and first for a NASA pilot—was to obtain stability and control data. (NASA Proj Off)
Senate approved nomination of William D. Ruckelshaus to head Environmental Protection Agency. (CR, 12/2/70, S19272)
