Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen announced his retirement, effective in September. He would remain consultant to company. (NYT, 6/2/72, 48)
President Lyndon B. Johnson had made “impulsive decision” in “intensity of emotion” when he changed name of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy, Circuit Judge James R. Knott of West Palm Beach, Fla., said in testimony before Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. Committee began hearings on S.R. 193, to redesignate Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral. Judge Knott testified that President Johnson had acted on request by widow of President John F. Kennedy following Kennedy assassination and said original name should be restored. {W Post, 3/9/72, A25; CR, 3/8/72, D224)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced new air transport security program to protect air passengers against hijackers. Program was being implemented at President Nixon’s direction. Security procedures required stationing armed local law enforcement officers at airport passenger check points during boarding periods, electronic screening of all passengers by airlines before boarding, and inspection by airlines of all carry-on items accessible to passengers during flight. (dot Release 103-72)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $12.1million contract to Boeing Co. to secure benefits from valuable work done in supersonic transport (sst) development program. Contract called for completion of seven advanced technological projects to enhance flight safety and efficiency and make aircraft more compatible with environment. Volpe said, by completing projects already begun, “funds already spent on them will not be wasted and the resulting technology will be available for advancement of aircraft design.” Congress had voted against further funding of SST program during 1971. (faA Release 72—88)
Impact of computers on society was discussed in Science by Massachusetts Institute of Technology computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum. Computer had “very considerably less societal impact than the mass media would lead us to believe.” Space travel could not have been undertaken without computers; computer and computer education industries had “grown to enormous proportions.” But “much of the industry is self-serving . . . like an island economy in which the natives make a living by taking in each other’s laundry.” Part that was not self-serving was supported largely by Government agencies and other gigantic enterprises that knew “short-range utility of computer systems but have no idea of their ultimate social cost.” Airline reservation systems and computerized hospitals “serve only a tiny, largely the most affluent, fraction of society. Such things cannot he said to have an impact on society generally.” (Science, 5/12/72, 609-14)
Patent No. 3 667 358 for cold camera for photographing stars was awarded to William D. Williams, Jr., 19-yr-old Univ. of Michigan student, and Scott Usher, packaging engineer for Lehn & Fink Products Co. Camera, mounted on telescope and loaded with film supersensitized after chilling with dry ice, permitted deep sky photography in very dim light with brief exposure time. Camera was simpler and less expensive than other cold-emulsion cameras and was expected to appeal to schools and clubs. (Jones, NYT, 6/10/72, 37; Pat Off pio) June 7:	Congressional resolutions were introduced to honor Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Planning, on his retirement from NASA. Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa„) submitted S.R. 84 expressing “gratitude and appreciation” to Dr. von Braun for “Outstanding contributions to and achievements in the space program” and “recognition of the benefits which his contributions and achievements have conferred and will continue to confer upon mankind.” Rep. J. Irving Whalley (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 628, “expressing the Nation’s gratitude and appreciation.” (CR, 6/7/72, S8885; H5391)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. signed two agreements during Moscow summit meetings. Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection, signed by President Nixon and Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny, called for cooperation to prevent pollution, to study pollution and its effect on environment, and to develop basis for controlling “impact of human activities on nature.” Agreement established Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection to meet each year alternately in Washington and Moscow. Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Medical Science and Public Health was signed by Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Minister of Health Boris V. Petrovsky. Parties agreed on joint efforts to combat most widespread and serious diseases, solve problems of effect of environment on man’s health, and resolve other important health problems. Agreement would be implemented by coordinated research, exchange of specialists and delegations, organization of colloquia, scientific conferences and lectures, exchange of information, and familiarization with technical aids and equipment. {PD, 6/5/72, 97-20)
Existence of 10th planet in solar system, three times as large as Saturn and twice as far as Neptune from sun, was suggested by scientists from Univ. of California’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. Mathematician Joseph L. Brady told press team had used computer to process mathematical observations on deviations in orbit of Halley’s Comet. Presence of 10th planet, far beyond Pluto, had been predicted from mathematical computations, (upi, W Post, 4/29/72, A3; Publications of the Astronautical Society of the Pacific, 5/72) April 29:	Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II were greeted by crowd of 2500 persons at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and presented copper plaques bearing etching of Hawaii’s state capitol. Young said mission’s success “shows the real teamwork that’s going to keep this country great. We really enjoyed the trip . . . but we sure are glad to be back.” (AP, W Star, 4/30/72, A3)
Dr. Donald Blessing Rice, Assistant Director of White House Office of Management and Budget, was named President of rand Corp. (Belair, NYT, 3/30/72, 17)
Space shuttle’s “subtle costs” were discussed in New York Times article by John N. Wilford: “Because NASA must initiate shuttle development within its current $3.2-billion budget framework, other programs will presumably by sacrificed.” Possible “victim” was Grand Tour mission planned for late 1970s. “The choice is certain to be unpopular with much of the scientific community.” Scientists had criticized NASA’s emphasis on “big-money manned projects at the expense of the less expensive science-oriented unmanned missions.” Shuttle development also would “restrict the funds available for other scientific projects in NASA and elsewhere in Government.” (NYT, 1/9/72, 6)
Data from 10-yr U.S. Supersonic Transport Development Program, terminated March 1971, had been cataloged and would be available for dissemination by National Technical Information Service of Dept, of Commerce, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. (dot Release 72—159)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 27th and last flight after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objective was to evaluate reaction augmentation system during boost. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and roach 1.4. (NASA proj off)
United Kingdom and West Germany agreed to abandon plans for European launcher and to buy U.S. launch vehicles instead. Decision was made at meeting in Bonn between U.K. Aerospace Minister Michael R. D. Heseltine and West German Aerospace Minister Klaus von Dohnanyi. (Reuters, NYT, 12/9/72, C7)
International Aerospace Hall of Fame announced 1972 selection of members: Gen. Henry H. Arnold, wartime commander of U.S. Army Air Forces; John K. Northrop, president and cofounder of Northrop Aircraft, Inc.; Sir Geoffrey de Havilland, British aircraft designer and founder of de Havilland Aircraft Co.; and Otto Lilienthal, German glider aircraft pioneer. Investiture ceremony would be held Oct. 14 in San Diego, (nasa Hist Off)
Roll-out ceremony for multinational European airbus and France’s second Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport was held in Toulouse, France. Aircraft were scheduled for maiden flights in few weeks. Concorde 2, similar to three service models entering production, was said to have eliminated smoke and noise that made Concorde 1 unwelcome in U.S. Airbus was standard preproduction model of 330-passenger, short- to medium-haul transport for 1975 operation. During ceremony British Aerospace Minister Michael Heseltine said British government was ready to confer with other European governments on possibility of integrated European aviation industry. (Lewis, NYT, 9/29/72, 8)
Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects was signed simultaneously in Washington, Moscow, and London. In statement following signing, Secretary of State William P. Rogers said convention had been formulated to compensate, fairly and promptly, if space object of one party caused injury or damage to citizen of another party. “I believe that the convention which we have signed today will accomplish that purpose. I concur in Admiral Alan Shepard’s statement in the U.N. General Assembly last year that it is a ‘sound treaty based on realistic perceptions of mutual interest and mutual benefit.’ Like its predecessor, this treaty is the result of intensive work in the United Nations Outer Space Committee and represents both a practical and an imaginative step in developing just international rules governing man’s activities in space. Many countries have had an active part in its formulation during years of intensive negotiations. The conclusion of the agreement has again demonstrated what noteworthy results a cooperative approach to international negotiations can achieve.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/29/72, Al; Rogers Text)
National Aeronautic Assn, named Federal Aviation Administrator John H. Shaffer to receive Wright Brothers Trophy. Shaffer was cited for “outstanding leadership of the worldwide operations of the faa, which has greatly enhanced all aspects of U.S. aviation to the benefit and safety of the general public and of all who fly.” (AP, W Post, 9/23/72, A22)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), critic of aerospace spending, was named Chairman of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, Veterans. Appointment followed death of Subcommittee Chairman, Sen. Allen J. Ellender (D-La.). {LA Times, 8/17/72; W Post, 8/18/72, A3)
Award of two research contracts to reduce aircraft noise were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. General Electric Co. had received $789 000 and Lockheed-Georgia Co., $77 042. Contractors would analyze and experiment with core engine noise control for propulsion systems of future aircraft, (faa Release 72-131)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) sent letter to NASA Hq. requesting NASA comments on General Accounting Office report that recommended Manned Spacecraft Center contracting officer “devote more attention” to performance of NASA contractor Service Technology Corp. Firm, subsidiary of Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., had received average annual income of $12 million from extensions to $16-million contract signed with NASA in 1967. STC work included building and ground maintenance, engineering design and construction of hardware, technical writing and editing, and publications distribution service. GAO had found stc practices “doubtful.” (H Post, 5/14/72)
NASA U-2 reconnaissance aircraft on loan to Virginia Institute of Marine Science would begin 45-day study of Chesapeake Bay area within two weeks to seek photographic evidence of path of Hurricane Agnes, vims Director, Dr. William J. Hargis, announced. Aircraft cameras, with high-resolution lenses, would photograph bay and adjacent continental shelf from 18 000-m (60 000-ft) altitude to trace flow of fresh water dumped over Chesapeake basin by storm, which Dr. Hargis described as “a once-in-200-years phenomenon.” (Nunes, W Post, 7/6/72, B2)
Dept, of Transportation award of $1.3-million grant to Atomic Energy Commission’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory to assess effects of proposed 1985-1990 high-altitude aircraft on environment was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Yolpe. Project was part of dot’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program (ciap). Laboratory would construct sophisticated computer models to predict effect of subsonic and supersonic aircraft on temperature, cloud formation, and stratospheric shielding of potentially hazardous ultraviolet radiation from sun. (dot Release 38-72)
Dr. John E. Condon, Director of Reliability and Quality Assurance and Acting Director of Safety, left nasa to enter private industry. (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 236)
Establishment of Office of Supply and Equipment Management under Assistant Administrator for Administration was announced by NASA. Office was responsible for receipt, use, and disposal of all NASA personal property, in-house and contractor held. It absorbed Property and Supply Div. and related functions of offices of Facilities and Procurement. William P. Risso, Director of Resources Management in Office of Applications, had been designated Director of new office, whose top priority was to ensure optimum use, reuse, and disposition of equipment throughout NASA, (nasa Ann)
Soviet tests of three-part warhead for giant SS—9 intercontinental ballistic missiles had failed to demonstrate sufficient accuracy to seek out and destroy three separate U.S. Minuteman missiles in their steel and concrete silos, Dr. John S. Foster, Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services. U.S. intelligence had concluded that U.S.S.R.’s projected ability to destroy large part of U.S. Minuteman force by mid-1970s might not materialize until 1980s. (Beecher, NYT, 3/22/72, 1)
British Airways Board had decided to order six Lockheed L-1011 TriStar jet airliners and to place options on another six, Wall Street Journal reported. British Aerospace Minister Michael Heseltine had told House of Commons that British government would aid Rolls-Royce (1971) Ltd. to develop more powerful version of aircraft’s RB-211 jet engine. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton had said later that order was “single most significant overseas order in Lockheed’s commercial aircraft programs during the past 25 years.” Lockheed estimated value of order at $150 million including spares. (WSJ, 8/8/71, 7)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. had said it would assume major portion of work it had been subcontracting on its F—14A jet fighter aircraft for Navy, Wall Street Journal reported. Grumman President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., had said plan to reduce subcontracting was necessary to “increase program efficiency and reduce costs.” First subcontractor to feel effect would be Republic Aviation Div. of Fairchild Industries Inc. (WSJ, 9/19/72, 13)
Protocol on U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation, established under May 26 agreement, was signed by Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, at White House ceremony attended by President Nixon. Protocol was signed simultaneously in Moscow by Vladimir A. Kirillin, Deputy Chairman of U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers. (PD, 7/31/72, 1187; Tass, fbis-Sov, 7/31/72, Gl)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said Dept, of Defense had suppressed secret report showing that cost of Navy F-14 jet fighter aircraft would rise to $20.8 million each—$4 million above published estimates. In statement to press, Sen. Proxmire said he was “shocked and dismayed” at DOD’s refusal to make report public. (Corddry, B Sun, 7/16/72, 17)
Soviet oceanologists had explored underwater volcanoes in Mediterranean using mobile Crab submarine apparatus similar to Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, Tass announced. Crab had TV system and system for transmitting control commands and was linked to control ship by cable for communications. Lowered 2000 m (6600 ft) below water from ship Academician Sergei Vavilov, Crab had examined underwater mountain north of Lipari Islands in Tyrrhenian Sea and collected samples of soil, algae, and marine animals. (fbis-Sov, 6/15/72, LI)
Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences announced award of 1972 Nobel Prizes in chemistry and physics to six U.S. citizens. Chemistry prize of more than $100 000 would he shared by National Institutes of Health scientist. Dr. Christian B. Anfinsen and Rockefeller Univ. scientists Dr. Stanford Moore and Dr. William H. Stein for “pioneering studies” in enzyme ribonuclease. Dr. Anfinsen’s investigations had “provided the answer to an important question concerning the way in which the active enzyme is formed in living cells; Moore and Stein have elucidated important principles related to the biological activity of the enzyme. These properties we generally associate with the concept of life and with living organisms.” Physics prize was awarded for theory of superconductivity developed jointly by Dr. John Bardeen of Univ. of Illinois at Urbana, Dr. Leon N. Cooper of Brown Univ., and Dr. John R. Schrieffer of Univ. of Pennsylvania. Superconductivity was phenomenon in which electrical resistance in certain metals vanished when metals were cooled to temperatures near absolute zero (0 kelvins; —459.7°F). (Weinraub, NYT, 10/21/72, 1)
Administration had summoned 400 leading U.S. scientists and engineers to series of White House meetings on nation’s domestic and economic problems, Washington Post reported. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., had exchanged ideas with physicists, engineers, chemists, and aerospace officials on urgent situations in meetings intended “to rally the country’s science-engineering community behind other goals than weapon-making.” (Cohn, W Post, 2/18/72, Al)
