Dr. John E. Naugle became Associate Administrator of NASA, a position in which he had acted since the departure of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone in April. Beginning his service with NASA in 1959, Dr. Naugle had been appointed Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications in 1967, and Deputy Associate Administrator of NASA in 1974. As Associate Administrator, he would be responsible for directing the research, development, and operational activities conducted by the Offices of Applications, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Science, and Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA anno, 23 Nov 75; SBD, 24 Nov 75, 122)
A team of four physicists—Dr. Paul B. Price and Dr. Edward K. Shirk of the Univ. of Calif., and Dr. Weyman A. Osborne and Dr. Lawrence S. Pinsky of the Univ. of Houston—reported finding evidence of a particle with only one magnetic pole. The discovery of the monopole, if confirmed, could have a major impact on physics, with practical applications such as new medical therapies, new sources of energy, extremely small and efficient motors and generators, and new particle accelerators of much higher energy than any yet built. The monopole, representing the basic indivisible unit of magnetism, would exist in two forms of opposite polarity, the north pole and the south pole. This would be analogous to the basic electric charge, the electron, which existed in the positive and negative charges, the proton and electron. Existence of the monopole had been predicted in 1931 by Paul Dirac, Fla. State Univ. professor. The four physicists detected tracks of the particle that had apparently penetrated a sandwich of more than 33 layers of plastic and emulsion photographic film suspended from a balloon floating at 39 600 m. (Sullivan, NYT, 15 Aug 75, 1; AP, B Sun, 15 Aug 75, A3; Joffee, W Post, 15 Aug 75, Bl)
Edward N. Cole, retired president of General Motors Corp., was designing a freight carrier, called the Huskie, twice the size of the Boeing 747, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Cole, whose plan Was still on the drawing board, envisioned a fleet of 300 Huskies carrying freight around the world, each aircraft flyihg 15 hr a day. Because fast loading and unloading Was critical to the plane’s ecohOihic success, an automated modular loading and unloading systerii was also being designed to permit the craft to take off again within 30 min Of landing. With the price tag for the fleet estimated at $13 billioh, Cole was counting on government interest to bolster his plans. CSM repotted that Dept, of Defense officials were interested in a fleet of privately built cargo plartes—with government-insured mortgages-^-that could be commandeered by the military in an emergency. (AP, CSM, 4 Feb 75, 5B)
