More than 25% of all scientists and engineers in the U.S. and the USSR were engaged in weapons work of some kind, whereas fewer than one hundredth of 1% were engaged in arms control or disarmament, said William Epstein, former director of the U.N. Disarmament Division, in a letter to the New York Times. Warning of the “terrible doomsday weapons that scientists may yet develop” in the spiraling arms race, Epstein called on scientists and engineers to establish nationally and internationally a code of conduct that would include educational work on the perils of the arms race and political efforts to achieve arms control and disarmament. “Science may be neutral and amoral, but scientists are not . . . They have a moral duty to use their capabilities for the benefit of humanity and not for its destruction.” Uniting their efforts behind a “Hippocratic oath” not to engage in means of mass murder, associations of scientists and other professional bodies could provide moral support and tangible assistance to those “even in dictatorial countries” where imprisonment or harassment would be the result of such action. (NYT, 18 Feb 76, 33)
Sweden’s Royal Academy of Sciences announced that three more Americans had won Nobel prizes: Prof. William N. Lipscomb, Harvard Univ., for chemistry, and Prof. Burton Richter of Stanford Univ. and Prof. Samuel C. C. Ting of MIT for physics. Prof. Lipscomb won for his studies of the structures and properties of boranes, and Profs. Richter and Ting, shared the physics prize for their independent discoveries of a new type of elementary particle known as psi or J. Americans had won all four of the prizes awarded so far this year; Prof. Milton Friedman of the Univ. of Chicago had won the prize for economics, and the prize for medicine had gone to Dr. Baruch S. Blumberg of the Univ. of Pa. Medical School and Dr. D. Carleton Gajdusek of the Natl. Institute for Neurological Diseases. All the prizes carry an award of $160 000, derived from the estate of Sweden’s Alfred Nobel, inventor of dynamite, who established the prizes in 1901. (NYT, 19 Oct 76, 1, 34; 24 Oct 76, E-14)
A new device called an ultrasonic bolt-stress monitor—using ultrasonics to measure stress on a bolt—had been developed by LaRC physicist Joseph S. Heyman, the Langley Researcher announced, and would be submitted to Industrial Research magazine as a candidate for selection among the 100 most significant new products developed during the year. The bolt-stress monitor would replace equipment now in use to monitor a multitude of bolts in a facility or a piece of equipment, as it would detect a 1 —psi change in 50 000 psi in measuring stress. Heyman had invented a continuous-wave ultrasonic microemboli monitor, used to observe blood circulating outside the body during surgery and detect larger than normal particles, that was selected by the magazine as an IR 100 winner in 1974. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 3)
During its 3 most active yr, NASA had awarded only 19% of its procurement funding to concerns in the industrialized Northeast, according to a Library of Congress study commissioned by Rep. Michael J. Harrington (D-Mass.), whereas the Sunbelt states—ranging from Maryland to Texas—received 33% of the total awards. Of $8.7 billion spent by NASA in procurement contracts for 1968, 1971, and 1975, the Northeast received $1.7 billion and southern regions received $2.9 billion, the report said. “While the aggregate populations in these combined regions are roughly comparable,” Harrington said, “the NASA procurement contracts run almost 2 to 1 against us . . . NASA’s contract award procedures now join that long and growing list of federally funded activities which discriminate against the industrialized Northeast states.” (NYT, 2 June 76, 40)
MSFC announced that two of its employees had manufactured a precision quartz ball that would be used by the National Bureau of Standards as a density measure. John Rasquin and Jack Reed of the Materials and Processes Laboratory in MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate made the precision sphere, which is 90 mm in diameter and weighs 290 g. NBS had selected quartz as the homogeneous material for its standard because it could be made with a high order of purity, had great temperature stability, and was ideal for use in an interferometer because of its precisely known optical properties. MSFC originally made two clear quartz spheres for NBS that were unsatisfactory because of their high transparency, as the interferometer required a highly reflective surface; NBS exposed the spheres to gamma radiation for 4 mo to make them opaque by changing their molecular structure, but the radiation induced minute internal stresses that altered the contour. The spheres, returned to MSFC, were reworked by Rasquin and Reed to NBS specifications of 1x10 6 deviation in radius. One of the spheres had been completed and the other was about 50% complete. (MSFC Release 76-209)
Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., proposed a $ 1 billion program to muffle noisy jet engines and replace older planes with quieter new ones, the Washington Post reported. The proposed program, part of a comprehensive aviation-noise policy submitted to the Office of Management and Budget, would be paid for by a surcharge on airline tickets—probably 2%—that would go into an escrow fund to be used by the nation’s airlines over a 6- to 8-yr period. The “retrofit” program—most controversial part of the noise-abatement policy— would consist of modifying older 2- and 3-engine jets (such as the McDonnell-Douglas DC—9 and Boeing 727) by surrounding them with sound-absorbent materials to make them quieter. The fund could be used as part of the cost of replacing older 4-engine jets (the Boeing 707 and the McDonnell-Douglas DC-8) with newer, quieter planes. Although the Air Transport Association (ATA) representing most U.S. airlines had long favored replacement of the 4-engine planes, the Post said, it had vigorously opposed retrofit of 3-engine planes because the cost would outweigh the benefits. Retrofit had been advocated by the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Aviation Administration, and many citizens’ groups to reduce noise levels around airports and take advantage of the useful life left in many of the older planes; however, the Post noted that opposition to retrofit in the administration had been based on expense, its possible contribution to inflation, and the fact that newer quieter planes would eventually solve the problem anyway. The Post quoted “no better than 50-50” chances that Congress would go along with providing public financing to help privately owned airlines make their planes quieter, according to a Capitol Hill source. Under Secretary Coleman’s proposal, the 8% surcharge on airfares now going into a trust fund for improving terminal and navigational facilities would be reduced by'2%, which would go into the retrofit fund, so that no actual increase in ticket prices would occur. (WPost, 15 June 76, A-3)
“An impressive record of cost-cutting that could well set an example to many agencies” had been achieved by NASA since the midsixties, said Sen. William A. Proxmire (D-Wis.), one of the agency’s severest critics. Chairman of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that handles NASA’s appropriation, Proxmire said that NASA had made its tight budget go farther by acting as its own prime contractor when construction bids were too high; buying electronic parts from a standardized list; providing reimbursable launches to private industry and other outside organizations on an “accelerated” basis, although not— according to Proxmire—charging enough for them; and, in general, making “one dollar do the job that it took two dollars to do in the free and easy money days.” {Today, 1 Jan 76, 1)
Bicentennial year 1976 also marked the 50th birthday of scheduled-airline service in the U.S., the National Aeronautic Association reported. On 13 April 1925, Henry Ford had started an air-freight service between Detroit and Chicago, first such' commercial flights on a regular schedule. Upon passage of the Air Commerce Act of 1926, one of NAA’s founding members, William P. MacCracken, Jr., took office as the first U.S. Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics. By 1931, airlines were spanning the country; by 1950, U.S. airlines carried 19 million passengers 16 billion km, and in 1975 they carried more than 200 million passengers 263 billion km—amounting to almost 80% of intercity public passenger travel in the U.S. Airlines also accounted for 93% of travel to overseas destinations. In 1976, the U.S. scheduled-airline fleet included 2200 jet aircraft serving communities nationwide with 13 000 daily flights. (NAA News, Apr 76, 3) May 1976
A slowdown ordered by the 14 000-member Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization 25 Aug. had caused disruptions in air travel nationwide, airline officials told the New York Times. Eastern Airlines experienced 1-to 2-hr delays in rush-hour traffic at La Guardia Airport, and similar snarls were reported by other carriers at other airports, the most severe at Los Angeles. Union president John F. Leyden had asked members to start handling traffic “by the book” and adhere rigidly to rules that required planes to stay about 5 to 10 km behind aircraft ahead of them, omitting efforts to expedite traffic flow as is normally done. The controllers were protesting delay in completion of a Civil Service Commission study of controller job classification, which held hope of higher pay levels, and a CSC announcement that its investigation had found both undergrading and overgrading in the jobs. (NYT30 Aug 76, A-9)
Lt. Col. Michael A. Love, test pilot of the successful NASA lifting-body program, was killed in the crash of an F-4C fighter on a dry lake bed at Edwards AFB, Calif., shortly after takeoff in a proficiency flight. Love’s navigator, Maj. E.B. Underwood, Jr., ejected from the plane before it crashed and was hospitalized in stable condition. Love, 37, was chief AF pilot assigned to the X-24B program that tested a wingless aircraft to develop a space vehicle that could be flown to earth and landed like a plane. After serving in the lifting-body program as a chase pilot for various M-2 and X-24A flights, Love made his first X-24B flight on 4 Oct. 1973 and had piloted the plane to its fastest speed—better than 1860 kph—before terminating the program 20 Aug. 1975 with a hard-surface landing of the X-24B on the runway at Edwards. (WStar, 2 Mar 76, A-5; W Post, 3 Mar 76, A-20; NASA X-Press, 12 Mar 76, 2)
The flight of NASA’s Pioneer 11 into unexplored space above the plane of earth’s orbit had confirmed the structure of the sun’s magnetic field for the first time, NASA announced. Dr. Edward J. Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—magnetometer experimenter for Pioneer 11 —reported to the meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union that observations conducted from Feb. to Nov. 1976, while the spacecraft was four times farther from the sun than the earth, showed that the solar magnetic envelope had a simple north pole-south pole structure split into northern and southern portions at the magnetic equator by a “warped” sheet of electric current. This warped sheet had appeared to move as the sun rotated, up and down relative to the earth’s orbital plane. As the solar magnetic field extended several billion miles over the north and south solar poles, well beyond the orbit of Saturn, earth spacecraft traveling in earth’s orbital plane had passed through the warped electric current and detected contradictory motions, the field in the northern solar hemisphere being carried outward by the solar wind and the field in the southern hemisphere reversing back toward the sun. Earlier spacecraft therefore reported reversals in the direction of the solar magnetic field each time the current sheet was encountered, reports that led to a variety of interpretations. When Pioneer 11 had passed close to Jupiter in Dec. 1974, the gravitational effect had thrown the spacecraft 62 million km above earth’s orbital plane, allowing it to measure solar phenomena at a point 16° above the solar equator—9° higher than previously possible—where it discovered a uniform solar field, pointing away from the sun. The present solar model would exhibit the warped current sheet about 15° each side of the solar equator, accompanied by small-scale random magnetic fields of varying intensity and direction; the north polar region would generate a well-ordered magnetic field in a single direction, and the south pole a similar field in the opposite direction. The solar wind would carry the magnetic field out until it met the interstellar gas, perhaps near the orbit of Pluto, where the outgoing north-polar field would link with incoming south-polar field to “close the magnetic loop,” Dr. Smith suggested. (NASA Release 76-199; ARC Release 76-85; NYT, 1 Dec 76, 1)
Proponents of the B-l strategic bomber, “vigorously opposed for years by people inside and outside of government,” seemed likely to win their struggle to get approval for the $ 22-billion program, said Science magazine. A House-Senate conference committee voted in mid-June to spend $960.5 million in procurement funds for the first 3 B-l planes, although the Senate had passed an amendment delaying spending of the money until a new administration should take office. This year’s fight to procure the B-l was the culmination of a 15-yr effort that began with the shooting down of a U-2 plane over the Soviet Union in 1960; the USAF projected the building of a low-flying manned bomber, the ideas converging in 1969 with A MSA (advanced manned strategic aircraft), a project opposed by then Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara. In 1969, when Melvin Laird became President Nixon’s Secretary of Defense, AMSA studies were concluded and the final design “metamorphosed into the B-l,” Rockwell Inti. Corp. becoming prime contractor. At the same time, other Pentagon planners were backing a strategic armed cruise missile decoy system (SCAD), assuming that Congress would not approve both programs. At the urging of the USAF, Secretary Laird canceled the SCAD program in July 1973, but the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Sen. Thomas McIntyre, D-N.H.) ordered it reinstated. Both the bomber and the cruise missile had encountered development problems and increased expenses; internal Rockwell documents from Jan. 1974 showed company concern about “competitive threats in the form of the standoff missile and . . . the launch aircraft” that other companies might seek to build. A massive public-relations campaign was mounted to protect the B-1; ultimately, Science said, the B-1 would win but the cruise missile would also have its day, quoting John B. Walsh, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E) at the Pentagon, as saying “you need both bombers and cruise missiles.” (Science, 23 July 76, 303)
