LaRC reported it had held a luncheon Aug. 11 to recognize the contributions of 26 inventors on the center staff to NASA’s patent program. Director Donald P. Hearth and Patent Counsel Howard J. Osborn presented awards, including one to Richard T. Whitcomb as 1976 coinventor of the yr for his patent “Airfoil Shape for Flight at Subsonic Speeds,” shared with Robert T. Jones of ARC. (LaRC Release 77-38)
DFRC announced that employees John G. McTigue and Stanley Markey would share a $5000 award for working out a way to truck the Shuttle orbiter overland from the Rockwell plant in Palmdale, Calif., to DFRC rather than use the Boeing 747 carrier, eliminating the need for a mate/demate device costing $2.53 million and saving the Shuttle program nearly $800 000. The two men used their knowledge of local terrain, geography, and manpower to set up a ground route with relatively minor problems. (DFRC Release 30/77)
MSFC announced that four of its engineers had received awards conferred by the Soviet Union for participating in the Apollo-Soyuz test project of 1975. Dr. William R. Lucas, director of MSFC, presented the S. Korolev medal to Harold Ledford (now of the Shuttle projects office) for “outstanding management and technical proficiency as chief engineer for science and engineering” from beginning to end of the ASTP. The USSR also sent Yuri Gagarin diplomas for “exemplary leadership” to three engineers who had chaired stress-corrosion review teams after prelaunch inspection of the long stored Saturn IB launch vehicle revealed a cracked fin. The teams had investigated all launch stages and associated hardware, independently assessing use of corrosion-susceptible materials. Jewel W. Moody’s review team and a Chrysler Corp. team assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn IB; Charles E. Cataldo’s team, with personnel from McDonnell Douglas and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell, investigated the S-IVB stage and rocket engines used on the various launch stages to assure they were flightworthy; and Paul H. Schuerer’s team, with personnel from IBM and the Bendix Corp., assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn instrument unit and inertial-guidance platform. (MSFC Release 77-13)
NASA announced plans to develop a prosthetic urinary sphincter for patients losing control of bladder functions because of injury or disease. Patients now used external collection devices, implanted catheters, or prosthetics difficult to operate. John Richardson of MSFC’s technology utilization office said NASA’s biomedical applications office had recommended MSFC for this job because of its expertise in design, manufacture, assembly, and operation of miniature valving. MSFC would have a contractor design and test the device and prepare documents for Food and Drug Administration approval, as well as manufacture the device commercially. A successful device would permit safe and quick emptying of the bladder and avoid infection, the prime source of fatal kidney failure among those without bladder control. (NASA Release 77-184; MSFC Release 77-163)
MSFC announced selection of William A. Brooksbank, Jr., as manager of the solar heating and cooling project in the center’s special projects office. MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas said that Brooksbank, most recently deputy manager of the Spacelab program office, was well qualified for the position by his background in engineering and management. Brooksbank had come to the Redstone Arsenal at Huntsville in 1958 as atomic energy project engineer for the Army’s ballistic missile agency; he had worked at MSFC since its establishment in 1960. (MSFC Release 77-218) •
MSFC announced that Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, had visited the center for the first time to discuss the NASA/ESA Spacelab and other NASA programs with MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas and his staff. Thomas J. Lee, manager of MSFC’s Spacelab program office, said the visit would familiarize the ESA official with NASA capabilities and programs “in which the Europeans might be interested as potential areas for future cooperative ventures.” (MSFC Release 77-167)
Aviation Week reported that NASA had chosen “key missions” for the six orbital flight tests of the Shuttle and had assigned payloads as well as the weight and volume available for additional experiments. Chester M. Lee, director of Space Transportation System operations, would give Associate Administrator John E. Naugle a list to begin assigning experiments on the basis of the key payloads. For the first mission (tentative schedule, March 1979) the Shuttle would carry only a developmental flight-instrumentation unit that would also ride on other flight tests. On the second mission (July 1979), the first true Shuttle payload would be an instrumented pallet for scientific research amounting to only a small weight in the payload bay but offering the NASA program office a first research opportunity on the Shuttle. On subsequent missions the Shuttle would carry (Sept. 1979) a remote manipulator built by Canada to maneuver a payload on the end of a jointed arm, plus a scientific payload; (Dec. 1979) a large spin-stabilized upper stage to boost an undetermined spacecraft payload into a higher orbit; (Feb. 1980) an interim upper stage for attachment to Skylab, to boost it into a higher orbit, or an alternate payload such as the long-duration exposure facility; (March 1980) a possible classified payload (such as the USAF Teal Ruby system for detecting and tracking aircraft from space) plus a GSFC-designed multimission spacecraft. The seventh orbital mission set in May 1980 would probably be a NASA-ESA Spacelab launch, unless another flight test was needed. NASA noted that unforeseen circumstances could change the key-payload schedule for the first orbital flight tests. (AvWk, May 16/77, 13)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Gen. Kenneth R. Chapman, USAF (Ret.), as assistant administrator for its Hq Office of DOD and Interagency Affairs, effective Apr. 1. He would replace Lt. Gen. William. W. Snavely, USAF (Ret.), who left NASA in Sept. 1976 to accept a position in Saudi Arabia. Chapman, a nuclear chemist, was formerly director of the Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). (NASA Release 77-50)
A lack of sunspots during the past yr and a half might have caused recent unusual cold weather and drought in the U.S., Dr. John A. Eddy of the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research told the 143rd meeting of the Am. Assn, for the Advancement of Science. Dr. Eddy, an astronomer who had studied the complex relation between solar activity and historic and climatic events, had traced short- and medium-term effects over several thousand yr in history records and as far back as 7000yr by measuring carbon-14 levels in tree rings. The theory was that sunspots increased the solar wind (solar particles and radiation that fan the earth) which determined the amount of cosmic and galactic radiation striking the earth. Tree-ring studies echoed abnormal conditions of cold weather and drought when the rings exhibited high levels of carbon-14 resulting from reduced solar-wind activity, resulting from fewer sunspots. “. . . The record of climate [has] a one-to-one correspondence that’s so good I don’t want to believe it,” Dr. Eddy told the Denver meeting. History reported the reign of King Louis XIV of France (1643-1715) as a time of high carbon-14 levels; Eddy said the most severe temperature drops on earth in the last thousand yr occurred in that period. Crops failed in the British Isles, a Norse colony in Greenland perished of cold, and Spanish conquistadors had ridden their horses into Mexico across a frozen Rio Grande. The aurora borealis produced by solar particles striking earth’s magnetic field did not appear during that period; astronomer Edmund Halley was 60yr old when he first saw northern lights in 1715, when the “little ice age” ended. “The fact is, we should have been into a rise of solar activity in the autumn of 1975,” Eddy noted, “and here we are a year and a half overdue into getting that rise.” (W Post, Feb 22/77, A-3; NYT, Feb 22/77, 13)
JPL reported that Donald Lynn and Jean Lorre of its image processing laboratory had shared in a scientific investigation of the Shroud of Turin, preserved in Italy since 1578. At the request of groups in N.Y. and N.M., Lynn and Lorre had used advanced NASA techniques (mathematical and contrast enhancement) to obtain a noticeably clearer image from negatives and color slides taken at a 1973 display of the cloth and the image appearing on it. (JPL Universe, July 1/77, 1; Natl Inq, July 19/77, 4)
NASA reported that the fifth and final free flight of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, testing its braking on a concrete runway, had successfully made a landing on concrete at Edwards AFB—although it had a bumpy finale when the orbiter touched down and bounced twice before stopping. At a postflight press conference, pilots Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton said the craft had reached speeds higher than expected after separating from its Boeing 747 carrier. Shortly after 8am local time the 747 had taken off with the orbiter attached to the top of its fuselage, climbing during the next 50 minutes to about 20 000ft altitude, where it nosed over and began to dive. At about 17 000ft the orbiter separated and came straight down without the turns made in previous flights; the dive angle was 25-22° compared with a commercial jetliner’s descent slope of about 3°. Touchdown, which came lmin 55sec after separation, overshot the 5000ft mark on the concrete runway by about 1000ft. The rear landing gear had touched, but the craft hopped back into the air, bounced, and tipped slightly before the pilots steadied it and stopped it with 2000ft of runway remaining. Approach speed had reached 330mph on the indicators, and the pilots described “oddities in the way the speed dropped” during the descent. Donald K. Slayton, in charge of the landing tests, said engineers this week would check out the airspeed indicators and the vehicle’s calculated energy profile, but further tests were not probable. Plans for future or-biter landings would change on the basis of data from the fifth test, modifying the aim point to allow for higher lift/drag coefficients with the tailcone off and the slower bleed-off of airspeed. (NASA Release 77-224; postflt rept free flight 5, SpSh orbiter ALT NYT, Oct 27/77, A-18; LA Times, Oct 27/77, 2; W Post, Oct 27/77, A10, B-3; JSC Roundup, Oct 28/77, 1; AvW/c, Oct 31/77, 16)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. John R. Carruthers as first director of a new division in the Hq Office of Applications that would manage materials processing in space. Dr. Carruthers, formerly of Bell Labs, had headed crystal-growth and glass research in developing optical fibers for lightwave communications. (NASA Release 77-67)
NASA reported that its data-analysis facility at KSC had been using a GE multispectral image analyzer developed for screening Landsat imagery to detect early stages of breast cancer, where diagnosis would normally be difficult and rapid multiplication of cancerous tissue would require massive surgery. The only solution previously available had been repeated diagnoses by x-ray, itself a health hazard. Radiological examinations of x-rays had been limited by the range of intensity detectable by the human eye, which was unable to distinguish more than 32 shades of gray, meaning that much of the data would be effectively invisible. However, the microdensitometer on the GE analyzer was able to differentiate 256 shades of gray with great accuracy. The computerized output of the densitometer would enter the analyzer with orders for enhancement, so that data previously invisible to a doctor’s eye could be available for earlier diagnosis. Robert L, Butterfield, electronics engineer at the KSC data-analysis facility, "had worked with radiologist Dr. William L. Walls of Titusville, Fla., for 2yr on a process for automatic enhancement of mammograms to detect early stages of breast cancer before radical surgery would become necessary. The aim of the study had been to differentiate women at low risk of breast cancer from those at high risk, based on the rate of change in the gray shades of the enhanced images, to reduce the need for repeated x-ray diagnoses. (NASA Release 77-102; KSC Release 105-77)
LaRC announced that Alex Haley, author of Roots, would be the speaker Feb. 7 at an LaRC colloquium and at an “Our Future in the Cosmos” public lecture. Demand for tickets to the lecture, part of a series sponsored by LaRC and the College of William and Mary, was so great that LaRC had shifted the Haley lecture from the Hampton high school to the Hampton Coliseum. Title of Haley’s talk was “A Saga of Black History.” (LaRC anno Jan 31/77)
