The NAA newsletter reported that competition had become more intense for world-record flights in general aviation. Robert Mucklestone was attempting to regain his around the world title in Class C-l.c Group 1 (2204 to 38581b) that he had first captured in 1975 from Dr. Alvin Marks, who in 1969 had beaten the record of British aviatrix Sheila Scott, who had traveled a 33 OOOmi route in 33 days with a total average speed of 36.15mph, including ground time. In 1977 Harold Benham and Jack Rood in a Beechcraft Bonanza Model 35 had bested Mucklestone’s record. Whatever the outcome of Mucklestone’s current flight, two Texans (William Wisner and Frank Haile) had planned a flight in July 1978 to break the record in that class. (NAA newsletter, June 78, 7)
INTELSAT announced appointment of 3 deputy directors and 4 division directors. New deputy director generals were Andrea Caruso, administration; Reginald Westlake, finance; and H. William Wood (former NASA deputy associate administrator for networks, OSTDS), operations and development. New division directors were Francis Latapie, procurement; Emeric Podraczky, engineering; William Geddes, operations; and NandKishore Chitre, systems planning. After INTELSAT’s contract with ComSatCorp for management services expired in Feb., INTELSAT would assume responsibility for all technical, operational, and procurement functions previously performed by ComSatCorp, which would continue to provide certain technical tasks under two service contracts. (INTELSAT Release 78-4-1)
NASA announced that LaRC physicist Dr. Joseph Heyman had received his third IR-100 award given by Industrial Research magazine for one of the 100 most significant new technical products of 1978. Presentation of the award to Dr. Heyman at a banquet in Chicago Sept. 21 marked the first time the magazine had selected one person three times for the honor. Dr. Heyman’s previous awards had been in 1974 and 1976. His 1978 device, jointly developed at LaRC and Washington Univ., St. Louis, was an acoustoelectric transducer that used very high-pitched sound waves to improve accuracy in measuring deviations in structural properties. Unlike conventional transducers, the new device was insensitive to the shape of sound waves, and would allow researchers to identify and evaluate more accurately material flaws and to characterize biomedical specimens and tissue. Heyman’s first IR-100 award had been for a continuous-wave ultrasonic microemboli monitor, which traced impurities in a patient’s blood during open-heart surgery. His 1976 award had been for an ultrasonic bolt stress monitor to indicate changes in bolt strain of less than one part in 10 000. (NASA Release 78-147; LaRC Release 78-48; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 5)
The gondola of Double Eagle II, first balloon to successfully cross the Atlantic, remaining parts of its balloon, and some of its equipment would soon become an exhibit at the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. The U.S. embassy in Paris had notified the museum that the three balloonists wanted the Air and Space Museum to be the repository of their craft. They had planned also to present documents and onboard equipment that had not been jettisoned, as well as the balloon envelope (the shell containing the gas). While the balloon was still aloft, Melvin Zisfein, acting director of the museum, had cabled the U.S. embassies in London and Paris to approach balloonists Maxie Anderson, Larry Newman, and Ben Abruzzo on the Smithsonian’s behalf. When Lindbergh was still in the air on his historic flight, Paul Garber had sent a cable to the airfield at Le Bourget asking for the plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, which had become one of the museum’s premier exhibits. “I thought it would be nice to continue in that tradition,” Zisfein said. (WStar, Aug 25/78, A-6)
JPL’s Edward Divita would be featured speaker at a meeting on nuclear waste disposal in Los Angeles Apr. 18, sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society. Divita, a professional nuclear engineer who had performed several radiation studies of nuclear and space systems, analyzing and assessing the various disposal options, would speak on “Technical Status of Salt Bed, Sea Bed, and Space Waste Disposal.” (JPL Universe, Apr 14/78, 1)
JPL reported it would participate in tracking and data acquisition as well as in navigation during the upcoming Pioneer Venus mission. Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group had designed 2 spacecraft and 4 probe vessels for the mission, and General Electric Co.’s Systems Division would provide a probe-entry system. R. B. Miller would be tracking and data systems manager at JPL, with William Kirhofer responsible for the navigation phase. First would be an orbiter carried in the nose cone of an Atlas-Centaur scheduled to go aloft from KSC May 20; the multiprobe vessel would be launched Aug. 7, also on an Atlas-Centaur. The flight to Venus would be relatively short, about 6mo for the orbiter and about 5mo for the multiprobe. The orbiter would study the atmosphere and other characteristics of Venus for 243 days. In the multiprobe phase a large entry probe would make a detailed sounding of the lower atmosphere and clouds of Venus, and 3 smaller probes would measure widely separated areas of the planet’s atmosphere. To conserve energy, JPL trackers and navigators would turn on the battery-powered radio transmitters of the probes only about 20min before entry into the atmosphere; ground controllers would not be able to check frequencies between launch in Aug. and shortly before entry in Dec. The orbiter-and-multiprobe mission would carry about 30 instruments for gathering scientific data on Venus. (JPL Universe, Apr 28/78, 1)
JSC researchers confirmed that a meteorite found by Dr. William Cassidy last winter on an expedition sponsored by NSF to the Antarctic [see Feb. 17] had proved to be one of the rarest types ever seen. A team of JSC meteorite experts using a binocular microscope had examined the fragment inside a lunar-type glove box flushed with dry nitrogen gas, and had sent an 0.4-gram sample to Dr. Brian Mason at the Smithsonian Institution for petrographic analysis of thin sections. The fragment, 4.5 to 4.6 billion yr old, had been a Type II carbonaceous chondrite (so called because of its high carbon content) of which only 15 other samples had been found, though not in so clean a condition or so well-preserved. These chondrites had been shown to contain amino acids of nonterrestrial origin, suggesting chemical formation of complex organic molecules in other regions of the solar system. The fragment would next be characterized, sectioned, and fully documented; subsequent analysis would then continue. (JSC Release 78-26; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; June 23/78, 1)
KSC reported that Joseph Malaga, center director of administration and management operations, had accepted appointment as vice chairman of the 16th Space Congress to be held Apr. 25 — 27,1979. Sponsored annually by the Canaveral Council of Technical Societies, the congress had originated as a weekend seminar for engineers and technicians and had evolved into an event drawing speakers and delegates from technical communities throughout the world. Malaga would also be NASA’s senior representative to the Congress. (Spaceport News, Aug 18/78, 1)
The Senate had cut $5 million from NASA’s $3.87 billion R&D budget for FY79 before passing a package appropriations bill that included the agency, Aerospace Daily reported. The Senate had first rejected by 44-43, then accepted by 45-42, an amendment offered by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to cut NASA’s budget and reduce budgets of five other departments and agencies by $805 million. Proxmire’s move might have spared NASA a far deeper cut, because Sen. William Roth (R-Del.) had proposed a 2% across-the-board cut for all agencies and departments covered by the bill (which, for NASA, would have been $80 million). Proxmire had offered his more selective amendment as a substitute, to which Roth had agreed. The amendment did not specify where NASA should cut its R&D. (A/D, Aug 9/78, 169)
The Congressional battle over President Carter’s efforts to delete funds for B-l bomber aircraft 5 and 6 would resume after Congress reconvened in Jan., said Aviation Week. The outcome would depend on a Senate rescission move led by Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, to uphold the administration’s stand against B-l funding. Last year the House had voted to oppose the Senate rescission stand after Senate-House conferees failed to resolve the issue. Senate B-l proponents led by Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.), Senate majority whip, had joined forces to sustain the House action and return the question to the conference. The administration might move quickly to win endorsement of the Stennis move to rescind while many senators were still away from Washington. (AvWk, Jan 16/78, 15)
