ComSatCorp announced that it would dedicate its new ground station on Saipan in the Marianas in November [see During June]. At the ceremony would be Carlos Camacho, governor of the Northern Marianas; ComSatCorp head Joseph V. Charyk; officials of the U.S. Department of the Interior and of U.S. communications carriers; and dignitaries from several Pacific nations. The Saipan station working with an Intelsat 22,300 miles over the Pacific could offer a wide range of services: in addition to more reliable telephone calls, residents would have access to television, telex, data, and facsimile, “an era of modern and improved communications,” the organization said. (ComSatCorp Release 80-38)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the continuing flight of Salyut 6 with its international crew, Bertalan Farkas of Hungary and Valery Kubasov, working with longtime occupants Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. Preparing Soyuz 35 for return to Earth, the cosmonauts carried into it containers of materials on which research had been completed: exposed rolls of film, space navigation charts, flight logs, biological objects, and substances produced in materials experiments. Used-up equipment would be taken into the “living compartment.” The crew had shot a film about their joint operations, including development of plants in weightlessness and production of metal alloys and castings. Tass reported June 3 that the descent module of Soyuz 35 had landed safely near Dzhezkazgan and that the Intercosmos crew were well. The Soyuz 36 that took them to Salyut 6 was still attached to it; on June 4, the Salyut 6 crew moved Soyuz 36 to the other docking port to make room for another craft. On June 5 at 1719 Moscow time the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-2 carrying Lt. Col. Yuri Malyshev and, as flight engineer, veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Aksyonov, tenth crew to visit Salyut 6 since its launch. An unmanned Soyuz T launched in December 1979 had docked with Salyut 6 and remained for more than three months, testing new automated features. Before docking with Salyut 6, the crew turned the Soyuz toward the Sun to test its solar batteries, one of the new features. On June 6 Soyuz T-2 docked with Salyut 6 at 1858 Moscow time. Tass said that the approach was automated up to within 180 meters, after which it was controlled by the crew. Konstantin Feoktistov explained that “earlier, during manual approach the station was.. .automatically aligned with the ship and was always directed toward it with its docking unit. .. [the crew] regulated the longitudinal speed and made sure that it went in straight. This time the station was immobile: the craft approached from the side... A quarter turn was made around the station and it came on to the axis level. The manual control system worked well. We think the crew was even better.” Later reports mentioned a malfunction of some automated part and the need for an unplanned manual docking. The visiting cosmonauts performed “dynamic operations” including a photographic turn around the station, which had not been possible before. After a four-day mission, Malyshev and Aksyonov undocked Soyuz T-2 June 9 and returned to the spot near Dzhezkazgan where the previous Soyuz crew landed. Popov and Ryumin remained in Salyut 6, which logged its thousandth day of flight June 24. Progress 10 was launched June 29. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 1-29/80; NY Times, June 10/80, C-2; A/D, June 10/80, 219; AvWk, June 23/80, 18)
The Soviet Union launched Lt. Col. Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V.	Aksyonov toward the orbiting station Salyut 6 in Soyuz T2, an “improved model” of its manned capsule. An uncrewed Soyuz T1 tested in December 1979 docked automatically with Salyut 6 and remained for 99 days. A U.S. expert on USSR space activity said that T2 was “a new ship” except in appearance: the main change was an on-board computer that for the first time let cosmonauts navigate independently of ground control. Launched from Tyuratam, the T2 arrived June 6 to join Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (WStar, June 5/80, A-12; June 6/80, A-10; June 7/80, A-12; WPost, June 6/80, A-22; NY Times, June 6/80, B-6)
