MSFC said that the Spacelab 1 payload crew was in Japan for a week, practicing the use of instruments scheduled to fly on the First mission in 19S3. A NASA-sponsored package, SEPAC (space experiments with particle accelerators), would study the interaction of Earth’s magnetosphere with the upper atmosphere. Professor Tatsuzo Obayashi of the University of Tokyo would be the principal investigator. Before leaving Japan December 15, the crew would be trained on the actual flight hardware at Japan’s National Space Development Agency. The crew— civilian scientists called payload specialists and two NASA mission-specialist astronauts—were Drs. Byron Lichtenberg and Michael Lampton of the United States, Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, and NASA mission specialists Drs. Owen Garriott and Robert Parker. Two payload specialists would actually fly on the mission with the mission specialists; the other two would support the mission on the ground. (MSFC Release 81-146) —NASA said that one of Japan’s major newspapers, Asahi Shibmun, had signed an agreement to fly a “getaway special” experiment on the Shuttle, possibly in late 1982, using the weightlessness of space to make pure artificial snow crystals directly from a gaseous substance while the Shuttle was in orbit. A Japanese physicist, the late Dr. Ukichiro Nakaya, had made the first artificial snow-crystal experiments in 1936. The Shuttle experiment, a first try at creating artificial snow in a weightless environment, would contribute significantly to crystallography, especially growth of semiconductor crystals or other items from a vapor source. The idea, suggested by two Japanese students, was chosen for 17,000 suggestions by the newspaper’s readers. To date NASA had accepted 321 getaway specials—privately funded experimental payloads—for flight on the Shuttle on a space-available basis, beginning with the fifth mission in 1982. (NASA Release 81-191)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 39 from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 5:59 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting Salyut 6/ Soyuz T-4 complex. Tass said that the Progress 12 cargo ship had undocked March 19 after being filled with discarded equipment to replace the supplies it brought and on March 20 had entered the atmosphere over the Pacific where it “ceased to exist.” The crew of Soyuz 39 were veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov as commander and the first citizen of Mongolia to fly in space, Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha, as researcher and “101st spaceman of the world.” They would join Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh already aboard the orbiting complex. Tass said that the launch commemorated the 60th anniversary of the revolution of the Mongolian People’s Republic, 10th nation to participate in manned spaceflight. United Press International (UPI) said that it was in honor of the 20th anniversary of launching Yuri Gagarin, first man into space, on April 12, 1961. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 22/81; UPI, in W Star, May 23/81, A-8)
NASA said that its joint sounding-rocket project with Canada’s National Research Council [see November 20] was successful. William A. Brence of WFC said that preliminary results were satisfactory. Data from the seven experiments launched on five large suborbital rockets from temporary facilities at a radar site on the Arctic coast would, in combination with ground-based observations, enlarge understanding of the dynamics of the cleft in Earth’s magnetic field. (WFC Release 81-20) During December: NASA announced the appointment of Dr. Walter B. Olstad, deputy associate administrator for management to direct all matters such as personnel, supply and equipment, facilities, computer support, and the like. He would succeed Edwin C. Kilgore, who retired October 2. C. Robert Nysmith would replace Olstad in an acting capacity. Both appointments were effective immediately. The Office of Management was created in the NASA reorganization plan effective in November to perform some of the functions previously under the Office of Management Operations and some previously under the NASA comptroller. Olstad began his association with the agency in 1954, working at the Langley laboratory as a research engineer in the transonic tunnel branch, then in the reentry physics branch. He became chief of LaRC’s space systems division in July 1975. He went to Headquarters in 1979 as deputy associate administrator for OAST. (NASA anno Dec 14/81; NASA Release 81-195)
NASA said that the principal investigators for the plasma-wave instruments on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)-managed Voyager 2, heading for rendezvous with Saturn in August 1981, discovered that the spacecraft had encountered the magnetic tail of Jupiter almost two years after leaving that planet, confirming a theory that the huge magnetosphere might extend all the way to Saturn. Dr. Frederick L. Scarf, scientist at TRW Inc., and his colleagues, Dr. Donald Gurnett and Dr. William Kurth of the University of Iowa, found plasma-wave phenomena from February 1981 identical to those of July and August 1979, when Voyager 2 had left Jupiter but was still in that planet’s magnetosphere. Scarf had published in 1979 in the Journal of Geophysical Research his idea that Jupiter’s magnctotail might reach as far as Saturn and that the rare alignment of outer planets that permitted the successive Jupiter-Saturn encounters might put Voyager 2 and Saturn simultaneously into Jupiter’s far-flung influence. Inside the Jovian tail, Saturn could experience unusual conditions observable by the Voyager when it arrived in August. The next Saturn encounter might differ widely from the two previous. (NASA Release 81-73)
