A mountain climbing team reached the wreckage of an Eastern Airlines Boeing 747 that crashed January 1, 1985, at 19,600 feet into Mt. Illimani in the Bolivian Andes and photographed the site for use in an investigation, Aviation Week reported. Judith Kelly, wife of William Kelly, a U.S. Peace Corps official who died in the crash, financed and led the three-person expedition because she was concerned that the accident investigation was lagging. Photographs of the site showed parts of the tail structure and the fuselage. Kelly also collected cable and honeycomb structures identified by part numbers and turned them over with the photos to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). Remains of the 29 persons on board were not located. The Kelly team's ascent was the fourth visit to the site since the crash and prompted questions over the status of the accident investigation. Although Bolivia had primary responsibility to report the accident, government officials said it was unlikely Bolivia would finance an expedition to the site due to lack of funds, but added it would not stand in the way of an investigation by the U.S., which was the country of aircraft registry and manufacture. Early in January Bolivian Bernardo Guarachi, who was Kelly's guide, reached the crash site and spent several hours there, bringing back pieces of wreckage and luggage tags identifying the flight. A second Bolivian team in March reached the site and took motion pictures. The film showed the aircraft wreckage, including a tail section that was torn off the plane, and scattered cargo and baggage. The team also found an engine cowling, a piece of the fuselage with the Eastern name on it, and other parts of the tail structure. A team sponsored by the Bolivian Red Cross spent three days in August at the site, but was hindered by new-fallen snow and lack of guidance on where to look for technical evidence. John Young, the NTSB investigator in charge, said he was discussing with officials in the safety board's accident investigation division whether the safety board should attempt to carry on the investigation and what approach to take. Recovery of the flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder could aid in determining navigation procedures the crew were taking. Because of the questions surrounding the crash of the aircraft, which was several miles off course when it struck the mountain 26 miles southeast of La Paz International Airport, the U.S. Air Line Pilots Association was discussing financing an expedition to recover the recorders. (AvWk, Sept 9/85, 40)
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and British Defense Minister Michael Heseltine signed a memorandum of understanding for Britain's participation in the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, Defense Daily reported. The signing came one day after British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had told Parliament that the negotiations over British participation were not finished but that she hoped for a signed agreement before Christmas. Joining Heseltine at a press conference following the signing, Weinberger said it "emphasizes both the closeness of our alliance and the special nature of our relationship which is a very vital thing" to both countries. "Britain is the leader in many of these technologies and we want very much to have these capabilities placed at the benefit of the program," he said. Heseltine explained the signing of the agreement one day after Thatcher's statement to Parliament, saying both he and Weinberger had received communiques overnight from their teams in Washington permitting completion of the agreement. Heseltine said the agreement offered a "very significant opportunity for British industry and for British research capability to be associated with a major and exciting program at the frontiers of human capabilities in many of the technologies of tomorrow." (D/D, Dec 9/85, 185)
University of Chicago scientists Edward Anders, Wendy Wolbach, and Roy Lewis found evidence that continent-sized firestorms 65 million years ago raged across much of the earth, blackening the skies with soot and possibly triggering a sudden global freeze that wiped out the dinosaurs, the Washington Post reported. The event occurred at the time that other scientists said a giant asteroid collided with earth, which may have generated enough heat to start the fires. It was the asteroid theory that led the University of Chicago researchers to ask whether a nuclear war could trigger a similar freeze, a phenomenon now known as nuclear winter. Their findings suggested that nuclear winter theorists had greatly underestimated the amount of soot that would enter the atmosphere from wildfires. The researchers found some of the soot, which eventually settled to the ground, in the same geologic layers that five years previously gave evidence of the asteroid impact. The layer, sampled in regions as far apart as Europe and New Zealand, contained an amount of soot, which was pure carbon, equal to about 10% of the carbon currently incorporated into all forms of life on earth. The original impact theory held that an asteroid, probably at least six miles wide, hit earth, blasting enough rock dust into the atmosphere to darken the sky for weeks. Deprived of sunlight, the ground would have cooled, bringing on a global freeze that exterminated not only the dinosaurs but many other species all over the world. Paleontologists knew that the dinosaurs died out in the most wide-ranging mass extinction the earth had even seen. Scientists working on the asteroid impact theory already had calculated that airborne rock dust alone would have been thick enough to bring on a devastating freeze. The discovery that vast quantities of soot might also have been in the upper atmosphere indicated that the period of darkness and freezing would have lasted longer, perhaps months, because soot washed out of the atmosphere more slowly than did rock dust, although it would have been no darker or colder than originally thought. The finding added two more factors that might have contributed to the extinction—concentrations of fire-produced toxic substances, such as carbon monoxide, and the destruction of plants and animals by fire. The researchers said the discovery was an accident, resulting from examination of ancient sediments while looking for traces of gases that had been part of the asteroid. Instead, they found that the sediments contained about 10,000	times as much carbon as would have been expected. The layer, sampled in Denmark, Spain, and New Zealand, was the one in which other scientists previously found unusually high concentrations of iridium, an element that is rare on earth but abundant in meteorites and asteroids. The scientists thought that when the asteroid hit the earth, the impact would have generated enough heat to vaporize the asteroid, sending its iridium into the atmosphere where it spread around the world. Anders said the impact would have scattered white-hot particles of rock dust as far as 800 and possibly 1,200 miles, igniting forest fires over the entire area. "Once started," he noted, "such a fire could spread over an entire continent, and the resulting winds may disperse the soot worldwide." The impact, other scientists calculated, would have left a crater 85 miles wide and 20 miles deep. Since no such crater had been found, many scientists assumed the asteroid hit the ocean, vaporizing the water before it hit the sea floor. (W Post, Oct 4/85, A2)
NASA announced that Edward Frankie was appointed effective October 27 deputy general counsel succeeding John O'Brien. Frankie had been chief counsel of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center since September 1982 and prior to that associate director, policy development and administrative legal systems, for the Selective Service System, where he was responsible for the development and promulgation of operating regulations for deferment and classification and the selection and training of local and appeal board members across the U.S. He served from 1974 to 1980 as a member of the Office of General Counsel, Department of the Navy. Frankie received B.S. and M.S. degrees in aerospace engineering from the Catholic University of America and a J.D. degree from Georgetown University School of Law. (NASA anno., Oct 15/85)
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev today told a U.S. Senate delegation that the USSR would make "radical proposals" to reduce strategic and intermediate-range offensive nuclear arms one day after the U.S. agreed to prohibit the militarization of space, the Washington Post reported. Gorbachev told the eight visiting senators, headed by Sen. Robert Byrd (D-W. Va.), that the Soviet Union opposed research on military space defense programs, such as President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), that went beyond what was done in laboratories. Clarifying the Soviets' position, Gorbachev said that any research outside of a laboratory was considered verifiable and subject to limits defined in the Antiballistic Missile Treaty ratified in 1972 by both countries. During the discussion on SDI research, according to notes taken by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.), Gorbachev said, "You can't verify what's going on in the brain . . . and that's what we refer to as fundamental or basic research. "But as soon as you go beyond the laboratory, to mock-ups, models, contracts with defense contractors, here surely verification can be done. "We want a ban on that phase of research that approaches design and manufacture," Warner said his notes concluded. (W Post, Sept 4/85, A1)
Ben Abruzzo, who took part in the 1st balloon crossings of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, died February 11 along with five others when his twin-engine Cessna 421 plane crashed after takeoff from Coronado Airport north of Albuquerque, the Washington Post reported. In 1978 Abruzzo, along with Maxie Anderson and Larry Newman crossed the Atlantic in the Double Eagle II, landing near Paris after the 3,000-mile flight. Late in 1981 Abruzzo, Newman, and two other men flew the Double Eagle V across the Pacific. Lifting off November 9 from Nagashima, Japan, Abruzzo crash-landed four days later in northern California in one of the worst storms there in 20 years. Abruzzo and another crew member won the Gordon Bennett race in 1979. (IV Post, Feb 13/85, C6) Large Space Systems
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger today cancelled the Army's new battlefield anti-aircraft gun, called the Division Air Defense (Divad) gun, saying that tests showed it would give soldiers no significant improvement over existing weapons, the Washington Times reported. Weinberger told a Pentagon press conference that operational tests held from March through June demonstrated the Divad mobile gun system "does not effectively meet the military threat" or justify adding $3 billion to the $1.8 billion already spent for development and production of the first Divads. The cancellation was one of the largest ever made of a weapon in production. Weinberger said the gun showed poor flexibility and a lack of range against the threat posed by Soviet missile-firing Hind helicopters. The Army declined comment, other than to say it would follow Weinberger's direction. Sources had said, however that the Army fought hard in meetings over the previous several weeks to keep the Divad in production. The Army had planned to buy 615 Divads for a total cost of $4.5 billion and had accepted delivery of 65 units. Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp. developed and built the weapon, employing 1900 people in its Divad division at Newport Beach, California. Ford Aerospace President Donald Rassier said the company understood the basis for the defense secretary's decision and that the firm had already begun work on new solutions to the growing Soviet threat. The Divad was based on the 40-millimeter double-barrel Swedish Bofers gun system, designed to be mounted on old M-48 tank chassis that the Army had in stock. Ford Aerospace equipped it with radar from the F—16 fighter for all-weather and nighttime operation. The Army considered the weapon essential for the defense of quick-moving armored tank divisions, especially in Europe, against both helicopters firing missiles and fixed-wing aircraft. (W Times, Aug 28/85, 1 A)
The Canadian recovery ship MV Kreuztrum, chartered by the U.S. government, retrieved from the Atlantic Ocean the first piece of wreckage, a section of fuselage skin approximately 15 by 30 feet, of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed in June off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Another Canadian recovery ship, the John Cabot equipped with a Scarab 2 underwater search and recovery vehicle, was also at the site. The two ships later recovered three other sections of the aircraft's fuselage and were in the process of lifting a fifth section. Recovery team members said they had confronted no serious problems but that the work was time-consuming. The Scarab 2 itself lifted a smaller second piece of wreckage; high-capacity winches on the Kreuztrum lifted two other sections. Officials said it was taking 18 to 24 hrs to lift each piece of wreckage. The ships' crews recovered the larger pieces by using four clamps that the Scarab 2 attached to each corner of a piece. Scarab 2 could take only two clamps down during a dive, and a third dive was necessary to carry down a lifting bridle to attach to the four clamps and a lift line to attach to the bridle. This method made it possible to raise large sections with as little additional damage as possible. "Since it takes two hours for the Scarab to dive to the 6,700-foot depth, two hours to do its work, and another three hours to swim back to the surface," a recovery official said, "it's going to take some time." Recovery officials believed wreckage retrieved as of the previous week was from the fuselage both fore and aft of the wing, and they were working to locate its position on the aircraft structure. They believed the fifth piece being recovered was a primary fuselage structure, including ribs and skin. Recovery officials said they established a two-tier priority system for the order in which they recovered wreckage. They gave top priority to pieces that were likely to confirm or refute primary theories on the cause of the crash. Secondary priority was given to pieces considered likely to contain evidence of what occurred to cause the aircraft to break up in flight. Early efforts focused on fuselage structure. The officials had located the aft pressure bulkhead of the Air-lndia 747 and scanned it with TV cameras, but said "there is nothing visible to indicate any common problem" with the August crash of a Japan Air Lines 474. Plans called for raising this bulkhead section toward the end of the recovery operation. (AvWk, Oct 21/85, 32)
The Washington Times reported on the "Planet X" theory of Daniel Whitmire and John Matese, physics and astronomy professors at the University of Southwestern Louisiana, in which they had suggested that an undiscovered planet triggered a rain of comets upon earth, resulting in extinctions of dinosaurs and other species at roughly 26-million-year intervals. "Planet X, if it's out there," Whitmire said, "lies in an orbit outside Neptune and, every 30 million years or so, passes through a ring or disc of comets that also lie out there. When it does, gravity diverts some of the comets toward earth, kicking up huge clouds of dust on impact that disrupt the weather enough to kill off many species of plants and animals." Whitmire noted the theory would explain several phenomena that had puzzled scientists: fossil evidence of extinctions at approximately 26-million-year intervals and the slight variations in Neptune and Uranus's orbits by Planet X's gravitational pull. (IV Times, Jan 17/85, 3A)
Navy Secretary John Lehman said that intercepting U.S. Navy aircraft ordered the Egyptian Boeing 737 Airliner, which Palestinians hijacked and ordered to be flown from Egypt, to land at Sigonella Air Base in Sicily "or else," Defense Daily reported. Lehman said one of two Grumman E-2C Hawkey airborne control aircraft, which joined six Grumman F—14 Tomcats and four tankers in the intercept mission, issued the command. Lehman said four of the F-14s flew a close intercept formation on the 737 to the landing in Sicily; the E-2Cs from the USS Saratoga had loitered overhead until the airliner took off from Egypt with the hijackers. There "was no deal," Lehman said, and no help from any other country. He noted the operation demonstrated the Navy's readiness, which "doesn't come cheap." (D/D, Oct 15/85, 225) Antisatellite System
