Two competing teams using NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) discovered the first known accretion-powered millisecond pulsar. The scientists believed the pulsar to be the missing link between two known types of stars: 1) “old, accreting neutron stars, which are powerful sources of [x]-rays generated from the material they are gobbling up from their companions,” and 2) even older “radiowave emitting pulsars that are rotating very rapidly and slowing down gradually.” Because the new star, designated SAX J1808.4-3658, was both emitting x-rays and spinning rapidly, scientists believed it was the link between the accreting and the radiowaveemitting neutron stars. Michiel van der Klis and Rudy Wijnands of the University of Amsterdam found the new pulsar—called the “Holy Grail of X-ray astronomy”—and measured the time between its rapid x-ray pulses, to derive its rotation rate. Van der Klis explained that, based on the fact of accretion, astrophysicists had long theorized that millisecond pulsars existed, but this was the first time that one had been “caught in the act.” Accretion, the process of drawing gas from a nearby “companion” star, causes pulsars to heat up, emitting x-rays. After accretion ends, high-velocity beams of subatomic particles continue to “blow material off the companion,” eventually causing the companion to vanish. Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology led the team that found the pulsar’s 2-hour orbital period, measured the orbit, and inferred the presence of the companion star. Tod E. Strohmayer, a member of the RXTE team at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, suggested, “[x]-ray and particle beam ablation may explain why millisecond pulsars are often found alone, despite the fact that they required a companion star to speed up.” Pulsars “vaporize” their companions, thus hiding the evidence, which is, as Strohmayer described it, the “stellar version of the perfect crime.”(NASA, “Newly Discovered Stellar Cannibal Provides Missing Link,” news release 98-129, 22 July 1998; Rudy Wijnands and Michiel van der Klis, “A Millisecond Pulsar in an X-ray Binary System,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 344–346; Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan, “The Two-Hour Orbit of a Binary Millisecond X-ray Pulsar,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 346–348.)
