Cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev departed Mir with their French colleague Jean-Pierre Haigneré, leaving the station empty for the first time in 131⁄2 years. On 2 August, in preparation for the departure, the crew had installed a new computer, which provided orientation and docking management systems to keep the station in orbit during the absence of a crew. The crew had also installed a ground-controlled backup system, which would prevent the station from crashing to Earth if a malfunction occurred on board the station.(David Hoffman, “Cosmonauts Abandon Mir: Russian Space Station Faces Demise After 13 Years Aloft,” Washington Post, 28 August 1999; Andrei Shukshin for Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Has New Computer in Control,” 2 August 1999; Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Crew Fit Equipment To Leave Station,” 6 August 1999.)
During a spacewalk lasting nearly 6 hours, cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev searched for the source of a leak that was slowly causing pressure loss in Mir; they also attempted to install an antenna needed for an experiment. Both efforts failed. The leak, first detected in late June 1999, was “above the allowable limit.” Although it posed no immediate threat to the space station, if the leak continued for three more months, the station would become uninhabitable.(Nikolai Pavlov for Reuters, “Mir Crew Spacewalks To Seek Pressure Leak,” 23 July 1999; Kansas City Star (MO), “Antenna Failure Prevents Mir Test: Two Cosmonauts Give Up After Trying To Fix It for Six Hours,” 24 July 1999.)
In the second-longest spacewalk in NASA’s history, lasting 8 hours and 15 minutes, Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld successfully replaced all six of HST’s gyroscopes and had “just enough time to equip each of the telescope’s six batteries with a voltage regulator to prevent overheating.” NASA believed corroded wires had caused the gyroscope failures. To avoid repeating the failure, engineers used pressurized nitrogen rather than air to force fluid into the new gyroscopes. Smith and Grunsfeld alternated working inside the tight space housing the gyroscopes. Because of his long arms, NASA assigned the 6-foot-3.5-inch-tall (1.9-meter-tall) Smith, who had worked on HST during its last service call in 1997, the task of replacing the two sets of gyroscopes on the sides, which were more difficult to reach. The spacewalk lasted 2 hours longer than scheduled. Although Smith and Grunsfeld went to work an hour early and quickly organizing their tools in the cargo bay, the pair needed extra time to open coolant-line valves on a disabled infrared camera and encountered difficulty latching the doors of the cargo bay holding the equipment.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Hubble Gets a Transplant: Initial Check Says New Parts Are Working,” Los Angeles Times, 23 December 1999, Associated Press, “Crew Replaces All 6 Hubble Gyroscopes,” Washington Times, 23 December 1999.)
