Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA’s Fiscal Year 2006 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 17 February 2005. route to their destination and assisted traffic managers in managing in-flight aircraft collaboratively; and new communication and visualization technologies, which helped airline industry personnel better understand air-traffic patterns and future trends. Michael R. Landis, Manager of the AATT project, remarked that NASA would incorporate many of the technologies and concepts developed by the AATT project into the Next Generation Air Transportation System, the initiative of the government and industry to modernize the National Airspace System.(NASA, “NASA Developed Tools for Successful Air Travel Program,” news release 05-058, 24 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05058_Improving_Air_Travel.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
Officials of the Personal Spaceflight Federation announced the newly formed organization’s establishment. The Federation’s stated purpose was to design and uphold the standards and processes necessary to ensure public safety, while promoting the growth of the private spaceflight industry. Pursuant to landmark legislation signed by President George W. Bush in December 2004Pub. L. No. 108-492, the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004the industry group planned to work with federal regulators to draft rules and standards for suborbital space tourism. The new federation brought together visionary space entrepreneurs, including SpaceShipOne designer Burt Rutan, whose team had won the US$10 million X Prize in October 2004 for conducting the first private suborbital spaceflight, and video-game developer John D. Carmack II, whose Armadillo Aerospace team had been among the leading contenders for the X Prize. Executive Director of the X Prize Foundation Gregg E. Maryniak, serving as the Federation’s spokesperson, remarked on the law’s new mandate that government and industry work together to develop safety standards. Maryniak stated that the Federation believed strongly that private industry must devise a suborbital product considerably safer than that of the current civil space program.(Personal Spaceflight Federation, “Space Entrepreneurs Resolve To Create Industry Group To Promote Safety Standards and Growth of the Personal Spaceflight Industry,” news release, 8 February 2005, http://www.commercialspaceflight.org/pressreleases/PSF%20Press%20Release%20- %20Original%20Announcement.pdf (accessed 27 August 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Racers Unite in Federation: Industry Group Will Follow Up on New Law,” MSNBC.com, 9 February 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6936543/ (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA announced the completion of the most extensive global topographic map ever created, using data collected during Endeavour’s Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) in February 2000. NASA and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) had processed the collected data for more than four years, creating digital elevation maps that encompassed 80 percent of Earth’s landmass and revealed, for the first time, large, detailed swaths of topography previously obscured by persistent cloud cover. The data covered Australia and New Zealand in unprecedented, uniform detail, as well as the more than 1,000 islands comprising much of Polynesia and Melanesia in the South Pacific and the islands in the South Indian and Atlantic oceans, including many that geographers had never topographically mapped. The low topography typical of the islands makes them vulnerable to tidal effects, storm surges, and long- term rise in sea level. Mission Project Scientist at NASA’s JPL, Michael Kobrick, remarked that the maps would help mitigate the effects of future disasters of the magnitude of the Indian Ocean tsunami, because scientists would now be able to see where rising waters would go. Kobrick also commented that the SRTM was among the most significant missions the Shuttle had performed and, probably, the most significant mapping mission of any single type.(NASA, “NASA Goes ‘Down Under’ for Shuttle Mapping Mission Finale,” news release 05-007, 6 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05007_srtm_update.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
NASA announced that it would remove the potentially problematic foam insulation ramps from the Space Shuttles’ external fuel tanks before the next Shuttle launch, which NASA had scheduled for 2006. NASA had examined the foam ramps after a portion of foam had separated from Discovery during its July 2005 launch, nearly striking the Shuttle. The event was similar to the one that had contributed to the destruction of Columbia in 2003. Engineers had designed the foam ramps―formally called Protuberance Air Loads (PALs)―to protect Shuttle tanks’ fuel- pressurization lines and electrical cables from potentially damaging winds during launch. NASA technicians remained unsure of why the foam ramp had separated from Discovery, but inspections conducted in November 2005 had revealed small cracks in a PAL. The PAL with the cracks was on a tank that NASA had tested before Discovery’s launch but had not used for that mission.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Plans To Remove Some Foam from Shuttle,” New York Times, 16 December 2005; Michael Cabbage, “Shuttle To Lose Fuel-Tank Foam,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 December 2005.)
A group of astronomers led by Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of a new planet in the solar system. The scientists had temporarily called the planet 2003 UB313 until the International Astronomic Union could formally approve the name that the scientists had proposed, but had not yet disclosed to the public. Although the scientists did not yet know the planet’s exact size, they believed it was larger than Pluto, which astronomers estimate is 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) in diameter. In addition, the newly discovered planet, which the scientists believed to be composed of rock and ice, was the furthest known object in the solar system, with a 560-year elliptical orbit around the Sun at distances ranging from 3.3 to 9 billion miles (5.3 to 14 billion kilometers) from the Sun. By comparison, Pluto’s orbit ranges from 2.7 to 4.6 billion miles (4.3 to 7.4 billion kilometers) from the Sun. The astronomers had also discovered that the orbit of 2003 UB313 is quite different from that of most planets in the solar system―it possesses an orbit skewed at an angle 44o from Earth’s orbit, whereas most planets orbit in planes that are close to that of Earth.(Kenneth Chang and Dennis Overbye, “Planet or Not, Pluto Has Far-Out Rival,” New York Times, 30 July 2005; NASA, “World Book at NASA: Pluto,” http://www.nasa.gov/worldbook/pluto_worldbook.html (accessed 2 July 2009); Richard A. Kerr, “Newfound ‘Tenth Planet’ Puts Pluto Behind the Eight Ball,” Science 309, 5736 (5 August 2005): 859.)
