NASA’s Deep Impact team of scientists, led by Michael F. A’Hearn of the University of Maryland, reported in the online edition of Science that they had found the first conclusive evidence of water ice on the surface of a comet. Jointly sponsored by NASA’s JPL and the University of Maryland, Deep Impact had crashed a space probe into the comet Tempel 1 on 4 July 2005 and had taken samples of the resulting debris. Through a spectral analysis of data about the comet, which the probe had collected before the crash, the scientists had determined the existence of three patches of ice covering 300,000 square feet (27,871 square meters), approximately 6 percent of Tempel 1’s total surface area. The team concluded that the exposed ice had come from larger reservoirs just below the comet’s surface. While scientists had long known that ice is a component of comets, this report marked the first discovery of ice on a comet’s exterior surface. Scientists speculate that comets might have been the first vector for the delivery of water and carbon-based molecules to Earth, providing the building blocks for life.(Reuters, “Deep Impact Probe Shows Ice on Comet’s Surface,” 2 February 2006; Brown University, “NASA’s ‘Deep Impact’ Team Reports First Evidence of Cometary Ice,” press release, 2 February 2006, http://www.brown. edu/Administration/News_Bureau/2005-06/05-072.html (accessed 27 August 2010); Ker Than, “Water Ice Detected on Comet’s Surface,” Space.com, 2 February 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060202_comet_ice.html (accessed 31 August 2010); see also Jessica M. Sunshine et al., “Exposed Water Ice Deposits on the Surface of Comet 9P/Tempel 1,” Science 311, no. 5766 (10 March 2006): 1453.)
An independent scientific panel, convened by the National Academy of Sciences’ (NAS’s) NRC, issued a report evaluating the results of a controversial 1999 study conducted by climatologist Michael E. Mann. Mann and his researchers had concluded that the warming of the Northern Hemisphere during the last decades of the twentieth century had no precedent within the past 1,000 years, and that the 1990s—particularly 1998—were the warmest years during that period. The study included a graph that had acquired the nickname “hockey stick,” becoming an environmentalist icon. The graph depicted little temperature variation in the Northern Hemisphere for almost 1,000 years, followed by a sharp upward hook representing recent rising temperatures. NAS had prepared the report, Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the Last 2,000 Years, at the request of House Science Committee Chairman Sherwood L. Boehlert (R- NY). The panel had found “sufficient evidence from tree rings, retreating glaciers, and other ‘proxies’ of past surface temperatures to say with a high level of confidence that the last few decades of the twentieth century were warmer than any comparable period in the last 400 years.” Although this conclusion vindicated the main argument of Mann’s study for the most part, the panel cautioned that scientists had found less empirical evidence proving that Northern Hemisphere warming had no precedent before 1600. The panel also stated that “because of larger uncertainties in temperature reconstructions for decades and individual years, and because not all proxies record temperatures for such short timescales,” they had less confidence in the team’s conclusions about the 1990s.
NASA awarded its Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal posthumously to astronomer and astrophysicist John N. Bahcall, who had died in August 2005 of a rare blood disorder. NASA honored Bahcall for his work developing the HST, along with astronomers Lyman S. Spitzer Jr. and George B. Field, and for his “extraordinary service to NASA’s astronomy program,” including “groundbreaking work in the 1960s toward explaining the scientific mysteries of the sun.” Bahcall had also received the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, and the National Medal of Science.(NASA, “NASA Honors Distinguished Astronomer with Medal,” news release 06-005, 10 January 2006, http://nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06005_Bahcall_AAS_Award.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physics to NASA scientist John C. Mather and University of California, Berkeley, scientist George F. Smoot. The pair received the award for research that strongly supported the Big Bang Theory as the definitive explanation of the universe’s origin. Mather and Smoot had used data from NASA’s Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to observe the universe 380,000 years after its inception. They had determined that the temperature of the cosmic microwave background—essentially, the Big Bang’s afterglow—was approximately -455oF. Their observations matched earlier predictions made by other scientists and indicated that nearly all of the universe’s radiant energy—the energy of light and other electromagnetic waves—had been released during the first year after the Big Bang. The pair also discovered slight temperature variations in this relatively uniform light, indicating the density differences in matter that had led to the creation of stars, galaxies, and the universe’s hierarchical structure.(Nobel Foundation, “The Nobel Prize in Physics 2006,” 3 October 2006, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/ physics/laureates/2006/press.html (accessed 31 March 2010); NASA, “NASA Scientist John C. Mather Wins 2006 Nobel Physics Prize,” news release 06-327, 3 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_ 06327_Mather_Nobel_prize.html (accessed 31 March 2010).)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing on an NRC report recommending a strategy for the federal government’s involvement in civil aeronautics, with particular emphasis on NASA’s future research priorities. The NRC had released the report, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future, in June 2006. Major General William W. Hoover, co-chair of NRC’s Committee on the Decadal Survey, testified that the NRC report would provide the executive branch with a “useful foundation” for developing a national aeronautics policy. Hoover urged NASA to allocate funding for research and technology more equitably, between NASA personnel and universities or industry, and to facilitate collaborative research with other federal agencies supporting aeronautics research, such as the FAA. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator for NASA’s Aeronautics Mission Directorate, testified that NASA’s aeronautics-research portfolio aligned closely with the research priorities outlined in the report. Porter also stated that, although NASA had worked with private industry in aeronautics research, NASA did not want to duplicate private-sector research or to pursue research that private industry was better equipped to conduct.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The National Academy of Sciences’ Decadal Plans for Aeronautics: A Blueprint for NASA? 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 26 September 2006 (statement of Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator, Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, NASA), http://science.house.gov/commdocs/hearings/space06/sept%2026/Porter.pdf (accessed 30 September 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The National Academy of Sciences’ Decadal Plans for Aeronautics: A Blueprint for NASA? 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 26 September 2006 (statement of William Hoover, National Research Council, the National Academies), http://science.house.gov/ commdocs/hearings/space06/sept%2026/Hoover.pdf (accessed 30 September 2010).)
