leading Istanbul newspaper, Milliyet, reported Turkish newsmen’s reactions after seeing movies of both the Shepard and Gagarin space flights: “When the film was over the journalists asked the Soviet consul general: ‘In the Shepard film we followed all phases of his space flight, but in yours we followed only Khrushchev. * * * Why don’t you show your space flight too?’ The Tass correspondent on behalf of the consul general answered: * * We are mainly interested in people’s excitement and reaction. This is what we wanted you to see.’ Gagarin may have gone into space, but this is not the impression of the journalists who saw both films: Shepard really went into space, not Gagarin, and in front of the whole world, too.”
May Day parade in Red Square, Moscow, reviewed by Maj. Yuri Gagarin beside Premier Khrushchev.
In article in New York Times, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “In my view, we [the United States] do not have a division between peaceful and nonpeaceful objectives for space. Rather, we have space missions to help keep the peace and space missions to enable us to live better in peace.”
USAF-USN-NASA X-15 flown to 108,600 feet and a record speed of 3,900 miles per hour, piloted by Joseph Walker at Edwards, Calif.
Yuri Gagarin reported in Pravda that “I was in the center of a whirl of flames” when his Vostok spacecraft reentered the atmosphere on April 12. His book, “Road to Outer Space,” was being serialized in Pravda.
Soviet Academy of Sciences revealed that the pulse rate of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had risen to 158 beats a minute in his Vostok flight, according to a report circulated by Tass.
President Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy to Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., who had directed the development to the Polaris IRBM.
NASA Office for the United Nations Conference headed bjr Dr. John P. Hagen was closed, effective this date. Continued uncertainty of arrangements for a conference on the peaceful uses of outer space within the United Nations made such a move necessary. Sustained NASA responsibility in this regard was assigned to the Office of International Programs.
15 (No. 1) flown to 49,780 feet by John B. McKay, NASA test pilot, at Edwards, Calif.
U.S.S.R. announced that Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin had successfully orbited the Earth in a 108-minute flight in a 5-ton Vostok (East), the first man to make a successful orbital flight through space.
National Aeronautic Association announced selection of Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Jr., to receive the Robert J. Collier trophy for his direction of the Polaris missile program.
In an interview with C. L. Sulzberger, Premier Khrushchev reviewed the world crisis in detail. “In a strange Darwinian interpretation of the advance of nations,” Sulzberger reported, “Mr. Khrushchev jokingly considers that the United States is still in the stage of ‘jumping’ while the Soviet Union has learned how to ‘fly.’ This refers to the Earth-orbiting successes of the Soviet spacemen, Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin and Maj. Gherman S. Titov.”
John Jay Ide, European representative of naca (1921-40, 1946-50) and U.S. representative at numerous international air law and commerce conventions, died in New York. He was a founder and fellow of the ias, a board member of the naa, and an honorary member of the Royal Aeronautical Society. Mr. Ide had contributed to world aviation in making known the results of naca research and in acquiring information on European progress, as well as helping the establishment of transatlantic commercial air routes.
U.S.S.R. submitted information on 16 Soviet space flights for inclusion in the U.N. public registry on space launchings. Included were the manned orbital flights by Majs. Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov. U.S. submitted a similar list to the U.N. on March 5, covering U.S. space launchings to Feb. 15, 1962, that were still in orbit.
nasa’s Associate Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., moderated a panel discussion on “Reliabllity—The Key to Space Operations,” at the 8th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control in Washington. Panelists John H. Rubel, Assistant Secretary of Defense; Dr. C. Stark Draper, Head of the Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, mit; Dr. Simon Ramo, Exec. VP of Thompson Ramo Wooldridge, Inc.; and Dr. Jack A. Morton, VP Device Development, Bell Telephone Laboratories discussed means of comprehensive, planned efforts to increase the Nation’s percentage of success in space launchings and operations.
House of Representatives passed a resolution declaring February 20 to be John Glenn Day, sent it to the Senate.
Representative Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.), speaking at House Education Subcommittee hearing, criticized nasa’s hopes to recruit 1,000 graduate students into space research each year during this decade: “That’sj25 per cent of our production of Ph.D.’s in the space-oriented sciences. That’s an incredible share of our brainpower to concentrate on one agency.” John F. Clark, Associate Director and Chief Scientist, nasa Office of Space Sciences, defended nasa aim as being commensurate with nasa’s share of total Government expenditures for research.
In ejection capsule test, brown bear “Big John” rode in capsule ejected from B-58 at 1,060 mph and 45,000 ft. and parachuted to earth near Edwards afb, Calif.
X-15 No. 2 was flown by nasa pilot John B. McKay in longest engine run to date (127 sec.), the craft reaching 67,000-ft. altitude and 2,693-mph speed (mach 4.08) in successful 9-min. flight near Edwards afb, Calif. Flight tested heat transfer rates over X-15’s skin, craft’s stability without its ventral fin, and newly designed windshield’s resistance to heat.
Dr. John P. Meehan of the University of Southern California reported that “Enos,” 37-lb chimpanzee who orbited the earth in MA-5 on November 29, 1961, developed temporary hypertension during flight due to frustration and confusion caused by equipment malfunction.
U.S. Army claimed a new world speed record for helicopters, when Capt. William F. Gurley (usa) flew a YHU-lD Iroquois helicopter over a closed-circuit course near Fort Worth, Texas, at 133.9 mph, shattering a two-year-old Soviet mark of 88 mph.
Department of Defense has issued a directive providing for closer and more effective cooperation between dod and nasa, dod’s Deputy Director of Research and Engineering John H. Rubel told the Senate Aeronautical and Space Committee. The directive gave the usaf authority to work with nasa on all levels for purposes of coordinating efforts and exchanging technical information but reserved to dod the responsibility for establishing new programs and assigning mllitary support to nasa.
Three fliers were credited with breaking two Soviet world records by flying their B-58 Hustler supersonic bomber to 85,360-ft. altitude with cargo of 11,023 lbs., dod announced. Fliers were: Maj. Fitzhugh L. Fulton (usaf), pilot; Charles R. Haines, civilian flight test engineer; and Capt. William R. Payne (usaf), navigator.
Soviet Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov and Yuri A. Gagarin hinted in a press interview that the U.S.S.R. would attempt prolonged manned orbital flight some time during 1962. Colonel Gararin remarked: “Recently in Japan I said that new flights through space are not far off and expressed confidence that they wollid certainly take place this year.” Major Titov then added: “I also am of the same opinion and want to add that the time already is past when the length of cosmic flights wlli be only hundreds of thousands of kilometers. I think that flights of future cosmonauts wlli be more prolonged and the route of their cosmic ships wlli measure mlliions of kilometers.”
John Stack, former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research and naca aerodynamicist, was awarded Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy—sterling silver model of Wright Brothers’ Kitty Hawk airplane—at Wright Memorial Dinner, Washington. Earlier in the day, ceremonies at Kill Devil Hills near Batty Hawk, N.C., commemorated 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ historic flight.
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., visited the White House at the invitation of the President.
X-15 No. 2, piloted by nasa’s John B. McKay, was flown to 129,000-ft. altitude (24.4 mi.) and 3,716-mph speed (mach 5) in test of aircraft’s performance without its electronic flight-control system and without its ventral fin. Pilot McKay induced the most severe yawing motion thus far in tests to check the craft’s re-entry stability under severe strain. Although pilot McKay later reported “the whole airplane shook for about three minutes,” the stability test was considered very successful. Altitude and speed were greatest ever achieved in X-15 flights without the lower tail-fin.
Reported from Cairo, Egypt, that Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin has said that the United States “eventually” would orbit a man around the earth.
Royal Aeronautical Society announced that John C. Wimpenny had made first extended manned flight under his own power in his pedal-powered Puffin. A design engineer, Wimpenny flew 993 yards at an average speed of 19K mph and an altitude of 5 to 8 feet.
usaf named first two test pilots of the mach three RS-70: Lt. Col. Joseph F. Cotton, of Rushville, Ind.; and Maj. Fitzhugh Flliton, of Talladega, Ala.
nasa test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 2 in sustained heat test, reaching peak altitude of 84,500 feet and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 5.11) in flight which created an estimated temperature on the leading edge of the wings of 1,100° F for more than a minute, and 1,290° F for a few seconds when leaving and re-entering the atmosphere.
Relationship between very low frequency (vlf) hiss and aurora australis (Southern lights) was confirmed after six months of research by two scientists, it was reported. Ward Helms and John Turtle, working at Byrd Station, Antarctica, believe they have confirmed the theory of Henry Morozumi, Stanford Univ. scientist, when they found peaks of auroral display and vlf hiss were identical in intensity and coincided repeatedly. Helms said he was “not certain that vlf hiss is part of the aurora, per se, but I’m sure that since the aurora and hiss peaks are simultaneous there is reason to think the same particles generating the aurora also generate the hiss.”
X-15 No. 1 flown to 107,000 feet at speeds up to 3,733 mph by Joseph A. Walker, in series of seven “roller-coaster dips” in test of the alternate stability augmentation system.
National Academy of Sciences announced that the John J. Carty Medal would be awarded Provost Charles H. Townes of mit for his pioneering work in the development of the maser (microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation). Dr. Townes was credited with the conception of the idea for the maser in 1951, which was subsequently used in radio astronomy in recording and charting minute radio signals emanating from celestial bodies and to receive echoes of a radar signal reflected from the planet Venus.
X-15 No. 2 was flown by nasa pilot John B. McKay in a relatively low-level flight to obtain information on aerodynamic heating. Maximum speed was 3,204 mph (mach 4.85) at 73,000 ft.; maximum altitude was 82,000 ft.
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin in Tokyo said: “The U.S.S.R. is at present constructing a giant spaceship which cannot be compared to those I and Titov rode in size.”
President Kennedy presented 1961 Harmon International Aviation Trophies to four pilots: Lt. Col. William R. Payne (usaf); Jacqueline Cochran; and Cdr. Malcolm R. Ross (usnr) and Lt. Cdr. Victor E. Prather (usn) (posthumously).
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, stated that the U.S. program for peaceful development of space was not inconsistent with military space development, in a speech before the National Capitol Section of the ars. “The true mission of our military strength is to protect the peace,” he said. “If we do not take adequate care of our national defense, we will not have a chance to do any of the other things in space—at least as free men.”
President Kennedy presented aec’s Enrico Fermi Award for 1962, carrying a $50,000 prize, to nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller, the citation reading: “For contributions to chemical and nuclear physics, for his leadership in the thermonuclear research and for efforts to strengthen national security.”
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller told 1962 conference of upi editors and publishers that recent U.S. nuclear tests in the Pacific had “not been quite satisfactory” and that it was his guess “that the Russians are ahead of us in the nuclear race today.”
Congressman John J. Rhodes (Ariz.) polled his district, receiving 5,000	replies to a series of current questions. To the question— “Are you in favor of United States-Kussian space cooperation?”— the response was: 19% said “Yes”; and, 70% said “No.”
Dr. John F. Clark was appointed Associate Director and Chief Scientist for nasa Office of Space Sciences. He was formerly Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs.
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to 197,000-ft. altitude and 3,784 mph speed (mach 5.13), in 9-min. flight near Delamar Lake, Nev., to evaluate new re-entry technique. Automatic roll damper ceased operating at 100,000-ft. during descent, causing X-15 to go into a simultaneous rolling and yawing motion. Pilot Walker regained stability with manual control and landed safely.
National Aeronautic Association announced John Stack, former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, would receive 1962 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Stack was cited for his major contributions to aeronautical research and for “his leadership and vision” during 34 years with naca and nasa.
Michael Friedlander, associate professor of physics at Washington University, St. Louis, was preparing to send up a series of huge balloons for cosmic ray experiments, beginning about August 15, from Calvina, South Africa.
usaf B-52H claimed a world record for nonstop, non-refueled distance flight over a closed circuit, having flown 11,400 miles in 22 hours, 38 minutes, 41.8 seconds, with an average speed of 510 mph. The closed-circuit course ran from Seymour Johnston afb, N.C., to Bermuda; Sondrestrom, Greenland; Anchorage, Alaska; Los Angeles, Calif.; Key West, Fla.; and back to Seymour Johnson. Pilot was Capt. William M. Stevenson (usaf) ; copilot was Capt. Floyd J. Schoendiest (usaf). Present record is held by Lt. Col. J. R. Grissom (usaf), who on December 14, 1960, flew a B-52G a distance of 10,078.84 miles.
nasa announced the appointment of Dr. Richard B. Morrison as Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Programs, Office of Space Sciences, in nasa Hq., succeeding Col. Donald Heaton (usaf). Dr. Morrison was previously professor of aeronautical engineering and supervisor of the Aircraft Propulsion Laboratory at the University of Michigan.
In emergency landing of X-15 No. 2, piloted by nasa’s John McKay, it went out of control when nosewheel broke off, the craft skidding nose down and sideways, then stopping in upside-down position. McKay sustained only superficial injuries; X-15 nose gear, wings, and tail were damaged. Flight was supposed to have reached 120,000-ft. altitude in test of stability during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere, but engine failed to develop power when X-15 was released from B-52 mother ship at 45,000 ft. and McKay glided to emergency landing at Mud Lake, Nev. Flight was 31st made in X-15 No. 2, seventh in X-15 by McKay, and first X-15 flight involving any injury to personnel.
John A. Johnson, General Counsel of nasa, testifying before the Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, stated that as of Feb. 28, 1962, a total of 297 inventions had been reported by nasa contractors under the patent provisions of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. Of these, 268 had been determined to be Government property, 29 had been or are being considered for waivers.
The Boys Clubs of America honored Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., for his example of good citizenship to youth, presenting him with the “Man and Boy Award” at Alexandria, Va.
X-15 (No. 3) piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) reached 3,886 mph and 157,000-ft. altitude in test of re-entry stability without the craft’s ventral fin. Walker said high climbing speed (186 mph faster than planned) was attained because sun’s glare temporarily prevented his reading instrument panel; thus, re-entry after engine shut-off was faster than planned. Test was seventh in series without X-15’s ventral fin.
National holiday in the Soviet Union, the anniversary of orbital flight of Yuri Gagarin. In ceremony in the Kremlin’s Congress Hall, Cosmonaut Gagarin declared: “We are on the threshold of more new space launchings. When these space ships return to earth, the Soviet people will have more holidays to celebrate.” Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev and Cosmonaut Titov also made short speeches, while Matislav Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, made the major address.
Soviet Navy Day, Admiral of the Fleet Sergei G. Gorshkov declaring in article in Pravda that rocket-firing atomic submarines are the backbone of the Soviet Navy; “The Soviet fleet is now more modern than the navy of any capitalist country.”
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, was awarded the Arnold Air Society’s trophy as the civilian who had made the most outstanding contribution to aerospace science and national security in 1961.
In interview at Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet physicist Dr. Sergei N. Vernov stated he believed particle acceleration accounts for outer radiation belt of the earth. Deep-space probes have not detected enough high-energy particles to prove the outer belt is replenished by high-energy particles ejected from the sun. Dr. Vernov believes the particles acquire their energy within the belt—through some as yet unknown accelerating mechanism. He believes there are two such means of acceleration, one sustaining the day-to-day energy level and the other accounting for its increases when a cloud of erupted solar gas reaches vicinity of earth, causing magnetic storms. Dr. Vernov suggested inner belt is sustained by protons formed by neutrons which decay upon bombardment by cosmic rays; some of the high-energy protons are trapped by earth’s magnetism to become the inner radiation belt.
Dr. Frank E. Bothwell, Chief Scientist of the Center of Naval Analysis, Franklin Institute, received the Navy’s highest civilian award, the Distinguished Civllian Service Award, for his work on design and development of the Polaris ballistic missile. June 27: X-15 No. 1 flown to unprogramed but record speed of 4,159 mph (mach 6.09) by nasa’s Joseph A. Walker at Edwards, Calif. Record speed was achieved at 96,000 ft. on climb to an altitude of 120,000 ft. In test of X-15 re-entry stabllity, Walker glided in at 23-degree angle of attack, highest angle flown to date, and placed X-15 into 80-degree bank.
Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee opened hearings to determine whether the U.S. has paid “unnecessary and excessive profits” to companies working on dod contracts. Sen. John L. McClellan, chairman of the committee, announced 40 that investigation would begin with the Army's family of Nike missiles, to be followed by the usaf’s Atlas.
jpl scientists reported that Venus-bound mariner ii was successfully transmitting data from nearly two million mi. in space. John W. Thatcher, staff engineer of jpl’s Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (dsif), said, “We fully expect that we will be able to track it and follow it well beyond Venus.” Signals were reported coming in relatively “loud and clear” at receiving stations in Goldstone, Calif.; Johannesburg, So. Africa; and Woomera, Australia.
aec announced Dr. Edward Teller would be awarded the Enrico Fermi Award at ceremony on Dec. 3. Citation accompanying the award would praise Dr. Teller “for contributions to chemical and nuclear physics, for his leadership in thermonuclear research, and for efforts to strengthen the national security.” Dr. Teller, now a professor at University of California, is most noted for his role in development of thermonuclear bomb.
X-15 made its 50th successful flight from Edwards afb, Calif., with nasa's Joseph A. Walker as pilot. The X-15 No. 1, testing an emergency flight control system, reached a speed of 3,920 mph (mach 5.84) and an altitude of 150,000 ft.
nasa announced contract award for research in communications between man and dolphins, results of which could apply if man encounters other species on distant planets. The $80,800, one-year contract was awarded to Communication Institute of St. Thomas, V.I., directed by Dr. John C. Lilly. Dr. Lilly’s research had already determined that dolphins communicate with each other and that they could be taught to mimic human speech.
President John F. Kennedy presented the Robert J. Collier Trophy, aviation’s most distinguished award, to four X-15 pilots: Major Robert M. White (usaf), A. Scott Crossfield (naa), Joseph A. Walker (nasa), and Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen (usn). Following the White House ceremony, the pilots received personal miniatures of the Collier Trophy at a luncheon co-sponsored by the Aero Club of Washington and the National Aeronautic Association.
Two usn pilots, in separate flights, officially claimed two world flying records held by U.S.S.R. since 1940. LCdr. Fred A. W. Franke reached 27,380-ft. altitude in UF-2G Albatross amphibian with 4,410-lb. load; LCdr. Donald E. Moore reached 29,460-ft. altitude in same aircraft with 2,205-lb. load. Both flights were made from New York nas, Floyd Bennett Field.
usaf announced selection of seven usaf officers and one usn officer for the second class in the usaf’s space pilot school. The class, to begin on June 18 at Edwards afb, Calif., would include LCdr. Lloyd N. Hoover (usn), Majs. Donald M. Sorlie and Byron F. Knole (usaf), and Capts. Albert H. Crews, Jr., Charles C. Bock, Jr., William T. Twin ting, Robert W. Smith, and Robert H. McIntosh (usaf).
Project Stargazer balloon landed after 18'(-hr. trip to 82,000-ft. altitude, in southwestern New Mexico, by Capt. Joseph A. Kittinger, Jr. (usaf), and William C. White, astronomer from U.S. Naval Test Station at China Lake. White had clearest view of heavens of any astronomer in history by using telescope mounted on top of gondola. J. Allen Hynek, director of usaf oar’s Project Stargazer, predicted great future for balloon astronomy.
Mr. John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, nasa, speaking before the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences in New York, advocated a variable-wing, variable-fuselage configuration for the nation’s supersonic transport aircraft. Not only were these practicable for the state of the art but the only way he saw to gain the necessary subsonic vs. sonic flight characteristics and load flexibility to make the aircraft economically usable.
The Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) received the Edward Warner Award granted every second year by the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao) Council, for “outstanding contributions to the development of international civil aviation.”
Federal District Judge Joseph Lieb signed injunction against International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 267, ordering the union to stop allegedly unfair labor practices—refusing to operate cranes unloading heavy equipment at Cape Canaveral missile launch complex.
Joseph A. Walker (nasa) flew Xyl5 No. 3 in test of the research aircraft’s ability to automatically correct undesired yaw. In nine-minute flight, the X-15 reached maximum altitude of 147,000 ft. and speed of 3,445 mph (mach 4.99).
usaf B-58 Hustler bomber claimed 3 transcontinental speed records after a Los Angeles-to-New York-to-Los Angeles nonstop flight: round trip, 4 hrs. 42 min. 12 sec.; west-to-east, 2 hrs. 1 min. 39 sec.; east-to-west, 2 hrs. 15 min. 12 sec. Flying most of the way at 50,000 ft. and at an average speed of 1,044.3 mph, the B-58 trailed a 40-mile-wide sonic boom along the ground in its wake. Crew was: Capt. Robert Sowers, pilot; Capt. Robert MacDonald, navigator; and Capt. John Walton, defense systems operator.
Pope John XXIII, addressing diplomats gathered in Consistorial Hall of the Vatican, called upon men of all nations to join in cooperative and peaceful exploration of outer space. “The church applauds man’s growing mastery over the forces of nature. Thanks to those men who harbor thoughts of peace, mankind could dedicate itself, in noble rivalry, not only to the great economic and social tasks which confront it but to the continuing exploration of space and to the bold achievements of modern technology . . .”
Cosmic-ray shower caused by atomic nucleus so powerful that it must have come from another galaxy was reported in Physical Review Letters. Cosmic-ray shower was detected at Volcano Ranch recording station near Albuquerque by John Linsley of mit Laboratory for Nuclear Science. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63, A2)
Joseph A. Walker, nasa’s senior X-15 pilot and holder of the world altitude and speed records for research aircraft, was awarded the Christopher Columbus International Prize for Communication. The award is made by the city of Genoa, Italy, each year on Columbus Day. U.S. Ambassador G. Frederick Reinhardt accepted the award on behalf of Mr. Walker, (nasa Release 63-229; AP, NTT, 10/14/63, 9)
10-day injunction by U.S. District Court Judge William J. Lindberg halted threatened iam strike against Boeing Co. President Kennedy, after receiving report from special board of inquiry, had ordered Justice Dept, to seek the injunction on grounds that such a strike would endanger national security. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/63)
Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board and chief executive officer of at&t, was cited by Saturday Review as “Businessman of the Year” (1962). Mr. Kappel spearheaded at&t’s $50-million commitment to Telstar ever since it was envisioned by Bell Labs scientist, Dr. John R. Pierce, in 1954. Saturday Review called Telstar “more than a triumph of the modem technology of space communications. It was also a symbol wise men could approve, of a new era in human communications, a work of peace that sought only to bring men together, not to destroy them. Finally, it was the product of a promising new teamwork in space between government and industry, in this case the largest private enterprise venture in the world . . . .” (Sat. Review, 1/12/63, 46)
Study by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell reported that lack of “timely guidance” by dod was largely responsible for failure of nuclear-powered aircraft project. Conceived in 1946 and declared technically feasible in 1951, project was canceled by President Kennedy in 1961 after dod and aec had spent more than $1 billion on the project, which did not reach the prototype stage. gao’s report said that dod “agrees that the program suffered considerably from lack of prompt decisions and from frequent changes in emphasis and goals.” (Wash. Post, 3/9/63; Av. Wk., 3/18/63, 25)
nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, Julian Scheer, said Lt. Col. John A. Powers, former Public Affairs Officer at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, would become technical consultant to nasa’s exhibits program at Hq., effective Sept. 1. Colonel Powers would supervise construction of spacecraft models used in nasa exhibits. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/18/63)
X-15 No. 3 flown to 92,500-ft. altitude at speed of 3,770 mph (mach 5.51) by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker in test to investigate heat transfer rates and unusual air flow over certain parts or the aircraft. More than 400 heat-measuring devices and 25 presssure-measuring devices were mounted on the aircraft to determine how heat caused by air friction is transmitted to aircraft’s surfaces and to record information concerning air flow, (frc Release; upi, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/19/63 ; M&R, 4/29/63,10)
X-15 No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) reached 3,856-mph speed (mach 5.57) and 124,200-ft. altitude, 156 mph faster and 26,200 ft. higher than planned because of one-degree error in flight angle. Aircraft was equipped with traversing probe, device that extends itself about three inches from X-15 surface every four seconds, to measure air flow, (fkc Release; NYT, 5/17/63, 19 j	_
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker attained record altitude of 347,800 ft. (65.9 mi.) and speed of 3,710 mph (mach 5.50). Flight was planned as 315,000-ft. altitude build-up for pilot Walker in preparation for later 350,000-ft. attempt, but X-15’s engine burned 85 sec. instead of planned 83 sec. Nitrogen-filled balloon was to have ejected from X-15’s tail during ascent to obtain altitude density measurements, but electrical ejection signal did not function properly. This was 90th flight of X-15. (frc Release 25-63; frc X-15 Flight Log; nasa Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.; nasa Release 63-160)
Dr. John R. Dunning, Dean of Columbia Univ. Faculty of Engineering, said in address before Design Engineering Conference^ of American Society of Mechanical Engineers, ntc, that “if the engineers do not aggressively claim the positions of leadership” in space effort and in exploitation of atomic energy, “this nation will pay an intolerable price for amateur improvisation.” Today’s engineers need knowledge of conventional engineering techniques as well as current developments in science; and some engineering schools are graduating “imitation physicists” and “disguised mathematicians” instead of men trained in the “great art” of systems design. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/63, 35)
Maj. Robert S. Sowers (usaf), Capt. Robert MacDonald (usaf), and Capt. John T. Walton (usaf) named by General Curtis E. LeMay (usaf) as recipients of 1962 MacKay Trophy “for the most meritorious flight of the year.” The fliers established new transcontinental speed records on March 5, 1962, in B-58 Hustler, (dod Release 724^63)
Award of patent for manned orbital spacecraft designed to glide into land or water landing wa9 reported in New York Times. Patent was obtained for nasa by Alan B. Kehlet, Dennis F. Hasson, and William W. Petynia. (NYT, 5/25/63,13,18)
Reacting to President Johnson’s Thanksgiving Day message announcing he had “acted ... to change the name of Cape Canaveral . . . [to] Cape Kennedy,” the City Council of Cape Canaveral and the Cocoa Chamber of Commerce adopted resolutions opposing changing the name of Cape Canaveral. Florida’s Governor Farris Bryant defended President Johnson’s decision, in a Tallahassee press conference: “. . . the people of Florida, in the year 2063, will look back and understand what President Johnson has done and will approve.” Arthur A. Baker, chairman of the Domestic Names Committee of the U.S. Board of Geographic Names, said he regarded the name change as an accomplished fact. Edward P. Cliff, chairman of the Board, also said he regarded the change as fact. Official name changing awaited action by the Board, which was scheduled to meet next Jan. 21. (AP, Was A Post, 12/6/63; un, N.Y. Herald Trib., 12/6/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
British scientist Dr. John F. Kerridge of Univ. of London reported at the cosmic dust conference in New York sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences that he had found material in meteorites that closely resembled the kinds of clays formed by water action on earth. This would argue that the meteorites were once part of a body large enough to have its own atmosphere and hence its own weather. This supported previous findings by Dr. Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham Univ., who also claims to have found fossil-like objects in meteorites. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/22/63, 32)
Addressing the Southwest Conference on Arms Control at the University of Oklahoma, William C. Foster, Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, discussed the complex relationship between national strategy, military security, and arms control in a thermonuclear world.
Dr. Joseph Kaplan, U.S. Chairman of International Geophysical Year, declared greatest success of igy was in preparing the way for other international research. Such studies would increasingly fall within scope of United Nations, he said. Dr. Kaplan was speaking before joint meeting of Peninsula Engineers Club and Institute of Aerospace Sciences in Newport News, Va. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/21/63)
26 persons associated with Project Mercury were presented the John J. Montgomery Award by the San Diego Chapter of the National Society of Aerospace Professionals. Recipients from nasa were Astronauts M. Scott Carpenter, L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., John H. Glenn, Jr., Virgil I. Grissom, Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Donald K. Slayton, and Walter M. Schirra; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; Dr. Walter C. Williams, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator; Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Project Mercury Manager; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Project Mercury Flight Operations Director; Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director of Engineering and Development; Dr. Charles A. Berry, Medical Operations Chief; and Lt. Col. John A. Powers (usaf) Mercury Public Affairs Officer. (San Diego Union, 12/6/63)
Discovery of new atomic particle, Phi-meson, was reported in Physical Review Letters by the two groups of researchers— Brookhaven National Laboratory, Long Island, and Univ. of California’s Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, Berkeley. New particle had been predicted by Dr. Jim John Sakurai last December, based on research by team from these two institutions and on speculation by nuclear theorist Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, Prof, of Physics at CalTech. (NYT, 4/15/63,1,14)
Weather conditions forced postponement of nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker’s 68-mi. altitude flight in X-15. Flight was made Aug. 22. (upi, ATT7,8/7/63)
Postmaster General J. Edward Day, speaking at a luncheon in Washington honoring the 25th anniversary of the cab, said: “Today, the 11 domestic trunkline carriers serve more than 600 points over routes in excess of 185,000 miles in length. Twenty-four smaller carriers provide service to some 900 smaller communities over routes m excess of 88,000 miles. Three carriers provide domestic all-cargo service to 38 points over routes in excess of 14,000 miles and another 15 carriers are licensed to provide supplemental services. Fifteen carriers are authorized to provide service to a total of 428 points outside the United States over routes in excess of 320,000 miles.” (CR, 6/27/63, A4098)
X-15 No. 1 flown by Joseph A. Walker (nasa) to 226,400-ft. altitude and 3,631-mph speed (mach 5.07), the X-15 engine burning for 84 sec. Mounted in aircraft’s fuselage was traversing probe, retracting every four sec. and measuring air pressures at varying distances from aircraft skin, (frc Release; frc X-15 Flight Log; nasa Hq. X-15 Proj. Off.)
nasa announced Albert F. Siepert, Director of Administration since formation of nasa in October 1958, had been appointed to new post of Deputy Director, nasa Launch Operations Center, effective about April 1. He would be succeeded by John D. Young, nasa Deputy Director of Administration since 1961. Don D. Cadle, Director of Resource Programming in nasa Office of Programs since 1961, was appointed Deputy Director of Administration to succeed John D. Young, (nasa Release 63-33)
X-15 No. 1 flown by pilot John McKay to 105,500-ft. altiude at maximum speed of 3,654 (mach 5.32) mph in test to measure distortion of photographs at extreme speeds. Camera was recessed in underside of aircraft’s nose. (AP, Chic. Trib., 4/26/63)
Speaking at Symposium on Space Rendezvous, Rescue and Recovery at Edwards afb, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said: “. . . It is worth keeping in mind that irrefutable facts and events demonstrate that the Soviets are conducting a vigorous space effort, and the evidence is strong that this program includes a manned lunar trip. “Let me emphasize that we should be making a vigorous effort to go to the moon and that we should continue to do so even if the Russians delete such an objective from their space program.” Dr. Welsh listed some major reasons for manned lunar project: “ (1) There is no other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “(2) Such a clear objective as that of the lunar project gives impetus, order, and efficiency to the program . . . .” Other outstanding reasons he listed were national prestige, economic spin-off, defense spin-off, and scientific advancement. (Text)
First award of the recently established Burroughs International Test Pilot Award was made to Joseph T. Tymczyszym, Chief of faa’s West Coast Supersonic Transport Office. The award presented by faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby at the Wings Club in New York was established by United Aircraft Corp. in honor of Richard H. Burroughs, Chance Vought test pilot who was killed when he stayed with his disabled experimental aircraft to guide it away from an inhabited area. Award would be administered by Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., of New York, (faa Release 63-96)
John Hawkinson, president of Television Shares Management Corp., said in St. Louis that electronics and aerospace industries provided more favorable investment prospects than any segment of U.S. business, (upi, Chic. Trib., 2/20/63)
Dr. Eugene Fubini succeeded John H. Rubel as Deputy Director, dod Research and Engineering. Rubel resigned to return to private industry. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,25)
Concluding its two-week meeting at Berkeley, Calif., International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics elected as president Joseph Kaplan, physicist of ucj,a, to succeed Vladimir V. Beloussov, Soviet seismologist. During the meeting, the 3,000 delegates laid plans for Upper Mantle Project to explore rock layer of the earth and for International Hydrological Decade (1965-1975) to study earth’s water resources and for projects during International Quiet Sun Year. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/2/63) During August:	Mockup model of Gemini two-man spacecraft shipped from McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to nasa Launch Operations Center, Cape Canaveral, for tests of ground support equipment at the launch complex. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/22/63)
Sen. Edward V. Long (D.-Mo.) and 13 other Senators proposed “freedom of information” bill to require Government agencies to publish in Federal Register all policy statements, rules, and procedures, and to make available for inspection all final opinions, statements, and interpretations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/63)
Report by Legislative Drafting Research Fund of Columbia Univ., for National Security Industrial Association, was made public, the report examining statutes covering Federal compensation for deaths, injuries, and property losses caused by defense and space-related accidents. Research found victims of accidents arising from aec activities were almost completely protected under existing laws, but that this was not the case for dod and nasa programs. Accidents in these programs would probably be infrequent but might be “catastrophic,” report said. Entitled “Financial Protection Against Rislrs of Major Harm in Government Programs,” study was prepared under general direction of John M. Kemochan, Director of the Fund. (NYT, 4/15/63)
X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,286 mph (mach 4.75) and 90,800-ft. altitude by Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), his second X-15 flight. The X-15 was put through two sharp rolling turns to test aircraft stability at high speeds and as part of the pilot’s familiarization training. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 11/15/63; X-15 Project Office)
James T. Koppenhaver resigned as Director, Office of Reliability and Quality Assurance, nasa. Deputy Director John E. Condon was appointed Acting Director of the Office, (nasa Announcement 63-198)	...	.
Balloon flight with instrumented payload to study oxygen conditions in stratosphere was conducted successfully from Palestine, Tex., John Sparkman, manager of National Center for Atmospheric Research’s Balloon Flight Station, announced. Balloon rose to 108,000 ft.; its 680-lb. instrument package was recovered in good condition 40 mi. north of San Angelo, Tex. Three similar attempts had failed when balloon split on two occasions and weather forced postponement on a third. Project was sponsored by Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (Houston Post, 8/24/63) ; to Director of nasa Manned
usaf oar announced formation of Scientific Advisory Group, composed of 12 leading U.S. scientists: Dr. Joseph Kaplan, chairman; Dr. Oliver G. Haywood, Jr.; Prof. Robert J. Havighurst; Prof. Henry Houghton; Dr. John P. Howe; Dr. Mark Kac; Dr. Carl Kaplan; Dr. Nathan L. Krisberg; Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper; Dr. David B. Langmuir; Prof. Leonard Schieff; and Prof. Frederick Seitz. Group would serve as advisory body to oar Commander, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, (oar Release 7-03—4)
X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker (nasa) was presented 1963 Pilot of the Year award by National Pilots Association in Miami. Award was made in recognition of Walker’s contribution to aeronautical research and the general advancement of aviation. Participating in the X-15 program since its inception, Walker has flown the X-15 25 times, more than any other man; he has flown it to record speed of 4,104 mph and has attained record altitude, 354,200 ft. (frc Release 36-63)
Edward M. Shafer, nasa Attorney-Adviser since September 1959, was appointed nasa Assistant General Counsel. (nasa Announcement 63-275)
Experiments to determine behavior of dust on moon’s surface described by Dr. John W. Salisbury of afcrl Space Physics Laboratory in OAR Research Review. Conducted in lunar simulation chamber in which effects of low pressure, radiation, and temperature on physical properties of probable lunar surface materials were studied, experiment demonstrated for first time that silicate powders, like metals, adhere to one another in ultrahigh vacuums. Particles also adhere to glass and metal surfaces. Experiment director Salisbury concluded “properly designed vehicles will not sink away into a sea of lunar dust, should one exist. The tendency of dust particles to stick to all metal and glass surfaces will, however, provide an unusual difficulty in the operation of camera lenses, portholes and mirrors.” (OAR Research Review, 8/12/63, 3-4)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to 209,400ft. altitude at speeds up to 3,488 mph (mach 4.73), in nine-minute flight from Mud Lake, Nev. Instrumentation mounted on aircraft’s tail measured radiation in ultraviolet and infrared spectra. Secondary purpose of flight was evaluation of air flow over X-15’s surface conducted at high angles of attack, (frc Release)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor with regard to various aid-to-education bills before the Senate, asserted a connection between excellence of education and loss of jobs to automation. As a case in point he inserted in the Congressional Record two New York Times articles on nasa’s findings of careless or inadequate workmanship in Project Mercury. “In both articles,” the Senator said, “the point is made that workmen on the projects do not have the necessary technical skill to complete them, in many instances, without the defects which resulted not only in serious failures of the end product but also in running up a substantial expense to the Government.” (CR, 10/7/63, 17847)
Sen. Mike Mansfield (D.-Mont.) paid tribute to X-15 pilot Joseph A. Walker and his record flight of July 19, and said that “there can be no question that Mr. Walker and all the members of the X-15 team are pioneers of the space age. The solid contributions of the X-15 program have been many and valuable. They include information on aerodynamic heating, the behavior of the boundary layer, the effect of noise levels on aircraft structures, measurement of friction drag on aircraft skin, new control systems, new piloting techniques, new landing gear designs and new ways of measuring landing gear loads, better instrument displays, and many other improvements to ‘performance, efficiency, or safety of air and space vehicles.’ In addition, during the current series of tests, the X-15 is being used to carry scientific experiments into space. One of these experiments will use a camera which may give us the first meaningful photographs of stars taken from outside the earth’s atmosphere. Speed and altitude records may be the incidental contributions of the remarkable X-15 program. More significant in the long run is the information and experience it has provided and continues to provide about this strange new sea of space upon which man has embarked . . . .” (CA, 7/22/63,12354)
During prelaunch preparations at Holloman afb, N.M., Project Stargazer balloon broke loose and soared away, finally landing 120-mi. east of Holloman. Balloon was to have carried gondola with two men, Capt. Joseph Kittinger (usaf) and astronomer William White, and their 12.5-in. telescope to study stars from above most of earth’s atmosphere, usaf spokesman said sudden wind blew the moored balloon from side to side, creating static electricity which triggered a safety mechanism to release the balloon. Damaged balloon would require repairs by manufacturer before it could be re-used. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
X-15 No. 1 was flown by nasa pilot Joseph Walker to 3,911 mph (mach 5.51) and 111,800 ft. at Edwards afb, Calif. During the flight a new measuring instrument, the traversing probe, popped in and out of the wing, measuring the whole profile of boundary layer over surface of the X-15. Surface temperature rose to 1,000° during the flight, the 86th for the X-15. (upi, Chic. Tnb., 6/26/63; nasa Hq.)
In speech before Public Relations Society of America luncheon meeting in Washington, msc Public Affairs Officer Lt. Col. John H. Powers (usaf) said preparations for Project Mercury flight MA-9 were proceeding on schedule. Flight was scheduled for mid-May. (AP, Birmingham, Post-Herald, 4/10/63)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) announced renaming of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy “will not be official unless it is acted on by the Florida Legislature.” Gurney quoted Arthur Baker, Chairman of Board of Geographic Names, as saying name change will apply only to federal maps and documents, is not compulsory for the people of Florida. (AP, Kansas City Times, 12/13/63)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) reported that Soviet cosmonauts are undergoing intensive training for “more complicated tasks.” Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, promoted to full colonel, is directingnew program of training the other veteran space flyers. ( upi, Wash. Post, 12/9/63)
Gen. Lucius D. Clay (usa, Ret.) named recipient of 1964 John Fritz Medal, citing him for “his distinguished service to the engineering profession, the nation, and to the world.” {NYT, 7/19/63)
usaf Project Stargazer balloon flight from Alamogordo, N.M., canceled because of high surface winds. Balloon was equipped with small aluminum gondola for pilot, Capt. Joseph Kittinger, Jr. (usaf), and civilian astronomer, William C. White, for a 24-hour observation with 12.5-inch gyroscopic telescope above 90 per cent of the earth’s atmosphere, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 3/26/63)
Donald T. Gregory, Technical Assistant to D Spacecraft Center, addressed nearly 1,000 Dade County educators at workshop for new teachers in Miami, Fla. Noting U.S. requires about 60,000 engineers yearly—while only 33,700 graduated in 1963—Gregory emphasized the importance of teaching all children about scientific and technological events of the space age and stimulating their interest and knowledge in science and engineering at an early age. (msc Release 63-139) August 24: usaf sac crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1174-63)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.i said on the Senate floor that “we can and should dedicate America’s great resources to the magnificent challenge of space” but charged nasa with waste and inefficiency. He inserted in the Congressional Record an article of his in which he recommended (1) nasa build into its organization more effective safeguards against waste, duplication, and other “leakage” of funds; (2) Congress acquire skilled investigators to analyze the space program in depth; and (3) “Private individuals and groups should apply their concern about excessive and unnecessary Government spending to the space program.” (CR, 11/5/63,19990-91)
In White House ceremony, President Lyndon B. Johnson awarded 31 Presidential Medals of Freedom, then added additional awards to the late President John F. Kennedy and the late Pope John XXIII. Among those receiving this new award, created by President Kennedy, were Dr. Alan T. Waterman, Robert A. Lovett, Edwin H. Land, and Mark S. Watson. (Wash,. Poet, 12/7/63, A8)
ComSatCorp announced that John A. Johnson, nasa General Counsel since nasa was formed in 1958, would become its Director of International Arrangements, nasa in turn announced that Mr. Johnson would be succeeded as General Counsel by Walter D. Sohier, Deputy General Counsel. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/63; ComSatCorp Release; nasa Release 63-259)
Marcel Nicolet of the Belgium National Space Research Committee was the winner of the Guggenheim International Astronautics Award at the banquet of the International Astronautics Federation in Paris. Nicolet had, in early 1961, suggested the existence of the helium layer between the oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere and the hydrogen upper atmosphere, later confirmed independently by R. E. Bourdeau, E. C. Whipple, P. C. Donnelly, and S. J. Bauer, using explorer vm ion trap data. Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin attended the XIVth iaf banquet dressed in civilian domes. (Cf. R. Jastrow, “Results . . . ,”
In letter to fcc Chairman E. William Henry, ComSatCorp Chairman Leo D. Welch said ComSat directors agreed that stock be issued to the public “at the earliest practicable date” and were planning stock issuance not later than early 1964. Replying to fco contention that stockholders should have voice in ComSat policy making (see July 26), Welch asserted that fcc was invading management functions of the directors and argued that the corporation’s initial studies were necessary to give potential investors “a responsible presentation of material facts in compliance with the applicable Federal and state securities laws.” (N. Y. Herald Tnb., 8/8/63; Clayton, Wash. Post, 8/8/63)
Univ. of Pittsburgh’s Chancellor Edward H. Litchfield announced plans for $30-million space research and coordination center. Center would be used for study in natural and social sciences and engineering and health areas connected with aerospace activities. (upi, Wash. Post, 1/12/63,1)
In lecture on “The Practical and Impractical Uses of Space” at Catholic University, Dr. Edward Teller supported the U.S. lunar program but parried questions on the reasons. “I just don’t know why ... I wanted to go to the moon before Sputnik.” Teller stated that he believed that water could be drawn from lunar rocks by underground nuclear explosions: “One hundred tons of water on the moon would be the equivalent of 100 tons of gold here.” He said that contamination of the water would not be a problem as the U.S. had already developed “clean” bombs and that even cleaner bombs are possible. (Ayres, Wash. Post, 11/9/63, C14) 741-023 O—64-28
In March issue of Physical Review, John Linsley of mit’s Laboratory for Nuclear Science reported that an atom of high energy, presumably from some galaxy outside our own Milky Way, penetrated our solar system and crashed into the earth’s atmosphere, setting off a cosmic-ray shower over New Mexico during February. Source of the atomic nucleus was reasoned because of its enormous power as the resultant cosmic-ray shower covered an area of several square miles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63)
Establishment of Div. of Space Sciences and Applied Physics in Catholic University’s School of Engineering and Architecture was announced by Rt. Rev. William J. McDonald, Rector of the Univ. {Wash. Post, 5/11/63)
nasa $150 awards to Dr. Karlheinz Thom and Joseph Norwood, Jr., for invention of plasma accelerator, were announced. Accelerator is capable of controlled ignition under very low gas pressures. (nasa Release 63-137)
President Kennedy witnessed successful firings of six Army missiles at White Sands Missile Range: Honest John, Little John, Sergeant, Hawk, Nike-Hercules, and Nike-Zeus. (M&R, 6/10/63, 12)
President of Boeing Co. William M. Allen testified in closed hearings before Senate Investigations Subcommittee that Boeing’s bid to build 23 tfx aircraft was $148,000,000 less than that of General Dynamics Corp., “yet we were downgraded by reason of our lower price. It was most disillusioning and discouraging to discover that one of the principal reasons Boeing lost the award was because our fixed-price bid was too low .... It has been stated that our cost estimates were unrealistic, demonstrating that we did not appreciate the complexities of developing the tfx . . . .” He said Boeing developed its bid on basis of careful calculations and was fully prepared to fulfill contract commitments at quoted price of $482,000,000. (AP, NYT, 5/3/63,1,14)
Donald Wills Douglas, founder, board chairman, and chief executive officer of Douglas Aircraft Co., was presented 1963 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at Aero Club of Washington’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet, (naa Release)
B-58 with usaf crew flew nonstop from Tokyo to London, completing the 8,028-mi. flight in 8 hrs. 35 min. for an average speed of 938 mph. The B-58 was refueled in midair five times. Previous record of 17 hrs. 42 min. was set in 1957 by U.K.’s W. Hoy, who flew a Canberra at an average speed of 335.7 mph. Crew members on the B-58 were Mai. Sidney G. Kubesch, Capt. Gerald R. Williamson, and Maj. John O. Barrett. (Av. TF&., 10/21/63; _ NYTX10/22/63,8) p ^ ^
usaf announced it was establishing three-man Gemini liaison and support office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Under Col. William A. Stellenwerf, office would deal primarily with Titan II launch vehicle for Gemini and recovery requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/15/63, 31; A-N-AF Journ. <& Reg., 7/13/63, 16)
Yuri Marinin, Soviet space writer, wrote in article translated by U.S. Dept, of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services that “earth-orbit rendezvous” method of manned lunar flight “is regarded as the most practical.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A5)
Dr. John Billingham, British aerospace medicine specialist, was appointed assistant to Dr. George Smith of Environmental Physiology Branch in Crew Systems Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Appointment of Billingham was first direct foreign appointment to msc. (msc Release 63-35)
Donald K. Slayton was sworn into his Civil Service appointment as Assistant Director for Flight Crew operations, msc. His resignation from the usaf had become effective the previous day. (msc Release 63-242)
Rep. Roman C. Pueinski (D.—111.) called attention to an article in the Chicago Sun-Times on the Midwest’s dissatisfaction with the distribution of Federal R&D projects. President’s science adviser Dr. Donald F. Hornig said two Congressional committees were investigating whether research contract funds had been concentrated in too few areas of the country to the detriment of other regions. Dr. Hornig also said that this investigation showed that science can no longer ignore the political process. (CR, 6/10/64, A3138)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) included in Congressional Record a resolution by Florida Library and Historical Commission appealing to the President, the Florida Governor, and the U.S. Board of Geographic Names “to carefully consider the possibility of retaining the name, Cape Canaveral, as the geographic designation only of the easternmost tip of the land formation known as Cape Canaveral (that tip upon which no portion of the missile complex is located) thereby detracting none whatever from the widespread desire to honor our late President John F. Kennedy.” (CR, 1/21/64, A214)
Yuri Gagarin, Soviet cosmonaut and first man to fly in space, said in Izvestia interview that Engr. Col. Vladimir Mikhailovitch Komarov, member of voskhod i crew, had once been disqualified for cosmonaut training because of heart-beat irregularity, but had been reinstated when a heart specialist declared his heart to be sound. (Loory, N.Y. Her., Trib., 10/13/64)
Attempted flight of X-15 No. 3, with Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) as pilot, was aborted 10 min. before scheduled launch from B-52 mother craft because of problems with cabin pressure, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) spoke on the Senate floor on general aviation (“all aviation activity except the airlines and the military”): “Three observations about general aviation are worth sharing. “General aviation has greatly expanded our horizons for recreation, commerce, and government for a relatively small but potent and influential number of people. It can do so for many more. “General aviation has sharply increased the pace of business and political competition. By reducing the unproductive travel time of costly personnel, the airplane, particularly in general aviation, has acted as a labor creator rather than as a labor saver. By making it 766-598 O—65--22 possible to do more things, the airplane has forced people to do more things to keep ahead of the competition. “General aviation in the rest of the world suffers under an oppressive load of regulatory restriction to so great an extent that it barely exists. We must guard against burdening U.S. general aviation with similar controls producing the same result.” (CR, 9/28/64, 22241-43)
Picket lines were set up at the entrances to Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) by United Plant Guards Workers of America. The union charged that Wackenhut Corp., subcontractor to twa at the Saturn/Apollo site, was employing nonunion guards. 1,886 of 2,597 construction workers at the Saturn V complex refused to cross the picket lines, and about 700 of 2,500 workers at the USAF Titan III site were absent. William Simkin, vice chairman of the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, requested that the 'building trades unions return to work, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/2/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/2/64; upi, NYT, 4/3/64)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), speaking at Midwest Governors’ Conference in Minneapolis, recommended establishment of a national technology commission to award Federal research projects to promote nationwide economic development. Rep. Karth said concentration of Government R&D contracts to industries and universities on East and West coasts showed that “the broad national economic development is not being served.” (Higgins, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/11/64)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.~Wis.) said GAO study showed that usaf could save more than $1 million a year in administrative costs at AMR through consolidation of supply management functions. (AP, Houston Chron., 4/3/64)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), received his colonelcy from President Johnson in White House ceremony. Since the Senate had not gotten to the promotion list prior to adjournment, the President, after consultation with members of Congress, had made a recess appointment for Glenn, (upi, NYT, 10/28/64, 38; Balt. Sun, 10/28/64)
X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John B. McKay (nasa) to 86,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,000 mph (mach 4.54). The flight continued checkout of the revised landing gear system on the No. 2 aircraft and checked modifications made to prevent nose gear from coming down prematurely. Total engine bum time was 76 sec. and tests performed were successful, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
ComSatCorp announced that six persons had been nominated by its board of directors for election to the new board by public stockholders. They were: Leo D. Welch, Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, David M. Kennedy, George L. Killion, Leonard H. Marks, and Bruce G. Sundlun. The corporation announced that the first annual meeting of the shareholders was tentatively planned for Sept. 17 in Washington. (ComSatCorp Release, 7/8/64; NYT, 7/9/64, 43C, 45C)
Nuclear “breeder” reactor using thorium fuel, pioneered by Vice Adm. Hyman G. Rickover, was under consideration by aec and Calif. Dept, of Water Resources for a nuclear power plant, according to recent letter from aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg to Sen. John 0. Pastore, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Built around the “seed-and-blanket” design developed by the Rickover team, the thorium-fueled reactor appeared to have “unusual potential for generating economic nuclear power and for breeding.” If successful, Dr. Seaborg said, the concept would “represent a major advance in reactor technology and an important milestone in our national objective of conserving nuclear fuel resources.” (Finney, NYT, 2/2/64,1,30)
Dr. Edward Teller, nuclear physicist, testified before House Select Committee on Government Research on the Federal Government’s role in research. Dr. Teller criticized DOD’s secrecy in scientific developments, saying practice had been to keep them secret unless it could be proved without a doubt that making them public would be in the national interest. “I think the burden of proof should be on the other side,” Dr. Teller stated. “I am pretty well convinced that the Russians have all our secrets and I am even afraid they have the secrets we are going to discover in the next two years. Our industry and our citizens don’t have those secrets.” (nasa LAR III/ll; AP, NYT, 1/23/64, 9)
London betting house of William Hill Ltd., announced odds of 100-to-l against manned lunar landing by U.S.S.R. before Jan. 1, 1971 and 150-to-l against manned lunar landing by U.S. before same date. Several weeks later the firm improved their odds by changing date to Jan. 1, 1968. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/27/64; SBD, 11/12/64)
USAf’s Vice Chief of Staff General William F. McKee was presented his third Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson. Retiring after 35 years in the armed forces, General McKee was joining NASA Sept. 1, as Assistant Administrator for Management Development. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/28/64; AP, NYT, 7/31/64, 5)
The Boeing Co. was awarded the annual Missiles and Rockets New Product of the Year Award for its development of a microminiature welder. The award was presented to Boeing officials by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Awards of Honor went to Kollmorgen Corp. (for compact pointing interferometer), and to Control Data Corp. (for its 6600 computer). (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (NASA) in planned captive flight, (nasa X—15 Proj. Off.)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) was appointed to newly established position of Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div. In this capacity he would be responsible for all aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (SBD, 3/13/64,399; M&R, 3/23/64, 9)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) inserted into the Congressional Record an editorial from the Wall Street Journal concerning Government participation in financing the supersonic transport: “. . . The question, as we see it, is not whether there will eventually be operational supersonic airlines, or even whether the Government has any business in that business. Rather, it is a question whether the Government is trying to rush the thing before its economic time, with too few charts and too little knowledge. “A more cautious flight into the unknown could well make for speedier progress in the end—not to mention sounder investments.” (CR, 3/3/ 64, 4067)
William J. Schulte, Assistant Administrator for General Aviation, faa, was named 1964 winner of National Business Aircraft Association Award for meritorious service to aviation. (Av. Wk., 9/14/64, 23)
Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.-Ill.), Chairman of House Subcommittee on National Research Data Processing and Information Retrieval Center, wrote in Washington Daily News article: “The greatest challenge in this changing world is the solution of the problem of handling scientific and technical information. “I am deeply concerned with the staggering acceleration of scientific and technical information which is the life-blood in the heart of our research and development effort. ... “I am convinced somewhere in the mountainous scientific literature there is a cure for cancer, a solution for harnessing limitless energy from nuclear fusion and a way to solve the food requirement of a growing world population.” (Wash. Daily News, 4/21/64) April21: Rep. John Brademas (D.-Ind.) inserted in Congressional Record an editorial on Rep. J. Edward Roush’s proposal that NASA establish a Midwestern office, broadcast by station WOWO: “. . . . We agree with Congressman Roush that if it is in the best interests of NASA to operate liaison offices to aid potential contractors in securing NASA business, then every area of the United States should qualify for this aid. . . .” (CR, 4/21/64, A1998-99)
General Creighton W. Abrams, Jr. <USA), presented the Distinguished Flying Cross to four of five Army pilots who recently broke ten world records for helicopters, including two records previously held by the Russians. The recipients were: Capt. William A. Welter, Jr.; Capt. Michael N. Antoniou; cwo Emery E. Nelson; and cwo Joseph C. Watts. The fifth pilot, Maj. John A. Johnston, was absent on an overseas assignment. The records were for speed, distance, and time-to-climb in class E-l, E-ID, and E-IE helicopters. With official recognition of the new records, the U.S. would hold 26 marks (52%), the U.S.S.R. 14 (28%), France 9 (18%), and Czechoslovakia 1 (2%). (dod Releases 793-64 and 824-64; NYT, 11/7/64,53)
Roscoe Drummond, in his Washington Post column, said success of Saturn I SA-5 “. . . means that the major advantage which the Soviets have had so long and which has yielded them their principal space spectaculars—the long Russian lead in rocket power—is now a thing of the past. ... “There should be no minimizing what the Soviets have already done. . . . “But the United States accomplishments have been more diverse. We have put almost four times as many spacecraft into orbit as the Soviets. We have made far more progress in the application of space technology in communications, weather, and navigation. We both have compiled a large volume of scientific data about outer space and neither is significantly ahead. “As Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, puts it, ‘the space race continues and it will be a long one.’” (Drummond, Wash. Post, 2/1/64, in CR, 2/1/64, A44I)
Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board of AT&T, was named recipient of the 1965 John Fritz Medal by United Engineering Trustees, Inc., for “leadership in the pioneering of space communications. . . .” (Av. Wk., 9/14/64, 23)
U.S. Army announced that the Lockheed-California Co.’s XH-51A compound helicopter (a helicopter having wings as well as rotor blades) had flown 242 mph—“the fastest known speed of any rotor craft in the world.” The flight was made by a test pilot, Donald Segner, off the Southern California coast. (AP, NYT, 12/14/64, 32)
Retiring science editor of New York Times William L. Laurence was honored at dinner in New York by wide range of scientific societies. Laurence was science journalist for 34 years, winner of two Pulitzer Prizes. (NYT, 1/21/64,1)
Balloon launched from Holloman AFB, Tex., carried telescope and instrumentation to 86,000-ft. altitude, where it focused on the planet Venus for more than three hours. Financed by usaf contract, the experiment was second such study of Venus this year by Johns Hopkins Univ. team headed by Dr. John Strong. Scientific results would be ahinounced later this year (see Dec. 7). (Fenton, Balt. Sun, 12/7/64; Sullivan, NYT, 12/8/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) told Aviation/Space Writers’ Association that usaf would seek bids for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory i(mol) by Dec. 1. dod had released $6 million for the project May 1, opening the door to preliminary study. Under present schedule, he said, hardware development could begin in about a year, with first unmanned flight late in 1967 or early 1968. (Benedict, AP, 5/27/64)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by John B. McKay (NASA) to altitude of 87,000	ft. and speed of 3,716 mph (mach 5.58), in flight near Edwards, Calif. During the flight, heat transfer and noise level measurements were made on the aircraft’s skin. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 8/27/64)
Sen. John Stennis (D.-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, said he had directed his staff “to up-date and review the current information and data relating to the reliability and dependability of the Nation’s long range ballistic missiles as soon as possible.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64; Raymond, NYT, 1/17/64, 13)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., left the hospital and returned home to Seabrook, Tex., where he would convalesce from inflammation of his inner ear. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/4/64)
Lt. Col. John D. Peters (usaf), engineer at Arnold Engineering Development Center, said in San Antonio that the four-legged landing gear designed for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module (lem) was “needlessly risky” and should be replaced by an inflatable “doughnut” to cushion the lem’s landing. Tube at lem’s base could be inflated just before landing, would allow a safe landing even if exact nature of lunar surface is unknown. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/64; SBD, 10/22/64,283)
Dr. John P. Meehan, physiologist at Univ. of Southern California, announced he would begin experiment in which 15 young men would lie flat on their backs for 30 days, then be put in a centrifuge and be subjected to forces eight times normal gravity while attempting to operate simulated space capsule controls. Purpose of the experiment was to duplicate effect of long periods of weightlessness in space on body’s heart-blood system and to devise ways of overcoming it. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/9/64)
In White House Ceremony, President Johnson awarded 1963 National Medal of Science to the recipients: Drs. Jerome B. Wiesner, Cornelius B. van Neil, Luis W. Alvarez, Vannevar Bush, John R. Pierce, and Norbert Wiener. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/14/64)
Chief engineer of Air Transport Association’s Supersonic Advisory Committee, John T. Dyment, estimated it would cost half-again as much as the $1 billion estimated by the Government to develop the U.S. supersonic transport and test it adequately. He criticized plans to take steps toward manufacturing before prototype testing was completed: “We must have supersonic transports built and flying for a year or so to gain the experience and the reliability before we even start a production line. This is essential. . . .” Detailed findings of the committee’s two-day meeting in New York would be reported to iata Technical Committee May 5. (Clark, NYT, 3/25/64,65)
With nuclear explosives new sea-level canal could be built across Isthmus of Panama for $500 million or less, according to Lawrence Radiation Laboratory’s Gerald W. Johnson, Director of AEC Project Plowshare. Technical and economic feasibility of such a project was discussed in letter from Johnson to Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.-R.I.), Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Use of nuclear explosives to dig new Panama canal had been under study since 1958, when Panama Canal Co. requested Lawrence Radiation Laboratory for preliminary feasibility study of the project. (Finney, NYT, 1/21/64, 1°) .
Navy Secretary Paul H. Nitze formally approved the retirement of Marine Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. The retirement was set for Jan. 1. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 11/5/64; NYT, 11/5/64,11)
None of the supersonic transport bidders was willing to assume the prescribed share of cost of the joint Government—industry-funded sst program, John P. MacKenzie reported in Washington Post. Under plan presented by President Kennedy, sst would cost $1 billion, with Government paying 75% of the cost and manufacturers paying remaining 25%. MacKenzie said none of the six bidding manufacturers had met the 25% participation challenge, and “some manufacturers said the plane could not be developed for $1 billion.” Officials were reported to be studying independent report by Eugene R. Black, former president of the World Bank, which unnamed sources said recommended Government finance 90% of the development cost. Report also was said to have proposed transferring sst program from faa to an independent agency, slowing pace of the sst development and avoiding international “race” with U.K.-France Concorde development. (MacKenzie, Wash. Post, 2/11/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/13/64; Newsweek, 2/17/64)
Col. John C. Nickerson (USA), 47, a key figure in USA-USAF Thor-Jupiter controversy, died in automobile accident in Alamagordo, N. Mex. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/3/64, A2)
X—15 No. 3 flown by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) to 97,000-ft. altitude and 3,820-mph speed (mach 5.69) from Edwards afb, Calif. During the flight, a new protective coating on underside of plane’s tail was tested for aerodynamic heating, for possible future application in X-15 No. 2. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/29/64; M&R, 10/5/64,11)
X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) in planned captive flight. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
Controller General Joseph Campbell said that the Federal Government could have saved $60 million by buying rather than leasing electronic data-processing systems for use on Government contracts. He recommended that a central management office be set up with authority to decide on the least expensive methods of obtaining data-processing equipment. (NYT, 11/4/64)	_
Five surviving men among the eight Army Air Service pilots who took part in the first flight around the world 40 years ago were honored by Explorers Club at dinner in Beverly Hills, Calif. A week later, the men were honored in ceremonies at afsc Hq., which also honored Donald W. Douglas, Sr., designer and builder of the four Douglas World Cruiser open-cockpit biplanes. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/21/64)
Soviet military newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) announced that Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin had been assigned head of its new “Cosmonauts’ Desk” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/9/64)
Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev had replaced Col. Yuri A. Gagarin as head of Soviet cosmonauts, Krasnaya Zvezda reported, (upi, NYT, 2/22/(A, 10) . .
Dr. John Strong, Director of Johns Hopkins Astrophysics and Physical Meteorology Laboratory, announced definite evidence of water vapor around and on the planet Venus. His determination was made as the result of a Feb. 21 daytime balloon flight to study Venus by means of a unique robot telescope system. The study was made under research grant for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories. “Since it is known that carbon dioxide exists on Venus, proof of water vapor forces us to re-examine every previous calculation made concerning the possibility of some sort of life existing on the planet,” Dr. Strong said. Amount of water vapor in the air above the Venusian cloud level was established with a relative precision of 5%. Launched from Holloman AFB, N. Mex., the balloon carried the telescope to altitude of 87,000 ft. (oar Release 4-64-2)
President of the Delaware Academy of Science, John S. Seney, reported experiments he hoped would lead man to fly under his own power, like a bird. He had captured a turkey buzzard which he hoped to put through a series of tests in a wind-tunnel in the basement of his home. “If we’re going to fly, the only way to do it is to find out what this bird’s got . . . and then put all this together in relation to what modern materials are available. Then maybe we’ll come up with some sort of flying suit.” {NYT, 12/28/64,51)
Dr. John Peter Minton of the National Cancer Institute confirmed that infrared laser rays had killed certain malignant tumors in mice. Dr. Minton had conducted several months of experiments in conjunction with engineers of the U.S. Army Missile Command engaged in laser research, (dod Release 237-64)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) addressed the National Space Club in “The great promise for the future of the space and defense industry is to turn some of the tremendous imagination, some of the talents and energies of your management, your scientists and engineers, to the major social and economic problems of our country. “Your industries, I submit, are eminently qualified to cooperate in this entirely different kind of takeoff because of your unique experience in solving inter-disciplinary problems through the technique of systems analysis. . . .” Emphasizing’that “space is not a WPA program,” he said he would not support accelerated space expenditures merely to stimulate the economy depressed by reduction in defense spending because of disarmament. (nsc Release)
Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin said in Moscow press conference that he and other Soviet cosmonauts were training for new space flights. “When we go and who will go—that we do not know. We will wait and see.” (AP, NYT, 4/8/64,10; AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/64, C6)
One of U.S.S.R.’s top test pilots, Col. Sergei G. Brovtsev, was killed in accident while testing helicopter. (Av. Wk., 8/3/64, 15)
Soviet scientist Sergei Vernon said at Moscow press conference that the zond I space probe was launched to study radiation hazards in space. The probe would “provide information about more remote areas of space we know little about.” (Balt. Sun, 4/8/64)
John Driscoll, Chairman of Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, met with James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, “to assure him we are ready, willing, and able to discuss with him and to negotiate with NASA for our turnpike location [of NASA' Electronics Research Center in Cambridge] in the event the Kendall-Sq. site is not selected.” After the meeting Mr. Webb repeated that the Kendall-Sq. location “better meets the requirements” of NASA than any other proposal. Meanwhile, in Boston, Dr. John J. Brennan, Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, said in press conference that the committee would use every available legal means to prevent location of the NASA center in Kendall Sq. (Boston Globe, 10/2/64)
X—15 No. 1 was piloted by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) to 112,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,500 (mach 5.11) mph to test scientific instruments (a densitron and daytime sky background experiments) carried in pods recently installed on the craft’s wing tips and to sample density of upper atmosphere. The flight also served as a checkout of the newly installed Honeywell inertial guidance system. (NASA X—15 Proj.Off.; NYT, 12/11/64,25)
Dr. William A. Mrazek, Director of MSFC Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory since 1956, was appointed chief engineer of Saturn launch vehicle project in MSFC Industrial Operations. (Marshall Star, 3/18/64,1)
X—15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot John B. McKay near Edwards afb with a microphone embedded in the X—15’s side to record noise of turbulent air sweeping over the surface, to help in prediction of metal fatigue. The X—15 reached maximum speed of 3,239 mph (mach 4.91) and peak altitude of 76,000 ft. This was 102nd flight of the X-15. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Wash. Post, 3/14/64; upi, NYT, 3/14/64, 39)
Amendment to $17 billion military procurement and r&d authorization bill to cut $52 million for development of new manned bomber was offered by Senators George McGovern (D.-S. Dak.), Gaylord Nelson (D. Wis.), and William Proxmire (D.—Wis.). Senator McGovern quoted minority report by the dissenting members of the House Armed Services Committee which pointed out that “the $52 million is just the beginning of a program which will cost close to $5 billion before it is completed,” said his amendment would “reduce the bomber funds to the $5 million level requested by the President and the Secretary of Defense.” (CR, 2/26/64,3602-04)
Michael V. LighthiU, director of British laboratory involved in developing Anglo-French supersonic airliner Concorde and reputable expert on sonic booms, spoke optimistically in interview about outcome of recent U.S. sonic boom experiments. Lighthill said that although there was not yet enough information from the Oklahoma City studies, preliminary reports were “very encouraging.” Damage from sonic booms was apparently less than many experts had feared. (Simons, Wash. Post, 8/8/64)
Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy voted $14 million in aec’s FY 1965 budget for flight test of Snap-lOA reactor. This action followed Budget Bureau letter to the Committee acknowledging that “reasonable and well informed men can differ” on such issues as the Snap flight test and stating that the Administration would conduct flight test if Congress authorized the funds, as long as the Administration’s $2,651,542,000 request for aec was not exceeded. Late last year the Administration had canceled orbital flight-test because of lack of specific mission for the Snap; leaders of the Joint Congressional Committee, Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.—R.I.) and Rep. Chet Holifield (D.— Calif.), had protested the decision, urging President Johnson to approve the flight test. (NYT, 3/26/64,24)
Gen. Thomas S. Power (usaf) retired as Commander-in-Chief of the Strategic Air Command (sac) . He was succeeded by Lt. Gen. John D. Ryan, formerly sac Vice Commander-in-Chief. Ryan would be made a four-star general. (NYT, 12/1/64, 46)
Death-ray use of the laser was impractical, the 72nd annual meeting of the Association of Military Surgeons of the U.S. was told by Dr. Donald H. Glew, Jr., George Washington Univ. surgeon who had conducted laser research for the Armed Forces. Dr. Glew said that, with present sources of laser beams at least, such rays would be impractical as weapons because the necessary equipment would be “far too massive for field use.” (ap, Wash. Post, 11/16/65, C5)
nasa pilot William Dana flew x—15 No. 1 to 80,200-ft. altitude at 2,795 mph (mach 4.22) in a pilot-checkout flight which also carried a slightly modified horizon scanner and device for measuring microscopic atmospheric pressure, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Speaking on safety in the Space Age, John L. Sloop, NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the 22nd Annual Greater Akron Safety Conference that “for the past ten years, the naca and NASA have had a frequency rate (injuries per million man hours work) ranging from 3.2 to 2.1. The national industrial frequency average, I am told, is 6.12 for 1963 and the average for all of Federal government is 7.9.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. dominated the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France, with premiere showing of 11-62 186-passenger jetliner, powered by four turbofan engines, each developing 23,100 lbs. thrust, and display of the M—110 crane helicopter reported to have set an unofficial world’s record last month by hoisting 25 tons more than 8,000 ft. into the air. Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin answered questions in the Soviet pavilion. (upi, Miami Her., 6/11/65)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) flew x-15 No. 1 to 266,500-ft. altitude at 3,580 mph (mach 5.08). The flight carried a slightly modified horizon scanner and device for measuring microscopic atmospheric pressure, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
x-15 No. 2 was flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 92,600-ft. altitude at a maximum speed of 3,260 mph (mach 4.80) to obtain data on the landing gear modification and on stability and control. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; FRC Release)
Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, Director of NASA Office of Grants and Research Contracts, was temporarily assigned as Special Assistant to Administrator James E. Webb. He would be concerned with examining, in depth, the progress made in the development and conduct of university activities. Dr. John T. Holloway would serve as the Acting Director of the Office of Grants and Research Contracts, (nasa Ann.)
x-15 No. 1 was flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 153,600-ft. altitude at a maximum speed of 3,750 mph (mach 5.40). Purpose was to check out landing gear revised recently, give pilot experience at higher altitude, and get apparatus data, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Wright Brothers Medal for 1964 was presented to three NASA LaRC scientists—Marion 0. McKinney, Jr., Richard E. Kuhn, and John P. Reeder —at the meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers in Los Angeles. Cited “for meritorious contribution to aeronautic engineering,” the scientists were selected for their paper “Aerodynamics and Flying Qualities of Jet/Vertical Takeoff-Landing and Short TakeoffLanding Airplanes,” presented in 1964 at the SAE-American Society of Mechanical Engineers meeting in New York. (LaRC Release)
The Soviet Union, with its May 9 display of missile and space might, has dealt a major blow to the complacency of those persons in the United States who consistently have underestimated the competence of the Russians in these fields,” wrote William J. Coughlin in an editorial in Missiles and Rockets. He continued: “The appearance of Soviet solid-fuel missiles of a type similar to the U.S. Minuteman ICBM indicates that the Soviets finally have overcome the chemical roadblock which until now has made possible the U.S. lead in solids. . . . “In a film which the Moscow correspondent of the New York Times estimated to be at least three years old, the Soviets also displayed launchings from an underground silo. The combination of these events suggests the Soviets now are in a position to rapidly close the missile gap with the United States to tbe point where it is of no consequence in military calculations. . . . “In the film release, the Russians for the first time showed their anti-missile missile in action. One sequence was of intercept of an ICBM. . . . “The increasing Soviet confidence also is indicated in the space field. The Soviets let it be known more than a month in advance that their next space spectacular could be expected May 9. . . . The launch of LUNIK v obviously was right on schedule. The acknowledgement after launch but in advance of impact that its goal was a lunar soft landing also is a more realistic approach to space developments than previously shown. “This shift toward a franker attitude is supported by the open admission of the Zond II Mars probe failure by Soviet scientists attending the Space Exploration Symposium in Chicago on May 4. “At the same time, the Russians released more information on the Soviet space program at the Chicago meeting than heretofore. “All of this points toward greater maturity in both Soviet missile programs and Soviet space programs. The competition therefore is far keener than many persons in the U.S. have been willing to admit. “The conclusion is clear. The U.S. cannot afford to let down or it will be far outdistanced in areas which will continue to be vital in its national security and well-being for many, many years.” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/17/65, 74)
XB-70a experimental supersonic bomber broke world aviation weight and speed endurance records during a one-hour 40 min. flight. It took off weighing 500,000 lbs., the heaviest at which any aircraft had been flown, and flew at continuous supersonic speeds for 80 min., longer than any other aircraft had. It cruised at a top speed of 1,400 mph and was piloted by A1 White and Van Shepard, (ap, Wash. Post, 3/25/65; NYT, 3/25/65; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/65)
x-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 102,100 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,541 mph (mach 5.17) to obtain data for stability and control evaluation, star tracker checkout, advanced X-15 landing dynamics, and landing gear modification checkout. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
usaf and NASA were finishing plans for joint lifting-body tests, reported William Normyle in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He said a joint usaf-nasa Flight Test Group was being formed at Edwards afb and would include NASA and usaf pilots who would flight-test three lifting-body configurations in a program to be monitored by NASA. Two configurations, the m-2 and the hl-10, were NASA designs built by Northrop Corp’s Norair Div. Third configuration, usaf’s sv-5, was developed by Martin Co. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 6/28/65, 19)
At a press conference, Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and LCdr. John W. Young (usn) described the three-orbit gt-3 flight of Mar. 23, as busy, exhilarating, near-perfect, and short on surprises. They said it was highly significant for future flight in space since it proved that a spacecraft could be maneuvered precisely, at will, and more independently of the ground than before. They said it also proved that man can eat and safely dispose of wastes as they will need to do on long flights. Major Grissom suggested two possible reasons that the “Molly Brown” had undershot the target landing area: one was that something might have gone wrong during the final orbit change or when subsequently the braking rockets were fired to start the spacecraft’s descent; the other was that there might have been a miscalculation of the craft’s center of gravity, (nasa Transcript)
John F. Mason outlined in Electronics the dramatic changes underway in U.S. tracking and communications stations around the world. “Before the end of the year, 85% of the telemetry gear on the Atlantic missile range will be replaced. Everywhere, new communications equipment is going in, new pulse radars are being installed and continuous-wave radar networks are being expanded. Slowly, the separate ranges are becoming an integrated global network. . . . “Besides the work going on at the ranges, research and development effort for programs of the future continues at an active pace at the various government and industry centers throughout the United States. “The reason for this general overhaul of the missile ranges is to support Apollo, the manned lunar mission, and approximately 70 other ambitious missile and space programs already under way. . . .” (Electronics, 2/22/65, 94—105)
A system for the docking and sealing together of two orbiting spacecraft, designed to allow men and tools to be moved back and forth between the two vehicles while they were joined, was granted a patent. Invented by John P. Dunn, Martin Co. engineer, the equipment was being built in full scale for tests in Martin’s rendezvous and docking simulator (Jones, NYT, 8/21/65, 25)
Dr. John T. F. Kuo, associate professor at Columbia Univ. Henry Krumb School of Mines, was studying the earth’s gravity from each of the Empire State Building’s 102 floors. Kuo was using a gravimeter sensitive to weight differences of one-billionth of a pound to measure gravitational acceleration on each floor. He felt that extrapolations from his figures might help in the “design of instrument measuring the gravitational acceleration on space vehicles as they hurtle through the universe.” (NYT, 3/15/65, 29)
x-15 No. 3 flown by pilot Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) to 244,700 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,404 mph (mach 4.66) to measure ultraviolet radiation and noise intensity of the boundary layer of air. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Passage of bills concerned with freedom of information was urged by William J. Coughlin in an editorial in Missiles and Rockets: “Intent of the bills is to establish a Federal public records law and to permit court enforcement of the people’s right to know the facts of government. Providing for sensible exceptions in the case of sensitive and classified information, the proposed law would require every agency of the government to make all its records promptly available to any person. . . . “The onus for restrictive news management usually falls on the Dept, of Defense, and rightly so, but there are a number of individuals in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration who are inclined to regard the agency as a preserve which should be off limits to the press. It is to the credit of Administrator James E. Webb that he has a consistent record of correcting abuses of press freedom that are called to his attention. The same cannot be said of his counterpart in the Defense Department.” (M&R, 4/25/65)
President Johnson nominated Gen. William F. McKee to be Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency. He made the appointment after signing a bill that exempted General McKee (usaf, Ret.) from the requirement that the faa administrator be a civilian, (ap, NYT, 6/25/65)
USAF has come up with something for NASA to reckon with, commented William Hines, concerning the Titan iii-c success, in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “It is the Air Force position—which NASA will now be forced to try to disprove—that anything Saturn IB can do, Titan m-c can do better. “The Air Force, for its part, must now try to prove Titan m-c’s reliability over the long haul . . . Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier Jr., head of the Titan m-c program, said it is his goal to make every one of the 12 shots in the Titan ill—C development series a 100% success. “Equally important with reliability is cost. Bleymaier says the Titan iii-c can be produced in quantity for $12.8 million, or just a little more than half the $22 million it is estimated nasa’s Saturn IB will cost. Titan m-c’s $800 million development cost is but a fraction of what NASA will have spent to get the first Saturn IB off the ground.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/19/65)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander (Manned Systems) of afsc Space Systems Div. and head of the Titan iii-c program, and project leaders Cols. David V. Miller (usaf) and Otto C. Ledford (usaf) were honored by Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk (usaf) for the success of the Titan-m program. General Bleymaier’s commendation for the Legion of Merit was for “outstanding service to the United States.” Colonels Miller and Ledford were awarded Commendation Medals. The ceremony was conducted at Eastern Test Range one hour after launch of Titan m-c-1. (Clark, NYT, 6/19/65, 1, 11)
Sir John Eccles, professor of physiology at Australian National University, cautioned Australia and New Zealand against overconcentration of scientific energy on space. At a scientific congress in New Zealand, he warned: “. . . we are spending too much of our resources, especially our intellectual resources, on the exploration of space when we have the much more important problem of life, and of man and his brain.” (NYT, 2/21/65, 9)
Edward L. Hays, chief of crew systems at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced that the crew of the Gemini GT-4 flight would wear the qualified Extravehicular Activity (Eva) spacesuit during their flight. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/19/65; M&R, 4/26/65, 7)
Roy William Johnson, first director of DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (arpa) in 1958 died at the age of 59. Johnson said at the time of his appointment: “Space will tax the imagination of the whole world for the next 100 years.” He retired in 1959. (JPash. Post, 7/23/65, B8)
First observance of Robert H. Goddard Day. On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) spoke of Dr. Goddard’s achievements as summarized by G. Edward Pendray in Technology and Culture (Fall 1963) : “Dr. Goddard— “Was the first to develop a rocket motor using liquid propellants (liquid oxygen and gasoline) during the years 1920-25. “Was first to design, construct, and launch successfully a liquid-fuel rocket—the event we mark today. “First developed a gyrostabilization apparatus for rockets in 1932. “First used deflector vanes in the blast of a rocket motor as a means of stabilizing and guiding rockets, also in 1932. “Obtained the first U.S. patent on the idea of multistage rockets, in 1914. “First explored mathematically the practicality of using rocket power to reach high altitude and escape velocity, in 1912. “Was first to publish in the United States a basic mathematical theory underlying rocket propulsion and rocket flight, in 1919. “First proved experimentally that a rocket would provide thrust in a vacuum, in 1915. “Developed and demonstrated the basic idea of the bazooka near the end of World War I, although his plans lay unused until finally put to use in World War ii. “First developed self-cooling rocket motors, variable thrust rocket motors, practical rocket landing devices, pumps suitable for liquid rocket fuels. “Forecast jet-driven airplanes, and travel in space.”	(CR, 3/16/65,
The Senate, in a 46-20 vote, gave final Congressional approval to a bill waiving the restriction barring military men from the post of Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency, clearing the way for President Johnson to appoint Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) of nasa. (CR, 6/17/65, 13541; WSJ, 6/18/65, 8)
usaf’s xc-142a V/Stol, designed and built by Ling-Temco-Vought, made its first public flight at Grand Prairie, Tex. piloted by John Konrad. Designed to take off and land vertically, the experimental aircraft had a wing that could be moved in flight from the normal horizontal position to a vertical position, enabling it to hover, fly backwards, sideways, and rotate 360° in either direction over the same spot. It could fly forward as slowly as 25 mph without stalling and could be flown at maximum speed of 425 mph; cruising speed was 250 mph. Five of the airplanes would be delivered to Edwards afb for further tests. (Wash. Post, 2/5/65; Clark, Houston Post, 2/5/65; A&A, 4/65, 8)
x-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), reached maximum speed of 3,550 mph (mach 5.20) and a maximum altitude of 271,000 ft. The purpose of the flight was to obtain data on the boundary layer noise, and reentry maneuvering techniques. (NASA x—15 Proj. Off.; X—15 Flight Log)
William C. Foster, Director of U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, said in testimony before House Foreign Affairs Committee that radioactive leakage from Soviet underground nuclear test Jan. 15 was apparently accidental. The radioactive fallout apparently did not violate the intent of the 1963 nuclear test-ban treaty.	(FonF, 1965, 61) . .
Sen. William Proxmire | D-Wis.) spoke on the floor of the Senate on potential dangers to universities from Federal research programs and advocated giving more decision-making responsibility on allocation of funds to the universities. (CR, 7/13/65, 16075-77)
Test model of the I.nnar Landing Research Vehicle designed to simulated lunar landing was flown by former nasa x-15 pilot Joseph Walker to 300-ft. altitude. Built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under contract to Nasa, the research craft had a jet engine that supported five-sixths of its weight; the pilot manipulated solid-fuel lift rockets that supported the remaining one-sixth. The craft’s attitude was controlled with jets of hydrogen peroxide. ( Wash. Post, 10/9/65, AT; ap, Houston Chron., 10/9/65)
xc-142a V/Stol, flown by Ling-Temco-Vought test pilots John Konrad and Stuart Madison, made a flawless first transition flight. The transport aircraft took off like a helicopter, adjusted its wings for conventional flight, and then circled the field, reversed the process, and made a vertical landing. The xc-142a’s first transition flight came only six flights after its initial hover flight on Dec. 29, 1964. It was the Nation’s first V/Stol built for operational evaluation rather than research, (ap, CSM, 1/13/65)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc, Ret.), would make a three-week goodwill trip to Western Europe in October, the White House announced, (upi, Wash. Post, 9/18/65)
William E. Simkin, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, reported that “some progress” had been made in efforts to settle the I am strike against McDonnell Aircraft Corp. which began Nov. 18. Union had demanded changes in job specifications and was dissatisfied with machinery for filing grievances against management. McDonnell was prime contractor for the Gemini spacecraft at Cape Kennedy. (Jones, NYT, 11/21/65, 43)
At NASA Industry Briefing on Computer Procurement, held at Hq., NASA briefed representatives of 14 leading companies in the automatic data processing industry on NASA’s present and future plans and policies for the procurement of large-scale computing systems. William Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, pointed out that NASA’s principal purpose in future Adp procurements would be to increase competition throughout the computer industry. Citing the growing concern in recent years over expanding Adp inventories and increasing dollar expenditures for computers throughout Government, Rieke outlined a three-point plan to improve the exchange of information between NASA and the computer industry: (1) NASA would hold annual industry briefings to inform computer firms of its long-range plans, problems, needs for improved system technology, and projected procurements with the first to be held next May; (2) individual computer manufacturers would be given an opportunity to conduct annual briefing for NASA’s personnel to inform NASA of their plans, problems, and developments; (3) in connection with large or unusual Adp procurements with restrictive requirements, NASA would hold prespecification briefings for interested companies in advance of issuing requests for proposals. Edmond C. Buckley, director of NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, outlined NASA’s methods for long-range planning on computer acquisition and utilization, and emphasized that the agency’s future Adp procurements would be for computing systems rather than just hardware. nasa Administrator James E. Webb traced the cooperative history of the NASA-Industry-University “team” in contributing to NASA’s accomplishments since 1958. He emphasized the importance of the computer industry’s contribution to the space effort, in particular, and solicited the industry’s continued cooperation in carrying out NASA’s mission, (nasa Release 65-391)
x—15 No. 2 piloted by nasa research pilot John ti. McKay attained a speed up to 3,659 mph (mach 5.19) and an altitude of 212,600 ft., photographed Gamma Cassiopeia with four 35-mm. cameras. Purpose was to verify theoretical data on the physical composition of the stars, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) one of the ten outstanding young men of 1964. Captain Engle, the youngest of the X-15 pilots, had logged nine flights in the X-15. Awardees would be honored at an awards congress Jan. 15—16 in Santa Monica, Calif, (ap, Des Moines Register, 1/12/65)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA by Administrator James E. Webb. His duties would include taking part in conferences, making speeches in the U.S. and abroad, and checking on projects under way. (nasa Release 65-67)
The Gold Hodgkins Medal for pioneer work in space age science, plus a cash award, was presented to three scientists during the second week of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s 75th anniversary observance in Cambridge, Mass.: Prof. Marcel Nicolet, National Center for Space Research, Brussels; Dr. Joseph Kaplan, UCLA; and Dr. Sydney Chapman, Geophysical Institute, Univ. of Alaska, (ap, Houston, Chron., 8/18/65)
U.S. suspended practice firing of Little John missiles in the foothills of Mt. Fuji at the request of the Japanese government to avoid clashes with about 2,000 farmers demonstrating near the target area. The farmers claimed that practice firing of the Little John, capable of carrying nuclear warheads, would lead to nuclear armament of Japan and would involve Japan in the Vietnam war. Little John was a short range, Army battlefield support missile,	(ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/65, A21; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/65, A13)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, was named to succeed Najeeb E. Halaby as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency. (Wash. Post, 4/28/65)
X-15 No. 2, piloted by John B. McKay (nasa), reached 239,000-ft. altitude and 3,511-mph speed (mach 5.16) in a flight to obtain information on the reaction augmentation system, to check out star-tracking ultra-violet stellar photography experiment, and to gain information on advanced x-15 landing dynamics and pilot altitude buildup, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Dr. Thomas F. Bates, professor of mineralogy and director of the Science and Engineering Institute at Pennsylvania State Univ., had been named science advisor to Interior Secretary Stewart L. Udall, it was announced. He would succeed Dr. John C. Calhoun, Jr., who was returning to his post at Texas a&m. ( upi, NYT, 3/16/65, 4)
Col. John H. Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was guest of honor and elected to membership at the 148th annual dinner of the New York Academy of Sciences. He said that 100 yrs. from now “space travel will not be a form of international competition, nor will it have political implications; it will be the beginning of the greatest exploration period in world history.” (NYT, 12/3/65,42)
Pilot John B. McKay (nasa) flew x-15 No. 3 to maximum altitude of 239,000	ft. at maximum speed of 3,545 mph (mach 5.03) to obtain data on pilot altitude buildup, (nasa x—15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight
Aerospace Corp.’s $22 million expenditure to construct buildings in California when space was available in nearby U.S. facilities was criticized by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell in his testimony before the House Armed Services Special Investigations Subcommittee investigating Aerospace. Campbell said that Aerospace had also incurred “certain questionable costs which appear to be of interest.” (ap, NYT, 5/5/65)
House voted to allow Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) to serve as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency and retain his military status. Effect of the legislation, if it were to become law, would be to let McKee draw reduced military retirement pay of $8,404 annually in addition to the Administrator’s salary of $30,000. Without the bill, he would have to give up his military status and retirement benefits. (CR, 6/3/65, 11961; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65)
usaf scientist Dr. John W. Evans received DOD’s Distinguished Civilian Service Award for his research on the physical processes of solar magnetic fields, mass motions of the solar photosphere, and growth and development of solar flares, (oar Release 5-65-1)
Robert V. Reynolds was named Assistant FAA Administrator for General Aviation Affairs by faa Administrator William F. McKee. Reynolds would serve the growing needs of general aviation which had more than 88,700 out of a total of 90,935 active civil aircraft. FAA had forecast that the general aviation fleet would grow to 105,000 by 1969.	( faa Release 65-58)
XB-70a research aircraft No. 2 made its sixth flight, reaching a speed of mach 2.23 (about 1,460 mph) and altitude of 54,000 ft. During the one-hour-and 44-minute flight (32 min. of which were at supersonic speeds), several studies were conducted: runway noise-levels were studied, sonic-boom tests conducted, experiments related to supersonic transport program made, and aircraft’s air-inlet control system was operated. Pilots were A1 White, chief test pilot, and Van Shepard, co-pilot, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/1/65, 1)
Senate defeated by 61-to-16 the proposed Proxmire amendment to make an across-the-board reduction of 5% in the NASA appropriations bill. This left the Senate bill, still to receive its final vote, at $5.19 billion. The House had passed a $5.16 billion appropriation. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) had contended that the manned lunar landing program constituted an “excessive waste.” Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.) had felt the problem was not one of waste or inefficiency but felt that more of the nation’s resources should be put into education, housing, pollution abatement, and other urban problems. Sen. Wayne Morse (D-Ore.) had supported the reduction but had proposed that the cut be 25 c/ or 50%. “The American people have been thoroughly taken in by a TV spectacular,” he said and charged that the space program “is all for the purpose of gratifying our national ego.” Senator Morse had indicated that no other single agency conducted programs “with such vague objectives with such little return to the national Government.” Proxmire had charged that NASA was the prime example of an agency whose expenditures Congress had difficulty in controlling, that certain project costs within the NASA program could be reduced, and that NASA used too great a proportion of our monetary, material, and manpower resources. The 16 Senators voting for the Proxmire amendment were Boggs, Clark, Cooper, Douglas, Fullbright, Gruening, Kennedy (N.Y.), McGovern Miller, Morse, Morton, Mundt, Nelson, Proxmire, Williams (N.J.), and Williams (Del.). {CR, 7/12/65, 15927-40)
More than 250 scholars and theologians met in New York to discuss means of attaining world peace and “to lay groundwork for a theology for the dawning age of cybernation.” Moral and technological implications of Pope John xxm’s encyclical Pacem in Terris were studied. Meeting was sponsored by Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions and the Fellowship of Reconciliation. (NYT, 3/2/65, 28; NYT, 3/3/65, 24)
NASA Hq. announced appointment of William C. Schneider as Deputy Director, Mission Operations and Gemini Mission Director, effective immediately. Schneider, formerly Deputy Director of the Gemini Program, was replaced by LeRoy E. Day, who became acting Deputy Director of the Gemini Program. (NASA Release 65—331)
usaf xb-70a research bomber was flown from Edwards Afb by naa pilot Van A. Shepard for 155 min.—10 min. longer than on any of its previous 28 test flights, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/23/65, A3)
NASA officially confirmed the six scientist-astronauts named in the Nation’s press June 27. They were Owen K. Garriott; Edward G. Gibson; Duane E. Graveline; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn) ; Frank Curtis Michel; and Harrison Schmitt. (NASA Release 65-212)
Thirty-six msfc employees received a variety of awards, including a Presidental Citation and six inventions awards, in a local ceremony observing NASA’s seventh anniversary. Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of MSFC, addressed the gathering and William Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, presented the invention awards, (msfc Release 65-273)
Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins Univ. told the Fifth Annual Space Conference at vpi that Venus was almost as hot on the side facing away from the sun as on the side facing the sun because the entire planet was kept warm by snowfalls. An instrumented balloon launched in 1964 had identified ice crystals in the Venusian atmosphere. Strong speculated that a 120-mph wind on the surface of the planet dragged the ice crystals around to the back side where they presumably became a “warming snowfall.” Dr. Strong, who intended to launch another instrumented balloon during 1965, said that an automated, unmanned balloon was preferable to a manned vehicle, (ap, Wash. Post. 8/24/65)
Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) flew x-15 No. 3 to 98,200 ft. altitude and a maximum speed of 3,886 mph (mach 5.7) in a test to determine how ablative material reacted to intense heat. (NASA X-15 Proi. Off.: upi, Wash. Post, 2/3/65; X—15 Flight Log)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as Federal Aviation Agency Administrator—less than 24 hrs. after confirmation by the Senate—in a White House ceremony. President Johnson, presiding, announced that General McKee’s primary task would be development of a supersonic transport (Sst). Mr. Johnson had approved five recommendations of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport: “Those five recommendations . . . are: first, the next phase of design covering an 18-month period beginning about August 1, 1965; second, the four manufacturers—Boeing Company, Lockheed Aircraft Company, General Electric Company, Pratt & Whitney Division of United Aircraft—be invited to continue this phase of the program; third, the FAA Administrator be authorized to enter into contracts with the airframe manufacturers to undertake detailed airframe design work and test them over the next 18 months; fourth, the FAA Administrator be authorized to enter into contracts with the engine manufacturers to construct and test over the next 18 months demonstrator engines to prove the basic features of the engines; and five, and finally—and very importantly—that the Congress be requested to appropriate—Senator Magnuson—the necessary funds to initiate the next phase of the program. And for this purpose I shall request an appropriation of $140 million.” Ira C. Eaker commented in the San Antonio Express: “When McKee succeeds in his SST mission, as I believe he will, any citizen will be able to buy a $50 ticket for a flight from Washington to Los Angeles in 55 minutes, or purchase for $55 air passage from New York to Paris in one hour. Of course, there will be cynics who will ask: ‘Who wants to fly to Paris in an hour?’ The answer is: Most of the people who want to go to Paris. “There is one predictable human trait. People will always go for the fastest transport. Not long after man got on a train, he took his freight out of the covered wagons and off the oxcarts forever. When people took up with automobiles, they soon put their produce, their pigs and their poultry on trucks. “There is also some algebraic or arithmetic relation between the speed of travel and the number of people who travel. About 10 times as many people fly the Atlantic now in five hours as crossed when the trip took five days. No doubt 10 times more people will cross the ocean when they can do it in an hour.” (White House Release; Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/8/65, 14)
In an article discussing preparations for the Gemini VI flight, William Hines noted in the Washington Evening Star: “Total propellant load of a ready-to-go Titan 2 consists of 13,700 gallons of a fuel called aero-zine-50 and 15,900 gallons of an oxidizer, nitrogen tetroxide. Their principal combustion product is nitric acid.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/11/65, A2)
U.S. would put a supersonic airliner into the skies no later than 1974, William F. McKee, Federal Aviation Administrator, told the Aero Club of Washington. He said faa had a target date of no later than 1974 for finishing all tests before regular passenger flights, (upi, NYT, 10/27/65,95)
Commenting on the Project Surveyor report of Rep. Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) Subcommittee on nasa Oversight [see Oct. 8], William J. Coughlin said:	“. . . the really amazing thing is that what the Karth report calls the ‘stormy dV-j-year history’ of the project has not been stormier. Given a limited budget to accomplish the impossible, anyone will have difficulties. . . . “The Karth report, in fact, acknowledges this when it states: ‘In essence, insufficient preliminary work was done prior to the decision to go ahead with the project, and the award of a contract for development of the Surveyor spacecraft.’” (Coughlin, M&R, 11/1/65, 46)
Rep. William S. Moorhead (D-Pa.) spoke on the floor of the House on the problem of collecting and using information for decision-making in government and industry: “Experts say that the human mind has difficulty in considering more than 10 or' 20 factors at the same time in making decisions. Yet, the unsolved problems of our society may require thousands or hundreds of thousands of factors or subfactors to be considered. Industry has learned to simulate mathematically a given environment. By varying the input assumptions or by varying subdecisions the decision maker can be given rational basis on which to make alternative decisions.” (CR, 9/21/65, 23755)
In its 150th flight, the X-15 (No. 3) was flown to 295,600-ft. altitude and top speed of 3,682 mph (mach 5.33) by NASA research pilot John B. McKay. Altitude marked the fourth highest reached by the X-15, Purpose of flight was to measure boundary layer noise; test a horizon scanner; and measure aerodynamic and structural loads on the horizontal tail surfaces. (NASA Release 65-310; X-15 Flight Log) *	Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (LCdr,. usn), after a record 30 days 205 ft. below the surface of the Pacific, said he was convinced “men can Sepfem&er 28: John B. McKay, pilot of 150th flight, in front of X-15 No. 3. live forever—any length of time they wish—beneath the surface of the ocean.” He told a news conference of the beauty, pain, and hard manual labor and added: “The ocean is a much more hostile environment than space. I worked much harder in Sealab 2 than in the Mercury capsule. More energy is required just to stay warm, because of the 50-degree cold. But the real key is the isolation. I think men can live as long in underwater habitats as they can in dewline stations or any place else where they are isolated.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/29/65)
Commenting on budgetary considerations as they might affect the Titan iii-C, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: “If the economy ax falls on the Titan 3C program in the wake of an unsuccessful launching Tuesday, it will be sad indeed. The program is one of the few major space efforts in recent memory to have gone along so far on schedule, close to budget limits, and with a reasonably high degree of success.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/24/65, A3)
Lunar Landing Research Vehicle flight by Joseph 'Walker at Edwards. by Rep. Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Karth committee summarized the most serious reasons for Surveyor’s delay: 1) the failure to do adequate preliminary work; 2) a series of major modifications; 3) inadequate staffing by jPL in the first three years; 4) too rapid expansion of personnel at a later date; 5) poor management on the part of Hughes; 6) a resistance on the part of Hughes to making management changes; 7) an improperly conducted testing program by Hughes; 8) management weaknesses in NASA; and 9) a lack of vigorous centralized control by NASA. To describe the magnitude of the Surveyor problems, the Congressional investigators highlighted a NASA press release of January 1961, which outlined Project Surveyor as costing about $50 million, consisting of seven spacecraft, each weighing 2,500 lbs., capable of placing over 200 lbs. of scientific payload on the lunar surface, with launches scheduled during the 1963-66 time period. The Subcommittee then noted that the first launch had been delayed about two and a half years, payload capability had been reduced to only a TV camera on the first four spacecraft and only 114 lbs. on the next three operational models, with total costs so far of nearly $350 million for the spacecraft R&D alone. The investigation concluded that the responsibility for the Surveyor situation could be found in the inadequate preparation for the project, the performance of JPL, the performance of Hughes Aircraft, and the performance of NASA Headquarters. “A serious mistake” was made at the very beginning of the Surveyor project when insufficient preliminary work was done to identify serious technical problems, judge feasibility, consider alternatives, and more accurately estimate costs. The investigation concluded further that this was “the inevitable result of a poorly defined project.” (House Rpt.)
The Sofar (Sound Fixing and Ranging Device), used to locate ICBm’s through a small explosive charge set off as the missile sank, would be transformed into a rescue device for aircraft and ships in the Pacific, Capt. John M. Waters, Jr. (uscg), told a U.S. Coast Guard-sponsored North Atlantic Search and Rescue Seminar in New York. A pressure switch mechanism would fire the explosive at 2,500 ft. below the surface—depth at which sound waves encountered least resistance; sound of the explosion would be picked up by four hydrophone listening stations and the exact disaster site plotted. Capt. Waters said the device was “practically foolproof” and had been endorsed by the Naval Aviation Center. Each Sofar locator would cost about $75. (Bamberger, NYT, 5/14/65, 65)
Highlights of report by Civil Service Commission Chairman John W. Macy, Jr., to President Johnson on Government savings during FY 1965 resulting from employee suggestions showed that one of the top suggestion awards went to NASA personnel. The $1,400 award to msfc aerospace technologists Emmett L. Martz, John L. Burch, and William L. Kimmons was for their design which reduced by $133,438 the cost of certain bearings in Saturn launch vehicle’s guidance system. NASA was among the five nondefense Government agencies that exceeded the million-dollar mark in savings from adopted suggestions. (Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 335)
Dr. William R. Lucas, chief of the Materials Div. of the Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, msfc, received the Hermann Oberth Award from the Alabama Section of the aiaa for his “outstanding individual scientific achievements in the field of astronautics and for the promotion and advancement of the aeronautical sciences.” (msfc Release 65—279)
X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 155,900 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,938 mph (mach 5.64) to obtain data on star tracking cameras, landing gear modification checkout, stability and control and advanced X-15 landing dynamics. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; X—15 Flight Log)
Soviet aircraft designer Oleg K. Antonov provided technical and performance specifications of the large An-22 aircraft during an interview conducted by J. Marmain for Wehr und Wirtschaft (W. Germany) : first flight was made in February 1965; aircraft shown at International Air Show, Paris, was transport model; considerable rebuilding, including 15-m. extension of the tail, would be required for the craft to accommodate 720 passengers. Antonov said his design office was not concerned with development of a passenger version of the An-22, a new version of the An-24 for 64 passengers, and a smaller special purpose aircraft. (Marmain, Wehr und Wirtschaft, 7/65, 390-91) During July: Paul Tillich, Protestant theologian, commenting upon the “Pacem in Terris” of Pope John xxm, wrote: “A . . . genuine hope for peace is the technical union of mankind by the conquest of space. Of course, nearness can intensify hostility; and the fact that the first manifestations of the technical oneness of the world were two world wars proves this possibility. But nearness can also have the opposite effect. It can change the image of the other as strange and dangerous; it can reduce self-affirmation and effect openness for other possibilities of human existence and—particularly as in the encounter of religions— of other possibilities of genuine faith.” (Tillich, “The Limits of Peace,” Chicago Today, Summary 1965, 2-5)
x-15 No. 3 was flown by Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) 3,136 mph (mach 4.62) to 94,400-ft. altitude for pilot checkout, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor told a White House Cabinet meeting that Government scientists wanted to undertake a national weather-control program to determine whether fog could be dispelled, hail suppressed, hurricanes diverted, and rain made, reported Howard Simons in the Washington Post. Connor’s report represented a change of view in the scientific community, heretofore reticent about weather modification. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/14/65, A9)
During May 7 flight of usaf-naa xb-70a No. 1, Michael L. Yaffee reported in Aviation Week and Space Technology, five of the experimental bomber’s six General Electric yj93 engines were damaged when the wing apex, a steel honeycomb structure, tore apart and scattered pieces of steel into both sides of the aircraft’s divided, rectangular air intake beneath the wing. The No. 5 engine was most heavily damaged, a post-flight examination had shown, but it was the only engine on the right side of the aircraft operating during the half-hour flight back to Edwards afb. When the apex broke, the xb-70a was flying at mach 2.56. About 30 min. later, naa test pilot Alvin S. White landed the aircraft with all left-hand engines (1, 2, and 3) operating at full power and engine No. 5 at 90% power. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 64-65, 67)
In an editorial in Missiles and Rockets, William J. Coughlin said: “A start on a correct mol public information program should be made immediately by taking samos off the dirty-word list and bringing it back out in the open. To do otherwise is to keep the U.S. in the position of accepting reconnaissance as something offensive, in the most literal sense. It is not. The U.S. conducts reconnaissance over the Soviet Union for its own protection against a closed society. It should not be afraid to acknowledge that fact.” (M&R, 11/22/65, 46)
Groundbreaking ceremony for Univ. of Maryland’s $1.5-million Space Science Building was held at the College Park, Md., campus. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Edward F. Holter, Vice Chairman of the Univ. of Maryland Regents, shoveled the first spadefuls of dirt. (Wash. Post, 4/27/65, A12)
x-15 No. 1 was flown by Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) to an altitude of 76,000 ft., at a speed of 2,761 mph (mach 4.06). (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Research pilots of the X-15, in front of X-15 No. 2 at Edwards, Calif.; Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf), Mai. Robert A. Rush-worth (usaf), John B. McKay (nasa), Capt. William J. Knight (usaf), Milton 0. Thompson (nasa), and William H. Dana (nasa).
House appointed to House-Senate Conference Committee on NASA FY 1967 authorization Reps. William E. Miller (R-N.Y.), Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.), Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), Joseph W. Martin (R-Mass.), James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), and Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (nasa lar V/95-96)
In Houston Post Edward W. O’Brien cited need for definition of future national space effort, pointing out that "the mighty industry-government team that has been mobilized for manned flight is tapering off.” Employment, at the peak, had been 400,000; by the end of 1967, total would be 200,000; by 1968, only 100,000. What the U.S. must soon determine is "whether this unique assembly of brainpower and mechanical skill should be held together, or whether it should be applied elsewhere to better public advantage.” (Houston Post, 8/16/66)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to 3,750 mph (mach 5.34) and 306,900-ft. altitude in flight test to collect micrometeoroids. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check dual channel radiometer, tip-pod accelerometer, and precision attitude. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
First direct measurement of minimum amount of energy required to initiate simple chemical reaction was announced by Cal Tech, where graduate student John Michael White had shown that one third of an electron volt of energy was necessary to split a hydrogen molecule and link a deuterium atom with one of the hydrogens. AEC-supported study had been suggested to White by Dr. Aron Kuppermann, prof, of chemical physics, who said measurement would make it possible to learn "whether bimolecular chemical reactions can be described by the laws of classical mechanics or whether it is necessary to use quantum mechanics.” (Cal Tech Release, 4/4/66)
nasa test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 1 to 3.,511 mph (mach 5.06) and 251,000-ft. altitude to collect micrometeorites. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check horizon scanner, electrical loads, and wing-pod flutter. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (usaf), was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in seventh glide flight at Edwards afb; purpose of flight was checkout of new pilot. (nasa Proj. Off.)
House passed H.R. 15963, bill to establish Cabinet-level Dept, of Transportation. Amendments proposed by Reps. Benjamin J. Rosenthal (D-N.Y.) and John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) that would have established an Office of Aircraft Noise Control and Abatement in the Department were defeated. (CR, 8/30/66, 20342-84)
msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry received aiaa’s IS 66 John Jeffries Award "for outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics through medical research.” Presentation was made at aiaa Military Aircraft Systems Meeting in Dallas. (msc Roundup, 10/28/66, 1)
Sst design proposal evaluations were submitted to faa by 235-member Government team and 30 domestic and foreign airlines; faa Administrator William F. McKee would study evaluations and make recommendation; President Johnson would mfie final decision by Jan. 1, 1967. {Wash. Post, 11/1/66, B7)
Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Co., General Electric Co., and Pratt & Whitney Div., United Aircraft Corp., submitted final designs for 1,800-mph Sst to faa. Evaluation team of Government and airline experts was expected to submit engine and airframe choices to faa Administrator William F. McKee by Nov. 1. Final selection would be announced by President Johnson in late 1966. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/1/66, D7; Clark, NYT, 9/7/66, 26)	...
International cooperation on patents procedures and mechanized information retrieval was urged at Washington, D. C., meeting of National Association of Manufacturers’ Patents Committee. U.S. Commissioner of Patents Edward J. Brenner said that "most of the search or examining work in anywhere from 15% to 80% of the applications . . . could be eliminated” if patent offices exchanged information. (Beller, Tech. Wk., 11/7/66, 20)
Quasars, once believed rare, might account for 28 per cent of the radio sources in space, Dr. John D. Wyndham, research fellow at Cal Tech, reported on the basis of 10-mo. research project. Dr. Wyndham had located all 328 sources listed in Third Cambridge Catalog of Radio Objects, then identified many of them with visible light sources, increasing the number of identifications to more than 150. Identification of radio noise source with a visible light source was first step in determining its distance and confirming that it was a quasar, he explained. (AP, NYT, 7/6/66, 35)
nasa announced appointment of Robert E. King, formerly director of labor relations for General Dynamics/Convair, as NASA Director of Labor Relations. King would provide overall direction for NASA’s external labor relations program; personally coordinate major policy issues and decisions affecting labor relations with dod, aec, and Dept, of Labor; and administer a positive labor relations program to prevent or resolve labor disputes between NASA contractors and their labor unions. He would report to William Rieke, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, (nasa Ann.)
Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor announced appointment of Dr. George S. Benton, Chairman of Dept, of Mechanics at Johns Hopkins Univ., as director of essa’s Institutes for Environmental Research. Dr. Benton, an authority in atmospheric, oceanographic, and hydrological sciences, would assume his new duties in July. (Dept, of Commerce Release 66-60)
usaf had established and would implement in FY 1967 procedures for the management of DOD’s secondary payload space activities, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod’s Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told closed hearing of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Program would provide for operation of a central business office which would accept requests for dod launch support of space experiments from nasa, other armed services, and other dod nonservice R&d activities. Arrangements for secondary payloads on usaf vehicles had previously been handled on an informal basis. (M&S Daily, 3/9/66)
Reorganization of nasa Office of Space Science and Applications (ossa) "to involve its operating offices more deeply in planning the use of manned spaceflight capabilities for scientific exploration of space” was announced by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. Several individual programs were reassigned: Pioneer interplanetary probe program from Lunar and Planetary Programs to Physics and Astronomy Programs; geodetic satellite program, including Geos and Pageos, from Physics and Astronomy Programs to Space Applications; management of programs leading to acquisition of scientific data through remote sensing from Manned Space Science Programs to Space Applications; Manned Space Science Programs office was renamed Manned Flight Experiments Office/ossA, to supervise all ossa manned flight support. Dr. John R. Clark, who had been Director of ossa (Sciences), was named Deputy Associate Administrator for ssa (Sciences). Robert F. Garbarini, who had been Director of ossa (Engineering), was named Deputy Associate Administrator for ssa (Engineering). All ossa advanced study efforts under Advanced Missions Staff would report to Dr. Clark. Acting director of that staff would be Dr. John E. Naugle. (nasa Release 66-27)
In his first X-15 flight test, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X-15 No. 1 to 2,045 mph (mach 3.0) and 75,400-ft. altitude before making successful emergency landing at Cuddeback Dry Lake, Calif., when fuel tank unported 90 sec. after launch. There was no aircraft damage or pilot injury. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams, and William W. Williams received Society of Automotive Engineers’ (sae) Wright Brothers Medal for their group report on development of soft-field and rough-field landing gear. Presentation was made at sae’s National Aeronautic and Space Engineering Meeting in Los Angeles. (Lockheed Southern Star, 9/15/66, 1)
U.K. would build $84-million prototype nuclear-power reactor of the breeder type—designed to produce large amounts of new fissionable atoms—at Dounreay in northeast Scotland, Technology Minister Frank Cousins told the House of Commons. Sir William Penney, head of British Atomic Energy Authority, told news conference he hoped to have commercial models of the breeder power station in operation by 1980. (NYT, 2/10/66; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, Al)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 3,614 mph (mach 5.12) and 192,300-ft. altitude for pilot altitude buildup, star tracker experiments, and base drag studies. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
Senate began consideration of FY 1967 Independent Offices Appropriation bill (H.R. 14921), which included $4,991,600,000 NASA appropriation. Two amendments proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to reduce NASA’s appropriation—one by $998,320,000, the other by $150,000,000—were defeated, (nasa lar V/128)
X-15 No. 1 was flown by NASA test pilot John B. McKay to 3,682 mph (mach 5.19) and 241,800-ft. altitude. Mission objectives included micrometeoroid collection and evaluation of pace transducer, horizon scanner, nonglare glass, and stick kicker. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
U.S.S.R. Antaeus cargo aircraft lifted 88 tons, 103 kg., in flight from Podmoskovnoye airport (Moscow) piloted by I. Y. Davidov, Krasnaya Zvezda announced. Previous cargo record had been 53 metric tons, 479 kg., lifted Dec. 16, 1958, by U.S. mats C-133 Cargomaster piloted by Col. John M. Thompson (usaf). (Tass, 10/30/66)
Dr. Edmund P. Learned, Harvard Univ. professor of business policy, became adviser to faa Administrator William F. McKee on "economic and financial aspects of the supersonic transport (sst) development program.” (faa; faa Release 66-38)
nasa and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) signed Memorandum of Understanding to conduct pulsed laser radar experiments to determine relationship of noctilucent clouds to height, distribution, and scattering properties of cosmic dust and aerosol particles, ssrc would provide optical equipment and design and construct light transmitter optical system; nasa would provide laser head, power supply, and other 3' ment. Each agency would bear the cosl of the equipment it would y and the responsibilities it would undertake. Results of experiments would be made available to scientific world, (nasa Release 66-35) • Device to alter wavelength of a laser beam to tune it for specific tasks such as communications, surgery, analysis of materials, or industrial applications was patented by Bell Telephone Labs, physicists Drs. Joseph A. Giordmaine and David A. Kleinman. In patented method, laser beam would be passed at a calculated angle through a special crystal so that frequency of the emerging light would be a multiple of original beam’s. (Jones, NYT, 2/12/66,33)
John A. Edwards, nasa Deputy Director, Gemini Program, had been designated Director of Operations for Saturn/Apollo Applications in omsf. (nasa Ann., 12/30/66)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) to 3,204.5 mph (mach 4.65) and 92,100-ft. altitude in pilot familiarization flight. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to evaluate aircraft’s controllability and natural stability. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to 3,682 mph (mach 5.34) and 132,700-ft. altitude in his third flight. Primary purpose was pilot checkout. (X-15 Proj. Off; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/5/66)
msfc engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr., ended 18day stay inside lunar vehicle simulator to test interior chamber design and investigate human factors of an enclosed cabin environment. During experiment they performed assigned tasks inside chamber, went outside in spacesuits to simulate going onto lunar surface to gather rock samples, and performed emergency tasks when the compartment walls were "punctured by meteoroids.” Results of experiment, conducted by Honeywell, Inc., might be used in developing hardware needed in future exploration of moon, (msfc Release 66-56)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.), speaking on floor of Senate, pointed out the contributions of small business to Gemini program and surveyor i mission and said they were "irrefutable evidence that there is still a significant place in our economy for the ambitious and talented ... in new and growing business firms.” (CR, 6/8/66, 12053)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), emphasizing the need for expanded efforts in the field of oceanography, said before the National Space Club in Washington, D. C., that oceanography was becoming increasingly related to space. He noted the recent NASA-Naval Oceanographic Office agreement whereby noo would coordinate all investigations about possible applications of manned earth orbital operations in the field of oceanography. He suggested that this program "be expanded formally to include unmanned operations as well.” He urged a national program with national goals, "coordinated by one agency like . . . [nasa]” and given adequate funds—"an all-wet nasa.” Karth said he did not think that post-Apollo programs, such as manned expeditions to Mars or to the moons of Jupiter would gain "general acceptance” until "we have solved the continually worsening home planet problems of hunger and poverty.” (Text)
usaf awarded Univ. of Colorado a 15-mo., $300,000 research contract to "conduct independent investigations into unidentified flying object (Ufo) reports.” Study would be headed by Dr. Edward U. Condon, a professor of physics at the university, (dod Release 847-66)
London bookmaker William Hill, who had offered 1,000-to-l odds against a manned lunar landing by the end of 1968, cut the odds to 10 to 1 after luna x entered a lunar orbit, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/6/66)
faa Administrator William F. McKee told the Economic Club of Detroit that by bringing closer together the industrialized and developing nations, supersonic aircraft would make possible "a better way of life for all. . . . The social meaning of this greater ability to communicate is difficult to imagine.” Calling air travel one of the Nation’s fastest-growing businesses, General McKee said that rate of increase had averaged 14 per cent over recent years and had jumped to 25 per cent for the first half of 1966. (NYT, 9/20/66, 76)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 4,250 mph (mach 6.33) and 98,900-ft. altitude during 9-min. flight, successfully using full external propellant tanks for first time and setting new speed record for X-15 aircraft. Previous 4,104-mph (mach 6.059) record had been set by the late Joseph A. Walker (nasa), June 27, 1962. (X-15 Proj. Off.; dpi, NYT, 11/19/66, 24)
Sen. Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (D-Va.), replaced Sen. Joseph D. Tydings (D-Md.) on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. House Science and Astronautics Committee membership remained the same. (NASA LAH V/l)
William L. Green, Jr., executive assistant in NASA’s Office of Public Affairs and former usia press officer, was appointed nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, (nasa Release 66-140; AF)
XB-70 No. 1 experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by L/Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and nasa test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton, reached mach 2.52 and 60,000-ft. altitude in flight from Edwards afb for the national sonic boom program. (XB-70 Flight log)
X-15 No. 2 was flown by Maj. William Knight (usaf) to 3,473 mph (mach 4.90) and 231,000-ft. altitude to conduct startracker experiment and base drag study and test alternate pitot static system. (X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 8/14/66, 8)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by nasa test pilot William H. Dana to 3,218 mph (mach 4.71) and 96,100-ft. altitude to check out MH inertial system, cockpit display, horizontal tail loads, and stick kicker. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
A Space Sciences Division in the Engineering and Development Directorate, a consolidated medical directorate, and title changes for key management positions became effective at msc. Medical Research and Operations Directorate would be headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, formerly Chief of Center Medical Programs. Medical directorate would include Biomedical Research Office, Medical Operations Office, and Occupational and Environmental Medicine Office. Addition of medical directorate brought the number of Center directorates to five. The four Assistant Directors would be known as Directors: Director of Administration, Wesley L. Hjornevik; Director of Flight Crew Operations, Donald K. Slayton; Director of Engineering and Development, Dr. Maxime A. Faget; and Director of Flight Operations, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. (msci 1130.1; msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1,2)
Ten-month survey was reported by Cal Tech radioastronomy research fellow Dr. John D. Wyndham. He found that at least a fourth of the radio sources reported beyond this galaxy belonged in the quasar category. If a fourth of the thousands of radio sources beyond the Milky Way are quasars, the latter must be very abundant, the report said. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/29/66, A26)
House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Space Science and Applications Subcommittee recommended cancellation of NASA’s proposed 1967 Venus mission and proposed that $42 million of otherwise programed money be used in the Voyager program to speed exploration of Mars—crashlanding a probe on that planet in 1969. Subcommittee action would go to full Science and Astronautics Committee in form of report on FY 1967 budget authorization for nasa’s ossa. Such reprograming action was new in space effort. Subcommittee Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said: "Congress is for the first time asserting its prerogatives, using its judgement, setting priorities of its own.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, 6)
X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,652 mph (mach 5.34) and 130,000-ft. altitude by Maj, William J. Knight (usaf) to check out electrical loads, nonglare glass, stick kicker, and shade window. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
NASA research pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency landing on Delamar Dry Lake, Nev., when engine of X-15 No. 1 aircraft shut down prematurely—probably because ammonia fuel pump ruptured—32 sec. after aircraft had been dropped from B-52 bomber at 45,000-ft. altitude. McKay escaped injury, and X-15 suffered only minor damage. (Edwards afb Memorandum; X-15 Proj. Off.)
Accomplishments between June 1 and 7—surveyor i, Gemini ix-a, OGO in, and Wasp missions—had given nasa "the most rewarding week in its short but action-packed history,” wrote William J. Coughlin in Technology Week. "Big shots and small, it all added up to an active and highly promising seven-day period for nasa. As someone commented, this was indeed the week that was.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 6/13/66, 54)
X-15 No. 2 was flown to 3,443 mph (mach 4.85) and 249,000-ft. altitude by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) on star-tracking mission. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was considering usaf proposal for an advanced manned strategic aircraft (Amsa) which would cost $1.5-$2 billion to develop, William Beecher reported in the New York Times. Bomber would reportedly be able to carry internally 25 nuclear-tipped short range attack missiles (Sram), plus nuclear bombs; have unrefueled range of 7,000 to 10,000 mi.; and be capable of traveling 1,625 mph—about 2Vi times the speed of B-52 aircraft, the mainstay of current bomber force. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/66, 1)
A new nuclear particle—the most massive and most stable yet found— had been discovered by physicists at Argonne National Laboratory (anl). Three and a half times as heavy as the proton, the particle wa9 "a 'nucleon resonance’ known simply as N*3245.” The number "3245” stood for 3,245 million electron volts, the amount of its energy. According to Dr. Alan D. Krisch of Univ. of Michigan, nucleon resonances "may be 'excited’ or highly energetic states of protons and neutrons . . . and can be produced only in accelerators. They are not observed in nature.” Krisch, along with John R. O’Fallon, Keith Ruddick, and Steven W. Kormanyos of Univ. of Michigan, and Lazarus G.	Ratner of anl, made the discovery using Argonne’s 13.5-billion electron volt (Bev) zero gradient synchrotron. They said this "abnormally stable” particle has a lifetime of one ten-thousandth of a millionth of a millionth of a millionth of a second, which is "longer than that of any of its family of nuclear particles.” Krisch suggested N*3245 may have "an unusually high spin which prevents it from decaying easily.” Discovery was reported in Physical Review Letters. (Phys. Rev. Letters, 4/18/66, 709; Amer. Inst, of Physics Release, 4/18/66)
X-15 No. 3 was flown to 3,580 mph (mach 5.11) and 254,200-ft. altitude by NASA pilot William H. Dana for altitude buildup, micrometeoroid collection, measurements of total solar flux and broadband light distribution by JPL spectroradiometer, and radiometer measurements of ultraviolet exhaust plume characteristics. (X-15 Proj. Off.; fbc Release; jpl Release 408)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown by Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and naa pilot Van H. Shepard, reached mach 2.53 and 60,800-ft. altitude in flight to generate sonic booms over instrumented sites and test structures at Edwards afb. (nasa Proj. Off".; upi, NYT, 12/22/66, 20)
X-15 No. 2 was flown to 3,614 mph (mach 5) and 102,200-ft. altitude by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) to conduct heat tests. Pilot conducted base-drag studies and checked out stability and control, ablative materials, and wing tip accelerometer. It was 170th flight of the X-15 and 7th during August, (frc Release 16-66; X-15 Proj. Off.)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 3 to 3,545 mph (mach 5.20) and 178,000-ft. altitude in flight test for altitude buildup. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check out boundary-layer noise, horizontal tail loads, and heat transfer panels. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (usaf), was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in 10th glide flight at Edwards afb; purpose was to explore lateral and longitudinal stability and control characteristics with dampers on and off. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Saturn V crawler completed first successful load-carrying run at ksc since track support roller bearings had been crushed during 7.9-million-lb.-load test July 25, 1965. Crawler lifted 447-ft., 10.6-million-lb. launcher umbilical tower No. 1 (Lut) and moved it 24 mi. in about nine hrs. ksc Procurement Director Michael Haworth revealed costs for two crawlers ordered would total $14.2 million, $5.1 million more than original $9.1-million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with Marion Power Shovel Co. (M&R, 2/7/66, 34)
Fifth anniversary of President John P. Kennedy’s call before a joint session of Congress to undertake a manned lunar landing in this decade.
nasa’s Procurement Office reorganized into two main divisions: Policy and Review, and Contract Management. George J. Vecchietti, Director of Procurement, named Paul A. Barron, formerly gsa Assistant General Counsel for Regulations and General Law,' Assistant Director of Procurement for Policy and Review. William P. Risso, formerly Special Assistant to Director of Procurement, was named Assistant Director of Procurement for Contract Management. Vecchietti also announced establishment of Procurement Surveys Div., with Harvey M. Kennedy, Jr., Director, and Staff Operations Div., with Harold E. Pryor, Director. (nasa Release 66-81)
Referring to nasa-dod decision of 1964 to exchange experts in each other’s programs, Aviation Week reported the score to date: 184 usaf, 78 Army, 25 Navy, and six usmc officers assigned to NASA; transferred to dod was one NASA official, Dr. Michael Yarymovich, now technical director of usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program. (Av. Wk., 4/25/66, 25)
M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (usaf), was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in ninth glide flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of flight were to complete pilot checkout and to extend the M2-F2’s flight envelope, (nasa Proj. Off.)
President Johnson appointed bob Director Charles L. Schultze chairman of committee to oversee final review of recommendations made by Nov. 28-Dec. 1, 1965, White House Conference on International Cooperation. Schultze would be assisted by Conference’s executive director, Raymond D. Nasher, and White House special assistants Walt W. Rostow and Joseph A. Califano, Jr. (Pres. Doc., 8/8/66, 1025)
New evidence supporting theory that Venus’ environment could sustain life was published by Johns Hopkins Univ. astrophysicists William Plummer and John Strong in Astropkydcal Journal. Past measurements of microwave emissions from Venus had indicated very high surface temperatures. Plummer and Strong concluded, on the basis of recent detailed measurements from high-altitude balloon observations by Cal Tech radioastronomers, that possibly "30 percent of the observed microwaves in the past had no bearing on surface temperatures but rather emanated from electrical discharges within the cloudy atmosphere of Venus.” They estimated Venus’ temperature ranges from 580°F ai equator to 9°F at poles and said there are extensive regions—greater than earth’s land area—"where man would find the temperature comfortable.” (NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. Post, 4/18/66, A7)
Establishment of National Natural Disaster Warning System to provide warnings of hurricanes, tornadoes, tidal waves, floods, and other natural hazards was announced by the White House in response to proposal by Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor. Warning System would "make effective use of present technology and existing facilities for the distribution of all warnings over a single authentic channel between the warning agency and the public”; it would eventually provide around-the-clock weather intelligence reaching hundreds of communities which had not previously had adequate warning service. (Pres. Doc., 3/7/66, 303)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana made successful emergency landing of X—15 No. 3 at Edwards afb after low pressure developed in fuel pump. (AP,B Sun, 4/27/67)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) to mach 1.35 and 37,000-ft altitude to conduct stability and control maneuvers, (nasa Proj Off)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of ost and science advisor to the President, addressing science writers’ seminar in St. Louis, doubted value of scientists’ becoming part-time politicians to promote greater public support of scientific activity. He said a scientist who used his skill in explaining complex subjects to laymen was “a much better politician than anyone trying to be an amateur on serious political matters.” Noting that rate of growth of Federal support of science activities had slowed in recent years, Hornig said $17 billion was still being spent annually on science activities, including $1.8 billion on academic science in universities. (AP, NYT, 11/19/67, 2; Federal Support for Academic Sciences and Other Educational Activities in Univ. and Col., July 67)
In February and March testimony released by Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on Disarmament, Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., indicated that U.S. was developing a new type of nuclear warhead designed to destroy enemy missiles with high-intensity x-rays. X-ray method, which would be used with three-stage Spartan missile, could destroy enemy missile by (1) disrupting avionic circuits used for guidance and detonation; (2) heating warhead to such high temperatures that it would ablate prematurely and burn up during reentry; or (3) triggering the warhead and causing premature detonation. (Committee Off; Av Wk, 5/15/67, 22; upi, P Inq, 5/11/67, 3; Finney, NYT, 5/10/67, 1)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.), member of Senate Foreign Relations Committee, on Senate floor called proposed Nike-X ABM system “a very expensive flying ‘erector set’ ” and said that Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was following an unwise course, “militarily, economically, and diplomatically. . . . Even if we were to spend forty billion dollars or more on a so-called massive system, the resulting increase in our security would be zero. . . . The result would he a waste of a great deal of money . . at a critical time. He cited three flaws in arguments supporting abm system: (1) justification based on approaching threat of Communist Chinese nuclear tipped missiles (“We have the capacity to devastate China many times over . . . and the Chinese know that,” he said); (2) assumption that a thin abm system would be effective against Communist China for any appreciable period; and (3) assumption that during so-called safe period in Chinese nuclear development, U.S., behind an abm defense, would be genuinely safe from nuclear attack. “The inevitable conclusion,” Senator Clark noted, “is that the proposed . . . system simply will not do the job which its proponents say it will do.” (Text; CR, 10/9/67, S14413-27)
William H. Woodward was promoted from Deputy Director to Director of oart’s Space Power and Electric Propulsion Div.—formerly Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div.—succeeding Harold B. Finger, who became NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management March 15. Woodward would be responsible for planning, managing, and coordinating advanced research and technology programs in the area of space power, including solar, chemical, nuclear, and electric propulsion, (nasa Release 67-78)
Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton made successful emergency landing of XB-70 No. 1 at Edwards afb after crew entry door opened on takeoff and main landing gear malfunctioned. (XB-70 Proj Off)
afsc’s Ballistic Systems Div. (bsd) and Space Systems Div. (ssd) were combined to form new Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) with headquarters in Los Angeles. New organization would be commanded by m/g John W. O’Neill, former Commander of Electronic Systems Div. m/g John L. McCoy, former BSD Commander, was named Deputy Commander for Missiles; m/g Paul T. Cooper, former SSD Commander, was appointed Deputy Commander for Space, (afsc Release 101.67; ssd Release 67-207)
U.S.S.R. and Great Britain planned to sign a joint technological agreement shortly as result of British government and industry team visit to Moscow during September, reported Aviation Week. Agreement would cover automatic landing, aircraft engine technology and reliability, engine noise, and sonic boom research, Minister of State John Stone-house, team leader, stated. Britain had substantial lead over U.S.S.R. in these fields, but Stonehouse contended sharing of information would lead to new export markets for British hardware in Soviet and Soviet-bloc countries. (Av Wk, 10/2/67,16)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell became NASA Associate Administrator. His appointment had been announced Aug. 25. Dr. Newell would be replaced as Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Sciences) by Dr. John E. Naugle. (nasa Release 67-228; NASA Ann, 10/20/67; Hines, W Star, 10/3/67, A4)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was piloted by Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton to mach 2.54 and 60,200-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb for national sonic boom program. (nasa Pro j Off)
Lewis Research Center’s Quiet Engine Program should produce a significant reduction in jet-engine noise and reverse the rising noise levels which had created serious problems at major airports, Michael L. Yaffee reported in Aviation Week. Expected to cost $50 million, program was seeking to develop a new turbofan demonstrator engine that would show a reduction of 15 PNdb (perceived noise in decibels) on takeoff and 20 PNdb on landing, below noise of current transport engines. Definition phase of Quiet Engine Program began under $458,000 contract LeRC awarded United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div., July 13. Remaining $750,000 allotted to program for FY 1967 was being used to purchase supporting services and hardware. (Yaffee Av Wk, 8/21/67, 38-9)
USN had selected six companies to compete for six-month study contract to design ship-based antimissile missile system which could support Nike-X, William Beecher reported in New York Times. Companies were Hughes Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., Boeing Co., Aerojet-General Corp., McDonnell Douglas Co., and Raytheon Co. Code-named Seaborne AntiBallistic Missile Intercept System (sabmis), it would be deployed on submarines and warships stationed in international waters off Communist China and U.S.S.R. to intercept long-range missiles launched from those countries. A USA Nike-X official commented: “The Navy system is both feasible and attractive. It could intercept enemy ICBm’s before they can deploy most of their penetration aids; it would reduce the number of missiles Nike-X would have to contend with; and it would tremendously increase the enemy’s technology problems by forcing him to become very sophisticated indeed if he wants to stand any chance of getting his icbm’s past both the mid-course and terminal phase defenses.” (Beecher, NYT, 7/4/67,1, 2)
Citizens League Against the Sonic Boom, an organization with 230 members in 18 states, had started a campaign to stop the construction of a U.S. sst, New York Times reported. Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. William A. Shurcliff, director of the campaign, said in a Cambridge, Mass., interview that the League would attack the sst program in Congress. “The amount of money provided thus far by Congress is less than one-quarter of what is needed to get a prototype in the air. The government must put about $1.1 billion together, and to date Congress has only supplied $200-million or $299-million. “I think our chances of stopping the program are good.” {NYT, 6/18/67, 60)
Addressing the House on means for a terminal-phase missile interception Systran, Rep. William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.) called for a sea-based antiballistic missile intercept system (sabmis). Pointing to the popular estimate that Red China would have a ballistic missile delivery capability in the early 1970s, the Congressman stated: “. . . deployment of a sabmis unit would place in the seas close to an adversary’s homeland and across his ‘launch trajectory window,’ a mobile, partly submerged screen of antimissile forces.” (CR, 9/19/67, H12137)
Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and naa test pilot Van Shepard flew XB-70 No. 1 to mach 1.43 and 42,200-ft altitude during two-hour performance evaluation flight at Edwards afb. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Senate, approving (71-1) dot’s FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 11456), accepted figures of its Appropriations Committee, where special attention had been given to air and highway safety programs [see Sept. 28]. Despite persistent efforts of Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wisc.), who would have allowed only $1 million for SST development, amount was fixed at $142 million. Senate-approved bill was sent to conference committee. (CR, 10/5/67, S14299-333)
Michael E. Gluhareff, Russian-born engineer and associate of helicopter pioneer Igor I. Sikorsky, died in Bridgeport, Conn., at 74. Gluhareff was engineering manager of Sikorsky Aircraft, a division of United Aircraft. His many patents had included a dart-shaped plane, sailplane (glider), tail-less airplane with rear-mounted propeller, and device to use exhaust gases of engines to increase the speed and load of the plane (co-inventor) . (AP, W Post, 9/6/67, B8)
FAA met with 11 U.S. airlines and one leasing company to discuss financing of sst. Following conference, faa Administrator William F. McKee announced that airline representatives had “indicated general agreement with the concept of assisting with financing of the prototype development phase.” (faa Release 67-11)
Joseph J. Tymczyszyn, a senior faa test pilot and chief of faa’s West Coast Supersonic Transport Development Field Office, had emerged as the test pilot most likely to certify the sst, Mitchell Gordon disclosed in the Wall Street Journal. Tymczyszyn, certifier of both the Boeing 707 and the Douglas DC-8 jetliners for U.S. service, had already spent four years familiarizing himself with sst operation, and had logged more than 1,000 hrs in sst simulators. (Gordon, WSJ, 1/3/67,1)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 1 to 3,205 mph (mach 4.84) and 71,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: (1) pcm system checkout; (2) measurement of coldwall heat transfer; (3) measurement of step panel heat transfer; (4) boost guidance checkout; (5)	energy management checkout; (6) check of tip-pod accelerometer; (7)	sonic boom study; and (8) study of horizontal tail loads. (X—15 Proj Off)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) and Sen. Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.) were assigned to vacancies on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences created by the resignations of Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (D-Va.), and Sen. George D. Aiken (R-Vt.). (Senate Comm.)
NASA test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald Mallick flew XB-70 No. 1 to mach 2.27 and 58,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb to check out: (1) three pacer airspeed calibration points; (2) photos of the tufted right upper canard; (3) boundary layer noise data; (4) stability, control, and handling qualities; (5) bypass close unstart of left inlet; (6) nose ramp flutter data; and (7) radar airspeed calibration, (nasa Proj
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) set new winged aircraft speed record when be flew X—15 No. 2 to 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) and 99,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb to: (1) test Martin ablative coating and ramjet
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., appointed Apollo 204 Review Board to investigate Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee: Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of LaRC, Chairman; Astronaut Frank Borman, msc; Maxime Faget, msc; E. Barton Geer, LaRC; George Jeffs, North American Aviation, Inc.; Dr. Frank A. Long, Cornell Univ.; Col. Charles F. Strang, Norton afb, Calif.; George C. White, Jr., nasa Hq.; and John Williams, ksc. Three advisory members were added later: Charles W. Mathews, Director of Saturn/Apollo Applications, nasa Hq. omsf; John Yardley, McDonnell Co. executive; and L/Col. William D. Baxter (usaf) . LaRC Chief Counsel George Mallay would serve as counsel to the board, (nasa Release 67—16; Wilford, NYT, 1/30/67, 2)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 167,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.32) to provide pilot experience at high altitude and check out horizon scanner, horizontal stabilizer alpha, 3rd landing skid, and electrical loads. (X-15 Proj Off)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 3,409 mph (mach 5.10) and 90,000-ft altitude in first flight with a new ablative coating and seeder designed to permit eiircraft to fly at mach 7.4 without basic airframe modification. Flight also tested: (1) stability and control with dummy ramjet and ablative; (2) Hycom phase-II camera (KA-51A); (3) ramjet local flow; (4) ramjet separation characteristics; and (5) wing tip accelerometer, (nasa Proj Off; Av Wk, 8/28/67, 33)
DOD officials were concerned about serious mechanical problems that had “undermined the readiness” of the Minuteman II icbm, William Beecher reported in the New York Times. “As recently as this spring, reliable sources say, nearly 100 missiles—about 40 per cent of all the advanced Minuteman 2 missiles and 10 per cent of the entire 1,000-missile Minute-man force—were out of action because of trouble with the weapon’s guidance and control system.” Although DOD’s “more or less official view” was that the problem was “worrisome hut well in hand,” many officials “while observing that mechanical problems will always group up in any complex electronics system and can be corrected, cite the Minuteman 2 trouble in questioning the wisdom of the near total reliance that Mr. McNamara places on intercontinental ballistic missiles in the strategic field.” [See July 28.] (Beecher, NYT, 7/28/67, 1, 2)
Paul E. Cotton, Director of Management Operations, in NASA’s omsf, was appointed director of oart’s Programs and Resources Div. Cotton would replace William E. Hanna, Jr., who had been named Director of the Bureau of Data Processing and Accounts in the Social Security Administration. (NASA Release 67-304)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) warned the Senate that U.S. deficit could reach $30 billion unless drastic cuts were made in Federal spending. He suggested that a $5-billion reduction in proposed FY 1968 spending be made by: (1) postponing public works programs such as highway construction until economic and military demands were lowered; (2) foregoing the “expensive frill” of sst development; (3) curtailing military costs by further reducing U.S. troop strength in Europe; and (4) cutting NASA’s post-Apollo funds by over $1 billion by postponing “such projects as a soft-landing on Mars, which has nothing to do with our present goal of a moon landing. “The situation that we face in fiscal 1968 involves an economy dominated by a heavy Federal budget, no matter how it is measured. If these circumstances materialize, there is no question about the immediate urgency of substantial expenditure reductions. . . . We may need a tax increase too, but first priority by all means should go to the reduction of spending.” (Text)
37,000-ft altitude over Canada. His theory conflicted with one set forth in 1966 by Johns Hopkins Univ. astrophysicists Drs. William Plummer and John Strong that surface temperatures of Venus were low enough to support life in certain areas. (Lyons, NYT, 5/28/67, 21) • The frontier of space is limited only by man’s “ability to maintain individual freedom and yet join many minds in concerted action,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the Celebration of The Prelude to Independence in Williamsburg, Va. “It is the essential requirement for each of us to do what we can as individuals and as groups to make our system of representative government work, and then work better. More and more this means that each of us must find a way to reach through complexity and organized prejudice to trusted sources of information and organized facts. We must not do less than to make sure we understand the fundamentals in the many important disciplines of human activity. Without this understanding of at least the fundamentals . . . today’s citizen cannot play the role only he can play in representative society, cannot bridge the gap from the old to the new, from one discipline to another. Without this capability, a citizen today cannot be a fully effective participant in a free society. Indeed, without this basic understanding on a large scale at all levels our nation is likely to forfeit the capability of collectively responsible action, and with it, the basis for an effective free society. . . .” (Text)
William S. Aiken, Jr., former Chief of Operations Research Branch, OART, was appointed Deputy Director, Aeronautical Vehicles Div., oart. (NASA Ann, 8/15/67)
President Johnson appointed Paul R. Ignatius, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), as Secretary of the Navy, succeeding Paul H. Nitze, who became Deputy Secretary of Defense July 1. John T. McNaughton, who had been nominated and confirmed as Nitze’s successor in June, was killed in an aircraft crash July 19. The President approved reassignment of Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower), to replace Ignatius. {PD, 8/7/67, 1100)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) made successful emergency landing of X—15 No. 1 at Edwards afb 59 sec after takeoff because of an electrical power failure. (X—15 Proj Off)
jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering appointed William H. Bayley, General Manager of Deep Space Network (dsn), as Assistant Laboratory Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition. In new post, Bayley would direct worldwide dsn which jpl had operated for nasa. Bayley succeeded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, who had taken leave of absence from jpl to accept post of Director of DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency. (jpl Release 461/11-67)
William Markowitz, physics professor at Marquette Univ., summarized his study of the reported flight dynamics of UFOs (unidentified flying objects) in Science. Study was made because of letter in Oct. 21, 1966, Science by Dr. J. Allen fiynek, consultant to usaf’s Project Blue Book, urging investigation of residue of puzzling UFO cases by physical and social scientists. Markowitz’s findings: (1) the control of reported ufos by extraterrestrial beings is contrary to the known laws of physics and (2) the data published do not justify the holding of investigations. He added that he would not believe that earth had ever been visited by any extraterrestrial until he was shown such a visitor. (Markowitz, Science, 9/15/67,1274^-79)
A national information system for assuring the availability of every significant scientific or technical document, regardless of its origin, was “inevitable,” Edward J. Brunenkant, director of AEc’s Division of Technical Information, predicted at New York meeting of the Special Libraries Assn. Noting that over 1 million scientific articles were being printed annually in 35,000 journals, Brunenkant conceded that the establishment of a national system would be “extraordinarily complex,” but said the need for it was “urgent.” (NYT, 6/1/67, 33)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor, urged President Johnson to appoint a commission to study the need for construction and deployment of an antiballistic missile (abm) system. “. . . the ABM question is of such a magnitude that it is essential to have a careful and objective evaluation of the course the United States should follow. I do not believe . . . that the military-industrial complex is objective enough to advise the United States Congress or the President on how we should proceed. This being the case, I strongly suggest that a temporary blue ribbon commission drawn from all sectors of national life is the best way to bring a thorough- inquiry into the issues. “Our very national survival may be at issue in the ABM controversy. It is time we put the best minds in the country to work.” (CR, 7/27/67, S10364-6)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, suggested that SST program was progressing too rapidly. “. . . it is not clear why the United States is so anxious to rush into a costly program of SST development involving many unsolved problems and great economic risk on the strength of a nebulous national prestige. It may well be that our prestige will lose a great deal more if we show ourselves to be a nation whose commitments and investments are based largely on a hysteria about our ‘image’—largely and simply because the British and French are building the Concorde—unable to wait and learn from their experience—and unable to take the advice of a multitude of technical and economic experts within our own country as to the inadvisability of this effort. . . .” {CR, 7/20/67, H9128)
Decrease in worldwide air temperature since the 1940’s might be due to emission of man-made pollutants into the atmosphere, National Center for Air Pollution scientists Robert A. McCormick and John H. Ludwig suggested in Science. Increasing amount of solid material made atmosphere more turbid and thus reduced amount of solar radiation reaching earth. Although excessive amount of carbon dioxide in atmosphere as a result of prolonged coal and oil burning should have made earth warmer, the authors noted, its effect had been offset by the turbidity caused by the pollutants. (McCormick, Ludwig, Science, 6/9/67, 1358-9)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X-15 No. 1 to 3,570 mph (mach 5) and 227,000-ft altitude in test to build up pilot altitude and check out horizon scanner and horizontal stabilizer. (X-15 Proj Off)
Michael Getler, in Aerospace Technology editorial, cited U.K.’s lack of “willingness to invest at home in the pursuit of new technology needed to compete and to grow,” as a maj or reason for devaluation of the British pound [see Nov. 18]. Comparing French and U.K. economies Getler noted that France had invested heavily in her own industry to support a large-scale military buildup and an expensive national space program. “In contrast to French willingness to pay for the cost of [r&d], the British have tended to treat their big companies solely as manufacturers. . . . “While the British have purchased [U.S.] Polaris missiles ... the French have built their own. The British . . . now are buying U.S.-built F-4s and F-llls, while the French continue to design and build newer versions of their own Mirage family, and are now exporting them. . . . “The British national space program is virtually non-existent despite a growing realization . . . [by] Parliament that investment in a properly scaled effort can be of great importance in developing [British] technology. . . . There is no suggestion that the British take on a multibillion dollar effort, but there certainly are grounds to support investment in a $100 million program . . . that would be directed at developing satellites with some obvious commercial applications.” Although U.K.’s purchases of U.S. goods were “good business for American industry,” Getler noted, “the long range risk to this country is that an old and comparably faithful ally will be weakened in the process. Eventually, the British will tire of buying U.S. weapons . . . [but will have] no R&D base ... to fall back. . . .” (Getler, Aero Tech, 12/4/67,58)
nasa test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald L. Maffick flew XB-70 No. 1 to 58,000-ft altitude and 1,581 mph (mach 2.43) in flight at Edwards afb. Purpose of test was to check lateral-directional stability, control, and handling qualities at mach 2.35 and 55,000 ft; inlet unstart at mach 2.4 and 57,500 ft; variable nose ramp functional test at mach 1.6 and 38,000 ft, and at mach 1.4 and 32,000 ft. Flight was successful. (XB-70 Proj Off)
First nonstop helicopter crossing of the Atlantic was successfully completed when two usaf HH-3E helicopters landed at Le Bourget Airport, opposite the U.S. pavilion at the Paris International Air and Space Show, following 30-hr 48-min flight from New York [see May 26-31]. Helicopters, which followed the route taken by Charles Lindbergh in 1927 when he became first man to fly the Atlantic nonstop alone, traveled 4,160 mi and made nine refuelings in flight. First flight crew was commanded by Maj. Herbert B. Zehnder (usaf) ; second by Maj. Donald B. Maurras (usaf). Both crews were submitting claims to Federation Aeronautique Internationale for new speed records from New York to London and New York to Paris, (upi, P EB, 6/1/67, 1; NYT, 6/2/67,17)
William M. Magruder, Lockheed Aircraft Corp,, had been selected to receive Flight Safety Foundation’s 1967 Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award, Aviation Week reported. (Av Wk, \/9/61, 13)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory, under construction at msc, would provide scientists with an unparalleled opportunity to examine extraterrestrial materials under controlled conditions, msc staff members James C. McLane, Jr., Elbert A. King, Jr., Donald A. Flory, Keith A. Richardson, James P. Dawson, Walter W. Kemmerer, and Bennie C. Wooley declared in Science. The laboratory would have four major functions: “(i) distribution of lunar samples to the scientific community for detailed investigations after a period of biologic quarantine; (ii) performance of scientific investigations of samples that are time-critical and must be accomplished within the quarantine period; (iii) permanent storage Under vacuum of a portion of each sample; and (iv) quarantining and testing of the lunar samples, spacecraft, and astronauts for unlikely, but potentially harmful, back-contamination (contamination of extraterrestrial origin).” (Science, 2/3/67, 525-9)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, discussed importance of defense R&D and problem of choosing among new technological developments available. Speaking before the Dallas Chapter of the Assn, of the U.S. Army and the Dallas Council on World Affairs, he noted that over 80% of all the scientists and engineers who had ever lived were alive today; scientific and technical manpower had increased 400%, compared to 50% for labor force; and % of aU U.S. R&D supported national defense. Current defense R&D funding was $8 billion. Discussing selection of proposed projects, he described a new tool and procedure called the Development Concept Paper, “a short, single document . . . [which] requires that . . . parties agree to a common document that states the issues, the assumptions, the alternative courses of action available, the pros and cons for each.” With this type of presentation, he said, the Secretary of Defense could more easily and more objectively decide whether to approve or reject a project, and if approved, the paper could be transmitted to project’s implementers as a guide. This new tool, he indicated, would be used in future to avoid repetition of past inappropriate decisions in which precious resources were wasted, such as air-launched Skybolt missile and B-70 aircraft which proved too vulnerable after $2 billion had been spent on their development; and C5-A subsonic transport aircraft, currently being produced for operation in 1969, whose production had been delayed since late 1950’s pending development of a system to utilize it. From such cases, Dr. Foster noted, “we have repeatedly learned that money is not enough. That enthusiasm is not enough. That technical innovation is not enough. We need critical analysis of purposes, missions, threats, and requirements. We also need realistic tested advanced alternatives produced by our investment in research. And to gain wise management decisions, we must join these together in constructive confrontation.” (Text)
U.K., France, and West Germany would develop a short-to-medium-distance aircraft designed to reduce cost of air travel by the early 1970s, John Stonehouse of the British Ministry of Technology told a London news conference. Known as the European Airbus Project, plan called for a 300-passenger twin-engine aircraft with a 1,931-km (1,200-mi) to 2,253km (1,400-mi) range to begin commercial service by 1973. Expected to cost $532 million, Airbus would be designed jointly by Sud-Aviation of France, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Arbeitsgemeinschaft Airbus of West Germany. (NYT, 7/26/67, 61M)
Senate Appropriations Committee activities were listed by Wall Street Journal: voted $142 million for this year’s development of the sst; doubled the House-approved $20 million for highway safety grants; added $50 million to FAA’s budget for improved air safety (versus the $7 million requested by the Administration) ; and, in all, voted nearly $1.7 billion for the Department of Transportation’s FY 1968 budget. Sponsor for the improved air safety figure of $50 million had been Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.), chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee that handled faa’s budget, who proposed $20 million for operation of air control towers and overtime payment for their crews, plus another $30 million for such new safety equipment as airport ground lighting and improved radar. Sen. Stennis had stated his hope that someday air safety projects could be financed partly with special user charges. (WSJ, 9/28/67,3)
William Tier, Deputy Manager of Operations in mfsc’s Saturn I/IB Program Office, was named Manager to replace Lee B. James. Tier’s former position would be filled by William F. LaHatte. (msfc Release 67-62)
Rep. John J. Rhodes (R-Ariz.), speaking in the House on behalf of .the Republican Policy Committee, urged that House/Senate Conference Committee on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill accept key Republican amendments adopted by the House. Amendments would reduce nasa’s FY 1968 budget request by $201.4 million, establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and require nasa to keep Congress fully and currently informed of problems. (CR, 7/19/67, H9045)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X—15 No. 2 to 96,000-ft altitude and 3,239 mph (mach 4.8) in flight at Edwards afb to check stabilization and control with dummy ramjet and check out thermalcouple system. Flight was successful except for break of dummy ramjet chute cable during landing sequence. (X-15 Proj Off)
jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering announced appointment of Fred H. Felberg, Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions, to the new position of Assistant Laboratory Director for Plans and Programs. He would be succeeded by Jack N. James, Deputy Assistant Director for Flight Projects. In his new position Felberg would be responsible for “planning jpl’s total program, including . . . effective distribution of manpower and resources.” (jpl Release 460)
NASA X—15 (No. 3) crashed in Mojave Desert when the aircraft “exceeded its structural limitations during the final portions of the reentry maneuver,” X—15 Accident Investigating Board suspected. X— 15’s pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams, did not use ejection system and was killed, the first fatality in the 191 flights since the three X—15s started their flight operations, June 8, 1959. Usual flight plan called for aircraft to ascend at a sharp angle after being dropped by B—52 aircraft. After engine burnout, plan called for coasting up into high thin air, then dropping back in pancake style into thicker air for reentry. According to a NASA spokesman, the aircraft had risen to about 260,000 ft and encountered trouble on the way down. “There apparently was some sort of control malfunction as the pilot attempted to pull out of his descent,” spokesman said. Radar and telemetry data received during flight were excellent, data being received down to an altitude of 60,000 ft. Speed and altitude records for winged aircraft—4,534 mph, by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf), and 354,200 ft, by nasa’s Joseph A. Walker (who had since died in crash of XB-70 No. 2 and F—104 aircraft) — had been set by X—15s. Two crash landings of X—15 aircraft had occurred; pilots had survived and aircraft had been restored to flight status. X-15 No. 3 pilot, Maj. Adams, 37, had finished usaf training in 1952, flown in combat in Korea, and graduated with honors from Aerospace Research Pilots School. Although assigned to mol program, he had requested transfer to X-15 operations. Board was continuing attempt to determine the probable cause. (fRC Release 26-67; AP, AIT, 11/16/67,15)
A 59-lb, $350,000 computer used on Gemini V mission had been reconditioned and was being used by USN in tests of new airborne weapons system designed to locate and destroy enemy radar, AP reported. USN declined to name the aircraft or reveal where the tests were being conducted. (AP, Denver Post, 5/14/67) Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, discussed NASA’s attempts to solve the increasing problem of aircraft noise. Efforts included: (1) active participation in the interagency task force established by President Johnson to study aircraft noise [see Feb. 1], (2) study of methods to reduce noise of conventional aircraft engines, (3) investigation of the use of steeper descent angles during approach to landing and steeper climb on takeoff to reduce noise by moving the source farther from the ground, and (4) research on a new turbine engine with low noise as a basic requirement. (Text; NNews, 5/16/67) Former afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) charged that the Johnson Administration was not “pushing technology” and suggested that $400-700 million more should have been spent annually on exploratory and advanced development during the past four or five years. He was particularly critical of the “arbitrary separation of space activities into peaceful and military. ... It simply serves to emphasize, by comparison, the straightforwardness of the Soviet program. Their single-purpose program seeks only to attain a versatile technological superiority which, once attained, will serve the political purpose they choose regardless of what kind of a space program we have or how we categorize it. . . .” (Text) Anglo-French Concorde supersonic aircraft, scheduled to enter commercial service in 1971, would pioneer three markets, monopolizing the first two until “pushed away” by U.S. SST, scheduled to enter passenger service in 1974-5, W. J. Jakimiuk, president of Sud-Aviation, predicted. Concorde would dominate the North Atlantic market where SSTs would first be used; however, “as soon as the U.S. sst penetration of the North Atlantic pushes away the Concordes, they will be introduced on the major other markets, where a position of monopoly again will be found,” Jakimiuk said. When U.S. SST “pushes” Concorde away from these routes, it would then move to a new series of routes where traffic density would be so low that “there will be no sst competition.” (NYT, 5/21/67, 88) Director of FAA sst Development b/'g J. C. Maxwell, referring to report by Institute for Defense Analyses (ida) which suggested that sst program could seriously weaken the Nation’s balance of payments [see May 16], said that “our balance of payments will continue to benefit if American and foreign airlines continue to buy and operate American aircraft in the upcoming supersonic area.” General Maxwell said faa estimated that 1990 market for SSTs, if operations were limited by sonic boom considerations, would be 500 aircraft, improving balance of payments position by $17 billion. If sonic boom did not limit operations, 1,200	aircraft would be sold, improving balance of payments position by $32billion. (Text; Lardner, W Post, 5/Y1/61, Cl) Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, responded to criticism that U.S. was losing its strategic superiority. “For many years, the Soviet Union apparently had been following our lead in every important strategic system technical development. . .. This is still the case. We are following their activities with great care. We see no evidence that our planned strategic capabilities will be endangered by recent Soviet technological actions. . . .” Dr. Foster announced that first MOL would be launched by USAF in 1970, confirming rumors that program was two years behind schedule. (Av Wk, 5/22/67,11) Awards presented included: (1) Monsanto Aviation Safety Award for the “most significant and lasting contribution to air safety” in 1966 to faa Deputy Administrator David D. Thomas, who was recognized as “the principal architect of the U.S. air traffic control system”; and (2)	1967 Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for distinguished and meritorious aerospace writing to Howard Benedict, AP senior aerospace writer, for series of articles from Aue. 8-Sept. 19, 1966, on Gemini XI mission. (Editor & Publisher, 5/13/67; faa Release 67-7)
Dr. Donald E. Guss, project scientist for gsfc’s Solar Particle Intensity and Composition Experiment, died in Cleveland after a heart attack. (W Post, 2/8/67)
Nasa personnel changes: (1) John S. Brown, Division Director in the Office of Legislative Affairs, NASA Hq., became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs; (2) John P. Jewett, Assistant Chief for Administration, Nevada Extension of aec/nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo—n), became Chief of snpo-n. (nasa Ann, 7/2/67, 7/25/67)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 3,818 mph (mach 5.68) and 135,000-ft altitude during nine-min flight at Edwards afb to: (1) provide pilot experience at high altitudes; (2) record stabilizer flow angle of attack; (3) test electrical loads; (4) check out 3rd landing skid; (4) check out pressure attitude indicator; (5) record data from X-15 sonic boom; and (6) check out ablative coatings on stabilizer. (nasa X—15 Proj Off)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 3 to 82,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.52) in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: (1)	cold-wall heat transfer; (2) step-panel heat transfer; (3) boost guidance checkout; (4) sonic boom study; and (5) pcm checkout. (nasa Proj Off)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown at ftc by usaf pilots Col. Joseph Cotton and L/c Emil Strumthal, reached mach 2.52 and 63,500-ft altitude in flight to test stability control and handling qualities. Other test objectives included: handling qualities at mach 1.2 and 40,000-ft altitude; unstarts; radar air speed calibration at mach 1.9 down to 1.2 and 45,000-ft altitude; nose ramp flutter function at mach 1.2 'and 32,000-ft altitude, and at mach 2.55 and 64,000-ft altitude. (NASA Proj Off)
Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf), pilot, and L/Col. Emil Sturmthal (usaf), copilot, flew XB-70 No. 1 to 59,700-ft altitude and 1,510 mph (mach 2.3) in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: longitudinal stability and control and handling qualities checkout; throat unstart checkout; variable nose ramp functional test; radar airspeed calibration; and handling qualities approach sidestep maneuvers. Flight was successful except for lost radar contact. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Carl B. Squier, U.S.’s 13th Federally licensed pilot and one of its earliest air daredevils, died at Burbank, Calif. Born in Decatur, Mich., he had worked since 1929 for Lockheed Aircraft Corp., becoming president in charge of sales and working as consultant beyond his retirement. He was a friend of such notables in U.S. aviation as Wiley Post, Charles A. Lindbergh, and Capt. Edward Rickenbacker. (NYT, 11/7/67, 41)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) urged that Congress cut $9 billion from President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget to avoid tax increase. Interviewed on “Youth Wants to Know” television program, Proxmire suggested that $5-7 billion be cut from public works, $1 billion from space, and $1 billion from U.S. forces in Europe. (AP, W Post, 2/12/67)
Busts of Wilbur and Orville Wright were unveiled in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans at New York Univ.’s Bronx campus. They were among 93 people named to the Hall of Fame since its opening in 1900. (NYT, 4/2/67,24) During week of May 7: Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, N.J., announced plans for what was believed to be the Nation’s first academic center for the study of cryogenics—a branch of physics related to the production and effects of very low temperatures. Dr. John G. Daunt was named to direct the new center. Stevens President Dr. Jess H. Davis said center would have two major objectives: “to help meet the pressing need for scientists and engineers who have substantial training and experience in this developing science,” and “to conduct basic research, which seeks to extend man’s knowledge of cryogenics into areas as yet unexplored.” (Bird, NYT, 5/14/67,63)
Senate passed $2.6-billion AEC FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 10918) which included $7.3 million for a new proton accelerator in Weston, 111. Amendment by Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.) to delay approval of the Weston site until' the community or the state passed open-housing laws which would enable Negro employees to find suitable housing near the plant was defeated. (CR, 1/13/61, S9484-521) The New York Times later commented: “. . . credit goes to Senators . . . who exposed the real issues at stake, and who won a moral victory when the vote margin in Weston’s favor proved much narrower than had been expected. . . . “But there is an even more basic objection to any commitments or expenditures for this expensive research tool at this time. That objection is simply the irrelevance of a 200 billion electron volt accelerator to any real present national problem. . . . The budget cutters are now in full cry demanding reductions in already inadequate expenditures for human needs. It is a distortion of the national priorities to commit many millions now to this interesting but unnecessary scientific luxury.” (NYT, 7/16/67,12)
nasa test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald Mallick flew X-70 No. 1 to mach 1.8 and 55,000-ft altitude in test to check out stability and control of handling qualities, by-pass airflow calibration, and nose ramp flutter. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.), Chairman of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, speaking at launching of Navy’s latest nuclear submarine, the Narwhal, in Groton, Conn., called for “full speed ahead” on building an abm system. (Av Wk, 9/18/67; jCR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, presented Distinguished Service Medal for outstanding service to m/g John L. Zoeckler, his Deputy C/S Systems. Ferguson cited Zoeckler’s “strategic use of management techniques to eliminate serious scheduling problems inherent in the F-lll program.” Zoeckler had managed System Program for F-lll aircraft system at asd, Wright-Patterson afb, from Oct. 14, 1963, until Sept. 1, 1967. (afsc Release 209.67)
Informed U.S. military sources said U.S.S.R. had now been convinced the aircraft carrier would be vital to international conflicts of today, and was even now building its first aircraft carrier, a “baby flattop,” reported UPI. Adm. Ephraim P. Holmes, Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, and his chief of staff, v/A William E. Ellis, said little was known of specifications but he believed it would have long-range capabilities. (Oestreicher, upi, W Post, 10/23/67, A3)
Changes in NASA staff alignment: Harold R. Finger, Manager of nasaaec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo) since its formation in 1960, was named to new NASA position of Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. He was succeeded in snpo by his deputy, Milton Klein. Reporting to Associate Administrator Finger would be Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly; Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs Dr. Rernhardt L. Dorman; Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Dr. Richard L. Lesher; and former LaRC Assistant Director Francis R. Smith in new post of Assistant Administrator for University Affairs. University Affairs Office would integrate, coordinate, and guide nasa’s relationships with colleges and universities; manage the Sustaining University Program; and assume other duties previously assigned to ossa’s Office of Grants and Research Contracts. Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, formerly Director of Grants and Research Contracts, was appointed Special Assistant to the Administrator on NASA—NAS and nasa-nae relationships. Other changes: DeMarquis D. Wyatt became Assistant Administrator for Program Plans and Analysis and David Williamson was appointed as his deputy. Rudget and programming functions previously under Wyatt were transferred to the Office of Administration, where they would be integrated into a NASA-wide system for resources management, including programming, budgeting, personnel management, and financial reporting. Rreene M. Kerr, Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis, resigned to return to private industry but would continue to serve as part-time consultant to NASA; Gen. Jacob M. Smart (usaf, Ret.) succeeded Kerr in addition to continuing to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator; William E. Lilly, Director of Program Control, omsf, became Assistant Administrator for Administration, replacing General Smart; and John Biggs, Deputy Executive Secretary, became Executive Secretary, replacing Col. L. W. Vogel (usa) , who returned to his previous assignment as Executive Officer, (nasa Releases 67-47, 67-49, 67-50)
aiaa named Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) winner of Octave Chanute Award for notable contribution to hypersonic and reentry flight. Maj. Knight flew X—15 research aircraft at mach 6.72 (4,534 mph) Oct. 3, 1967. Annual award of $500 and travel stipend of $1,000 would be presented at aiaa Second Flight Test, Simulation and Support Conference in Los Angeles March 26. (afns Release 3—8—68—165; aiaa Release, 3/20/68; afsc Newsreview, 5/68, 9)
XB—70 research aircraft was flown to 15,500-mi altitude by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr. Primary goals were not achieved because main landing gear valve malfunctioned. Low-speed, gear-down handling qualities, propulsion system, and performance tests were accomplished during 2-hr 30-min flight from Edwards afb. (XB—70 Proj Off)
Commenting on James E. Webb’s retirement, Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.) said on Senate floor, “I have been a member of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences since about the time Mr. Webb was appointed to head NASA. I am not given unduly to praise a man. I am not impressed by a title. I am impressed by a record. But I am certainly impressed with the fact that Mr. Webb carried out his responsibilities for nasa with an expenditure of $34 billion, in what might be called a crash program; and I have not seen any evidence of any activity of his except that clothed in the highest degree with integrity, honesty, frankness and openness in his dealings with the committee, with Congress, as well as with the public.” (CR, 10/8/68, S12227—8)
nasa test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 1 to 187,500-ft altitude and 3,546 mph (mach 5.27) to test spray-on foam insulation, much lighter than previously used insulation, for use on Saturn V 2nd stage. Test, from Edwards afb, was satisfactory, with X—15 performing in maximum-heating design trajectory close to that of Saturn V and sustaining temperatures of up to 1,500°F. (X—15 Proj Off; msfc Release 68-69; AP, P Inq, 4/5/68)
jpl announced appointment of r/a John E. Clark (usn, Ret.) as jpl Deputy Director, effective Feb. 19. Adm. Clark had retired as Commandant, Twelfth Naval District, in September 1967. (jpl Release)
arc scientists Dr. William L. Quaide and Verne R. Oberbeck had developed method of calculating lunar soil depths using measurements based on Lunar Orbiter photos and Surveyor photos and surface analyses, nasa announced. Studies indicated that many of moon’s smaller craters and much of soil and fragmental material on lunar surface were result of meteoroid impacts. By simulating impacts in laboratory and comparing results with photos of lunar craters scientists identified four crater types: (1) craters with up to 12-ft dia, round bottoms, and depths 25% of their diameter; (2) craters with 12- to 22-ft dia, flat bottoms, and central mound; (3) craters with 22- to 30-ft dia, flat bottoms, and no mound; and (4) craters with diameter greater than 30 ft with second crater gouged in flat bottom. Thick layer of fragmented material, calculated by new method to be up to 20 yd deep, coincided with densely cratered areas to support impact theory, (nasa Release 68—59; SBD, 4/5/68, 202)
XB—70 No. 1, flown by nasa test pilots Donald L. Maffick and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., reached 9,500-ft altitude and 316.5 mph to obtain inflight data for sst program. Flight ended prematurely after 71 min because of hydraulic system malfunction. (XB—70 Proj Off; NASA Release 68-105; SBD, 6/17/68,229)
XB—70A experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by NASA test pilots Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Maffick, reached mach 1.64 and 39,400-ft altitude during 1-hr 58-min flight from Edwards AFB to test exiter vane integrated loads and frequency and handling qualities. All primary objectives were accomplished, although cabin pressure problem necessitated manual operation of system. (XB—70 Proj Off)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully acconfplished eighth flight after being air-launched from B—52 aircraft. During four-minute pilot-checkout flight Manke tested limit cycle characteristics and performed stability and control maneuvers, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68—105; SBD, 6/17/68, 229)
Scientists at Univ. of California at Los Angeles, testing to determine if life could exist in hostile environment of Venus, said they had grown algae in atmosphere of 100% carbon dioxide. They said Venus had more than 90%. More complex plants had not survived, reported Dr. Willard F. Libby, Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, Dr. Joseph Seck-bach of Israel, and Dr. Irene Aegerter of Switzerland. (AP, NYT, 12/8/68, 35)
U.S.S.R. published Zond VI photo of 70-mi-wide lunar crater carrying name honoring geneticist Nikolay I. Vavilov, who had been sent to Siberia in 1939 for opposing ideas of Trofim D. Lysenko, and his brother Sergei I. Vavilov, who had later become president of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Nikolay Vavilov died in Siberia in 1943; his brother died in 1951. Soviet name for crater, Brothers Vavilov, had not yet been accredited by International Astronomical Union. (NYT, 12/3/68, 36)
Sudden affirmative response by U.S.S.R. to President Johnson’s longstanding offer for discussion of limiting missiles may have substantial meaning, said William S. White in Washington Post. “If this should turn out to be the case it would be ironic, indeed. It would mean that only after renouncing his office had the President been able to convince the Russians . . . that this country was honestly prepared to make accommodations with Moscow, so long as they were realistic and enforceable accommodations to reduce a possibility of nuclear holocaust that still hangs over the world and will so hang whatever may or may not happen in the Vietnams.” ( W Post, 7/1/68, A21)
dod released April 23—24 testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee. Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, had said F— 111A wings had broken off during Jan. 23 ground test—under load greater than expected in flight but less than stipulated 50%-overload safety margin—before introduction into Vietnam combat, where aircraft had operated under protective restrictions. General Dynamics Corp. President Frank W. Davis later termed ground testing which broke wings off usaf F—111A “normal.” Tests, he indicated, were made to determine stress limitations. “We’ve had no failures ... at stress simulation to be expected in combat.” (Transcript; Kelly, W Star, 7/7/68, A3; AP, W Post, 7/7/68, A22; 7/8/68, A15; Corddry, B Sun, 7/7/68, 1)	_
Ryan XV—5B Vertifan aircraft made first vertical and hovering flights at arc, piloted by Ryan chief test pilot William Anderson in airworthiness tests. These were first vertical flights since extensive modifications converted aircraft from original XV—5A to new version for NASA research [see July 18]. Aircraft made three vertical lift-offs, reaching 20-ft altitude and remaining stationary in air up to one minute, (arc Astro-gram, 8/15/68, 3)
Bullet fragment in brain of holdup victim Joseph Barrios was successfully repositioned into brain membrane by whirling patient in ARC centrifuge, subjecting him to force of 6 g. Fragment had moved from critical central ventricle to lateral ventricle when doctors at O’Connor Hospital in San Jose, Calif., somersaulted Barrios on rotating chair, but fragment could move again. Force of centrifuge—normally used by NASA for space research—imbedded fragment in membrane of left ventricle, where it was expected to remain safely encapsulated by scar tissue. Dec. 16 x-rays showed fragment had not moved since centrifuge treatment. Barrios was sent home from hospital Dec. 17. (Brody, NYT, 11/21/68, 37; AP, W Post, 11/21/68, A3; arc Astro gram, 12/8/68,1; arc Medical Services Branch)
Lightweight plastic foam invented by ARC scientists Dr. John A. Parker and Salvatore Riccitiello showed promise for industrial fire protection, particularly fuel fires. Extremely light polyurethane with additives formed tough, protective char layer when exposed to flame, while simultaneously releasing fire-extinguishing gases which helped to quench flame. Used to fill airspaces within structures, foam would prevent oxygen from reaching and feeding a fire. Demonstrations had shown it suitable for fire protection in aircraft, spacecraft, homes, and other structures. Other possible uses included automobiles, boats, trains, oil refineries, paint and chemical processing, and laboratories. Foam was resistant to heat flow, making it an excellent insulator, (nasa Release 68-187)
White House announced that Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) had submitted his resignation as head of FAA, effective July 31. There was no indication of successor. {W News, 7/2/68, 12; WSJ, 7/2/68)
Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—who became first man in space when he orbited earth once in U.S.S.R.’s Vostok I April 12, 1961—and engineer Col. Vladimir S. Seryogin were killed when their MiG—15 jet aircraft crashed northwest of Moscow during training flight. Gagarin, who had been commander of Soviet Corps of Cosmonauts and officer in charge of cosmonaut training, was second cosmonaut to die in an accident. Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov had died when Soyuz I crash-landed after reentry April 24, 1967. Bodies of Cosmonaut Gagarin and Col. Seryogin would be cremated and buried in Kremlin wall, (upi, W Star, 3/28/68, 1; Reston, W Post, 3/29/68, 1)
Donald A. Hall, designer of Lindbergh aircraft, Spirit of St. Louis, died in San Diego, Calif., at age 69. (NYT, 7/3/68, 33)
Nearly 200,000 mourners filed past biers of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin and Col. Vladimir Seryogin in Soviet Army House in Moscow. Premier Alexey Kosygin, President Nikolay V. Podgorny, and Communist Party leader Leonid I. Brezhnev briefly joined honor guard of soldiers near biers. (Winters, B Sun, 3/30/68; NYT, 3/31/68, 21)
Analysis of data returned by Pioneer VIII had led arc scientists to speculate that earth’s magnetic tail, extension of its magnetic envelope (magnetosphere) blown out by solar wind to resemble comet’s tail, might be shorter than the 200 million mi suggested by certain theoretical calculations. When Pioneer VII flew through tail region at 3.5-million-mi distance from earth after Aug. 17, 1966, launch, it found long period when solar wind was completely or partially blocked out, suggesting spacecraft had observed end of organized tail region. Conditions encountered in tail area by Pioneer VIII at 1.75 million mi from earth after Dec. 13, 1967, launch, were similar. However, instead of smooth cylindrical structure expected at smaller distance, Pioneer VIII found conditions resembling turbulent wake, leading some scientists to conclude tail was shorter. Others, including Pioneer Project Scientist, Dr. John Wolfe, believed tail might include successively turbulent and smooth areas, (arc Astrogram, 6/20/68; AP, NYT, 6/22/68, 53)
Univ. of Wisconsin professor Dr. William Kraushaar, speaking at dedication of new $4.3-million Center foT Space Research at mit, reported discovery by NASA’s Oso III of high intensity of gamma rays flowing from center of Milky Way. Dr. Kraushaar said finding was first observation to support theory that galaxy centers were rich reservoirs of cosmic rays. (Wilford, NYT, 4/27/68, 40)
Senate adopted S.R. 391, changing assignments of minority Senators to standing committees. Measure excused Senators Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) and Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.) from Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and assigned Senators Mark O. Hatfield (R-Ore.) and Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) to Committee. (NASA LAR VII/90)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) had established Yuri Gagarin gold medal honoring cosmonaut who became first man in space April 12, 1961, during Soviet Vostok I mission, Space Business Daily reported. Medal would be awarded annually to pilot contributing best performance of year in peaceful exploration of space. (SBD, 12/11/68, 178)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) piloted X—15 No. 1 to 218,500-ft altitude and 3,409 mph (mach 4.74) in flight from Edwards afb. Objective of flight, exposure and satisfactory retraction of wtr experiment, was not accomplished because abnormally low hydraulic pressure and severe vibrations prevented aircraft’s reaching required altitude. (X—15 Proj Off)
Senate, after secret session, defeated by vote of 45 to 25 amendment by Sen. John S. Cooper (R-Ky.) to eliminate from $71.8-billion defense appropriations bill the $387.4 million requested by Administration to start deployment of Sentinel antiballistic missile system. Final action on largest defense appropriations bill in U.S. history was deferred. {CR, 10/2/68, S11872-85; AP, W Star, 10/2/68, A4; Finney, NYT, 10/3/68, 1; Lardner, W Post, 10/5/68,1)	.
Univ. of Colorado physicist Dr. Edward U. Condon announced that Univ. $500,000 ufo study for usaf had been completed on schedule. Dr. Condon declined to discuss conclusions and said final report would be submitted to nas in September. He protested May 14 Look magazine article, which called project fiasco, but said completion of field investigations were not related to controversy. Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.), citing article on House floor, questioned scientific profundity and objectivity of project and urged Congress to take over ufo investigation from usaf. (CR, 4/30/68, H3087; Clark, NYT, 5/1/68, 5)
Investigation of Nov. 15, 1967, X—15 accident by NASA board indicated that pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) who died in crash, had suffered disorientation and operated controls improperly. Mistaking roll indicator for heading indicator, he had increased heading error, causing aircraft to spin uncontrollably at mach 5 and 230,000-ft altitude and then to go into severe pitch oscillation and disintegrate at altitude above 60,000 ft. Board requested that Government report on MH—96 control system experience and recommended use of telemetry for directional readings by NASA X—15 ground control center, careful checkout of experiments and equipment for next X—15 flight, inclusion in pilot’s physical examination of special tests for tendency toward vertigo, and development of additional methods to maintain proper heading under ballistic flight conditions, (frc Release 20—68; NASA Release 68-126)
nasa test pilots Donald L. Mallick and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew XB—70A to 42,000-ft altitude and mach 1.62 in flight from Edwards AFB. Purpose of flight was to evaluate performance at variety of speeds, check exciter vane function, determine ground effects during low approach, and evaluate pilot proficiency during touch-and-go landing. (XB—70 Proj Off)
nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed eleventh flight from Edwards afb. Vehicle with full load of fuel was carried to altitude, where successful jettison test was performed before launch from B—52 aircraft, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA test pilots l/c Emil Sturmthal and Col. Joseph F. Cotton flew XB—70A to 39,400-ft altitude and mach 1.23 in flight from Edwards AFB. Purpose was to check exciter vane function, aeroelasticity, stability, control, and gust and canard loads and determine ground effects during load approaches. (XB—70 Proj Off)
XB-70A, flown by nasa test pilots Donald L. Mallick and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., reached 63,000-ft altitude and mach 2.54 in flight from Edwards afb. Accomplished successfully were ilaf systems check; exciter vane tests; evaluation of stability, control, and handling qualities; and observation of duct turbulence, (nasa Pro] Off)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 1 to 264,000-ft altitude and 3,443 mph (mach 4.71) during flight from Edwards AFB to conduct WTR experiment and check horizon scanner, sky brightness, fluidic probe, and fixed alpha ball. (X—15 Proj Off)
NASA was conducting three separate studies to determine reasons for failures of May 18 launch of Nimbus B, Aug. 10 launch of Ats IV, and Sept. 18 launch of Intelsat III—-which had brought its launch record down to 0.500 average. Before May failure, agency had compiled “almost incredible” launch record, said Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post. Sources close to NASA had said agency was conducting fourth investigation to determine whether there was “something systemic at the root of the trouble.” One theory was that decline in NASA launch activity in 1968, with 42 attempted launches thus far compared to 69 at same time in 1967, had caused similar drop in attention to detail. Second theory was that layoffs and turnover in launch crews had cut down efficiency and introduced element of inexperience. Third theory was that nasa was suffering from “a sudden case of overconfidence brought on by its long string of launch successes.” Seven-man hoard to investigate failure of first Intelsat III mission met for organization session. Board, convened by Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, would have five observers in addition to seven voting members and would be chaired by Daniel G. Mazur, Assistant Director for Technology at GSFC. (nasa Release 68—160; NYT, 9/21/68, 14; W Post, 9/24/68, A10)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V automatic research station had apparently suffered series of errors during reentry that could have been fatal if men had been on board, John Lannan reported in Washington Evening Star. According to one unidentified U.S. source, Zond V had entered atmosphere and “skipped” back out as planned, but then skipped along top of atmosphere and reentered “at a peculiar angle.” Reentry caused g forces and heat loads that would have been fatal to crews if aboard, and spacecraft landed thousands of miles short of its intended landing area, which was probably on land in Soviet territory. Chicago Tribune later supported theory that Zond V’s reentry was a disaster and reported that U.S. sources said evidence indicated spacecraft had: (1) failed to circle as close to moon as intended, and was thus unable to obtain useful photos of possible landing sites; (2) reentered earth’s atmosphere at angle much steeper than planned, causing friction temperatures that would have killed cosmonauts; and (3) landed in water accidentally instead of in Soviet territory as planned. (W Star, 9/28/68, Al; C Trib, 10/1/68)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly presented NASA’s FY 1969 administrative operations (AO) budget to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He said $648.2 million was requested and “the same stringent measures that were required in FY 1968 to operate at a level of $628 million have been continued into FY 1969.” (Testimony)
NASA announced publication of Teleoperators and Human Augmentation (nasa SP—5047), nasa—aec technology survey issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization and written by Edwin G. Johnsen and William R. Corliss. It covered work of both agencies in development of teleoperators, including history of the robot-like machines, assessment of their impact on technology, and explanation of principal subsystems of those in use. Since 1948 “some 3,000 manipulator arms” had been built in U.S.—• “the advance guard of an army of man-machine systems now assembling to serve man in a variety of ways.” (nasa Release 68-62)
U.S. patent No. 3,381,917 was awarded to Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosysterns Co., and Edward G. Ganczak, research associate, for Bell Pogo and Flying Chair, flying platforms on which pilot could stand or sit on fuel tank. Engine was kerosene turbojet. Both had arm pieces with which pilot directed thrust. Pilot could disembark without encumbrance, advantage useful to soldiers, policemen, or firemen. (Jones, NYT, 5/11/68,45)
sst prototype construction would be delayed one year because of design changes “which would result in significant improvements in the production airplane,” Boeing Co. President William M. Allen announced. Detailed plans of recommended changes were being prepared for faa approval. Although present design could result in airworthy flight-test aircraft, FAA and airline reviewers had concluded that prototype should have more substantial range and payload “to assure it is a sound foundation for an economically successful commercial aircraft.” First flights now would be in 1972. (Boeing Release; W Post, 2/23/68, A3; WSJ, 2/23/68, 4)
X—15 No. 1, flown from Edwards afb by nasa test pilot William H. Dana, successfully reached 255,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.04) in 199th and last flight of program. Purpose was to conduct WTR experiment and check out fixed alpha cone and fluidic probe. Flight scheduled for Dec. 20 was later canceled because of adverse weather. It was not rescheduled because NASA announced completion of program [see Jan. 21 and Dec. 20]. (X—15 Proj Off; nasa Release 68-221; AP, W Post, 10/25/68; SBD, 10/29/68, 289)
msfc announced award of $1,400 to msfc Test Laboratory Engineer John A. Hauser for invention of five-module system for purifying and filtering gas to purity necessary in development of Saturn rockets. (msfc Release 68-82)
Univ. of California physicist Dr. Edward Teller, at hearing on nuclear nonproliferation treaty before Senate Foreign Relations Committee, urged Congress to preserve option of giving nonnuclear allies control over “purely defensive” nuclear weapons systems. He was referring, he said, to system that could be exploded only over a nation’s territory, one involving “time-lock” of monthly inspection by donor nation, and one which would be proof against tampering or analysis designed to develop it into offensive system. (Maffre, W Post, 7/18/68, A4; Sherman, W Star, 7/18/68, A12)
In press interview Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe said he favored building SST. “I certainly don’t want to see our country play second fiddle . . . and if this is feasible and economical to build and operate and the economy of the nation budget-wise will permit it, I probably would like to see it go ahead.” (upi, W Star, 3/16/69, All)
nasa’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, reached 78,000-ft altitude and mach 1.55 after air launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of flight, 23rd in series, was to obtain data on performance, stability, and control—especially roll control, (nasa Proj Off)
Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.), for himself and Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.), introduced S.J.R. 133 “to redesignate the area in the state of Florida known as Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral.” Measure was referred to Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 7/10/69, S7819)
Where the Legend Starts,” film depicting life of late Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, was being prepared in U.S.S.R., Tass announced. Gagarin, first man in space on Vostok I April 12, 1961, died in aircraft crash March 27, 1968. (AP, C Trib, 4/9/69)
President Nixon would ask Congress to appropriate $662 million over five years to assist in SST development, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. Federal Government would spend estimated $761 million through FT 1974, including $99 million in funds already appropriated, to construct and flight-test two prototype Boeing sst models. Total development cost was estimated $1.5 billion, with $1.3-billion Government participation to be repaid from sale of approximately 300 aircraft capable of carrying 300 passengers each at maximum 1,800-mph speeds, (dot Release 21069)
Project Tektite Aquanauts Richard A. Waller, Conrad V. W. Mahnken, John G. Van Derwalker, and H. Edward Clifton were brought to surface and placed in decompression chamber for 19 hrs, after recordbreaking 59 days on ocean floor off St. John, Virgin Islands. They had submerged Feb. 15 in successful experiment to determine how men functioned for extended periods underwater. At news conference later, aquanauts revealed they had spent 25—40 hrs outside underwater habitat during first two weeks, moving no farther than 300 ft; later they averaged 70 hrs per week, swimming up to 3,000 ft from habitat to study marine life, ocean currents, and geology. (Lyons, NYT, 4/14/69, 17; AP, W Star, 4/15/69, Bll; W Post, 4/16/69, A9; 4/17/69; 4/19/69, A6)
President Nixon received report of 10-member ad hoc committee appointed Feb. 7 to review all aspects of SST program. Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs, chairman, said no votes were taken by committee on recommendations to President; each member had submitted his suggestions to Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe and they were included in report, (upi, W Post, 3/29/69, A2)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 60,500-ft altitude and mach 1.6—vehicle’s fastest speed to date—after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of flight, 27th in HL—10 series and 14th with power, was to obtain stability and control data at transonic speeds. (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/29/69, 12)
Congressional sources quoted by John Finney in New York Times said White House had ordered cancellation of DOD’s mol program [see June 10] over dod and usaf objections and in response to mounting congressional pressure to hold down military spending. (NYT, 6/12/69, 1)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached 54,000-ft altitude and 724 mph (mach 1.1)—first supersonic flight by HL—10—after 45,000-ft-altitude air-launch from B—52 aircraft. Primary purpose of 17th flight, made north of Four Corners, Calif., was to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on proposals made at aaas meeting in Dallas, Tex., Dec. 26—31, 1968, for agency to establish priorities for Federal spending in research, education, technology, weapon development, and science. Dr. James V. Shannon, former nih director, had proposed creation of top-level council equal in stature to National Security Council and Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Science Adviser, had recommended adding Secretary of Science to Presidential Cabinet. Star said, “There will be strong opposition to both of these proposals. The cry of centralization will be raised.” However: “What is proposed . . . is a body of. informed advisers, whose duty it is to suggest ... to instruct the President, the Congress and public on the potentialities for good and evil that could result if a given path were followed. The President would still have to make the executive decisions. Congress would still control the purse. The public would still have the final verdict of the ballot. But all of them could use some responsible, expert guidance through the awesome and fantastic new world that lies just ahead.” (W Star, 1/5/69, Gl)
Senate, by vote of 58 to 22, rejected amendment submitted by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to strike from H.R. 14794, dot FY 1970 appropriations bill, $80 million for SST development. (CR, 12/17/69, S17003, S17005—48)
NASA and DOT award of $165,908 contract to Booz-Allen Applied Research Inc. for six-month study of total U.S. investment in aeronautical r&d since 1945 was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Joint effort was to develop methods of assessing national benefits which accrued from R&D development expenditures, (dot Release 22269)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced new faa regulation establishing maximum noise level for new subsonic transport aircraft at 93—108 effective perceived noise decibels—up to 10 epndbs less than those for noisiest aircraft already in service. Regulation would be effective Dec. 1, but aircraft like Boeing 747 with high-bypass-ratio engines for which application for type certificate was made before Jan. 7, 1967, would be granted additional time to comply, (dot Release 69-124)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer announced allocations of $34,144,479 to construct and improve 177 U.S. airports under FY 1970 Federal-aid Airport Program. Appropriations, based on $30 million authorized by Congress and carryover funds from previous years, represented last year of funding authorized under current Federal Airport Act. Program stressed preservation and expansion of facilities at existing airports to accommodate high-performance, sophisticated aircraft; increasing airport capacity; relieving congestion; and continuing construction of airports initiated under earlier programs, (faa Release 69-59)
National Aeronautic Assn, conferred title “Elder Statesman of Aviation” on Adm. Joseph J. Clark (usn, Ret.), Katherine Stinson Oteroo, and William A. Patterson, retired President of United Air Lines. (W Star, 11/15/69, A3)
Scientist-astronaut Dr. William E. Thornton, who had been grounded in spring, received usaf clearance to continue jet pilot training. Thornton had had difficulty landing because of distortion of vision called aniseikonia, which reduced hi§ depth perception. Vision had been corrected with special glasses, (upi, W Star, 8/26/69, A3; W Post, 8/26/69, A9)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 66,000-ft altitude and mach 1.6 in powered flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objectives of flight, 29th in series, were to obtain stability and control data and airspeed calibration, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 15th flight. Primary objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.9 and to determine control characteristics at mach 0.9. Vehicle was air-launched from B—52 aircraft north of Four Comers, Calif., at 45,000-ft altitude and mach 0.7. Manke ignited three chambers of XLR—11 engine, rotated vehicle, climbed to 55.000-	ft altitude, and sustained flight at mach 0.9 for 100 secs. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 81,000-ft altitude and mach 1.42 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Primary objective of flight, 24th in series and first with new engine, was to obtain stability, control, and engine data, (nasa Proj Off)
sst economics were discussed by FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer before Long Island Assn, of Commerce and Industry in Manhasset, N.Y. Study of simulated sst operation in 1980s, with comparison of sst and subsonic jets based on total operating cost rather than direct operating cost and using 1969 values, had shown “sst beats the 707 substantially and comes much nearer to equaling the impressively low 747 costs.” Elements of ground support and overhead costs gained advantage of sst’s greater productivity in seat-miles per hour. “The 2707—300 [sst] is two thirds as big as the 747 and it flies three times as fast, so it will do twice as much as the 747 (and 4% times the 707 or DC—8) in the same time period.” By 1978, sst introduction date, aircraft’s total operating cost “comes within one-tenth of a cent per seat-mile of matching the 440-seat economy version of the 747.” (Text)
Dr. John M. DeNoyer, former Assistant Director for Research at U.S. Geological Survey, became Director of Earth Observations Programs in nasa Office of Space Science and Applications, (nasa Hq WB, 1/5/70)	_ _	_	_
usaf released three-volume Scientific Study of Unidentified Flying Objects, report of Univ. of Colorado scientists directed by Dr. Edward U. Condon. It concluded that “nothing has come from the study of UFOs in the past 21 years that has added to scientific knowledge. . . . Further extensive study of UFOs probably cannot be justified in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” Scientists felt “the reason that there has been very little scientific study of the subject is that those scientists who are most directly concerned, astronomers, atmospheric physicists, chemists, and psychologists, having had ample opportunity to look into the matter, have individually decided that UFO phenomena do not offer a fruitful field in which to look for major scientific discoveries.” In review of study, nas special review panel had concluded, “On the basis of present knowledge the least likely explanation of UFOs is the hypothesis of extraterrestrial visitations by intelligent beings.” Condon report recommended dod handle UFO sighting reports in normal surveillance operations and found no basis for contention that ufo data were “shrouded in official secrecy.” Report stated, “The history of the past 21 years has repeatedly led Air Force officers to the conclusion that none of the things seen, or thought to have been seen . . . constituted any hazard or threat to national security.” Report of two-year study, commissioned by USAF for $500,000, had been approved by nas panel. (Text; Sullivan, NYT, 1/8/69, 1; 1/10/69, 32; Boffer, Science, 1/17/69, 260—2)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced faa plans to issue proposal to control emission of aircraft smoke in flight in effort to combat air pollution, (faa Release 69—129)
Intelligence briefings to high dod officials had indicated U.S.S.R. missile defense was three-quarters complete and had been slowed in recent months to improve its radar system, said William Beecher in New York Times. Briefings also indicated that antimissile system around Moscow, even when finished, would not alter balance of power between U.S.S.R. and U.S. or undermine U.S. retaliatory power. (NYT, 2/13/69, 1)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, was air-launched from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude and glided to successful landing. Purpose of flight, 16th in series at frc, was pilot checkout, (nasa Proj Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced selection of Robert P.	Selfridge, Director of Greater Rockford (111.) Airport, to receive faa Award for Distinguished Service for his “contribution in developing and promoting the cause of General Aviation” and for his “constructive suggestions, imagination, dedication and service to the aviation users, above and beyond the role of an Airport Director.” (faa Release 69-67)
Florida Legislature passed concurrent resolution asking President Nixon and Congress to restore name “Cape Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy, subject to agreement by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), brother of late President John F. Kennedy. Original Spanish name meant “plantation of cane.” (AP, W Star, 6/7/69, Al)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached 79,000-ft altitude and mach 1.39 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose of flight, 25th in series and 12th using engine, was to obtain stability and control data at various angles of attack in speed range around mach 1.2. (nasa Proj Off)
NASA’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, reached mach 0.6 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 40,000-ft altitude over South Rogers Lake Bed, Calif. Objectives of unpowered flight, sixth in series, were to check out new pilot, evaluate handling characteristics with 30° upper flap, and evaluate handling qualities at various roll gain settings of stability augmentation systems (SAS). (NASA Proj Off)	'
NASA was developing novel technique for photographing faint x-ray sources, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Testifying on supporting research and technology program, he said technique would reduce required exposure time 1/10 to 1/1000 and was “likely to revolutionize x-ray observations where telescopes are not usable.” Based on Princeton Univ. development and laser image-enhancement technique, it was “major technological advance as an outgrowth of the space program and should find applications in all fields of x-ray science.” gsfc was developing advanced gamma-ray telescope to observe center of galaxy and other celestial objects. Univ. of Colorado was developing advanced coronagraph to observe solar corona from earth orbit six months instead of the few minutes per year possible during solar total eclipse by ground-based observation. (Testimony)
President Nixon announced selection of Gerard C. Smith, former Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning, as Director of Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Adrian S. Fisher had been acting director since resignation of William C. Foster. {PD, 2/3/69, 188)
President Nixon accepted pro forma resignation of Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. Appointed by President Kennedy 'in 1961, Dr. Welsh had been Council’s first and only appointed executive secretary. (W Post, 2/5/69, A7; AP, W Star, 2/5/69, 1)
In Washington Post review of Contact! The Story of the Early Birds by Henry Serrano Villard, John Osgood said: “Despite the technical complexities of the recent translunar injection, the mystique of flight remains undiminished 65 years after Orville Wright managed his mere 120 feet of powered flight. Mystique or no, it is still difficult to comprehend what drove the early aeronauts to attempt feats which most often won them the contempt and ridicule of their countrymen.” (W Post, 2/18/69, B4)
First royalty-bearing license under NASA’s foreign patent program had been granted to Nippon Electric Co., Ltd. in Tokyo, NASA announced. Invention bearing NASA-owned patent No. 484,436 and made by gsfc’s Joseph G. Haynos, was concerned with connections between solar cells that permitted flexibility and low weight. Company had made initial payment to NASA for exclusive manufacturing rights in Japan and agreed to continue royalty payments for duration of license. (nasa Release 69—40)
Liverworts grown in lunar soil at LRL had reached three-inch height and were “green and happy,” Washington Post said, while controls, grown in earth soil, were “puny—not even an inch high—and pale.” Difference in plants, commonly found on rocks and in forests and among first to grow in volcanic areas, had been considered small when first noted in August. However, LRL Chief of Preventive Medicine, Dr. William Kemmerer, now called difference “one of the really unexpected results of the lunar mission.” Plant tests had been conducted to see if lunar material caused harm to earth plants. Control plants had been grown in desert soil. Tobacco cells and soy bean cells in culture with lunar soil had done better than controls in earth soil; ferns were growing “more spectacularly” than some grown in earth soil. Man’s knowledge of trace mineral requirements in plants and animals was “very, very limited,” Dr. Kemmerer had said. “I don’t think we’ll find something going on in lunar nutrition that we don’t find on the earth, I do think important questions have been raised.” (Cohn, W Post, 11/14/69)
In Physical Review Letters, Univ. of Maryland physicist Dr. Joseph Weber described detection.of gravity waves from unknown source but in two places simultaneously. Coincidences were observed on gravitational-radiation detectors over 1,000-km base line at Argonne National Laboratory and at Univ. of Maryland. Probability that coincidences were accidental was “incredibly small.” NSF-supported study provided first real evidence of existence of gravity waves postulated by Prof. Albert Einstein more than 50 yrs ago. (Physical Review Letters, 6/16/69, 1320—24; Lannan, W Star, 6/15/69, A25)
In Nature, Stanford Univ. astronomer Dr. Edward K. Conklin reported recording earth’s motion using background radiation believed to have been produced at early stage in universe’s expansion. If theory was correct, radiation defined extremely distant reference frame for measurement of earth’s motion. Recording showed 100-mi-per-sec movement in direction midway between direction of Big Dipper and star Arcturus. (Nature, 6/7/69, 971—2)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 21st flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objectives were to obtain stability, control, and performance data at speeds up to mach 1.35. (nasa Proj Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $200,000 faa contract to Univ. of Tennessee at Knoxville for two-year study of methods of reducing sonic boom, to help faa establish certification standards for new aircraft, (faa Release 69—127)
NASA announced appointment of John A. Whitney as Assistant General Counsel for Procurement Matters, (nasa Release 69—167)
faa announced it had amended its Dec. 3 rule intended to ease congestion at five of Nation’s busiest airports. Amendments provided for extra sections of scheduled air carrier flights without regard to established quotas at all airports except John F. Kennedy, increase in flight quotas at Kennedy between 5:00 pm and 8:00 pm, effective date June 1 instead of April 27, and termination date of Dec. 31. (faa Release 69—23)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) delivered Landon Lecture at Kansas State Univ.: “With this new generation of weapons [mirvs] about to sprout from the arsenals of the Soviet Union and the United States, I have been joined by almost half the Senate and a sizable number of House members in calling for a joint moratorium on flight tests of the so-called mirv systems.” (Text)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers told Senate Foreign Relations Committee during hearings on nonproliferation treaty that he hoped U.S.—U.S.S.R. missile talks would be under way before it became necessary for U.S. to start deployment of proposed Sentinel abm system. He said U.S. would have obligation under treaty to enter into strategic arms talks with U.S.S.R. and expressed hope such talks could begin within six months. (Transcript, 377—8)
Successful results of seeding hurricane Debbie on Aug. 18 and 20 were announced by Secretary of Commerce Maurice H. Stans and Secretary of the Navy John H. Chafee at Washington, D. C., press conference. Analysis of silver iodide seeding had suggested storm was weakened by intervention. While scientists could not state absolutely that hurricanes could be modified, Secretaries pledged their departments to intensified effort in Project Stormfury, joint venture of essa and usn. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/5/69, 90)
Senate considered H.R. 12307, FY 1970 Independent Offices and hud bill which contained $3,715 billion NASA appropriation. It rejected by 22 to 46 amendment by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that would have reduced FY 1970 NASA funds by $100 million. Conference report accompanying bill noted considerable concern about “future of funding for manned lunar programs because of budget constraints . . . and a question of National priorities.” Conferees suggested Congress, NASA, and Administration review manned lunar program policy for future “and decide and determine policy” and that Committees on Appropriations be “advised at earliest possible date.” (CR, 10/11/69, D1046, S13989, S14010-6, S14025-50, S14053; House Conf Rpt 91-649)
Senate adopted S.R. 13 establishing numerical size of Senate standing committees for 91st Congress and adopted S.R. 14 and S.R. 15 electing majority and minority standing committee membership. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences was reduced from 16 to 15 members, with Republican Sens. Len B. Jordan (R-Idaho) and Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) dropping off. Senate also approved appointment of Sens. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.), Charles McC. Mathias, Jr. (R-Md.), and William B. Saxbe (R-Ohio) to committee. Democratic assignments on committee remained unchanged. (CR, 1/14/69, S152-87)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 19th flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude north of Four Corners, Calif. Manke fired engine at full power for 66 secs and at half power for 40 secs, reaching 64,500-ft altitude. Objectives—expansion of flight envelope to mach 1.2 and collection of stability, control, and performance data —were met. (nasa Proj Off; UPl, W Star, 5/29/69, A16; SBD, 6/4/69, 152)
Flying magazine issued special report on F—111, including “The People vs. the F—111” by John Fricker and “The F—111—a Pilot’s Verdict” by Richard B. Weeghman. Fricker called F—111 “not guilty” of charges that concept of commonality was invalid, that selection of General Dynamics Corp. instead of Boeing Co. as prime contractor was result of “political consideration,” that F—111 suffered from excessive flight restrictions, that it was unsafe, and that it was “operational flop.” To charge that cost escalation of F—111 program had been excessive, Fricker delivered verdict “Guilty, with mitigating circumstances”—factory, engineering, and research costs had risen twice as much as originally estimated. (Flying, 5/69)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Secor D. Browne to be member of Civil Aeronautics Board for remainder of term expiring Dec. 31, 1974. He would replace John H. Crooker, who had resigned effective Sept. 30. Browne would also be designated cab Chairman. (PD, 9/15/69, 1249)
Flaws in F—Ills produced to date were detailed by l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of afsc, and l/g George S. Boylan, Jr., Deputy Chief of Staff, Programs and Resources, usaf Hq., in testimony before Senate Committee on Appropriations. Aircraft were seriously short in engine power for nonnuclear missions. Their weight had grown without commensurate engine power increase and thus acceleration time was now four minutes. Outlay of $80 million was necessary to overhaul 450 F—Ills to correct serious flaw in wing boxes. (Testimony)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 50,000-ft altitude and mach 0.9 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude north of Four Corners, Calif. Flight objectives were to complete pilot checkout and to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
ERc announced it had developed and successfully flight-tested “Flying Baton,” simple, low-cost device to provide eye-level artificial horizon for pilots. Developed by Center’s William J. O’Keefe, device could contribute to more “head-up” flying, be used for precision attitude flying, and allow pilot more time to look outside aircraft, (erc Release 69-19)
dot and hud announced $166,734 project for studies to recommend short- and long-term relief from aircraft noises at John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York; O’Hare International Airport, Chicago; Bradley International Airport, Hartford, Conn.; and Cape Kennedy Regional Airport, Fla. Studies were to define noise problems, to identify activities affecting problems, to identify approaches to land
Senate Interior Committee held hearing on July 10 S.J.R. 133 by Sens. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) to return original name, “Cape Canaveral,” to Cape Kennedy. Sen. Gurney said name “Canaveral” “may well be the oldest geographical point in the United States, certainly on the east coast, recorded even before the ancient names of Cape Cod and Jamestown.” ksc would retain late President John F. Kennedy’s name. Witnesses suggested . name change had been made “with high emotions” and without proper legal proceedings. Cape had been renamed for late President by executive order from President Lyndon B. Johnson Nov. 29, 1963. (Greider, W Post, 11/25/69, A3)
British Aircraft Corp. chief test pilot Brian Trubshaw flew Anglo-French Concorde 002 supersonic airliner on successful 24-min maiden flight from Filton Airfield, near Bristol. Aircraft, built to reach 1,400-mph speed, flew at 300 mph during flight, which copilot John Cochran termed “marvelous.” French version Concorde 001 made maiden flight March 2. (W Star, 4/10/69, A13; AP, W Post, 4/10/69, A12)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.), for 37 cosponsors, introduced on Senate floor S.R. 211, “sense of the Senate” resolution urging President Nixon to propose to U.S.S.R. immediate suspension by U.S. and U.S.S.R. of flight test of multiple missile warheads and strongly supporting prompt negotiations with U.S.S.R. on weapon issues. (CR, 6/17/69, S6538)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) presented to House petition by 729 scientists, engineers, and students in these fields, submitted by Scientists for Social and Political Action, care of Dr. Martin L. Perl of Stanford Univ. It called for open Congressional hearings to review substance and direction of entire military R&D program including abm system. (CR, 4/30/69, H3220) During April: nas—nrc Space Science Board published Sounding Rockets: Their Role in Space Research, report by Committee on Rocket Research recommending that NASA increase annual expenditures on rocket research to $27 million by 1971 and thereafter restore its earlier policy of increasing support 12% per year; that nsf, Naval Research Laboratory, and usaf immediately increase their support by 36%, and then maintain an annual 12% increase until 1975; and, additionally, that support for rocket research be increased by appropriate ratio to compensate for any reduction in satellite support. Report noted sounding rockets were responsible for dozens of major scientific discoveries, including discovery of solar x-rays emanating from millionth-degree corona of sun; for mapping of solar spectrum and structure of earth’s atmosphere; and for existence of three new branches of astronomy—uv, x-ray, and gamma-ray. Greatest single advantage of sounding rockets for studying upper atmosphere was unique ability to obtain direct, vertical profiles at altitudes of 24.8 to 124.3 mi (40 to 200 km), (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 4/69, 2; nas pio)
Defense Secretary-designate Melvin R. Laird announced retention of Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., as Director of Defense Research and Engineering. (Kelly, W Star, 1/13/69, A5; upi, W Star, 1/14/69, A6)
Senate adopted by 85—0 vote amendment offered by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to S. 2546, FY 1970 military procurement authorization, which would require study and review by Comptroller General of profits made by Government agencies, including NASA, on contracts for which there had been no formally advertised competitive bidding. {CR, 9/17/69, S10743—52)
In letter to Attorney General, Sen. William F. Proxmire (D-Wis.) asked that Justice Dept, investigate possible violations of Federal law in handling of Government’s contract with Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for production of C—5A aircraft and urged that dod immediately freeze funding for C—5A. (Proxmire Off; Nossiter, W Post, 5/6/69, A3)
In Senate, Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) called for at least temporary halt in usaf plans to purchase Lockheed C—5A cargo aircraft while U.S. Comptroller General studied aircraft’s costs and value to be gained from further purchases. (CR, 8/13/69, S9972-8)
jpl Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, announced appointment of Dr. Clarence R. Gates as manager of JPl’s newly established Mission Analysis Div. New division would incorporate Systems Analysis section, Systems Analysis Research section, and jpl Navigation Program which Dr. Gates had headed since 1968. (jpl Release 524)
National Academy of Engineering announced election of 44 U.S. engineers to membership. Included were Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, honored for “technological leadership in defense research and engineering,” and Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, for “major contributions to the design of military submarines and other underwater equipment,” fNAE Release)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said June 10 cancellation of usaf mol program would eliminate “wasteful, ill-conceived and costly project set in motion four years ago principally to still the clamoring of aerospace lobbyists for ‘military presence in space,’ whatever that might mean.” Longer term effect would be “inevitable blurring of a meaningless and arbitrary—but still restrictive—line separating U.S. civilian and military space activities.” (W Star, 6/22/69, C4)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. founder Allan H. Lockheed died in Tucson, Ariz., at age 80. He had begun career at 16 as auto mechanic, taught himself to fly, and in 1915 established aircraft manufacturing firm with brother Malcolm. In 1926 he formed partnership with John K. Northrop which developed into Lockheed Aircraft Corp. They pooled resources to produce Lockheed Vega aircraft, which set 27 records from 1928 to 1932. Lockheed resigned in 1929 but served as adviser to several aviation companies. (UPI, W Star, 5/28/69, B7; W Post, 5/28/69, CIO)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloting by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 68,000-ft altitude and mach 1.2 during 22nd flight west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose was to obtain performance, stability, and control data. (NASA Proj Off)
Australian Prime Minister John G. Gorton announced in Canberra that Australian government had accepted U.S. proposals for “a joint United States-Australian defense space communications facility” at Woomera, South Australia, site of Australian Weapons Research Establishment. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/24/69, Al)
In Washington Evening Star, William Hines said, “If a successful farmer suddenly started economizing on seed, his neighbors and family would begin to doubt his judgment, if not his sanity. Yet this is precisely what Uncle Sam is doing in cutting back the financing of scientific research. Despite denials from budget officials in the past weeks, federal support of science in fiscal 1970 continues on an alarming down-trend that has been apparent for several years. It has been said that in an advanced economy like ours, research expenditures are ‘seed money’ and the analogy is apt. Like individual seeds in a field, not every research dollar germinates, and not all those that do mature. But total return is vastly greater than outlay—and that is the story of science as well as of agriculture.” (W Star, 1/26/69, C4)
President Nixon submitted following nominations to Senate: Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) to be usaf Chief of Staff, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn) to be Chief of Naval Operations for additional two-year period, and Gen. Earle G. Wheeler (usa) for reappointment as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, for additional one-year term. {PD, 6/16/69, 845)
If jpl were taxed as business it would bring in estimated $840,000 and reduce property tax rate in La Canada-Flintridge, Calif., district from $4.20 to $2.56, according to La Canada School Superintendent, Dr. Donald Ziehl. Instead, he told School Board, district would receive $85,000 from Government under fixed-amount system used in lieu of property tax on Federal facilities. (Michals, Glendale News-Press, 3/19/69)
m/g James T. Stewart, former Vice Director of usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, had been named afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems, Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, announced. Gen. Stewart would replace m/g John L. Zoeckler, who retired from usaf July 31. (afsc Release 130.69)
Dr. William D. McElroy, nsf Director, announced 36-mo extension of Deep Sea Drilling Project, which was nearing end of 18-mo contract period. To date, holes up to 3,231 ft deep had been drilled at more than 66 sites in Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, in water depths up to 20,140 ft, to retrieve sediment samples that had rained onto ocean floor for millions of years. Project sought data on inner space—history and origins of ocean basins and continents. Contract extension—from June 30, 1970, to June 30, 1973—covered additional drilling during 15 two-month cruises of drilling ship Glomar Challenger, (nsf Release 69-144)
Project Tektite, multiagency-industry program to determine ability of men to perform scientific research mission while living isolated on ocean floor under saturated diving conditions for long period, began at St. John, Virgin Islands. Four U.S. aquanauts, Richard A. Waller, H. Edward Clifton, John G. Van Derwalker, and Conrad V. W. Mahnken jumped into sea at Beehive Cove and swam to “habitat,” underwater capsule moored 42 ft below sea level for 60-day experiments. Tektite program was jointly sponsored by usn, NASA, and Dept, of the Interior, with participation by U.S. Coast Guard. Prime contractor, General Electric Co., furnished undersea habitat. NASA and usn behavioral and biomedical teams would observe aquanauts continuously to identify psychological and physiological reactions to long-term mission performed in hostile and isolated environment common to undersea and space missions, (nasa OMSF pao; Lannan, W Star, 2/16/69, A3; 2/17/69, A6)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) released report on Safeguard ABM system prepared at his request by Harvard law professor Abram Chayes and MIT provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner and scientists George W. Rathjens and Steven Weinberg. It said that “the Sentinel/Safeguard anti-ballistic missile system should not be deployed at this time.” Recommendation was based on conclusions system was unlikely to perform according to specifications under nuclear attack, was susceptible to penetration, and was not well adapted to perform missions assigned to it. Deployment would probably start “new round in the arms race” and “seriously impede the conclusion of an arms control agreement.” (Kelly, W Star, 5/7/69, A8; Chapman, W Post, 5/7/69, Al)
Nixon Administration policy toward Federal graduate aid was discussed in Science by John Walsh: There were signs “the Administration is veering away from a policy'of changing the primary form of direct federal support to graduate education from fellowships and training grants to guaranteed loans. For those who feared that the prevailing system of federal grants was to be supplanted there is some consolation that the grants are headed down but not out.” While NASA had liquidated sustaining university programs, agency would still provide indirect support of graduate students through research assistantships financed under $75 million in research grants to universities approved in past budgets. (Science, 6/26/70,1559-61)
dod proposal to save Lockheed Aircraft Corp. from bankruptcy by adding $1.45 billion to Government payments on four Lockheed contracts was outlined by David M. Packard, Deputy Secretary of Defense, in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Forces Committee, (dod Release 1057-70; Text)
Robert H. Gray, Director, Unmanned Launch Operations at KSC, became Deputy Director of KSC Launch Operations. John J. Neilon, Deputy Director, Unmanned Launch Operations, assumed post of Acting Director, Unmanned Launch Operations. (KSC Ann)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate William D. Ruckelshaus as Administrator of Environmental Protection Agency. Agency would bring together major Federal pollution control programs, effective Dec. 2. Nomination was submitted to Senate Nov. 16. (PD, 11/9/70, 1545-6; 11/23/70,1583)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 14th flight from frc. Vehicle was launched from B-52 aircraft at 12 800-m (42 000-ft) altitude and reached 19 800 m (65 000 ft) and mach 0.95. Data on lateral directional derivatives at mach 0.9 and longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio were obtained. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.	Dana, successfully completed 35th flight after air launch from B:52 aircraft at FRC. Purposes of powered flight were to obtain data with speed brakes open at supersonic speed and to obtain additional stability and control data at supersonic speeds. If data were satisfactory XLR-11 engine would be replaced by hydrogen-peroxide landing engines for powered approach and landing phase of program. (NASA Proj Off)
l/g John W. O’Neill (usaf), afsc Vice Commander, testified on status of F-lll aircraft before Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. USAF investigation of Dec. 22, 1969, crash that had killed two pilots near Nellis afb, Nev., had shown “structural failure of the left wing occurred at very low altitude, during a normal dive recovery after a routine delivery of air-to-ground ordnance. Although the aircrew escape module performed as it was designed, time between ejection and ground impact did not allow the recovery chute to open.” Metallurgical flaw, “somewhat like an ultra-thin hairline crack, existed in the lower plate of the wing pivot fitting.” In addition to usaf investigations, special ad hoc committee of Air Force Scientific Advisory Board had reviewed findings and technical data. “We have concluded that the flaw was introduced at a subcontractor facility at some point during the manufacture of the lower plate. ...” No modifications to present structure were planned but structural inspections of all F-llls would “utilize improved ultrasonic inspection techniques and procedures developed as a direct result of this problem.” Program would cost estimated $31.2 million. First aircraft were to be completed and returned to flight status in June 1970. All aircraft should be restored by shortly after first of year. (Testimony)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced appointment of Rolf Eliassen, and reappointment of Howard G. Vesper and William Webster, as members of General Advisory Committee to aec for terms expiring Aug. 1,1976. (PD, 8/3/70, 998)
faa air traffic controllers would delay final descent for landing of turbojet aircraft until close to their destination airport and climb aircraft out as rapidly as possible after takeoff, in program announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe to increase safety and reduce noise at U.S. airports, (faa Release 70-94)
MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton, on behalf of himself and msc Flight Crew Operations staff, received 1969 IEEE Reliability Award in Los Angeles for exceptional contributions to field of reliability. (NASA Hq Reliability & Quality Assurance Newsletter, 3/70, 2)
afsc announced reassignment of m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, Vice Commander of Aeronautical Systems Div., Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, to become Deputy Chief of Staff for procurement and production at afsc Hq. Aug. 1. He would be succeeded at Wright-Patterson by M/G John B. Hudson, (asfc Release 180.70)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Rudolph A. Peterson, Chairman of Executive Committee of Bank of America, to succeed William A. Hagerty as member of ComSatCorp Board of Directors until 1973. (PD, 7/27/70,969, 986)
John D. Hodge, Manager of msc Advanced Missions Program Office, left NASA to become Director of Transportation Systems Concepts for DOT’S Transportation Systems Center at Cambridge, Mass. Hodge had received NASA Medal for Exceptional Service twice during 10-yr NASA service, (msc Release 70-60)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe appointed Herbert W. Richardson, professor of mechanical engineering at MIT, as dot Chief Scientist, (dot Release 17670)
Milky Way galaxy was losing gravitational energy at rate equivalent to mass of 1000 suns annually, Maryland Univ. physicist Dr. Joseph Weber said during third Cambridge Conference on Relativity at Institute for Space Studies in New York. Dr. Weber had measured flow of gravitational energy and computed energy being lost from source of waves in galaxy’s center. Results indicated that eventually a star like the sun, at galaxy’s edges, would break free of weakening gravity and fly off into space. One estimate had placed event at hundreds of millions of years in future. (AP, B Sun, 6/10/70, A3)
Intention to create separate faa office to deal with total air transportation security problems, including aircraft hijacking, was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release 70-57)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced that Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va., would be site of June 1972 U.S. International Aeronautical Exposition. One million visitors were expected to view more than 500 exhibits. (DOT Release 16670)
R/A Donald B. MacMillan (usn, Ret.), last survivor of 1909 Peary expedition that discovered North Pole, died at age 95. (NYT, 9/9/70, 48)
U.S. Court of Appeals was studying suit to force disclosure of SST report prepared by panel headed by physicist Richard L. Garwin at President Nixon’s request, Washington Evening Star said. Suit, filed by conservationist Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth, had been dismissed Aug. 21 by U.S. District Court Judge John H. Pratt on grounds report was covered by doctrine of executive privilege. (W Star, 12/8/70, A3)
LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin announced appointment of G. Mervin Ault as Assistant Director of Power and Materials Directorate, Dr. Bernard Lubarsky as Assistant Director for Aeronautics, and Edward F. Baehr as Technical Consultant to the Director. (LeRC Release 70-51)
New York Times editorial commented on appointment of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., to succeed Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as President’s Science Adviser: “Not surprisingly for one who has been engaged in industrial research for many years, Dr. David has indicated he is most concerned with applied areas such as health-care delivery, transportation, housing and defense. But he is certainly aware that the long-term scientific and technological health of the nation depends on the vitality of its basic research enterprise. Even the best medical organization in the world will be able to do little to conquer cancer. . .until molecular biologists and other basic scientists understand why cells grow out of control and how to prevent them from doing so. As science adviser, Dr. David will have to help assure that basic research is not sacrificed to the urgent demands for solving society’s immediate problems.” (NYT, 8/21/70)
FAA issuance of advance notice of proposed aircraft engine emission standards, soliciting comments, was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Studies had shown that one percent of total U.S. air pollution might be attributed to aircraft emissions. (faa Release 70-28)
Dr. Donald G. Rea, former NASA Deputy Director for Planetary Programs in ossa, would become jpl Assistant Laboratory Director for Science March 16, NASA announced. In newly created post Dr. Rea would be responsible for managing jpl’s total science program and would act as jpl’s chief scientist. (NASA Release 70-37)
William T. Piper, founder of Piper Aircraft Corp.—one of world’s largest light-aircraft corporations—died at age 89. Piper, known as “the Henry Ford of aviation,” had built more aircraft than anyone else in the world, including durable, inexpensive Piper Cub. (Krebs, NYT, 1/17/70,31)
faa announced formation of interagency committee including representatives of NASA, DOD, and dot to prepare five-year national plan for development and implementation of new microwave-scanning-beam instrument landing system for civil-military use. System was major recommendation of dot’s Air Traffic Control Advisory Committee in March 5 report to Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release T 70-32)
Discovery (through infrared radiometric observations) of local temperature in Jupiter’s North Equatorial Belt far in excess of those at level of solid ammonia clouds and (through visual observations) of orange-brown coloration within belt were described in Science by MIT astronomers John S. Lewis and Ronald G. Prinn. Astronomers concluded that high-resolution spectroscopic examination of spots might result in detection of water vapor in Jupiter’s atmosphere. “In the design of Jupiter flyby and orbiter missions for the 1970’s, the possibility of conducting related experiments in the immediate vicinity of the planet should be considered.” Data could reduce uncertainties in design parameters of entry probes. Astronomers also suggested that, in multilayer cloud model, solar uv photolysis of hydrogen sulfide in regions where ammonia clouds were sparse or absent should lead to production of inorganic chromophores—molecular coloring agents. (Science, 7/31/70,472-3)
faa study had shown that if rush-hour commuters traveled from suburban areas to downtown business sections by aircraft, they would generate one eighth of air pollution emitted by private automobiles, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said. Study completed by Center of Transportation at Rutgers Univ. had found from research in Connecticut-New York-New Jersey area that 36 metric tons (40 short tons) of pollutants emitted in morning and evening by commuter automobiles could be reduced to 4.5 metric tons (5 short tons) if aircraft were used instead. Number of commuters who would voluntarily change to aircraft, if available, had been determined at approximately 30%. (faa Release 70-78)
Joint dod-dot test program to determine value of helicopters in providing medical assistance to automobile accident victims and others requiring emergency medical care was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Program would use UH-1 helicopters of Army’s 507th Air Ambulance Corps at Fort Sam Houston, Tex., in San Antonio area July 15 through Dec. 31. (dod Release 577-70)
Delays caused by sun’s gravity in return of radio signals by Mariner spacecraft had verified Einstein theory of relativity, jpl astronomer Dr. John D. Anderson said in report to Conference on Experimental Tests of Gravitational Theories at Cal Tech. In tests begun April 30, Anderson and team including Dr. Duane O. Muhle-man of Cal Tech and Dr. Pasquale B. Esposito and Warren L. Martin of JPL had taken several hundred radio measurements of Mariner VI and VII in wide-range solar orbit using precise distance-measuring system and 64-m (210-ft) Goldstone antenna. Experiments tested validity of theory that velocity of light was slower in gravitational field near sun than in interplanetary space where gravitational fields were weaker. “Our experiments to date show that Einstein’s predictions are right, to within 2 to 4 per cent. The best measurements we have thus far indicate a maximum delay of about 204 microseconds for Mariner VI, as compared with an expected 200 microseconds using Einstein’s theory.” Findings cast doubt on more recent theories of Dr. Charles Brans and Dr. Robert H. Dicke that Einstein’s formulations could be incorrect by 1% “If the Brans-Dicke theory were correct, the time delay would be much less. . .perhaps about 186 microseconds. .. .if the much older Newtonian theory were correct, there would have been no time delay at all.” (nasa Release 70-200)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 26 800-m (88 000-ft) altitude and mach , 1.4 during powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose of flight, 33rd in series, was to obtain stability and control data at various mach numbers and angles of attack. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached mach 0.98 at 20 000-m (66 000-ft) altitude after air launch from B-52 aircraft from FRC. Objectives of powered flight, 16th mission in X-24A series, were to evaluate handling qualities at 5° angle of attack at mach 0.95, determine lateral directional derivatives at mach 0.94 with 40° upper-flap deflection, and determine longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag data with 40° upper flap. (NASA Proj Off)
Astronautical Multilingual Dictionary of the International Academy of Astronautics, conceived by the late Dr. Theodore von Karman, was published by Academia Publishing House of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences in Prague. Executive editor was Ing. J. Vlachy and scientific editor Prof. R. Pes'ek. U.S. coeditors were Dr. Woodford A. Heflin of usaf’s Air University Aerospace Studies Institute and William H. Allen of NASA. Other coeditors were in U.S.S.R., Germany, France, Italy, Argentina, and Czechoslovakia. (Text; Air University Dispatch, 4/10/70,18)
NASA announced appointment of Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs in OSSA since 1967, as GSFC Deputy Director, effective April 6. Hearth had joined NASA in 1962 as Manager of Advanced Programs and Technology. In 1966 he became Assistant Director for Planetary Flight Programs and was Deputy Director of Voyager Program in 1967. (NASA Release 70-35)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed third flight from frc. Captive portion—usually conducted on separate flight—was completed at 9100-km (30 000-ft) altitude to verify B-52/adapter/heavy-weight M2-F3 compatibility, check out propellant system, and check out jettison system. Flight portion followed air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude to expand launch envelope, study transonic configuration, investigate lateral phugoid present on M2-F2, check out reaction control system, and evaluate nose window requirements. (NASA Proj Off)
New standards for certification of transport aircraft over 5670 kg (12 500 lbs), effective May 8, were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Standards included warning system to alert pilots to failing power-operated control system; operating procedures for flight in turbulence; design of airframe for dynamic loads from continuous turbulence, with flight load measurements required for new aircraft with unreliable methods of predicting load intensities; system for preventing condensation on inside of windshield during flight and taxiing; greater redundancy in control system designs; flight tests to demonstrate freedom from flutter through transonic speed range; protection of empennage from bird strikes; more comprehensive airframe lightning protection criteria; additional fire protection for powerplant; dual locking for all critical removable fasteners; protection of fuel system components in event of gear-up landing; design precautions to minimize hazards of turbine rotor failure; fail-safe criteria for aircraft systems; changes in design standards to accommodate modern instrumentation and to require basic flight and navigation instrument at each pilot station; and improvements in reliability of hydraulic systems, (faa Release 70-35)
Grand Tour” of outer solar system was discussed by William Hines in Chicago Sun-Times: “The grand tour idea came out of Caltech several years ago after a graduate student in Prof. Homer J. Stewart’s aeronautical engineering department calculated the added energy that could be imparted to a spacecraft by the massive gravitational fields of various planets. This information, together with the unusual configuration of outer planets in the 1980s, was patched together by Stewart into the grand tour concept. Theoretically, Stewart calculated, it should be possible to fire a spacecraft into a near-miss trajectory toward Jupiter and then let that planet, biggest in the solar system, take over. Jupiter would add energy, and hence velocity, to the spacecraft.... This would send the craft toward Saturn, where more energy would be borrowed from the ringed planet’s gravitational field, and then on to Uranus for more of the same, Neptune and finally Pluto.” (C Sun-Times, 3/9/70)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.	Dana, successfully reached mach 0.7 after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude. Objectives of glide flight— first in M2-F3 series—were to check out pilot, evaluate center-fin modification, determine aileron characteristics, evaluate stability augmentation system modifications, and evaluate speed brakes. (NASA Proj Off)
Transfer of sst program from faa to Office of Secretary of Transportation and appointment of William M. Magruder, Deputy Director of Commercial Engineering at Lockheed California Co., as Director of Supersonic Transport Development Program were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (dot Release 7670)
Univ. of Maryland astronomer Dr. Joseph Weber had located source of gravity waves that permeated universe in concentrated area near constellation Sagittarius at center of Milky Way, New York Times reported. (NYT, 2/22/70, F4)
usaf Chief of Staff, Gen. John D. Ryan, approved flights of seven heavily instrumented F-llls needed in r&d programs. Remaining 226 F-llls continued to be grounded pending final determination of test and inspection procedures to ensure against repetition of manufacturing defect that led to fatal Dec. 22, 1969, crash. (AP, NYT. 2/12/70, C9)
Sen. John L. McClellan (D-Ark.) on Senate floor accused NASA of secretly altering low bid of Fairchild Hiller in competition for $50-million contract for ats-f and G spacecraft and of permitting General Electric Co. to reduce overhead costs in its final offer so that total was below that of Fairchild Hiller Corp. He compared procurement project with dodtfx competition and contract awards. “I believe that a thorough review of the phased procurement source selection system should be undertaken. . .in order to determine whether the system should be modified, changed, or eliminated.” (CR, 7/9/70, S10974-5)
President Nixon announced appointment of new members of President’s Science Advisory Committee: Dr. Solomon J. Buchsbaum, Vice President of Research, Sandia Laboratories; Dr. Theodore L. Cairns, Assistant Director, Central Research Dept., E. I. du Pontde Nemours & Co.; Dr. James S. Coleman, Dept, of Social Relations, Johns Hopkins Univ.; Dr. Val L. Fitch, Princeton Univ. physicist; and Dr. Lloyd H. Smith, Jr., Chairman of Dept, of Medicine, Univ. of California, San Francisco Medical Center. New members would serve until Dec. 31, 1973. They succeeded William R. Hewlett, who had resigned, and Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Dr. Sidney D. Drell, Dr. Charles P. Slichter, and Dr. Charles H. Townes, whose terms had expired. (PD, 3/16/70, 357-8)
Nomination of Thomas W. Moore as member of Board of Directors of Corp. for Public Broadcasting for term expiring March 26, 1976, was submitted to Senate. Term of John D. Rockefeller III had expired. (PD, 8/31/70, 1116)
National Transportation Safety Board released contents of its letter to faa recommending safety measures to protect Boeing 747 passengers. And Reuben B. Robertson III ot Ralph Nader’s Center for Study of Responsive Law, in letter to Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe, charged faa with suppressing news of “near tragedies” aboard 747s. Later Washington Post said both actions stemmed from Sept. 17 and 18 incidents in which 747 engines had disintegrated in flight. There had been no injuries. (Hoffman, W Post, 10/2/70, A3)	.
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed captive flight from frc to verify compatibility of B-52 aircraft, adapter, and vehicle; check out systems; and verify check list, (nasa Proj Off)
Senate rejected, by vote of 43 to 22, amendment to H.R. 17123, $19.3billion FY 1971 military procurement authorization, to ensure that weapon systems and subsystems were thoroughly tested before production was begun. Amendment, proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), had been called “fly-before-you-buy.” (CR, 8/17/70, SI3529-44; SBD, 8/17/70, 202)
dod announced appointment of Dr. James W. Mar, professor of aeronautics and astronautics at MIT, as USAF Chief Scientist, effective Sept. 14. Dr. Mar would succeed John J. Welch, Jr., who would return to ltv, Inc. (dod Release 740-70)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate four assistant directors of NSF: Edward C. Creutz to be Assistant Director for Research; Lloyd E. Humphreys to be Assistant Director for Education; Lewis Levin to be Assistant Director for Institutional Programs; and Thomas B. Owen to be Assistant Director for National and International Programs. Nominations were submitted to Senate March 31, 1970. (PD, 3/30/70, 444; 4/6/70, 475)
Expansion of Project mast (military assistance for safety in traffic), joint test program to determine value of helicopters in providing medical assistance in emergencies [see July 15], was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Program would be expanded to area surrounding Colorado Springs, Colo., and Seattle, Wash, (dod Release 634-70)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Adm. Willard J. Smith (uscg, Ret.) to be Assistant Secretary of Transportation, replacing Walter L. Mazan, who had resigned. Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe established Office of Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Safety and Consumer Affairs and announced nomination of Adm. Smith to new post. (PD, 8/10/70, 1033; dot Release 17070)
In Science, Project Tektite I scientific team—Dr. H. Edward Clifton, Conrad V. W. Mahnken, John G. Vanderwalker, and Richard A. Waller—discussed results of February-April 1969 experiment sponsored by NASA, USN, Dept, of Interior, and General Electric Co. to provide data for behavioral, biomedical, and engineering studies and marine sciences program. Between 10% and 20% of waking time had been devoted to psychological tests for biomedical studies. Minor external ear infections contracted by*all divers was only health problem to affect scientific program. Experiments had demonstrated advantages of underwater habitation and saturation diving for biological and geological research: opportunity for continuous monitoring of organisms or processes and for more research time in water. (Science, 5/8/70,659-63)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $97 880 cost-sharing contract to Northern Research and Engineering Corp. to establish design criteria for control and reduction of oxides of nitrogen emitted from jet aircraft engines, (faa Release 70-65)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig—Vice President and Director of Eastman Kodak Co., professor at Univ. of Rochester, and former Presidential Science Adviser—was named President of Brown Univ. in Providence, R.I., effective June 1. (W Star, 3/14/70, A2; Science, 3/20/70, 1597)
New York State Attorney-General Louis J. Lefkowitz had filed suit against 58 domestic and foreign airlines using John F. Kennedy International and LaGuardia Airports to require improved noise abatement devices on jet aircraft, Washington Post said. (W Post, 7/4/70, A4)
Introduction to the Solar Wind by John C. Brandt was reviewed in Science by Roger A. Kopp of National Center for Atmospheric Research. In 1958 it had been argued that sun’s 995 800 K (1 000000°F) corona must expand continuously into space with supersonic velocities near earth’s orbit. Subject had remained in controversy until 1962 observations from Mariner II indicated plasma outflow from sun with 400-km-per-sec (249-mps) velocities and mean particle density of about 10 per cc (0.06 cu in) at orbit of earth. “The obvious place to begin a discussion of the solar wind is at the sun, and the author sets the stage by summarizing current knowledge of classical solar physics.” (Science, 9/18/70, 1195-6)
John L. Steele, Senior Correspondent of Time-Life News Service, praised James E. Webb’s book Space Age Management in speech at Time-Life and Kaiser Corp. luncheon to direct attention to need for pollution control. Former NASA Administrator Webb had written that space accomplishments could “usher in new era of great advances for us and for mankind. . .because our accomplishments indicate a fundamental improvement in man’s ability to find and use new knowledge.” These included new ways in which large-scale organized efforts were managed; encouragement of multidisciplinary efforts using science, engineering, and management; new techniques and tools for research in social and physical sciences; and “creative manner in which these are applied to the solution of age-old problems.” With these accomplishments U.S. had shown, Webb had written, “that we can perform the most difficult and challenging tasks without departing from or damaging our fundamental values or our democratic institutions.” (CR, 5/28/70, S8008-9)
Armed Forces Management editorial by Michael Getler said nuclear test ban treaty “came only after the Soviets unilaterally broke a testing moratorium to gather what they needed to know in the vital area of weapons effects, and the ink was barely dry on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Treaty when the Pentagon announced the Russians were testing a new Fractional Orbital Bombardment System that was certainly a spiritual, if not technical, violation of that pact.” (AFM, 5/70, 13)
Federal financing of sst would be “complete misplacement of national priorities,” Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York said in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Transportation. “I am prepared to do all in my power to prevent any sst from landing at New York’s airports until it is proven safe both to our environment and to the health of our citizens.” (upi, W Star, 9/4/70, A5)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, completed fourth flight—and first powered flight—from frc. Objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.8, check out engine operation, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, investigate lateral phugoid present on second flight but not on third, check reaction control operation, and investigate landing visibility. Engine shut down prematurely, after launch from B-52 aircraft, precluding completion of all planned maneuvers. Investigation was under way. (NASA Proj Off)
First charting of exact locations of six continental land masses as they drifted across globe for millions of years at rate of about 10 cm (4 in) annually was reported by ESSA marine geologists Dr. Robert S. Dietz and John C. Holden in Journal of Geophysical Research. Calculations, made by using geological landmarks to plot maps, showed that original “supercontinent” of Pangaea had split midway through Triassic geological period, about 200 million yrs ago, into land masses of Laurasia (now North America, Europe, and Asia) and Gond-wana (now Africa, South America, Australia, Antarctica, and India) through sea floor’s spreading, welling up of molten material called magma from earth’s mantle through rift in ocean bed. Subsequent spreading had separated continents. (Journ of Geophysical Research, 9/10/70,4939-55)	_
Appointment of L/G Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. {usaf, Ret.), as Director of Civil Aviation Security for dot was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (dot Release 20370)
Edward C. Polhamus of LaRC Stability and Performance Branch testified before Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations during F-lll hearings. Extensive wind-tunnel tests of F-lll during aircraft’s development stage had led LaRC engineers in 1963 to conclude F-lll would not meet USAF specification for primary mission dash requirement; aircraft would not develop maneuver capability at supersonic speeds specified by contractor; and aircraft’s directional stability was extremely low at supersonic speeds. Primary mission shortcoming had been “associated with a high drag level which required significant design changes to solve.” Polhamus said contractor, General Dynamics Corp., had insisted F-lll would exceed primary mission requirement “and did little in the way of airframe modification.” (Testimony; PInq, 4/8/70, 2)
USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke in joint program, successfully completed 18th flight, reaching mach 1.15 after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000ft) altitude from frc. Objectives of powered flight—first at supersonic speed—were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.1, obtain lateral directional derivatives at mach numbers greater than 1.0, obtain longitudinal-trim and lift-to-drag-ratio data with 40° upper flap, obtain longitudinal derivatives, and make 270 knots-indicated-air-speed approach, (nasa Proj Off; upi, WPost, 10/15/70, A4)
Establishment of faa Office of Air Transportation Security to cope with criminal acts against aircraft and airports was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would replace FAA Office of Investigations and Security and would emphasize deterrence of aircraft hijacking. Carl F. Maisch, Director of Office of Investigations and Security and former FBI agent, had been named director of new office, (faa Release 70-81)
Holt, Rinehart and Winston published Operation Overflight, in which author Francis Gary Powers said information supplied by Lee Harvey Oswald, identified by Warren Commission as assassin of President John F. Kennedy, might have enabled Russians to shoot down his U-2 espionage aircraft in 1960. Powers believed Oswald had supplied U.S.S.R. with data on MPS-16 height-finding radar equipment. (AP, B Sun, 4/20/70, 6)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $3million dot contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design 480-km-per-hr (300-mph) tracked air-cushion research vehicle (tacrv). (dot Release 6370)
International participation in erts program was discussed in Astronautics A Aeronautics by John Hanessian, Jr., and John M. Logsdon, of George Washington Univ.: “Broad participation in erts. . .makes sense only if a global operational Earth-resources-survey system follows. The design and institutionalization of such a system will test the ingenuity of national and international policy makers, and any steps which may make their task less complex are desirable. Widespread international involvement in the ERTS program would be such a step. And it would.. .serve [both] the needs of many nations of the world and the national interest of the U.S. Many constraints on broad participation in erts stem from the level of funding and the pace now planned for the program. Thus it falls within the power of the U.S, to eliminate them. This we should do.” (AAA, 8/70, 56-63)
Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received Society of Manufacturing Engineers Interprofessional Cooperation Award at dinner in Detroit, Mich., for giving U.S. “through his work in jet propulsion, missilery, and telemetry ... a viable defense system while contributing substantially to her pre-eminence in the investigation of outer space.” (Pasadena Star-News, 4/2/70)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke reached 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude and mach0.85 during second powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 200-m (40 000-ft) altitude from frc. Purpose of flight—11th in X-24A series and first for a NASA pilot—was to obtain stability and control data. (NASA Proj Off)
Senate approved nomination of William D. Ruckelshaus to head Environmental Protection Agency. (CR, 12/2/70, S19272)
afsc announced reassignment of officers: m/g Lee V. Gossick, Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems, would become Chief of Staff for afsc on departure of m/g Clifford J. Kronauer; m/g Kenneth W. Schultz, Deputy for Minuteman, samso, Norton afb, Calif., would succeed m/g Gossick as Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems; b/g Abner B. Martin would succeed m/g Schultz as Deputy for Minuteman; b/g Herbert A. Lyon, Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems, afsc, would succeed b/g Martin as Deputy for Reentry Systems; b/g William W. Gilbert, Vice Commander of usaf Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., would command European Communications Area, with additional duties as Deputy Chief of Staff, Communications, usaf, Europe. (afsc Release 216.71; afsc pio )
faa award of $229 746 planning grant-offer to New Jersey Dept, of Transportation for master plan of v/sTOLport to serve New York metropolitan and northern New Jersey areas was announced by FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer, (faa Release 71-168)
Senate by vote of 61 to 28 rejected amendment proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to terminate usn F—14 fighter aircraft program by deleting $801.6 million from H.R. 8687, $51-billion FY 1972 military procurement authorization. (CR, 9/29/71, S15329— 15405)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 1261, to authorize nsf “to undertake a loan guarantee and interest assistance program to aid unemployed scientists and engineers in the conversion from defense-related to civilian, socially-oriented research, development, and engineering activities.” (CR, S3225—31)
New world distance record in heavyweight turboprop class was claimed by usn for P—3C Orion aircraft piloted 11280 km (7010 mi) by Cmdr. Donald H. Lilienthal in nonstop flight from Atsugi Naval Air Station, Japan, to Patuxent Naval Air Station, Md., in 15 hrs 21 min. Previous record of 7662 km (4761 mi) had been set by Soviet 11-18 aircraft in 1967. (dod Newsfilm Release 60-71)
White House announced appointment of William M. Magruder, former Director of sst Development for dot, as special consultant to President Nixon. (PD, 9/13/71,1260) Stratoscope II, reused with modifications for each flight, weighed 3800 kg (8400 lbs) and had optical system with 91-cm (36-in) aperture and photographic resolution of 0.1 arc sec—equal to ability to distinguish two objects 76 cm (30 in) apart at distance of 1600 km (1000 mi). Photographs would be made in visible region of spectrum (4000-6000 A). Balloon-borne telescope, 198 m (650 ft) long, reached operating altitude at 25 200 m (82 800 ft) and performed flawlessly during night-long flight. Stratoscope drifted westward at 32 to 40 km per hr (20 to 25 mph) and returned to earth 96.6 km (60 mi) northeast of Little Rock, Ark., Sept. 10. Mission objectives were accomplished and scientific results were being evaluated. Instrument package was damaged during landing, apparently striking top of oak tree, but film was reported intact. (msfc Releases 71-53, 71—141; Huntsville Times, 9/10/71, 9; 9/11/71)
faa—dot program to lower base of positive control airspace to 5486 m (18 000 ft) over entire U.S. by end of 1971 was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Purpose was to reduce potential for midair collisions. Current positive control base was between 5486 and 18 288 m (18 000 and 60 000 ft) over northeastern and north central U.S. and between 7315 and 18 288 m (24 000 and 60 000 ft) over remainder of conterminous 48 states, (faa Release 71—50)
Lenc had turned over to St. Vincent Charity Hospital in Cleveland, Ohio, small analog computer designed by LeRC scientists Vernon D. Gebben and John A. Webb, Jr., at cost of $1500, NASA announced. Computer measured increase or decrease of stroke volume of heart, or changes in length of time heart valves remained open, to detect certain abnormalities early in development. Hospital planned to use computer experimentally before application to human patients recovering from open heart surgery, (nasa Release 71-69)
Completion of dot study of general-aviation safety was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. General-aviation industry consisted of 133 814 single-engine aircraft, 16 000 multi-engine aircraft, 2229 jet aircraft, 33 992 flight instructors, 2170 FAA-approved flight and ground schools, and 732 729 pilots, including 195 861 students. In 1970 general aviation had accounted for more than 25 million flight hours and nearly 6 billion km (nearly 4 billion mi) flown. Of 621 fatal general-aviation accidents in 1970, 201 had been identified as weather-caused. Study recommended biennial flight review of pilot competency, priority support of FAA General Aviation Accident Prevention Program, tightening of certification requirements for flight instructors and pilots, modernization of faa flight service stations, improvement of faa reporting of real-time weather data, review of faa general-aviation structure, clarification by faa of regulations covering general operating and flight rules, publication of faa regulations in separate parts rather than in current volume format, and adoption of standard traffic pattern for uncontrolled airports, (dot Release 20271)
nasa’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by nasa test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed its 11th flight from frc. Objectives were to check out fuel jettison system and newly installed engine chamber purge system, (nasa Proj Off)
Bipartisan 115-member congressional group—Members of Congress for Peace Through Law—issued report criticizing proposed B-l bomber aircraft as unnecessary, ineffective, and obsolete in nuclear age. Report was prepared by Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and Rep. John F. Seiberling (D—Ohio). (CR, 5/5/71, H3558-63)
Formation of new Military Aircraft Programs Office within oart and appointment of Albert J. Evans, Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicles Systems Div. in oart, as its Director were announced by NASA. Office would direct ongoing support to usaf on F-15 and B-l programs and to usn on F—14 program; usaf/nasa Transonic Aircraft Technology (tact) Program in which nasa supercritical wing would be flight-tested on modified F-lll aircraft; usa/nasa Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft Technology Program; and other possible joint research, experimental, and prototype aircraft programs. William S. Aiken, Jr., Deputy Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div., would succeed Evans in former post, (nasa Release 71—186)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Research and Engineering, and team of dod scientists testified before congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy during hearings to determine whether treaty could safely be negotiated to ban underground tests without inspection. Dr. Foster and Dr. Stephen J. Lukasic, Director of dod Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa), said that, while advances had been made in detecting underground tests, it was still impossible to spot some detonations of up to 100 kt. (Lyons, NYT, 10/28/71, 1)
Thirtieth anniversary of opening of Washington National Airport. Number of passengers using facility annually had grown from fewer than 400 000 in 1941 to nearly 10 million in 1970. At commemorative ceremonies faa award for extraordinary service was presented to Edward V. Rickenbacker, veteran pilot and retired Eastern Airlines Chairman. Airport received commemorative plaque from Arlington County (Va.) Board, (faa Release 71-89; Bernstein, W News, 6/16/71, 35; Eisen, W Post, 6/17/71, D3)
White House announced that Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., President’s Science Adviser, had chaired working conference with industry, education, and Government representatives on employment problems of scientists and engineers in aerospace and defense industries. Meeting had been called at President Nixon’s request. (PD, 3/8/71, 436)
Plans to store lunar rocks in vault-like facility at msc to retain their original condition for future researchers were described by NASA officials in AP interview published by New York Times, lrl curatorial and research projects would be consolidated in specially air-conditioned facility covering 465 sq m (5000 sq ft) of existing laboratory space scheduled for completion in time for March 1972 Apollo 16 mission. Dr. John H. Pomeroy, nasa’s Assistant Director for Lunar Sample program, said project had been “a very important aim since the very beginning, because we realize these are unique and irreplaceable samples and it may be years before we go back to these places.” (NYT, 9/7/71)
Appointment of Richard P. Skully, Manager of faa’s Miami Area Office, as Director of faa Office of Environmental Quality was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer, (faa Release 71-134)
faa plan to create v/stol Special Projects Office to formulate and maintain development plan for v/stol program, provide executive management of faa v/stol r&d, and make economic studies and market analyses of v/stol sales and service potential was announced by John H. Shaffer, faa Administrator. Jerold M. Chavkin, Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development, would be acting Director (faa Release 71—24)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced amendment to S. 32, Conversion Research, Education and Assistance Act of 1971, to establish New Cities Research and Experimentation Administration. Agency would employ defense and aerospace personnel. (CR, 10/13/71, S16259-63)
Collapsed craters formed in terrestrial basalt flows near Grants, N. Mex., exhibited size-frequency distributions similar to those for craters in terraces on inner walls of lunar crater Copernicus, arc scientists Ronald Greeley and Donald E. Gault reported in Science. Similarities suggested Copernicus craters had origin similar to basalt collapse craters. Scientists suggested that interior terraces of Copernicus were lava flows through fractures during postimpact adjustments after formation of Copernicus. (Science, 2/5/71, 477-9)
faa—dot program to lower base of positive control airspace to 5486 m (18 000 ft) over entire U.S. by end of 1971 was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Purpose was to reduce potential for midair collisions. Current positive control base was between 5486 and 18 288 m (18 000 and 60 000 ft) over northeastern and north central U.S. and between 7315 and 18 288 m (24 000 and 60 000 ft) over remainder of conterminous 48 states, (faa Release 71-50)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) issued statement that C-5A program was expected to cost $4.9 billion, increase of $300 million over 1970 figures: “Taking into account that the program has been reduced from 120 planes to 81, we find an overrun of $2.2 billion. On a unit basis, the costs have risen from $28 million originally estimated for each C-5A to $60 million, an increase of over 100%.” (Text)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. James R. Schlesinger and William O. Doub as members of aec. (CR, 8/6/71, D845)
usaf’s X-24A lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 27th flight after air launch from B—52 aircraft over frc in joint nasa—usaf program. Objectives of powered flight were to determine lateral-directional derivatives with rudder bias at 2° toe out, evaluate handling qualities with y accelerometer feedback and power on, determine transonic pitch damping, and obtain upper-flap pressure with upper flaps at 13°. Although only three of four engine chambers ignited, most objectives were achieved, with vehicle reaching 19 500-m (64 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.1. (nasa Proj Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced faa was considering major policy change to permit establishment of FAA facilities and services at privately owned airports open to public. Such facilities and services were restricted to publicly owned airports. FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer said policy change would be “in accord with faa’s assigned mission and responsibility of assuring safety and efficiency of all civil aircraft operations and of promoting air commerce and civil aeronautics.” (faa Release 71—110)
usn P—3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft established world record for nonrefueled, long-distance flight for heavyweight turboprop aircraft. P—3C Orion, piloted by Cdr. Donald H. Lilienthal (usn), attained speed of 808 km per hr (502 mph). Previous record of 727 km per hr (452 mph) had been established by Soviet 11-18 in May 1968.	(AF Mag, 4/71,15)
Appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, as Assistant Director for Research Applications, nsf, was announced by Dr. William D. McElroy, nsf Director. Dr. Eggers would head major new organizational unit of nsf designed to support research applied to environmental and societal problems, (nsf Release 71-118)
White House announced President Nixon would accept resignation of Dr. William D. McElroy as Director of National Science Foundation. Dr. McElroy would remain in position until February 1972. (PD, 7/26/71, 1078)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 23rd flight at frc. Objectives of powered flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.5, determine lateral-directional derivatives, and determine longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio with 40° upper flap setting and 0° rudder bias. Pilot performed pushovers, pullups, and aileron doublets at a number of angles of attack, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa’s M2—F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, completed sixth flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft over frc. Objectives were to obtain M2—F3 and B-52 adapter compatibility by captive flight at 9000-m (30 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.46 to 0.67, expand flight envelope to mach 0.85 by climbing to 13 700 m (45 000 ft) and releasing M2-F3, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, investigate lateral phugoid, and obtain performance data at mach 0.8. Alternate flight plan was flown after one of three engine chambers malfunctioned, but vehicle reached mach 0.8 and most objectives were achieved, (nasa Proj Off)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer, in letter to Airline Pilots Assn. President John J. O’Donnell, rejected alpa’s Nov. 1 request for accelerated five-year plan to install landing aids at U.S. airports. Shaffer said faa was legally unable “to accede to one limited group’s requests to the prejudice of other legitimate demands.” (Text)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of John E. Hirten, former President of Institute of Planners of California, as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems. Hirten would succeed Michael Cafferty, who had returned to private law practice, (dot Release R—24)
U.S.S.R.’s largest and most advanced space tracking ship, 40 800 000-kg (45 000-ton), 230-m (760-ft) Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, had been unveiled in Odessa Harbor, New York Times reported. Ship was equipped with 100 antennas, including four large parabolic antennas for deep space communications, and could operate at sea for up to one year. (Shabad, NYT, 12/14/71, 11)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) released GAO report that showed official cost estimates for F—14 usn jet fighter aircraft had risen from $11.5 million to $16.7 million per aircraft since March 1971. Sen. Proxmire said he was “drafting amendments” to military authorization bill before Congress “which would terminate” $5-billion F—15 project. (W Post, 9/9/71,2)
X-24A lifting body reached its maximum speed of 1687 km (1048 mph) and 21 300-m (70 000-ft) altitude during 25th flight from frc. usaf aircraft, launched from B-52 aircraft, was piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke on powered flight to expand flight envelope, determine lateral-directional derivative with rudder bias at 2° toe out, and check lateral-acceleration feedback to control system, (nasa Proj Off; Pres Rpt 72)
In cable to Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), Jean-Jacques ServanSchreiber, member of French National Assembly, said Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport “looks to us.. . like an industrial Vietnam.” Every Concorde cost analysis had proved to be wrong. Cost had “multiplied here, as it will everywhere, four times the initial evaluations.” Facts had not been available until recent months. “Now the public eye is on the project and what it sees is bankruptcy.” (Kenworthy, NYT, 3/14/71, 21)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of John E. Hirten, former President of Institute of Planners of California, as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems. Hirten would succeed Michael Cafferty, who had returned to private law practice, (dot Release R—24)
nas and nae released Jamaica Bay and Kennedy Airport: A Multidisciplinary Environmental Study. Report, prepared at request of Port of New York Authority, recommended against expansion of John F. Kennedy International Airport. “Any runway construction will damage the natural environment of the Bay and reduce its potential use for conservation, recreation, and housing.” (nas-nae Release 2/17/71)
nasa and Stanford Univ. Biomedical Technology Transfer Team (bateam), fourth bateam to be established and first formed at leading medical school, would apply NASA-generated aerospace technology to problems in cardiology, NASA announced. Team of five medical consultants and five aerospace engineering consultants under Stanford Univ. cardiologist Dr. Donald C. Harrison would concentrate on cardiovascular medicine. NASA had eight special teams—four working on environmental problems and four on biomedical activities, (nasa Release 71—154)
arc researchers had used sensors on twin-engine Cessna 401 light aircraft to detect and measure oil spills in Pacific Ocean off California, nasa announced. Sensors had detected slicks from heavy and light crude oils and light diesel oil. arc researchers John P. Millard and John C. Arveson had said approach should be applicable to satellite-borne sensor system, (nasa Release 71-42)
President Nixon announced 25 appointments to new National Advisory Committee on Oceans and Atmosphere and designation of Dr. William A. Nierenberg, Director of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and Dr. William J. Hargis, Jr., Director of Virginia Institute of Marine Science, as Chairman and Vice Chairman. {PD, 10/25/71, 1429)
msfc announced appointment of Dr. William R. Lucas, Director of msfc’s Program Development Directorate, as msfc Deputy Director, Technical, effective Feb. 15. Dr. Lucas’ position would be assumed by James T. Murphy in acting capacity, (msfc Release 71-25)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced H.R. 9379, “bill to establish an Office of Technology Transfer.” He said: “As a nation we have enjoyed many valuable side-effects, spin-offs or ‘fallouts’ from [Federal] research. Many of the examples of the miracles of modern science, of technology transfer, the path from ‘science to sales’ come from the annals of NASA, largely because NASA has made a concerted effort to accomplish the transfer of their space technology to everyday usage and have publicized that effort especially well.” (CR, 6/23/71, H5825-6)
Development of surgical implement to simplify cataract removal with high-frequency vibration and pump to liquify and remove cataract and lens material was announced by LeRC. Hand-held instrument— developed by four-man LeRC team in cooperative program with Dr. William J. McGannon, prominent Cleveland eye surgeon—had been successfully tested on animals. NASA was seeking patent on instrument, which would reduce cataract operation time and patient’s convalescent period by minimizing stitching problem in most cases. Instrument made only small puncture, (nasa Release 71-203)
Permanent appointment of Gustav E. Lundquist as Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development was announced by John H. Shaffer, FAA Administrator. Lundquist had been in acting capacity since January 1970. David R. Israel, former Deputy Director of Defense Communications Planning Group in DOD, had been named Director of newly created Office of Systems Engineering Management and Spencer S. Hunn had been named Director of National Airspace System Program Office in faa. (faa Release 71-2)
Delivery of first operational automated radar terminal system (arts hi) to new control tower at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Computer-based system would be operational by mid-1971. Components, when added to existing airport surveillance radars, would permit display of vital flight information on radar scopes used by air traffic controllers. Alpha-numeric data tags would be attached to related aircraft target or “blip.” (faa Release 71—5)
NAS held meeting on molecular constitutions of interstellar space. Dr. William J. Welch, Univ. of California at Berkeley astronomer, said 23 different molecules had been detected in interstellar space. Dr. Arno A. Penzias of Bell Telephone Laboratories said new radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., had detected amount of carbon monoxide that “covers vast regions of space.” Detected carbon seemed “to play a disproportionately large role.” Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of Univ. of Maryland said it might be possible that carbon monoxide was formed in shells around very young and very old stars from which it was ejected into space. (Lyons, NYT, 10/27/71, 51)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke in joint program, completed 21st flight from frc. Objectives of powered flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.5, determine lateral-directional derivatives, and obtain longitudinal trim and, lift-to-drag data with 40° upper flap at 0° rudder bias. Two of four engines were shut down because of sticky angle-of-attack indicator; alternate two-engine flight plan was followed and completed successfully. (NASA Proj Off)
After meeting with President Nixon at White House, Secretary of the Treasury John B. Connally, Jr., announced President’s intention to send to Congress request for legislation providing $250 million in loan guarantees for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. {PD, 5/10/71, 738)
Visit to U.S. by Soviet Americanologist Georgy Arbatov reflected continuing tension between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Joseph Kraft said in Baltimore Sun. While Arbatov had been received cordially “in very high places,” difficulties arose “whenever conversations came round to specifics.” Subject of strategic arms had been particularly thorny, “for the Russians appear to be forcing the pace in the arms race with the new holes apparently set out for deployment of an improved SS-9 or some other monster weapon.” (B Sun, 5/11/71, 17)
Rep. F. Edward Hebert, Chairman of House Armed Services Committee, announced that he would move to block $806-million procurement funds for usn F-14 jet fighter aircraft until usn solved overcost problems. Funds were included in $21.9-billion military weapons authorization bill before House. (AP, W Post, 6/16/71, A2) Grumman Aerospace Corp. released statement saying it would be “very appropriate” for Congress to stop funding usn’s F-14 jet fighter aircraft until cost-overrun problems were settled. (W Star, 6/16/71, A4)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 20 400-m (67 000-ft altitude) and mach I.	05 during ninth flight from frc. Objectives were to determine aileron effectiveness at speed greater than mach 0.9, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95 and 0.90, expand flight envelope, and evaluate speed brake. (NASA Proj Off)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, announced appointment of Dr. Aaron Firierman of State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook to manage JPL’s newly established Office of Computing and Information Systems. (jpl Release 583)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. pilots Robert K. Smyth and William H. Miller conducted successful 58-min flight of usn F-14 from Grumman facility at Calverton, N.Y. Same pilots had flown first usn F—14 on second flight, on Dec. 30, 1970, when it crashed into woods near Grumman facility seconds after they successfully ejected. Aircraft was kept at speeds below 467 km per hr (290 mph) during maneuvers to familiarize pilots with handling characteristics. (Witkin, NYT, 5/25/71)
Boeing Co. was reactivating 767 project that was “simmering on a back burner” while sst was alive, William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. Project “borrows liberally” from NASA aircraft development work. Boeing 767 subsonic jet would be about same size as Boeing 707, with same passenger capacity, but would be more than 160 km per hr (100 mph) faster. Cruising speed would be 1167 km per hr (725 mph) or mach 0.98, “about the greatest achievable without generation of a sonic boom.” LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright had said aircraft’s speed was attributable to its supercritical wing that could operate at speeds near mach 1 in shockproof condition. Boeing spokesman had said aircraft could be in service by end of decade. Hines said Boeing also was considering production of stretched version of 727. (W Star, 7/11/71, D4)
Approval by NASA Project Designation Committee of designation questol for quiet, experimental, STOL transport research aircraft was announced by NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P, Donnelly in memorandum to NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Roy P. Jackson. (Text)
nasa’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, reached mach 0.8 and 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude during 13th flight, air-launched from B-52 from frc. Objectives of powered flight were to obtain stability and control data at speeds above mach 1.0, expand flight envelope, and evaluate reaction control system. Evaluation of reaction control system was only objective achieved because engine shut down prematurely. (NASA Proj Off)
Award by dot of $3.5-million contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. for construction of tracked air cushion research vehicle was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Vehicle, 15.5 m (51 ft) long and weighing nearly 27 000 kg (60 000 lbs), would accommodate four persons including operator and test engineer. DOT would test vehicle at its High Speed Test Center in Pueblo, Colo., on its completion, scheduled for March 1972. (dot Release fra 971)
List of Federal agencies using mtf for scientific activities was inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.). Agencies included Environmental Protection Agericy, U.S. Geological Survey and other Interior Dept, activities, USA Corps of Engineers, noaa and nasa. Mississippi State Univ. and Louisiana State Univ. had programs at mtf; state governments of Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas had established full-time liaison with mtf; and Dept, of Agriculture and other Federal agencies were investigating possible use of facility. (CR, 12/15/71)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, completed 28th flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf test program. Objectives were to obtain lateral directional derivatives with rudder bias at 2° toe out, evaluate handling qualities with power and yaw accelerometer feedback system on, and determine supersonic lift-to-drag ratio data and longitudinal trim. Flight was intended to reach maximum mach number, but only two of four chambers ignited. Pilot immediately switched to two-chamber profile and mission plan. (NASA Proj Off)
m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.)—first Commanding General of Army Ballistics Missile Agency (abma) at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., in 1955 and head of team that launched Explorer 1 Jan. 31, 1958 —had become an Episcopal priest, National Enquirer reported. He was curate of Church of Good Shepherd in Maitland, Fla. (Natl Enq, 1/10/71)
nasa Contractor Equal Employment Opportunity Program activities were transferred from Procurement Office to Industrial Relations Office. Joseph M. Hogan would continue to direct group and would report to Robert E. King, Director of Industrial Relations. Personnel and functions concerned with participation of minority-owned business in NASA procurements would remain in Procurement Office, (nasa Special Ann)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Stanford Univ. chemist John D. Baldeschwieler to be Deputy Director of ost. He would succeed Dr. Hubert Heffner, who had resigned to return to duties at Stanford. {PD, 7/26/71, 1066, 1080)
NASA announced establishment of Delta Launch Vehicle System Review Board to investigate and recommend corrective action for failure of Thor-Delta 85 to place Oso 7 in planned orbit Sept. 29 and failure of Thor-Delta 86 to orbit itos-b Oct. 21. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, had appointed Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director, as Board Chairman. (nasa Release 71-217)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service released report, The Soviet SST. Report by John D. Holmfeld summarized progress of Tu-144 from press reports and U.S. and U.K. technical journals. Tu-144 was “clearly an aircraft which is competitive with the Concorde.” It had 27.1-m (89-ft) wing span and Concorde’s was 25.6 m (84 ft); it was 56 m (184 ft) long and Concorde was 62.1 m (204 ft). Tu-144 weighed 149 700 kg (330 000 lbs); Concorde weighed 174 600 kg (385 000 lbs). Tu-144 would cruise at 2490 km per hr (1550 mph) at 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude; Concorde cruised at 2170 km per hr (1350 mph) at altitude of 18 000 m (60 000 ft). On New York-London route, Concorde flight time was estimated at 3 hrs and 30 min; Tu-144 probably would require 3 hrs and 10 min. Tu-144 maximum range was estimated to be 6400 km (4000 mi). Tu-144 was powered by four Kuznetsov NK—144 turbofan engines with 127 480-newton (28 660-lb) thrust. Concorde’s four Rolls-Royce Olympus engines had 146 000-newton (32 825-lb) thrust. (Text) “These benefits are worth a substantial investment of the Nation’s resources, not to the neglect of other needs of our Nation and humanity, but as part of our investment in the continuing future and strength of our Nation.” (Text)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, reached mach 1.22 and 21 300-m (70 000-ft) altitude during 12th flight, launched from B-52 from frc. Objectives of powered flight—acquisition of stability and control data above mach 1.0, expansion of flight envelope, and evaluation of reaction control system— were achieved. (NASA Proj Off)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer announced faa was installing new computer-assisted weapon detection system at one gate of Dulles International Airport in Virginia to keep potential hijackers from boarding commercial flights. System automatically screened passengers at rate of 20 per min as they passed through electro-magnetic fields that detected metal. Information was evaluated by computer that could discriminate between different metal objects on basis of weight. Alarm sounded when excess metal or gun was detected. (faa Release 71—126)
House adopted resolution setting number of members of Committee on Science and Astronautics at 30 and resolution providing for assignment of majority and minority members of Committee. Majority (Democratic) members were: George P. Miller, Calif., Chairman; Olin E. Teague, Tex.; Joseph E. Karth, Minn.; Ken Hechler, W. Va.; John W. Davis, Ga.; Thomas N. Downing, Va.; Don Fuqua, Fla.; Earle Cabell, Tex.; James W. Symington, Mo.; Richard T. Hanna, Calif.; Walter Flowers, Ala.; Robert A. Roe, N.J.; John F. Seiberling, Jr., Ohio; William R. Cotter, Conn.; Charles B. Rangel, N.Y.; Morgan F. Murphy, 111.; Mike McCormack, Wash. Minority (Republican) members were: James G. Fulton, Pa.; Charles A. Mosher, Ohio; Alphonzo Bell, Calif.; Thomas M. Pelly, Wash.; John W. Wydler, N.Y.; Larry Wynn, Jr., Kans.; Robert D. Price, Tex.; Louis Frey, Jr., Fla.; Barry M. Goldwater, Jr., Calif.; Marvin L. Esch, Mich.; R. Lawrence Coughlin, Pa.; John N. Happy Camp, Okla. (CR, 2/4/71, H428, H434)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached mach 0.93 during eighth flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf program. Purposes of flight were to evaluate effects of moving center of gravity slightly forward and of decreasing launch mach number by launching at 12 200-m (40 000-ft) altitude instead of 13 700 m (45 000 ft). (NASA Proj Off)
Physicist Dr. Edward Teller criticized DOD secrecy in speech at PMR Hq. at Point Mugu, Calif. He said Soviet development of SS—9 icbm and expanded ABM system posed threat to U.S. deterrent capability but DOD secrecy made it impossible to reveal details of threat. As result, many in Congress and Nation doubted threat’s reality, (pmk Missile, 6/3/71, 1)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed seventh flight from frc, reaching 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.83. Objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.85, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, and evaluate reaction control system. (NASA Proj Off)
Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen announced his retirement, effective in September. He would remain consultant to company. (NYT, 6/2/72, 48)
President Lyndon B. Johnson had made “impulsive decision” in “intensity of emotion” when he changed name of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy, Circuit Judge James R. Knott of West Palm Beach, Fla., said in testimony before Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. Committee began hearings on S.R. 193, to redesignate Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral. Judge Knott testified that President Johnson had acted on request by widow of President John F. Kennedy following Kennedy assassination and said original name should be restored. {W Post, 3/9/72, A25; CR, 3/8/72, D224)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced new air transport security program to protect air passengers against hijackers. Program was being implemented at President Nixon’s direction. Security procedures required stationing armed local law enforcement officers at airport passenger check points during boarding periods, electronic screening of all passengers by airlines before boarding, and inspection by airlines of all carry-on items accessible to passengers during flight. (dot Release 103-72)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $12.1million contract to Boeing Co. to secure benefits from valuable work done in supersonic transport (sst) development program. Contract called for completion of seven advanced technological projects to enhance flight safety and efficiency and make aircraft more compatible with environment. Volpe said, by completing projects already begun, “funds already spent on them will not be wasted and the resulting technology will be available for advancement of aircraft design.” Congress had voted against further funding of SST program during 1971. (faA Release 72—88)
Impact of computers on society was discussed in Science by Massachusetts Institute of Technology computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum. Computer had “very considerably less societal impact than the mass media would lead us to believe.” Space travel could not have been undertaken without computers; computer and computer education industries had “grown to enormous proportions.” But “much of the industry is self-serving . . . like an island economy in which the natives make a living by taking in each other’s laundry.” Part that was not self-serving was supported largely by Government agencies and other gigantic enterprises that knew “short-range utility of computer systems but have no idea of their ultimate social cost.” Airline reservation systems and computerized hospitals “serve only a tiny, largely the most affluent, fraction of society. Such things cannot he said to have an impact on society generally.” (Science, 5/12/72, 609-14)
Patent No. 3 667 358 for cold camera for photographing stars was awarded to William D. Williams, Jr., 19-yr-old Univ. of Michigan student, and Scott Usher, packaging engineer for Lehn & Fink Products Co. Camera, mounted on telescope and loaded with film supersensitized after chilling with dry ice, permitted deep sky photography in very dim light with brief exposure time. Camera was simpler and less expensive than other cold-emulsion cameras and was expected to appeal to schools and clubs. (Jones, NYT, 6/10/72, 37; Pat Off pio) June 7:	Congressional resolutions were introduced to honor Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Planning, on his retirement from NASA. Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa„) submitted S.R. 84 expressing “gratitude and appreciation” to Dr. von Braun for “Outstanding contributions to and achievements in the space program” and “recognition of the benefits which his contributions and achievements have conferred and will continue to confer upon mankind.” Rep. J. Irving Whalley (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 628, “expressing the Nation’s gratitude and appreciation.” (CR, 6/7/72, S8885; H5391)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. signed two agreements during Moscow summit meetings. Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection, signed by President Nixon and Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny, called for cooperation to prevent pollution, to study pollution and its effect on environment, and to develop basis for controlling “impact of human activities on nature.” Agreement established Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection to meet each year alternately in Washington and Moscow. Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Medical Science and Public Health was signed by Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Minister of Health Boris V. Petrovsky. Parties agreed on joint efforts to combat most widespread and serious diseases, solve problems of effect of environment on man’s health, and resolve other important health problems. Agreement would be implemented by coordinated research, exchange of specialists and delegations, organization of colloquia, scientific conferences and lectures, exchange of information, and familiarization with technical aids and equipment. {PD, 6/5/72, 97-20)
Existence of 10th planet in solar system, three times as large as Saturn and twice as far as Neptune from sun, was suggested by scientists from Univ. of California’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. Mathematician Joseph L. Brady told press team had used computer to process mathematical observations on deviations in orbit of Halley’s Comet. Presence of 10th planet, far beyond Pluto, had been predicted from mathematical computations, (upi, W Post, 4/29/72, A3; Publications of the Astronautical Society of the Pacific, 5/72) April 29:	Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II were greeted by crowd of 2500 persons at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and presented copper plaques bearing etching of Hawaii’s state capitol. Young said mission’s success “shows the real teamwork that’s going to keep this country great. We really enjoyed the trip . . . but we sure are glad to be back.” (AP, W Star, 4/30/72, A3)
Dr. Donald Blessing Rice, Assistant Director of White House Office of Management and Budget, was named President of rand Corp. (Belair, NYT, 3/30/72, 17)
Space shuttle’s “subtle costs” were discussed in New York Times article by John N. Wilford: “Because NASA must initiate shuttle development within its current $3.2-billion budget framework, other programs will presumably by sacrificed.” Possible “victim” was Grand Tour mission planned for late 1970s. “The choice is certain to be unpopular with much of the scientific community.” Scientists had criticized NASA’s emphasis on “big-money manned projects at the expense of the less expensive science-oriented unmanned missions.” Shuttle development also would “restrict the funds available for other scientific projects in NASA and elsewhere in Government.” (NYT, 1/9/72, 6)
Data from 10-yr U.S. Supersonic Transport Development Program, terminated March 1971, had been cataloged and would be available for dissemination by National Technical Information Service of Dept, of Commerce, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. (dot Release 72—159)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 27th and last flight after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objective was to evaluate reaction augmentation system during boost. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and roach 1.4. (NASA proj off)
United Kingdom and West Germany agreed to abandon plans for European launcher and to buy U.S. launch vehicles instead. Decision was made at meeting in Bonn between U.K. Aerospace Minister Michael R. D. Heseltine and West German Aerospace Minister Klaus von Dohnanyi. (Reuters, NYT, 12/9/72, C7)
International Aerospace Hall of Fame announced 1972 selection of members: Gen. Henry H. Arnold, wartime commander of U.S. Army Air Forces; John K. Northrop, president and cofounder of Northrop Aircraft, Inc.; Sir Geoffrey de Havilland, British aircraft designer and founder of de Havilland Aircraft Co.; and Otto Lilienthal, German glider aircraft pioneer. Investiture ceremony would be held Oct. 14 in San Diego, (nasa Hist Off)
Roll-out ceremony for multinational European airbus and France’s second Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport was held in Toulouse, France. Aircraft were scheduled for maiden flights in few weeks. Concorde 2, similar to three service models entering production, was said to have eliminated smoke and noise that made Concorde 1 unwelcome in U.S. Airbus was standard preproduction model of 330-passenger, short- to medium-haul transport for 1975 operation. During ceremony British Aerospace Minister Michael Heseltine said British government was ready to confer with other European governments on possibility of integrated European aviation industry. (Lewis, NYT, 9/29/72, 8)
Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects was signed simultaneously in Washington, Moscow, and London. In statement following signing, Secretary of State William P. Rogers said convention had been formulated to compensate, fairly and promptly, if space object of one party caused injury or damage to citizen of another party. “I believe that the convention which we have signed today will accomplish that purpose. I concur in Admiral Alan Shepard’s statement in the U.N. General Assembly last year that it is a ‘sound treaty based on realistic perceptions of mutual interest and mutual benefit.’ Like its predecessor, this treaty is the result of intensive work in the United Nations Outer Space Committee and represents both a practical and an imaginative step in developing just international rules governing man’s activities in space. Many countries have had an active part in its formulation during years of intensive negotiations. The conclusion of the agreement has again demonstrated what noteworthy results a cooperative approach to international negotiations can achieve.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/29/72, Al; Rogers Text)
National Aeronautic Assn, named Federal Aviation Administrator John H. Shaffer to receive Wright Brothers Trophy. Shaffer was cited for “outstanding leadership of the worldwide operations of the faa, which has greatly enhanced all aspects of U.S. aviation to the benefit and safety of the general public and of all who fly.” (AP, W Post, 9/23/72, A22)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), critic of aerospace spending, was named Chairman of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, Veterans. Appointment followed death of Subcommittee Chairman, Sen. Allen J. Ellender (D-La.). {LA Times, 8/17/72; W Post, 8/18/72, A3)
Award of two research contracts to reduce aircraft noise were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. General Electric Co. had received $789 000 and Lockheed-Georgia Co., $77 042. Contractors would analyze and experiment with core engine noise control for propulsion systems of future aircraft, (faa Release 72-131)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) sent letter to NASA Hq. requesting NASA comments on General Accounting Office report that recommended Manned Spacecraft Center contracting officer “devote more attention” to performance of NASA contractor Service Technology Corp. Firm, subsidiary of Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., had received average annual income of $12 million from extensions to $16-million contract signed with NASA in 1967. STC work included building and ground maintenance, engineering design and construction of hardware, technical writing and editing, and publications distribution service. GAO had found stc practices “doubtful.” (H Post, 5/14/72)
NASA U-2 reconnaissance aircraft on loan to Virginia Institute of Marine Science would begin 45-day study of Chesapeake Bay area within two weeks to seek photographic evidence of path of Hurricane Agnes, vims Director, Dr. William J. Hargis, announced. Aircraft cameras, with high-resolution lenses, would photograph bay and adjacent continental shelf from 18 000-m (60 000-ft) altitude to trace flow of fresh water dumped over Chesapeake basin by storm, which Dr. Hargis described as “a once-in-200-years phenomenon.” (Nunes, W Post, 7/6/72, B2)
Dept, of Transportation award of $1.3-million grant to Atomic Energy Commission’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory to assess effects of proposed 1985-1990 high-altitude aircraft on environment was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Yolpe. Project was part of dot’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program (ciap). Laboratory would construct sophisticated computer models to predict effect of subsonic and supersonic aircraft on temperature, cloud formation, and stratospheric shielding of potentially hazardous ultraviolet radiation from sun. (dot Release 38-72)
Dr. John E. Condon, Director of Reliability and Quality Assurance and Acting Director of Safety, left nasa to enter private industry. (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 236)
Establishment of Office of Supply and Equipment Management under Assistant Administrator for Administration was announced by NASA. Office was responsible for receipt, use, and disposal of all NASA personal property, in-house and contractor held. It absorbed Property and Supply Div. and related functions of offices of Facilities and Procurement. William P. Risso, Director of Resources Management in Office of Applications, had been designated Director of new office, whose top priority was to ensure optimum use, reuse, and disposition of equipment throughout NASA, (nasa Ann)
Soviet tests of three-part warhead for giant SS—9 intercontinental ballistic missiles had failed to demonstrate sufficient accuracy to seek out and destroy three separate U.S. Minuteman missiles in their steel and concrete silos, Dr. John S. Foster, Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services. U.S. intelligence had concluded that U.S.S.R.’s projected ability to destroy large part of U.S. Minuteman force by mid-1970s might not materialize until 1980s. (Beecher, NYT, 3/22/72, 1)
British Airways Board had decided to order six Lockheed L-1011 TriStar jet airliners and to place options on another six, Wall Street Journal reported. British Aerospace Minister Michael Heseltine had told House of Commons that British government would aid Rolls-Royce (1971) Ltd. to develop more powerful version of aircraft’s RB-211 jet engine. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton had said later that order was “single most significant overseas order in Lockheed’s commercial aircraft programs during the past 25 years.” Lockheed estimated value of order at $150 million including spares. (WSJ, 8/8/71, 7)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. had said it would assume major portion of work it had been subcontracting on its F—14A jet fighter aircraft for Navy, Wall Street Journal reported. Grumman President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., had said plan to reduce subcontracting was necessary to “increase program efficiency and reduce costs.” First subcontractor to feel effect would be Republic Aviation Div. of Fairchild Industries Inc. (WSJ, 9/19/72, 13)
Protocol on U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation, established under May 26 agreement, was signed by Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, at White House ceremony attended by President Nixon. Protocol was signed simultaneously in Moscow by Vladimir A. Kirillin, Deputy Chairman of U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers. (PD, 7/31/72, 1187; Tass, fbis-Sov, 7/31/72, Gl)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said Dept, of Defense had suppressed secret report showing that cost of Navy F-14 jet fighter aircraft would rise to $20.8 million each—$4 million above published estimates. In statement to press, Sen. Proxmire said he was “shocked and dismayed” at DOD’s refusal to make report public. (Corddry, B Sun, 7/16/72, 17)
Soviet oceanologists had explored underwater volcanoes in Mediterranean using mobile Crab submarine apparatus similar to Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, Tass announced. Crab had TV system and system for transmitting control commands and was linked to control ship by cable for communications. Lowered 2000 m (6600 ft) below water from ship Academician Sergei Vavilov, Crab had examined underwater mountain north of Lipari Islands in Tyrrhenian Sea and collected samples of soil, algae, and marine animals. (fbis-Sov, 6/15/72, LI)
Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences announced award of 1972 Nobel Prizes in chemistry and physics to six U.S. citizens. Chemistry prize of more than $100 000 would he shared by National Institutes of Health scientist. Dr. Christian B. Anfinsen and Rockefeller Univ. scientists Dr. Stanford Moore and Dr. William H. Stein for “pioneering studies” in enzyme ribonuclease. Dr. Anfinsen’s investigations had “provided the answer to an important question concerning the way in which the active enzyme is formed in living cells; Moore and Stein have elucidated important principles related to the biological activity of the enzyme. These properties we generally associate with the concept of life and with living organisms.” Physics prize was awarded for theory of superconductivity developed jointly by Dr. John Bardeen of Univ. of Illinois at Urbana, Dr. Leon N. Cooper of Brown Univ., and Dr. John R. Schrieffer of Univ. of Pennsylvania. Superconductivity was phenomenon in which electrical resistance in certain metals vanished when metals were cooled to temperatures near absolute zero (0 kelvins; —459.7°F). (Weinraub, NYT, 10/21/72, 1)
Administration had summoned 400 leading U.S. scientists and engineers to series of White House meetings on nation’s domestic and economic problems, Washington Post reported. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., had exchanged ideas with physicists, engineers, chemists, and aerospace officials on urgent situations in meetings intended “to rally the country’s science-engineering community behind other goals than weapon-making.” (Cohn, W Post, 2/18/72, Al)
Capt. Edward V. Rickenbacker (U.S. Army Air Corps, Ret.), the most decorated U.S. pilot of World War I, died in Zurich, Switzerland, after a heart attack at age 82. One of the top automobile racing drivers in the U.S. by the age of 21, Rickenbacker enlisted in the Air Service at the start of World War I. He received the Croix de Guerre with four palms, Legion of Honor, Distinguished Service Cross with nine Oak Leaf Clusters, Medal of Merit, and the Congressional Medal of Honor for downing 26 German aircraft and at least 4 enemy balloons. He became General Manager of Eastern Airlines, Inc., in 1934, and the same year piloted a Douglas airliner from Los Angeles to Newark, N.J., in 12 hrs 3 min 50 sec for a coast-to-coast passenger aircraft record. He was President and General Manager of Eastern Airlines, from 1938 to 1953, when he became Chairman of the Board. He retired in 1963 and was elected to the Aviation Hall of Fame in 1965. Throughout his life Rickenbacker had advocated greater use of military aircraft. In 1922 he supported his friend Gen. Billy Mitchell in urging a separate U.S. Government department for aeronautics. Following Rickenbacker’s death, President Nixon issued a statement: “ ‘Captain Eddie’ Rickenbacker was an American original—a celebrated racing car driver in the early years of the 20th Century, the leading American fighter pilot in World War I, a pioneer of commercial aviation, and a generous, patriotic citizen in both war and peace.” (Hailey, W Past, 7/24/73, C4; PD, 7/30/73, 924)
Establishment of the lunar data analysis and synthesis program was announced by NASA. Scientists throughout the world would be invited to propose investigations drawing on a variety of lunar data and cutting across a number of scientific disciplines to build a detailed picture of the moon’s origin, history, and characteristics. The knowledge would carry implications for other solar system planets, including the earth, and would provide the basis for future mission planning and broad dissemination of new knowledge to the public. The program would be conducted by the Lunar Programs Div., headed by William T. O’Bryant, in the Office of Space Science. (NASA Release 73-50)
Former Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario was named Executive Director of the new congressional Office of Technology Assessment for a six-year term by the 12-member joint Congressional Technology Assessment Board chaired by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) (A&A, 12/73, 12; Off Tech Ass) November 2:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 606 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 39 708-km (24 673.4-mi) apogee, 635-km (394.6-mi) perigee, 717.5-min period, and 62.7° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; Sov Aero, 1/7/74, 4)
Soviet news agency Tass announced the Soviet crews for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous and docking mission. The first crew would be Cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov, the first man to walk in space (during the March 18, 1965, Voskhod 2 mission), and Valery N. Kubasov, flight enginer on the Soyuz 6 mission (Oct. 11-18, 1969). The second crew would be Anatoly V. Filipchenko, pilot on Soyuz 7 (Oct. 12-17, 1969), and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, flight engineer on Soyuz 10 (April 23—25, 1971). Third crew would be Cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Boris Andreyev and fourth would be Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Ivanchenko—none of whom had been in space before. (fbis-Sov, 5/25/73, LI)
The Dept, of Defense and Grumman Aerospace Corp. had agreed on a new price for 50 F—14 jet fighter aircraft, nearly $10 million below that estimated earlier, the Washington Star-News quoted informed sources as saying. Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., had written Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Tactical Air Power of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, that dod would need $693 million rather than the $703 million it had requested in its FY 1974 budget. (Kelly, W Star-News, 9/7/73, A12)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., directed the Navy to produce preliminary plans for a $250-million prototype development plan for a jet-fighter aircraft costing less than the controversial F—14 Tomcat missile-armed fighter. He also authorized the Navy to negotiate with Grumman Aerospace Corp. for an additional 50 F-14s armed with Phoenix missiles. The 50 aircraft would bring the F—14 total to 184 on order, with a possible 50 being ordered in FY 1974. The F—14 price was expected to average $25.8 million per aircraft. (Corddry, B Sun, 6/8/73, A8)
President Nixon signed Executive Order 11748 establishing the Federal Energy Office in the Executive Office of the President. He announced the appointment of Deputy Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon as Executive Director. The President said: “I have decided to bring together in one agency the major energy resource management functions of the Federal Government to provide the centralized authority we must have for dealing with the energy crisis.” He was assuming chairmanship of the Energy Emergency Action Group, “which will continue to oversee all major policy issues relating to energy.” He would ask Congress to create a Federal Energy Administration “and, in the Executive Office of the President, a Federal Energy Office to carry out all energy-related functions.” {PD, 12/10/73, 1388-92)
Grumman Corp. had submitted a proposal to the Navy for Dept, of Defense purchase of further lots of the F—14 jet fighter aircraft, Grumman Corp. President John C. Bierwirth told the annual shareholders meeting in Bethpage, N.Y. (Andelman, NYT, 5/18/73, 49)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of John W. Barnum to be Under Secretary of Transportation succeeding Egil Krogh, Jr., who had resigned. Krogh, former assistant to President Nixon’s Chief Domestic Adviser John D. Ehrlichman, had resigned while under investigation for his role in the Watergate activities. (PD, 6/4/73, 717, 727; Time, 5/14/73, 22)
President Nixon accepted the resignation of John A. Love as Assistant to the President and Director of the Energy Policy Office. {PD, 12/10/73, 1448)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified before the Senate Committee on Armed Services on the Soviet thrust for military and technological superiority: “The United States reacted to one Soviet technological advance—the Sputnik—with a successful ten-year effort to restore our technological superiority in space. Now we are lagging again in some technology areas and it may well require another decade after some new jolt before the United States regains an acceptable technological posture.” The U.S.S.R. was “at such levels of technical competence in broad areas of defense technology that technological breakthroughs of major significance are possible. They could seriously destabilize the balance of world power and weaken our strength for deterrence and negotiations. They could encourage military opportunism in any of a number of areas and raise the risk of war or armed confrontation.” (Testimony)
The first rocket-powered flight of the X-24B lifting body, to be piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, was aborted because of overcast conditions at the launch and recovery site. At B-52 takeoff the weather was clear, but it worsened steadily during the flight-to-Iaunch period. An igniter test was performed with satisfactory results. The flight was rescheduled tentatively for Nov. 14. (nasa prog off)
The Florida Senate Natural Resources Committee had unanimously endorsed a proposal to restore the name “Cape Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy, Today reported. If the bill—sponsored by State Sen. Henry Sayler (R—St. Petersburg), State Sen. John Vogt (D-Merritt Island), and State Sen. Lori Wilson (I-Merritt Island)—became law, “Cape Canaveral” would appear on all official state maps and publications. (Today, 3/22/72, Bl)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., announced that dod would halt production of F—111 fighter-bomber aircraft when the current production run ended late in 1974 with the 543rd F-lll. In 1962 dod had planned to build 1726 F-llls for $3.4 million each, United Press said; the aircraft would wind up costing $14.6 million each, a cost overrun of 430%. (upi, W Post, 6/7/73, C8)
The Senate, by a vote of 90 to 5, passed H.R. 7528, $3.046-billion FY 1974 NASA authorization bill [see May 30], after rejecting an amendment proposed by Sen. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.) that would have reduced the authorization by 4% ($122 million). (CR, 6/19/73, S11476— 503)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.), for himself and Sen. James B. Allen (D—Ala.), introduced S.J.R. 69 to authorize the President to proclaim
President Nixon submitted the nomination of G. Joseph Minetti to be reappointed as a member of the Civil Aeronautics Board for six years ending Dec. 31, 1979. (PD, 12/3/73, 1370, 1381)
Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) reintroduced S.J. R. 94, to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. {CR, A/Yl/13, S7554-5)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nominations of Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Jerry W. Friedheim to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs and of John 0. March to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs. Friedheim would succeed Daniel Z. Henkin, and March, Gardiner L. Tucker, both of whom had resigned. (PD,	355, 365,
President Nixon’s intention to nominate Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and former Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, to be Secretary of Defense succeeding Elliot L. Richardson, was announced by the White House Press Secretary. William E. Colby would succeed Dr. Schlesinger. The nominations were submitted to the Senate May 24 and confirmed June 28. Richardson would become Attorney General May 25. (PD, 5/14/73, 661—2; 5/28/73, 709, 714; CR, 6/28/73, S12394)
Grumman Corp. spokesman told the press in Bethpage, N.Y., that Grumman had accepted an $18-million, short-term loan from the Navy at the same time the firm had said it would not honor a contract to provide the Navy with F-14 jet fighter aircraft, (upi, W Post, 1/4/73, D6) January 4:	President Nixon announced that Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, would remain in the NASA positions during the President’s second term of office. President Nixon also accepted the resignation of Gerard C. Smith as Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, U.S. Ambassador, and Chief of the U.S. delegation to the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt). He announced the resignation of Secor D. Browne as Chairman and of Whitney N. Gillilland as Vice Chairman of the Civil Aeronautics Board. He submitted to the Senate the nominations of Elliot L. Richardson to be Secretary of Defense and of Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe to be U.S. Ambassador to Italy. {PD, 1/8/73, 10’12) . . . .
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of John Eger to be Deputy Director of the Office of Telecommunications Policy. Eger, legal assistant to the Federal Communications Commission Chairman, would succeed George F. Mansur, Jr., who had resigned effective April 1. (PD, 8/6/73, 951, 957)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), with 30 cosponsors, introduced S. 32, National Science Policy and Priorities Act of 1973—reintroducing S. 32 from the preceding Congress. The bill, passed by the Senate but not the House, provided three-year authorization of $1.8 billion for “civilian research and engineering problems of our society.” (CR, 1/4/73, S103— 12)
A U.S. Navy and United Kingdom agreement to begin an eight-month study of an advanced vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) Harrier aircraft was announced by Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner. Rolls-Royce Ltd. and Hawker Siddeley Group Ltd., of the U.K., and McDonnell Douglas Corp. and United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. would study the design of the Pegasus 15 engine, specifications of the new power plant, projected costs, identification of airframe modifications for the uprated engine and an advanced technology wing, test performance predictions, preparation of a preliminary aircraft specification, and definition of a possible full development program. (dod Release 189-73)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations assigned members to the Subcommittee on Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, Space Science, Veterans: Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), Chairman; Sen. John 0. Pastore (D—R.I.); Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.) ; Sen. Mike Mansfield (D-Mont.) ; Sen. Daniel K. Inouye (D-Hawaii) ; Sen. Rirch Rayh (D—Ind.) ; Sen. Lawton M. Chiles, Jr. (D-Fla); Sen. Charles M. Mathias, Jr. (R—Md.) ; Sen. Clifford P. Case (R—N.J.) ; Sen. Hiram L. Fong (R—Hawaii); Sen. Edward W. Brooke (D—Mass.) ; and Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska). {CR, 1/18/73, D31)
A Science editorial commented on the resignation of President Nixon’s Science Adviser, Dr. Edward A. David, Jr. [see Jan. 3]: The resignation and “likelihood that the office of the President’s science adviser will be abolished come as a disappointing shock. David is a scientist-engineer of very broad competence who maintained intellectual integrity in the emotional heat of politics.” Abolition of office was “one of many consequences of President Nixon’s determination to reorganize the Executive Office of the President.” It was probable that the President’s Science Advisory Committee and the Office of Science and Technology “would vanish” in reorganization. Criticism of Presidential Science Advisers had been “that they often became so involved in the day-to-day fighting of political brush fires that they lost sight of the forest.” The scientific establishment had fought against creation of a Dept, of Science. “It has been argued that science and technology permeate the activities of virtually all executive agencies and that centralization would not be wise. The argument had been driven home too well. In consequence, there is now danger that science, while being everywhere, will be nowhere.” (Abelson, Science, 1/19/73, 9)
Plans to operate the new Trident nuclear-powered submarine with 24 missiles of 6500- to 9700-km (4000- to 6000-mi) range from the Pacific Ocean were announced by Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner. Facilities at the Bangor Annex of the Naval Torpedo Station Keyport near Bangor, Wash., would be expanded as base for Trident, to broaden the area of operations of deterrent submarines, (dod Release 84—73; NYT, 2/17/73, 30)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), Chairman of the Special Subcommittee on the National Science Foundation of the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, introduced S. 1977, $704 million FY 1974 NSF authorization bill. The bill would establish an Energy Research Div. and would authorize not less than $50 million for energy research programs. (CR, 6/11/73, S10810-12)
John W. Crowley, Jr., NASA Director of Aeronautical and Space Research from the agency’s establishment in 1958 until his retirement in 1959, died in Denver, Colo., at the age of 75. Crowley had joined NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1921, becoming Chief of the Aeronautics Div. in 1940 and Head of the Research Dept, in 1943. He came to naca Hq. in 1945 as Acting Director of Aeronautical Research and was appointed Associate Director for Research in 1947. Crowley received NASA’s first Distinguished Service Medal in 1959. (W Post, 1 Aug 74, C7)
During the third quarter of the Federal energy conservation program, energy savings in the nondefense agencies had been 19% of anticipated energy use, and savings by the Dept, of Defense had been 31%, President Nixon said in a statement following receipt of a report from Federal Energy Administrator John C. Sawhill. Total savings for the first nine months of the Federal program had equaled 75 million barrels of oil, or $600 million in reduced costs. Secretary of Commerce Frederick B. Dent had reported that industrial energy consumption had been reduced by 5% per unit of output October 1973-January 1974. This rate, which was expected to be maintained or exceeded in 1974 by all of commerce and industry, would bring annual savings equal to 425 million barrels of oil. (PD, 8 July 74,788)
Directors of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Textron Inc. announced tentative agreement on a management reorganization to aid the financially troubled Lockheed. Textron would invest $85 million in Lockheed shares and stock. Textron’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer G. William Miller would also become Chairman and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed; Lockheed’s Chairman Daniel J. Haughton would become Vice Chairman. Lockheed was to remain a separate corporation. The arrangement provided for the release of the Federal Government from its 1971 guarantee of up to $250 million in bank loans to Lockheed. The agreement was subject to several conditions, including requirements for Lockheed to bring firm production commitments of its L-1011 TriStar aircraft to a total of 180 and to change accounting procedures. (Textron Release, 3 June 74; Witkin, NYT, 4 June 74,1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 14 from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam, carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich and Yuri P. Artyukhin to work in the orbiting Salyut 3 research station launched 25 June [see 25 June-19 July], (gsfc Wkly SSR, 3-10 July 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 5 July 74, Ul)
Edward N. Cole, retired president of General Motors Corp., was designing a freight carrier, called the Huskie, twice the size of the Boeing 747, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Cole, whose plan Was still on the drawing board, envisioned a fleet of 300 Huskies carrying freight around the world, each aircraft flyihg 15 hr a day. Because fast loading and unloading Was critical to the plane’s ecohOihic success, an automated modular loading and unloading systerii was also being designed to permit the craft to take off again within 30 min Of landing. With the price tag for the fleet estimated at $13 billioh, Cole was counting on government interest to bolster his plans. CSM repotted that Dept, of Defense officials were interested in a fleet of privately built cargo plartes—with government-insured mortgages-^-that could be commandeered by the military in an emergency. (AP, CSM, 4 Feb 75, 5B)
A team of four physicists—Dr. Paul B. Price and Dr. Edward K. Shirk of the Univ. of Calif., and Dr. Weyman A. Osborne and Dr. Lawrence S. Pinsky of the Univ. of Houston—reported finding evidence of a particle with only one magnetic pole. The discovery of the monopole, if confirmed, could have a major impact on physics, with practical applications such as new medical therapies, new sources of energy, extremely small and efficient motors and generators, and new particle accelerators of much higher energy than any yet built. The monopole, representing the basic indivisible unit of magnetism, would exist in two forms of opposite polarity, the north pole and the south pole. This would be analogous to the basic electric charge, the electron, which existed in the positive and negative charges, the proton and electron. Existence of the monopole had been predicted in 1931 by Paul Dirac, Fla. State Univ. professor. The four physicists detected tracks of the particle that had apparently penetrated a sandwich of more than 33 layers of plastic and emulsion photographic film suspended from a balloon floating at 39 600 m. (Sullivan, NYT, 15 Aug 75, 1; AP, B Sun, 15 Aug 75, A3; Joffee, W Post, 15 Aug 75, Bl)
Dr. John E. Naugle became Associate Administrator of NASA, a position in which he had acted since the departure of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone in April. Beginning his service with NASA in 1959, Dr. Naugle had been appointed Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications in 1967, and Deputy Associate Administrator of NASA in 1974. As Associate Administrator, he would be responsible for directing the research, development, and operational activities conducted by the Offices of Applications, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Science, and Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA anno, 23 Nov 75; SBD, 24 Nov 75, 122)
More than 25% of all scientists and engineers in the U.S. and the USSR were engaged in weapons work of some kind, whereas fewer than one hundredth of 1% were engaged in arms control or disarmament, said William Epstein, former director of the U.N. Disarmament Division, in a letter to the New York Times. Warning of the “terrible doomsday weapons that scientists may yet develop” in the spiraling arms race, Epstein called on scientists and engineers to establish nationally and internationally a code of conduct that would include educational work on the perils of the arms race and political efforts to achieve arms control and disarmament. “Science may be neutral and amoral, but scientists are not . . . They have a moral duty to use their capabilities for the benefit of humanity and not for its destruction.” Uniting their efforts behind a “Hippocratic oath” not to engage in means of mass murder, associations of scientists and other professional bodies could provide moral support and tangible assistance to those “even in dictatorial countries” where imprisonment or harassment would be the result of such action. (NYT, 18 Feb 76, 33)
Sweden’s Royal Academy of Sciences announced that three more Americans had won Nobel prizes: Prof. William N. Lipscomb, Harvard Univ., for chemistry, and Prof. Burton Richter of Stanford Univ. and Prof. Samuel C. C. Ting of MIT for physics. Prof. Lipscomb won for his studies of the structures and properties of boranes, and Profs. Richter and Ting, shared the physics prize for their independent discoveries of a new type of elementary particle known as psi or J. Americans had won all four of the prizes awarded so far this year; Prof. Milton Friedman of the Univ. of Chicago had won the prize for economics, and the prize for medicine had gone to Dr. Baruch S. Blumberg of the Univ. of Pa. Medical School and Dr. D. Carleton Gajdusek of the Natl. Institute for Neurological Diseases. All the prizes carry an award of $160 000, derived from the estate of Sweden’s Alfred Nobel, inventor of dynamite, who established the prizes in 1901. (NYT, 19 Oct 76, 1, 34; 24 Oct 76, E-14)
A new device called an ultrasonic bolt-stress monitor—using ultrasonics to measure stress on a bolt—had been developed by LaRC physicist Joseph S. Heyman, the Langley Researcher announced, and would be submitted to Industrial Research magazine as a candidate for selection among the 100 most significant new products developed during the year. The bolt-stress monitor would replace equipment now in use to monitor a multitude of bolts in a facility or a piece of equipment, as it would detect a 1 —psi change in 50 000 psi in measuring stress. Heyman had invented a continuous-wave ultrasonic microemboli monitor, used to observe blood circulating outside the body during surgery and detect larger than normal particles, that was selected by the magazine as an IR 100 winner in 1974. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 3)
During its 3 most active yr, NASA had awarded only 19% of its procurement funding to concerns in the industrialized Northeast, according to a Library of Congress study commissioned by Rep. Michael J. Harrington (D-Mass.), whereas the Sunbelt states—ranging from Maryland to Texas—received 33% of the total awards. Of $8.7 billion spent by NASA in procurement contracts for 1968, 1971, and 1975, the Northeast received $1.7 billion and southern regions received $2.9 billion, the report said. “While the aggregate populations in these combined regions are roughly comparable,” Harrington said, “the NASA procurement contracts run almost 2 to 1 against us . . . NASA’s contract award procedures now join that long and growing list of federally funded activities which discriminate against the industrialized Northeast states.” (NYT, 2 June 76, 40)
MSFC announced that two of its employees had manufactured a precision quartz ball that would be used by the National Bureau of Standards as a density measure. John Rasquin and Jack Reed of the Materials and Processes Laboratory in MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate made the precision sphere, which is 90 mm in diameter and weighs 290 g. NBS had selected quartz as the homogeneous material for its standard because it could be made with a high order of purity, had great temperature stability, and was ideal for use in an interferometer because of its precisely known optical properties. MSFC originally made two clear quartz spheres for NBS that were unsatisfactory because of their high transparency, as the interferometer required a highly reflective surface; NBS exposed the spheres to gamma radiation for 4 mo to make them opaque by changing their molecular structure, but the radiation induced minute internal stresses that altered the contour. The spheres, returned to MSFC, were reworked by Rasquin and Reed to NBS specifications of 1x10 6 deviation in radius. One of the spheres had been completed and the other was about 50% complete. (MSFC Release 76-209)
Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., proposed a $ 1 billion program to muffle noisy jet engines and replace older planes with quieter new ones, the Washington Post reported. The proposed program, part of a comprehensive aviation-noise policy submitted to the Office of Management and Budget, would be paid for by a surcharge on airline tickets—probably 2%—that would go into an escrow fund to be used by the nation’s airlines over a 6- to 8-yr period. The “retrofit” program—most controversial part of the noise-abatement policy— would consist of modifying older 2- and 3-engine jets (such as the McDonnell-Douglas DC—9 and Boeing 727) by surrounding them with sound-absorbent materials to make them quieter. The fund could be used as part of the cost of replacing older 4-engine jets (the Boeing 707 and the McDonnell-Douglas DC-8) with newer, quieter planes. Although the Air Transport Association (ATA) representing most U.S. airlines had long favored replacement of the 4-engine planes, the Post said, it had vigorously opposed retrofit of 3-engine planes because the cost would outweigh the benefits. Retrofit had been advocated by the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Aviation Administration, and many citizens’ groups to reduce noise levels around airports and take advantage of the useful life left in many of the older planes; however, the Post noted that opposition to retrofit in the administration had been based on expense, its possible contribution to inflation, and the fact that newer quieter planes would eventually solve the problem anyway. The Post quoted “no better than 50-50” chances that Congress would go along with providing public financing to help privately owned airlines make their planes quieter, according to a Capitol Hill source. Under Secretary Coleman’s proposal, the 8% surcharge on airfares now going into a trust fund for improving terminal and navigational facilities would be reduced by'2%, which would go into the retrofit fund, so that no actual increase in ticket prices would occur. (WPost, 15 June 76, A-3)
“An impressive record of cost-cutting that could well set an example to many agencies” had been achieved by NASA since the midsixties, said Sen. William A. Proxmire (D-Wis.), one of the agency’s severest critics. Chairman of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that handles NASA’s appropriation, Proxmire said that NASA had made its tight budget go farther by acting as its own prime contractor when construction bids were too high; buying electronic parts from a standardized list; providing reimbursable launches to private industry and other outside organizations on an “accelerated” basis, although not— according to Proxmire—charging enough for them; and, in general, making “one dollar do the job that it took two dollars to do in the free and easy money days.” {Today, 1 Jan 76, 1)
Bicentennial year 1976 also marked the 50th birthday of scheduled-airline service in the U.S., the National Aeronautic Association reported. On 13 April 1925, Henry Ford had started an air-freight service between Detroit and Chicago, first such' commercial flights on a regular schedule. Upon passage of the Air Commerce Act of 1926, one of NAA’s founding members, William P. MacCracken, Jr., took office as the first U.S. Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics. By 1931, airlines were spanning the country; by 1950, U.S. airlines carried 19 million passengers 16 billion km, and in 1975 they carried more than 200 million passengers 263 billion km—amounting to almost 80% of intercity public passenger travel in the U.S. Airlines also accounted for 93% of travel to overseas destinations. In 1976, the U.S. scheduled-airline fleet included 2200 jet aircraft serving communities nationwide with 13 000 daily flights. (NAA News, Apr 76, 3) May 1976
A slowdown ordered by the 14 000-member Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization 25 Aug. had caused disruptions in air travel nationwide, airline officials told the New York Times. Eastern Airlines experienced 1-to 2-hr delays in rush-hour traffic at La Guardia Airport, and similar snarls were reported by other carriers at other airports, the most severe at Los Angeles. Union president John F. Leyden had asked members to start handling traffic “by the book” and adhere rigidly to rules that required planes to stay about 5 to 10 km behind aircraft ahead of them, omitting efforts to expedite traffic flow as is normally done. The controllers were protesting delay in completion of a Civil Service Commission study of controller job classification, which held hope of higher pay levels, and a CSC announcement that its investigation had found both undergrading and overgrading in the jobs. (NYT30 Aug 76, A-9)
Lt. Col. Michael A. Love, test pilot of the successful NASA lifting-body program, was killed in the crash of an F-4C fighter on a dry lake bed at Edwards AFB, Calif., shortly after takeoff in a proficiency flight. Love’s navigator, Maj. E.B. Underwood, Jr., ejected from the plane before it crashed and was hospitalized in stable condition. Love, 37, was chief AF pilot assigned to the X-24B program that tested a wingless aircraft to develop a space vehicle that could be flown to earth and landed like a plane. After serving in the lifting-body program as a chase pilot for various M-2 and X-24A flights, Love made his first X-24B flight on 4 Oct. 1973 and had piloted the plane to its fastest speed—better than 1860 kph—before terminating the program 20 Aug. 1975 with a hard-surface landing of the X-24B on the runway at Edwards. (WStar, 2 Mar 76, A-5; W Post, 3 Mar 76, A-20; NASA X-Press, 12 Mar 76, 2)
The flight of NASA’s Pioneer 11 into unexplored space above the plane of earth’s orbit had confirmed the structure of the sun’s magnetic field for the first time, NASA announced. Dr. Edward J. Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—magnetometer experimenter for Pioneer 11 —reported to the meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union that observations conducted from Feb. to Nov. 1976, while the spacecraft was four times farther from the sun than the earth, showed that the solar magnetic envelope had a simple north pole-south pole structure split into northern and southern portions at the magnetic equator by a “warped” sheet of electric current. This warped sheet had appeared to move as the sun rotated, up and down relative to the earth’s orbital plane. As the solar magnetic field extended several billion miles over the north and south solar poles, well beyond the orbit of Saturn, earth spacecraft traveling in earth’s orbital plane had passed through the warped electric current and detected contradictory motions, the field in the northern solar hemisphere being carried outward by the solar wind and the field in the southern hemisphere reversing back toward the sun. Earlier spacecraft therefore reported reversals in the direction of the solar magnetic field each time the current sheet was encountered, reports that led to a variety of interpretations. When Pioneer 11 had passed close to Jupiter in Dec. 1974, the gravitational effect had thrown the spacecraft 62 million km above earth’s orbital plane, allowing it to measure solar phenomena at a point 16° above the solar equator—9° higher than previously possible—where it discovered a uniform solar field, pointing away from the sun. The present solar model would exhibit the warped current sheet about 15° each side of the solar equator, accompanied by small-scale random magnetic fields of varying intensity and direction; the north polar region would generate a well-ordered magnetic field in a single direction, and the south pole a similar field in the opposite direction. The solar wind would carry the magnetic field out until it met the interstellar gas, perhaps near the orbit of Pluto, where the outgoing north-polar field would link with incoming south-polar field to “close the magnetic loop,” Dr. Smith suggested. (NASA Release 76-199; ARC Release 76-85; NYT, 1 Dec 76, 1)
Proponents of the B-l strategic bomber, “vigorously opposed for years by people inside and outside of government,” seemed likely to win their struggle to get approval for the $ 22-billion program, said Science magazine. A House-Senate conference committee voted in mid-June to spend $960.5 million in procurement funds for the first 3 B-l planes, although the Senate had passed an amendment delaying spending of the money until a new administration should take office. This year’s fight to procure the B-l was the culmination of a 15-yr effort that began with the shooting down of a U-2 plane over the Soviet Union in 1960; the USAF projected the building of a low-flying manned bomber, the ideas converging in 1969 with A MSA (advanced manned strategic aircraft), a project opposed by then Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara. In 1969, when Melvin Laird became President Nixon’s Secretary of Defense, AMSA studies were concluded and the final design “metamorphosed into the B-l,” Rockwell Inti. Corp. becoming prime contractor. At the same time, other Pentagon planners were backing a strategic armed cruise missile decoy system (SCAD), assuming that Congress would not approve both programs. At the urging of the USAF, Secretary Laird canceled the SCAD program in July 1973, but the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Sen. Thomas McIntyre, D-N.H.) ordered it reinstated. Both the bomber and the cruise missile had encountered development problems and increased expenses; internal Rockwell documents from Jan. 1974 showed company concern about “competitive threats in the form of the standoff missile and . . . the launch aircraft” that other companies might seek to build. A massive public-relations campaign was mounted to protect the B-1; ultimately, Science said, the B-1 would win but the cruise missile would also have its day, quoting John B. Walsh, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E) at the Pentagon, as saying “you need both bombers and cruise missiles.” (Science, 23 July 76, 303)
MSFC announced selection of William A. Brooksbank, Jr., as manager of the solar heating and cooling project in the center’s special projects office. MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas said that Brooksbank, most recently deputy manager of the Spacelab program office, was well qualified for the position by his background in engineering and management. Brooksbank had come to the Redstone Arsenal at Huntsville in 1958 as atomic energy project engineer for the Army’s ballistic missile agency; he had worked at MSFC since its establishment in 1960. (MSFC Release 77-218) •
LaRC reported it had held a luncheon Aug. 11 to recognize the contributions of 26 inventors on the center staff to NASA’s patent program. Director Donald P. Hearth and Patent Counsel Howard J. Osborn presented awards, including one to Richard T. Whitcomb as 1976 coinventor of the yr for his patent “Airfoil Shape for Flight at Subsonic Speeds,” shared with Robert T. Jones of ARC. (LaRC Release 77-38)
JPL reported that Donald Lynn and Jean Lorre of its image processing laboratory had shared in a scientific investigation of the Shroud of Turin, preserved in Italy since 1578. At the request of groups in N.Y. and N.M., Lynn and Lorre had used advanced NASA techniques (mathematical and contrast enhancement) to obtain a noticeably clearer image from negatives and color slides taken at a 1973 display of the cloth and the image appearing on it. (JPL Universe, July 1/77, 1; Natl Inq, July 19/77, 4)
NASA reported that the fifth and final free flight of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, testing its braking on a concrete runway, had successfully made a landing on concrete at Edwards AFB—although it had a bumpy finale when the orbiter touched down and bounced twice before stopping. At a postflight press conference, pilots Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton said the craft had reached speeds higher than expected after separating from its Boeing 747 carrier. Shortly after 8am local time the 747 had taken off with the orbiter attached to the top of its fuselage, climbing during the next 50 minutes to about 20 000ft altitude, where it nosed over and began to dive. At about 17 000ft the orbiter separated and came straight down without the turns made in previous flights; the dive angle was 25-22° compared with a commercial jetliner’s descent slope of about 3°. Touchdown, which came lmin 55sec after separation, overshot the 5000ft mark on the concrete runway by about 1000ft. The rear landing gear had touched, but the craft hopped back into the air, bounced, and tipped slightly before the pilots steadied it and stopped it with 2000ft of runway remaining. Approach speed had reached 330mph on the indicators, and the pilots described “oddities in the way the speed dropped” during the descent. Donald K. Slayton, in charge of the landing tests, said engineers this week would check out the airspeed indicators and the vehicle’s calculated energy profile, but further tests were not probable. Plans for future or-biter landings would change on the basis of data from the fifth test, modifying the aim point to allow for higher lift/drag coefficients with the tailcone off and the slower bleed-off of airspeed. (NASA Release 77-224; postflt rept free flight 5, SpSh orbiter ALT NYT, Oct 27/77, A-18; LA Times, Oct 27/77, 2; W Post, Oct 27/77, A10, B-3; JSC Roundup, Oct 28/77, 1; AvW/c, Oct 31/77, 16)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. John R. Carruthers as first director of a new division in the Hq Office of Applications that would manage materials processing in space. Dr. Carruthers, formerly of Bell Labs, had headed crystal-growth and glass research in developing optical fibers for lightwave communications. (NASA Release 77-67)
NASA announced plans to develop a prosthetic urinary sphincter for patients losing control of bladder functions because of injury or disease. Patients now used external collection devices, implanted catheters, or prosthetics difficult to operate. John Richardson of MSFC’s technology utilization office said NASA’s biomedical applications office had recommended MSFC for this job because of its expertise in design, manufacture, assembly, and operation of miniature valving. MSFC would have a contractor design and test the device and prepare documents for Food and Drug Administration approval, as well as manufacture the device commercially. A successful device would permit safe and quick emptying of the bladder and avoid infection, the prime source of fatal kidney failure among those without bladder control. (NASA Release 77-184; MSFC Release 77-163)
NASA reported that its data-analysis facility at KSC had been using a GE multispectral image analyzer developed for screening Landsat imagery to detect early stages of breast cancer, where diagnosis would normally be difficult and rapid multiplication of cancerous tissue would require massive surgery. The only solution previously available had been repeated diagnoses by x-ray, itself a health hazard. Radiological examinations of x-rays had been limited by the range of intensity detectable by the human eye, which was unable to distinguish more than 32 shades of gray, meaning that much of the data would be effectively invisible. However, the microdensitometer on the GE analyzer was able to differentiate 256 shades of gray with great accuracy. The computerized output of the densitometer would enter the analyzer with orders for enhancement, so that data previously invisible to a doctor’s eye could be available for earlier diagnosis. Robert L, Butterfield, electronics engineer at the KSC data-analysis facility, "had worked with radiologist Dr. William L. Walls of Titusville, Fla., for 2yr on a process for automatic enhancement of mammograms to detect early stages of breast cancer before radical surgery would become necessary. The aim of the study had been to differentiate women at low risk of breast cancer from those at high risk, based on the rate of change in the gray shades of the enhanced images, to reduce the need for repeated x-ray diagnoses. (NASA Release 77-102; KSC Release 105-77)
MSFC announced that Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, had visited the center for the first time to discuss the NASA/ESA Spacelab and other NASA programs with MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas and his staff. Thomas J. Lee, manager of MSFC’s Spacelab program office, said the visit would familiarize the ESA official with NASA capabilities and programs “in which the Europeans might be interested as potential areas for future cooperative ventures.” (MSFC Release 77-167)
DFRC announced that employees John G. McTigue and Stanley Markey would share a $5000 award for working out a way to truck the Shuttle orbiter overland from the Rockwell plant in Palmdale, Calif., to DFRC rather than use the Boeing 747 carrier, eliminating the need for a mate/demate device costing $2.53 million and saving the Shuttle program nearly $800 000. The two men used their knowledge of local terrain, geography, and manpower to set up a ground route with relatively minor problems. (DFRC Release 30/77)
A lack of sunspots during the past yr and a half might have caused recent unusual cold weather and drought in the U.S., Dr. John A. Eddy of the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research told the 143rd meeting of the Am. Assn, for the Advancement of Science. Dr. Eddy, an astronomer who had studied the complex relation between solar activity and historic and climatic events, had traced short- and medium-term effects over several thousand yr in history records and as far back as 7000yr by measuring carbon-14 levels in tree rings. The theory was that sunspots increased the solar wind (solar particles and radiation that fan the earth) which determined the amount of cosmic and galactic radiation striking the earth. Tree-ring studies echoed abnormal conditions of cold weather and drought when the rings exhibited high levels of carbon-14 resulting from reduced solar-wind activity, resulting from fewer sunspots. “. . . The record of climate [has] a one-to-one correspondence that’s so good I don’t want to believe it,” Dr. Eddy told the Denver meeting. History reported the reign of King Louis XIV of France (1643-1715) as a time of high carbon-14 levels; Eddy said the most severe temperature drops on earth in the last thousand yr occurred in that period. Crops failed in the British Isles, a Norse colony in Greenland perished of cold, and Spanish conquistadors had ridden their horses into Mexico across a frozen Rio Grande. The aurora borealis produced by solar particles striking earth’s magnetic field did not appear during that period; astronomer Edmund Halley was 60yr old when he first saw northern lights in 1715, when the “little ice age” ended. “The fact is, we should have been into a rise of solar activity in the autumn of 1975,” Eddy noted, “and here we are a year and a half overdue into getting that rise.” (W Post, Feb 22/77, A-3; NYT, Feb 22/77, 13)
MSFC announced that four of its engineers had received awards conferred by the Soviet Union for participating in the Apollo-Soyuz test project of 1975. Dr. William R. Lucas, director of MSFC, presented the S. Korolev medal to Harold Ledford (now of the Shuttle projects office) for “outstanding management and technical proficiency as chief engineer for science and engineering” from beginning to end of the ASTP. The USSR also sent Yuri Gagarin diplomas for “exemplary leadership” to three engineers who had chaired stress-corrosion review teams after prelaunch inspection of the long stored Saturn IB launch vehicle revealed a cracked fin. The teams had investigated all launch stages and associated hardware, independently assessing use of corrosion-susceptible materials. Jewel W. Moody’s review team and a Chrysler Corp. team assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn IB; Charles E. Cataldo’s team, with personnel from McDonnell Douglas and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell, investigated the S-IVB stage and rocket engines used on the various launch stages to assure they were flightworthy; and Paul H. Schuerer’s team, with personnel from IBM and the Bendix Corp., assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn instrument unit and inertial-guidance platform. (MSFC Release 77-13)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Gen. Kenneth R. Chapman, USAF (Ret.), as assistant administrator for its Hq Office of DOD and Interagency Affairs, effective Apr. 1. He would replace Lt. Gen. William. W. Snavely, USAF (Ret.), who left NASA in Sept. 1976 to accept a position in Saudi Arabia. Chapman, a nuclear chemist, was formerly director of the Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). (NASA Release 77-50)
Aviation Week reported that NASA had chosen “key missions” for the six orbital flight tests of the Shuttle and had assigned payloads as well as the weight and volume available for additional experiments. Chester M. Lee, director of Space Transportation System operations, would give Associate Administrator John E. Naugle a list to begin assigning experiments on the basis of the key payloads. For the first mission (tentative schedule, March 1979) the Shuttle would carry only a developmental flight-instrumentation unit that would also ride on other flight tests. On the second mission (July 1979), the first true Shuttle payload would be an instrumented pallet for scientific research amounting to only a small weight in the payload bay but offering the NASA program office a first research opportunity on the Shuttle. On subsequent missions the Shuttle would carry (Sept. 1979) a remote manipulator built by Canada to maneuver a payload on the end of a jointed arm, plus a scientific payload; (Dec. 1979) a large spin-stabilized upper stage to boost an undetermined spacecraft payload into a higher orbit; (Feb. 1980) an interim upper stage for attachment to Skylab, to boost it into a higher orbit, or an alternate payload such as the long-duration exposure facility; (March 1980) a possible classified payload (such as the USAF Teal Ruby system for detecting and tracking aircraft from space) plus a GSFC-designed multimission spacecraft. The seventh orbital mission set in May 1980 would probably be a NASA-ESA Spacelab launch, unless another flight test was needed. NASA noted that unforeseen circumstances could change the key-payload schedule for the first orbital flight tests. (AvWk, May 16/77, 13)
LaRC announced that Alex Haley, author of Roots, would be the speaker Feb. 7 at an LaRC colloquium and at an “Our Future in the Cosmos” public lecture. Demand for tickets to the lecture, part of a series sponsored by LaRC and the College of William and Mary, was so great that LaRC had shifted the Haley lecture from the Hampton high school to the Hampton Coliseum. Title of Haley’s talk was “A Saga of Black History.” (LaRC anno Jan 31/77)
INTELSAT announced appointment of 3 deputy directors and 4 division directors. New deputy director generals were Andrea Caruso, administration; Reginald Westlake, finance; and H. William Wood (former NASA deputy associate administrator for networks, OSTDS), operations and development. New division directors were Francis Latapie, procurement; Emeric Podraczky, engineering; William Geddes, operations; and NandKishore Chitre, systems planning. After INTELSAT’s contract with ComSatCorp for management services expired in Feb., INTELSAT would assume responsibility for all technical, operational, and procurement functions previously performed by ComSatCorp, which would continue to provide certain technical tasks under two service contracts. (INTELSAT Release 78-4-1)
NASA announced that LaRC physicist Dr. Joseph Heyman had received his third IR-100 award given by Industrial Research magazine for one of the 100 most significant new technical products of 1978. Presentation of the award to Dr. Heyman at a banquet in Chicago Sept. 21 marked the first time the magazine had selected one person three times for the honor. Dr. Heyman’s previous awards had been in 1974 and 1976. His 1978 device, jointly developed at LaRC and Washington Univ., St. Louis, was an acoustoelectric transducer that used very high-pitched sound waves to improve accuracy in measuring deviations in structural properties. Unlike conventional transducers, the new device was insensitive to the shape of sound waves, and would allow researchers to identify and evaluate more accurately material flaws and to characterize biomedical specimens and tissue. Heyman’s first IR-100 award had been for a continuous-wave ultrasonic microemboli monitor, which traced impurities in a patient’s blood during open-heart surgery. His 1976 award had been for an ultrasonic bolt stress monitor to indicate changes in bolt strain of less than one part in 10 000. (NASA Release 78-147; LaRC Release 78-48; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 5)
The NAA newsletter reported that competition had become more intense for world-record flights in general aviation. Robert Mucklestone was attempting to regain his around the world title in Class C-l.c Group 1 (2204 to 38581b) that he had first captured in 1975 from Dr. Alvin Marks, who in 1969 had beaten the record of British aviatrix Sheila Scott, who had traveled a 33 OOOmi route in 33 days with a total average speed of 36.15mph, including ground time. In 1977 Harold Benham and Jack Rood in a Beechcraft Bonanza Model 35 had bested Mucklestone’s record. Whatever the outcome of Mucklestone’s current flight, two Texans (William Wisner and Frank Haile) had planned a flight in July 1978 to break the record in that class. (NAA newsletter, June 78, 7)
JSC researchers confirmed that a meteorite found by Dr. William Cassidy last winter on an expedition sponsored by NSF to the Antarctic [see Feb. 17] had proved to be one of the rarest types ever seen. A team of JSC meteorite experts using a binocular microscope had examined the fragment inside a lunar-type glove box flushed with dry nitrogen gas, and had sent an 0.4-gram sample to Dr. Brian Mason at the Smithsonian Institution for petrographic analysis of thin sections. The fragment, 4.5 to 4.6 billion yr old, had been a Type II carbonaceous chondrite (so called because of its high carbon content) of which only 15 other samples had been found, though not in so clean a condition or so well-preserved. These chondrites had been shown to contain amino acids of nonterrestrial origin, suggesting chemical formation of complex organic molecules in other regions of the solar system. The fragment would next be characterized, sectioned, and fully documented; subsequent analysis would then continue. (JSC Release 78-26; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; June 23/78, 1)
JPL reported it would participate in tracking and data acquisition as well as in navigation during the upcoming Pioneer Venus mission. Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group had designed 2 spacecraft and 4 probe vessels for the mission, and General Electric Co.’s Systems Division would provide a probe-entry system. R. B. Miller would be tracking and data systems manager at JPL, with William Kirhofer responsible for the navigation phase. First would be an orbiter carried in the nose cone of an Atlas-Centaur scheduled to go aloft from KSC May 20; the multiprobe vessel would be launched Aug. 7, also on an Atlas-Centaur. The flight to Venus would be relatively short, about 6mo for the orbiter and about 5mo for the multiprobe. The orbiter would study the atmosphere and other characteristics of Venus for 243 days. In the multiprobe phase a large entry probe would make a detailed sounding of the lower atmosphere and clouds of Venus, and 3 smaller probes would measure widely separated areas of the planet’s atmosphere. To conserve energy, JPL trackers and navigators would turn on the battery-powered radio transmitters of the probes only about 20min before entry into the atmosphere; ground controllers would not be able to check frequencies between launch in Aug. and shortly before entry in Dec. The orbiter-and-multiprobe mission would carry about 30 instruments for gathering scientific data on Venus. (JPL Universe, Apr 28/78, 1)
The Senate had cut $5 million from NASA’s $3.87 billion R&D budget for FY79 before passing a package appropriations bill that included the agency, Aerospace Daily reported. The Senate had first rejected by 44-43, then accepted by 45-42, an amendment offered by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to cut NASA’s budget and reduce budgets of five other departments and agencies by $805 million. Proxmire’s move might have spared NASA a far deeper cut, because Sen. William Roth (R-Del.) had proposed a 2% across-the-board cut for all agencies and departments covered by the bill (which, for NASA, would have been $80 million). Proxmire had offered his more selective amendment as a substitute, to which Roth had agreed. The amendment did not specify where NASA should cut its R&D. (A/D, Aug 9/78, 169)
The gondola of Double Eagle II, first balloon to successfully cross the Atlantic, remaining parts of its balloon, and some of its equipment would soon become an exhibit at the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. The U.S. embassy in Paris had notified the museum that the three balloonists wanted the Air and Space Museum to be the repository of their craft. They had planned also to present documents and onboard equipment that had not been jettisoned, as well as the balloon envelope (the shell containing the gas). While the balloon was still aloft, Melvin Zisfein, acting director of the museum, had cabled the U.S. embassies in London and Paris to approach balloonists Maxie Anderson, Larry Newman, and Ben Abruzzo on the Smithsonian’s behalf. When Lindbergh was still in the air on his historic flight, Paul Garber had sent a cable to the airfield at Le Bourget asking for the plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, which had become one of the museum’s premier exhibits. “I thought it would be nice to continue in that tradition,” Zisfein said. (WStar, Aug 25/78, A-6)
JPL’s Edward Divita would be featured speaker at a meeting on nuclear waste disposal in Los Angeles Apr. 18, sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society. Divita, a professional nuclear engineer who had performed several radiation studies of nuclear and space systems, analyzing and assessing the various disposal options, would speak on “Technical Status of Salt Bed, Sea Bed, and Space Waste Disposal.” (JPL Universe, Apr 14/78, 1)
The Congressional battle over President Carter’s efforts to delete funds for B-l bomber aircraft 5 and 6 would resume after Congress reconvened in Jan., said Aviation Week. The outcome would depend on a Senate rescission move led by Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, to uphold the administration’s stand against B-l funding. Last year the House had voted to oppose the Senate rescission stand after Senate-House conferees failed to resolve the issue. Senate B-l proponents led by Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.), Senate majority whip, had joined forces to sustain the House action and return the question to the conference. The administration might move quickly to win endorsement of the Stennis move to rescind while many senators were still away from Washington. (AvWk, Jan 16/78, 15)
KSC reported that Joseph Malaga, center director of administration and management operations, had accepted appointment as vice chairman of the 16th Space Congress to be held Apr. 25 — 27,1979. Sponsored annually by the Canaveral Council of Technical Societies, the congress had originated as a weekend seminar for engineers and technicians and had evolved into an event drawing speakers and delegates from technical communities throughout the world. Malaga would also be NASA’s senior representative to the Congress. (Spaceport News, Aug 18/78, 1)
NASA declared the launch of Comstar C on June 29, 1978, to be successful. Put into a transfer orbit by an Atlas Centaur at the Eastern Test Range (ETR), the spacecraft on July 1 successfully fired its apogee motor to go into the desired synchronous orbit. The assessment was signed January 12 by Joseph B. Mahon, director of the expendable launch-vehicle program in the Office of Space Transportation Systems, and by John F. Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems. (NASA MOR M-491-201-78-03 [postlaunch] Jan 16/79).
NASA announced creation of a new Headquarters program office called Space Transportation System Operations, headed by an associate administrator not yet appointed, to be responsible for Shuttle operations including scheduling, pricing, launch-service agreements, the Spacelab program, and expendable launch vehicles (except Shuttle upper stages). Dr. Robert A. Frosch said the move would centralize Shuttle services in a user-oriented organization. The former Office of Space Transportation Systems (STS) was renamed Office of Space Transportation System Acquisition; John Yardley would continue as associate administrator for STS development and acquisition, including the Shuttle and its upper stages, associated ground facilities and equipment, and system improvements. (NASA Release 79-127)
NASA declared successful the May 4 launch of FltSatCom 2 from ETR on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit. An apogee kick motor fired May 6 had put the spacecraft into the desired synchronous orbit. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. John F. Yardley declared November 1 that NASA objectives had been accomplished. (NASA MOR M-491-202-79-02 [postlaunch] Nov 5/79)
ComSatCorp announced that it would dedicate its new ground station on Saipan in the Marianas in November [see During June]. At the ceremony would be Carlos Camacho, governor of the Northern Marianas; ComSatCorp head Joseph V. Charyk; officials of the U.S. Department of the Interior and of U.S. communications carriers; and dignitaries from several Pacific nations. The Saipan station working with an Intelsat 22,300 miles over the Pacific could offer a wide range of services: in addition to more reliable telephone calls, residents would have access to television, telex, data, and facsimile, “an era of modern and improved communications,” the organization said. (ComSatCorp Release 80-38)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the continuing flight of Salyut 6 with its international crew, Bertalan Farkas of Hungary and Valery Kubasov, working with longtime occupants Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. Preparing Soyuz 35 for return to Earth, the cosmonauts carried into it containers of materials on which research had been completed: exposed rolls of film, space navigation charts, flight logs, biological objects, and substances produced in materials experiments. Used-up equipment would be taken into the “living compartment.” The crew had shot a film about their joint operations, including development of plants in weightlessness and production of metal alloys and castings. Tass reported June 3 that the descent module of Soyuz 35 had landed safely near Dzhezkazgan and that the Intercosmos crew were well. The Soyuz 36 that took them to Salyut 6 was still attached to it; on June 4, the Salyut 6 crew moved Soyuz 36 to the other docking port to make room for another craft. On June 5 at 1719 Moscow time the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-2 carrying Lt. Col. Yuri Malyshev and, as flight engineer, veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Aksyonov, tenth crew to visit Salyut 6 since its launch. An unmanned Soyuz T launched in December 1979 had docked with Salyut 6 and remained for more than three months, testing new automated features. Before docking with Salyut 6, the crew turned the Soyuz toward the Sun to test its solar batteries, one of the new features. On June 6 Soyuz T-2 docked with Salyut 6 at 1858 Moscow time. Tass said that the approach was automated up to within 180 meters, after which it was controlled by the crew. Konstantin Feoktistov explained that “earlier, during manual approach the station was.. .automatically aligned with the ship and was always directed toward it with its docking unit. .. [the crew] regulated the longitudinal speed and made sure that it went in straight. This time the station was immobile: the craft approached from the side... A quarter turn was made around the station and it came on to the axis level. The manual control system worked well. We think the crew was even better.” Later reports mentioned a malfunction of some automated part and the need for an unplanned manual docking. The visiting cosmonauts performed “dynamic operations” including a photographic turn around the station, which had not been possible before. After a four-day mission, Malyshev and Aksyonov undocked Soyuz T-2 June 9 and returned to the spot near Dzhezkazgan where the previous Soyuz crew landed. Popov and Ryumin remained in Salyut 6, which logged its thousandth day of flight June 24. Progress 10 was launched June 29. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 1-29/80; NY Times, June 10/80, C-2; A/D, June 10/80, 219; AvWk, June 23/80, 18)
The Soviet Union launched Lt. Col. Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V.	Aksyonov toward the orbiting station Salyut 6 in Soyuz T2, an “improved model” of its manned capsule. An uncrewed Soyuz T1 tested in December 1979 docked automatically with Salyut 6 and remained for 99 days. A U.S. expert on USSR space activity said that T2 was “a new ship” except in appearance: the main change was an on-board computer that for the first time let cosmonauts navigate independently of ground control. Launched from Tyuratam, the T2 arrived June 6 to join Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (WStar, June 5/80, A-12; June 6/80, A-10; June 7/80, A-12; WPost, June 6/80, A-22; NY Times, June 6/80, B-6)
MSFC said that the Spacelab 1 payload crew was in Japan for a week, practicing the use of instruments scheduled to fly on the First mission in 19S3. A NASA-sponsored package, SEPAC (space experiments with particle accelerators), would study the interaction of Earth’s magnetosphere with the upper atmosphere. Professor Tatsuzo Obayashi of the University of Tokyo would be the principal investigator. Before leaving Japan December 15, the crew would be trained on the actual flight hardware at Japan’s National Space Development Agency. The crew— civilian scientists called payload specialists and two NASA mission-specialist astronauts—were Drs. Byron Lichtenberg and Michael Lampton of the United States, Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, and NASA mission specialists Drs. Owen Garriott and Robert Parker. Two payload specialists would actually fly on the mission with the mission specialists; the other two would support the mission on the ground. (MSFC Release 81-146) —NASA said that one of Japan’s major newspapers, Asahi Shibmun, had signed an agreement to fly a “getaway special” experiment on the Shuttle, possibly in late 1982, using the weightlessness of space to make pure artificial snow crystals directly from a gaseous substance while the Shuttle was in orbit. A Japanese physicist, the late Dr. Ukichiro Nakaya, had made the first artificial snow-crystal experiments in 1936. The Shuttle experiment, a first try at creating artificial snow in a weightless environment, would contribute significantly to crystallography, especially growth of semiconductor crystals or other items from a vapor source. The idea, suggested by two Japanese students, was chosen for 17,000 suggestions by the newspaper’s readers. To date NASA had accepted 321 getaway specials—privately funded experimental payloads—for flight on the Shuttle on a space-available basis, beginning with the fifth mission in 1982. (NASA Release 81-191)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 39 from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 5:59 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting Salyut 6/ Soyuz T-4 complex. Tass said that the Progress 12 cargo ship had undocked March 19 after being filled with discarded equipment to replace the supplies it brought and on March 20 had entered the atmosphere over the Pacific where it “ceased to exist.” The crew of Soyuz 39 were veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov as commander and the first citizen of Mongolia to fly in space, Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha, as researcher and “101st spaceman of the world.” They would join Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh already aboard the orbiting complex. Tass said that the launch commemorated the 60th anniversary of the revolution of the Mongolian People’s Republic, 10th nation to participate in manned spaceflight. United Press International (UPI) said that it was in honor of the 20th anniversary of launching Yuri Gagarin, first man into space, on April 12, 1961. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 22/81; UPI, in W Star, May 23/81, A-8)
NASA said that its joint sounding-rocket project with Canada’s National Research Council [see November 20] was successful. William A. Brence of WFC said that preliminary results were satisfactory. Data from the seven experiments launched on five large suborbital rockets from temporary facilities at a radar site on the Arctic coast would, in combination with ground-based observations, enlarge understanding of the dynamics of the cleft in Earth’s magnetic field. (WFC Release 81-20) During December: NASA announced the appointment of Dr. Walter B. Olstad, deputy associate administrator for management to direct all matters such as personnel, supply and equipment, facilities, computer support, and the like. He would succeed Edwin C. Kilgore, who retired October 2. C. Robert Nysmith would replace Olstad in an acting capacity. Both appointments were effective immediately. The Office of Management was created in the NASA reorganization plan effective in November to perform some of the functions previously under the Office of Management Operations and some previously under the NASA comptroller. Olstad began his association with the agency in 1954, working at the Langley laboratory as a research engineer in the transonic tunnel branch, then in the reentry physics branch. He became chief of LaRC’s space systems division in July 1975. He went to Headquarters in 1979 as deputy associate administrator for OAST. (NASA anno Dec 14/81; NASA Release 81-195)
NASA said that the principal investigators for the plasma-wave instruments on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)-managed Voyager 2, heading for rendezvous with Saturn in August 1981, discovered that the spacecraft had encountered the magnetic tail of Jupiter almost two years after leaving that planet, confirming a theory that the huge magnetosphere might extend all the way to Saturn. Dr. Frederick L. Scarf, scientist at TRW Inc., and his colleagues, Dr. Donald Gurnett and Dr. William Kurth of the University of Iowa, found plasma-wave phenomena from February 1981 identical to those of July and August 1979, when Voyager 2 had left Jupiter but was still in that planet’s magnetosphere. Scarf had published in 1979 in the Journal of Geophysical Research his idea that Jupiter’s magnctotail might reach as far as Saturn and that the rare alignment of outer planets that permitted the successive Jupiter-Saturn encounters might put Voyager 2 and Saturn simultaneously into Jupiter’s far-flung influence. Inside the Jovian tail, Saturn could experience unusual conditions observable by the Voyager when it arrived in August. The next Saturn encounter might differ widely from the two previous. (NASA Release 81-73)
The 200-inch telescope at Mt. Palomar observatoiy and an extremely sensitive electronic camera made the first confirmed sighting of Halley’s comet beyond the orbit Of Saturn. Recording the reflected light of an object the night of October 15 and observing it again at a predicted location the night of October 17, G. Edward Danielson and David C. Jewitt of CalTech told an October 20 press conference “it was both where we expected it to be and had the correct brightness.”'. The sighting was the farthest ever made of Halley’s, named for English astronomer Edmond Halley, first to recognize it as one traveling through the inner solar system every 76 years. He correctly predicted its reappearance in 1758 but did not live to see it. Its spectacular appearance in 1910 resulted from a favorable arrangement of Sun, Earth, and comet that would not occur on this visit. (W Post, Oct 21/82, D-1)
A NASA team investigating space-suit failures that occurred during STS-5 issued a report listing ways to improve and simplify contractor test and inspection procedures. Regulators and motors would undergo more extensive testing on the Shuttle orbiter just before being stored, and space suits would be fully tested the day before a scheduled space walk. The first failure to be detected, shutdown of a fan motor while Joseph R Allen was donning his suit, was the fault of sensors in the motor electronics. The other failure, that of an oxygen regulator in William Lenoir’s suit, resulted from the absence of two tiny devices holding a regulator spring in place. (NASA Release 83-9)
U.S. balloonist Joe W. Kittinger crash-landed his 10-story balloon on a mountain in Savona, Italy, after completing the first solo balloon flight across the Atlantic. Kittinger also made the flight in four days, setting a speed-for-distance record. Six other people had tried the solor ocean crossing, but all failed, and two died in the attempt. A three-man U.S. crew of Max-ie Anderson, Ben Abruzzo, and Larry Newman was the first to cross the Atlantic by balloon in 1978. Kittinger said, before beginning his flight, that his next goal would be a solo crossing of the Pacific. (W Times, Sept 19/84, 1A, 6A)
Ben Abruzzo, who took part in the 1st balloon crossings of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, died February 11 along with five others when his twin-engine Cessna 421 plane crashed after takeoff from Coronado Airport north of Albuquerque, the Washington Post reported. In 1978 Abruzzo, along with Maxie Anderson and Larry Newman crossed the Atlantic in the Double Eagle II, landing near Paris after the 3,000-mile flight. Late in 1981 Abruzzo, Newman, and two other men flew the Double Eagle V across the Pacific. Lifting off November 9 from Nagashima, Japan, Abruzzo crash-landed four days later in northern California in one of the worst storms there in 20 years. Abruzzo and another crew member won the Gordon Bennett race in 1979. (IV Post, Feb 13/85, C6) Large Space Systems
The Washington Times reported on the "Planet X" theory of Daniel Whitmire and John Matese, physics and astronomy professors at the University of Southwestern Louisiana, in which they had suggested that an undiscovered planet triggered a rain of comets upon earth, resulting in extinctions of dinosaurs and other species at roughly 26-million-year intervals. "Planet X, if it's out there," Whitmire said, "lies in an orbit outside Neptune and, every 30 million years or so, passes through a ring or disc of comets that also lie out there. When it does, gravity diverts some of the comets toward earth, kicking up huge clouds of dust on impact that disrupt the weather enough to kill off many species of plants and animals." Whitmire noted the theory would explain several phenomena that had puzzled scientists: fossil evidence of extinctions at approximately 26-million-year intervals and the slight variations in Neptune and Uranus's orbits by Planet X's gravitational pull. (IV Times, Jan 17/85, 3A)
A mountain climbing team reached the wreckage of an Eastern Airlines Boeing 747 that crashed January 1, 1985, at 19,600 feet into Mt. Illimani in the Bolivian Andes and photographed the site for use in an investigation, Aviation Week reported. Judith Kelly, wife of William Kelly, a U.S. Peace Corps official who died in the crash, financed and led the three-person expedition because she was concerned that the accident investigation was lagging. Photographs of the site showed parts of the tail structure and the fuselage. Kelly also collected cable and honeycomb structures identified by part numbers and turned them over with the photos to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). Remains of the 29 persons on board were not located. The Kelly team's ascent was the fourth visit to the site since the crash and prompted questions over the status of the accident investigation. Although Bolivia had primary responsibility to report the accident, government officials said it was unlikely Bolivia would finance an expedition to the site due to lack of funds, but added it would not stand in the way of an investigation by the U.S., which was the country of aircraft registry and manufacture. Early in January Bolivian Bernardo Guarachi, who was Kelly's guide, reached the crash site and spent several hours there, bringing back pieces of wreckage and luggage tags identifying the flight. A second Bolivian team in March reached the site and took motion pictures. The film showed the aircraft wreckage, including a tail section that was torn off the plane, and scattered cargo and baggage. The team also found an engine cowling, a piece of the fuselage with the Eastern name on it, and other parts of the tail structure. A team sponsored by the Bolivian Red Cross spent three days in August at the site, but was hindered by new-fallen snow and lack of guidance on where to look for technical evidence. John Young, the NTSB investigator in charge, said he was discussing with officials in the safety board's accident investigation division whether the safety board should attempt to carry on the investigation and what approach to take. Recovery of the flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder could aid in determining navigation procedures the crew were taking. Because of the questions surrounding the crash of the aircraft, which was several miles off course when it struck the mountain 26 miles southeast of La Paz International Airport, the U.S. Air Line Pilots Association was discussing financing an expedition to recover the recorders. (AvWk, Sept 9/85, 40)
The Canadian recovery ship MV Kreuztrum, chartered by the U.S. government, retrieved from the Atlantic Ocean the first piece of wreckage, a section of fuselage skin approximately 15 by 30 feet, of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed in June off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Another Canadian recovery ship, the John Cabot equipped with a Scarab 2 underwater search and recovery vehicle, was also at the site. The two ships later recovered three other sections of the aircraft's fuselage and were in the process of lifting a fifth section. Recovery team members said they had confronted no serious problems but that the work was time-consuming. The Scarab 2 itself lifted a smaller second piece of wreckage; high-capacity winches on the Kreuztrum lifted two other sections. Officials said it was taking 18 to 24 hrs to lift each piece of wreckage. The ships' crews recovered the larger pieces by using four clamps that the Scarab 2 attached to each corner of a piece. Scarab 2 could take only two clamps down during a dive, and a third dive was necessary to carry down a lifting bridle to attach to the four clamps and a lift line to attach to the bridle. This method made it possible to raise large sections with as little additional damage as possible. "Since it takes two hours for the Scarab to dive to the 6,700-foot depth, two hours to do its work, and another three hours to swim back to the surface," a recovery official said, "it's going to take some time." Recovery officials believed wreckage retrieved as of the previous week was from the fuselage both fore and aft of the wing, and they were working to locate its position on the aircraft structure. They believed the fifth piece being recovered was a primary fuselage structure, including ribs and skin. Recovery officials said they established a two-tier priority system for the order in which they recovered wreckage. They gave top priority to pieces that were likely to confirm or refute primary theories on the cause of the crash. Secondary priority was given to pieces considered likely to contain evidence of what occurred to cause the aircraft to break up in flight. Early efforts focused on fuselage structure. The officials had located the aft pressure bulkhead of the Air-lndia 747 and scanned it with TV cameras, but said "there is nothing visible to indicate any common problem" with the August crash of a Japan Air Lines 474. Plans called for raising this bulkhead section toward the end of the recovery operation. (AvWk, Oct 21/85, 32)
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and British Defense Minister Michael Heseltine signed a memorandum of understanding for Britain's participation in the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, Defense Daily reported. The signing came one day after British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had told Parliament that the negotiations over British participation were not finished but that she hoped for a signed agreement before Christmas. Joining Heseltine at a press conference following the signing, Weinberger said it "emphasizes both the closeness of our alliance and the special nature of our relationship which is a very vital thing" to both countries. "Britain is the leader in many of these technologies and we want very much to have these capabilities placed at the benefit of the program," he said. Heseltine explained the signing of the agreement one day after Thatcher's statement to Parliament, saying both he and Weinberger had received communiques overnight from their teams in Washington permitting completion of the agreement. Heseltine said the agreement offered a "very significant opportunity for British industry and for British research capability to be associated with a major and exciting program at the frontiers of human capabilities in many of the technologies of tomorrow." (D/D, Dec 9/85, 185)
University of Chicago scientists Edward Anders, Wendy Wolbach, and Roy Lewis found evidence that continent-sized firestorms 65 million years ago raged across much of the earth, blackening the skies with soot and possibly triggering a sudden global freeze that wiped out the dinosaurs, the Washington Post reported. The event occurred at the time that other scientists said a giant asteroid collided with earth, which may have generated enough heat to start the fires. It was the asteroid theory that led the University of Chicago researchers to ask whether a nuclear war could trigger a similar freeze, a phenomenon now known as nuclear winter. Their findings suggested that nuclear winter theorists had greatly underestimated the amount of soot that would enter the atmosphere from wildfires. The researchers found some of the soot, which eventually settled to the ground, in the same geologic layers that five years previously gave evidence of the asteroid impact. The layer, sampled in regions as far apart as Europe and New Zealand, contained an amount of soot, which was pure carbon, equal to about 10% of the carbon currently incorporated into all forms of life on earth. The original impact theory held that an asteroid, probably at least six miles wide, hit earth, blasting enough rock dust into the atmosphere to darken the sky for weeks. Deprived of sunlight, the ground would have cooled, bringing on a global freeze that exterminated not only the dinosaurs but many other species all over the world. Paleontologists knew that the dinosaurs died out in the most wide-ranging mass extinction the earth had even seen. Scientists working on the asteroid impact theory already had calculated that airborne rock dust alone would have been thick enough to bring on a devastating freeze. The discovery that vast quantities of soot might also have been in the upper atmosphere indicated that the period of darkness and freezing would have lasted longer, perhaps months, because soot washed out of the atmosphere more slowly than did rock dust, although it would have been no darker or colder than originally thought. The finding added two more factors that might have contributed to the extinction—concentrations of fire-produced toxic substances, such as carbon monoxide, and the destruction of plants and animals by fire. The researchers said the discovery was an accident, resulting from examination of ancient sediments while looking for traces of gases that had been part of the asteroid. Instead, they found that the sediments contained about 10,000	times as much carbon as would have been expected. The layer, sampled in Denmark, Spain, and New Zealand, was the one in which other scientists previously found unusually high concentrations of iridium, an element that is rare on earth but abundant in meteorites and asteroids. The scientists thought that when the asteroid hit the earth, the impact would have generated enough heat to vaporize the asteroid, sending its iridium into the atmosphere where it spread around the world. Anders said the impact would have scattered white-hot particles of rock dust as far as 800 and possibly 1,200 miles, igniting forest fires over the entire area. "Once started," he noted, "such a fire could spread over an entire continent, and the resulting winds may disperse the soot worldwide." The impact, other scientists calculated, would have left a crater 85 miles wide and 20 miles deep. Since no such crater had been found, many scientists assumed the asteroid hit the ocean, vaporizing the water before it hit the sea floor. (W Post, Oct 4/85, A2)
NASA announced that Edward Frankie was appointed effective October 27 deputy general counsel succeeding John O'Brien. Frankie had been chief counsel of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center since September 1982 and prior to that associate director, policy development and administrative legal systems, for the Selective Service System, where he was responsible for the development and promulgation of operating regulations for deferment and classification and the selection and training of local and appeal board members across the U.S. He served from 1974 to 1980 as a member of the Office of General Counsel, Department of the Navy. Frankie received B.S. and M.S. degrees in aerospace engineering from the Catholic University of America and a J.D. degree from Georgetown University School of Law. (NASA anno., Oct 15/85)
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev today told a U.S. Senate delegation that the USSR would make "radical proposals" to reduce strategic and intermediate-range offensive nuclear arms one day after the U.S. agreed to prohibit the militarization of space, the Washington Post reported. Gorbachev told the eight visiting senators, headed by Sen. Robert Byrd (D-W. Va.), that the Soviet Union opposed research on military space defense programs, such as President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), that went beyond what was done in laboratories. Clarifying the Soviets' position, Gorbachev said that any research outside of a laboratory was considered verifiable and subject to limits defined in the Antiballistic Missile Treaty ratified in 1972 by both countries. During the discussion on SDI research, according to notes taken by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.), Gorbachev said, "You can't verify what's going on in the brain . . . and that's what we refer to as fundamental or basic research. "But as soon as you go beyond the laboratory, to mock-ups, models, contracts with defense contractors, here surely verification can be done. "We want a ban on that phase of research that approaches design and manufacture," Warner said his notes concluded. (W Post, Sept 4/85, A1)
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger today cancelled the Army's new battlefield anti-aircraft gun, called the Division Air Defense (Divad) gun, saying that tests showed it would give soldiers no significant improvement over existing weapons, the Washington Times reported. Weinberger told a Pentagon press conference that operational tests held from March through June demonstrated the Divad mobile gun system "does not effectively meet the military threat" or justify adding $3 billion to the $1.8 billion already spent for development and production of the first Divads. The cancellation was one of the largest ever made of a weapon in production. Weinberger said the gun showed poor flexibility and a lack of range against the threat posed by Soviet missile-firing Hind helicopters. The Army declined comment, other than to say it would follow Weinberger's direction. Sources had said, however that the Army fought hard in meetings over the previous several weeks to keep the Divad in production. The Army had planned to buy 615 Divads for a total cost of $4.5 billion and had accepted delivery of 65 units. Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp. developed and built the weapon, employing 1900 people in its Divad division at Newport Beach, California. Ford Aerospace President Donald Rassier said the company understood the basis for the defense secretary's decision and that the firm had already begun work on new solutions to the growing Soviet threat. The Divad was based on the 40-millimeter double-barrel Swedish Bofers gun system, designed to be mounted on old M-48 tank chassis that the Army had in stock. Ford Aerospace equipped it with radar from the F—16 fighter for all-weather and nighttime operation. The Army considered the weapon essential for the defense of quick-moving armored tank divisions, especially in Europe, against both helicopters firing missiles and fixed-wing aircraft. (W Times, Aug 28/85, 1 A)
Navy Secretary John Lehman said that intercepting U.S. Navy aircraft ordered the Egyptian Boeing 737 Airliner, which Palestinians hijacked and ordered to be flown from Egypt, to land at Sigonella Air Base in Sicily "or else," Defense Daily reported. Lehman said one of two Grumman E-2C Hawkey airborne control aircraft, which joined six Grumman F—14 Tomcats and four tankers in the intercept mission, issued the command. Lehman said four of the F-14s flew a close intercept formation on the 737 to the landing in Sicily; the E-2Cs from the USS Saratoga had loitered overhead until the airliner took off from Egypt with the hijackers. There "was no deal," Lehman said, and no help from any other country. He noted the operation demonstrated the Navy's readiness, which "doesn't come cheap." (D/D, Oct 15/85, 225) Antisatellite System
NASA's acting administrator Dr. William R. Graham announced that he would not hesitate to make substantial changes wherever they might be warranted in the organization. Graham said, "That goes not only for the [launch] decisionmaking process, but also for engineering, design, vehicle certification and qualification." (W Times, Feb 26/86)
William V. Boynton, an Arizona University scientist charged with developing a comet penetratorlander for NASA, announced that a prototype prober was successfully tested at the Sandia National Laboratory in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The comet penetrator, an integral part of NASA's Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, is an instrumentbearing missile designed to pierce a comet's surface to a depth of 3 feet or more. (NASA Release 87161)
John W. "Jack" Russell, a crack aviation mechanic and retired NASA employee, was scheduled to be the first member of the aviation support sector to be enshrined in the Amherst Museum's Niagara Frontier Aviation Hall of Fame. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/91)
Physicists at Los Alamos National Laboratory discovered that huge parts of the sun's magnetic field break away and are propelled into space by the constantly blowing solar wind. This explains how the sun's magnetic field remains in balance while new magnetic field lines are formed, according to Los Alamos physicist John Phillips. (W Times, Mar 22/91)
The House Government Operations Committee asked NASA to reinstate the third bidder, Convex Computer Corporation, for the Operations Automatic Data Processing contract. Convex was disqualified for filing its bid nine minutes late. The request was made, according to committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, in order to encourage competition. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 15/91; Government Computer News, Apr 15/91))
NASA announced that Dr. Martin J. Fettman of Colorado State University's College of Veterinary Medicine would be the prime payload specialist for the second Spacelab Life Sciences mission scheduled for launch in August 1993. Previously named crew members consist of Commander John Blaha; Pilot Richard Searfoss; Payload Commander Rhea Seddon; and mission specialists William S. McArthur, Jr.; Shannon Lucid, and David Wolfe. (NASA Release 92-190)
G. Joseph Minetti, 85, died of heart failure on March 13. He served on the Civil Aeronautics Board for 22 years, leading the panel during years of enormous expansion and change in the aviation industry. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
Writing in the New York Times, author John Lukacs called the proposed $8.4 billion Super Collider in Texas "super nonsense." He labelled as outdated the view held by proponents of the Super Collider that science might discover the smallest building block of the universe and that the universe could be explained by a Grand Unified Theory. (NY Times, June 17/93)
Edward Frieman, who served as chairman of the White-House-led Earth Observing System Engineering Review Committee, said that NASA needed to institute an outside review process for its science missions. NASA's internal review process tended to bloat rather than streamline science missions, he said. "They're really not review teams, they're the advocates, said Frieman, director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in LaJolla, California. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
Operators of Biosphere 2, the world under glass experiment, named John B. Corliss, a NASA consultant, to head research for the $150 million private venture. (AP, Mar 1/93)
In a letter to the editor of the Washington Post, Michael Oppenheimer, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund in New York, took issue with an April 5 Washington Post article on ozone depletion. Oppenheimer charged that the article failed to "convey the seriousness of the ozone depletion problem." (W Post, Apr 25/93)
Joseph George Sobala, 60, a retired chief of the communications systems branch of NASA, died of cancer January 29 at his home in Washington.
Writing in the Washington Post, Michael Schrage, a columnist for the Los Angeles Times, suggested that a dramatic and effective way to boost the nation's industrial competitiveness while sending a signal that the Cold War was over would be to cut in half the budget of the national laboratories. The move might shock the labs into more energetically redefining their mission, according to Schrage. The national labs include the University of California's Lawrence Livermore Lab, Los Alamos in New Mexico, and Brookhaven in New York. (W Post, Feb 19/93)
Dr. John Peoples Jr., director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois, was appointed to take over direction of the dismantling of the Superconducting Super Collider in Texas. Dr. Peoples was to replace Dr. Ray F. Schwitters, the Super Collider's founding director, who resigned last week after Congress decided to terminate the $11 billion project. (NY Times, Nov 9/93)
John Bolton, a pioneer in radio astronomy, died  at Buderim in Queensland, Australia.  He was 71. Bolton was credited with having discovered, in 1947, the first radio "stars," galaxies that broadcast incredibly strong signals in radio wave length. (NY Times, Jul 20/93)
Responding to an Op-Ed piece by John Lukacs in the New York Times that attacked both the Super Collider and the field of particle physics, Edward Farhi, Professor of Physics, M.I.T.,
Scientist John Bradley of MVA Inc. in Norcross, Georgia, said in a report in the journal Science that ancient space dust particles, composed of a black glassy substance embedded with metal, that zipped into Earth's atmosphere might be older than the solar system. Some of these tiny dust grains appeared to be similar to one of the major raw materials of the universe, interstellar dust grains, known as GEMS (glass with embedded metal and sulfides). Scientists collected GEMS, which they believed were left from a passing comet's wake, from a NASA U-2 airplane several miles above Earth. The GEMS were rare--only one or two were collected per hour of U-2 flight time--but showed signs of exposure to irradiation when studied under a transmission electron miscroscope. (UP, Aug 11/94)
The Pentagon announced that Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition John Deutch had agreed to hold $10 million in Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) funding pending the outcome of a Department of Defense (DoD) launch modernization study and a 60-day NASA-DoD review of the Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) flight test program. (Defense Daily, Feb 2/94; NY Times, Feb 2/94; AP, Feb 2/94; H Post, Feb 3/94)
A senior scientist at the National Museum of Natural History, Kenneth M. Towe, refuted a recent satellite-based NASA claim that the presence of hydrogen fluoride in the atmosphere confirms that ozone depletion is largely caused by clorofluorocarbons. Towe pointed out that, contrary to NASA's contention, hydrogen fluoride does have a natural source--it is emitted by volcanoes--and it plays a large role in the destruction of ozone in the lower stratosphere. Towe's position received corroboration from another authority, Michael S. Coffman, president of Environmental Perspectives, Inc., in Bangor, Maine. (W Times, Jan 10/95; WSJ, Jan 12/95; Bangor Daily News, Jan 11/95))
Rockwell International Corporation pled guilty to charges of violating federal law in disposing of hazardous waste. Federal prosecutors had charged the company with violating the law after a 1994 explosion at a Rockwell rocket-testing facility in Southern California killed scientists Otto K. Heiney and Larry A. Pugh. Rockwell’s Chief Executive Officer Donald R. Beall called the incident “a corporate failure for which we accept responsibility.” By pleading guilty, Rockwell acknowledged liability and agreed to pay a US$6.5 million fine. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, the case was only one aspect of a long-term investigation into Rockwell’s compliance with environmental regulations, an investigation that Rockwell’s guilty plea did not end. Federal auditors were also looking into the possibility that Rockwell had overcharged NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense for disposal costs.(Andy Pasztor, “Rockwell Probe To Continue After Unit Pleads Guilty to Waste-Disposal Charge,” Wall Street Journal, 9 April 1996; Mark Reed, “Firm Agrees To Pay Fine in Fatal Blast,” Los Angeles Times, 9 April 1996. 54 New York Times, “NASA Research Plane Aids in Waste Cleanup,” 9 April 1996.)
While constructing a piping trench, two surveyors at NASA’s LARC located the fossil remains of a 3.5 million-year-old, 30-foot (9-meter) baleen whale. The workers found the whale’s skull, tympanic bulla, vertebrae, and rib fragments. Langley loaned the remains to the nearby College of William and Mary. Gerald H. Johnson, a geologist at the College of William and Mary, suggested that the discovery provided a clue to the history of the Langley site, indicating that the Atlantic shoreline probably used to be located 30−40 miles (48−64 kilometers) west of its present location.(NASA, “Ancient Whale Surfaces at NASA Langley,” news release 96-145, 22 July 1996.)
European astronomers unveiled a new, more accurate map of the stars. Scientists immediately praised the 17-volume celestial guide as a milestone in astronomy. The ESA’s Hipparcos project had produced the map over 17 years, at a cost approaching US$1 billion. Astronomers called the release of the Hipparcos data the beginning of a new and fruitful debate. Hipparcos Project Scientist Michael Perryman said, “It’s a massive leap forward in our understanding. But the science of Hipparcos doesn’t stop here. For the scientific community it is just beginning.” In total, the map indicated the positions and motions of more than 118,000 stars.(Association Press, “Mapping the Heavens,” 15 May 1997.)
Two competing teams using NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) discovered the first known accretion-powered millisecond pulsar. The scientists believed the pulsar to be the missing link between two known types of stars: 1) “old, accreting neutron stars, which are powerful sources of [x]-rays generated from the material they are gobbling up from their companions,” and 2) even older “radiowave emitting pulsars that are rotating very rapidly and slowing down gradually.” Because the new star, designated SAX J1808.4-3658, was both emitting x-rays and spinning rapidly, scientists believed it was the link between the accreting and the radiowaveemitting neutron stars. Michiel van der Klis and Rudy Wijnands of the University of Amsterdam found the new pulsar—called the “Holy Grail of X-ray astronomy”—and measured the time between its rapid x-ray pulses, to derive its rotation rate. Van der Klis explained that, based on the fact of accretion, astrophysicists had long theorized that millisecond pulsars existed, but this was the first time that one had been “caught in the act.” Accretion, the process of drawing gas from a nearby “companion” star, causes pulsars to heat up, emitting x-rays. After accretion ends, high-velocity beams of subatomic particles continue to “blow material off the companion,” eventually causing the companion to vanish. Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology led the team that found the pulsar’s 2-hour orbital period, measured the orbit, and inferred the presence of the companion star. Tod E. Strohmayer, a member of the RXTE team at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, suggested, “[x]-ray and particle beam ablation may explain why millisecond pulsars are often found alone, despite the fact that they required a companion star to speed up.” Pulsars “vaporize” their companions, thus hiding the evidence, which is, as Strohmayer described it, the “stellar version of the perfect crime.”(NASA, “Newly Discovered Stellar Cannibal Provides Missing Link,” news release 98-129, 22 July 1998; Rudy Wijnands and Michiel van der Klis, “A Millisecond Pulsar in an X-ray Binary System,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 344–346; Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan, “The Two-Hour Orbit of a Binary Millisecond X-ray Pulsar,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 346–348.)
Cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev departed Mir with their French colleague Jean-Pierre Haigneré, leaving the station empty for the first time in 131⁄2 years. On 2 August, in preparation for the departure, the crew had installed a new computer, which provided orientation and docking management systems to keep the station in orbit during the absence of a crew. The crew had also installed a ground-controlled backup system, which would prevent the station from crashing to Earth if a malfunction occurred on board the station.(David Hoffman, “Cosmonauts Abandon Mir: Russian Space Station Faces Demise After 13 Years Aloft,” Washington Post, 28 August 1999; Andrei Shukshin for Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Has New Computer in Control,” 2 August 1999; Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Crew Fit Equipment To Leave Station,” 6 August 1999.)
During a spacewalk lasting nearly 6 hours, cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev searched for the source of a leak that was slowly causing pressure loss in Mir; they also attempted to install an antenna needed for an experiment. Both efforts failed. The leak, first detected in late June 1999, was “above the allowable limit.” Although it posed no immediate threat to the space station, if the leak continued for three more months, the station would become uninhabitable.(Nikolai Pavlov for Reuters, “Mir Crew Spacewalks To Seek Pressure Leak,” 23 July 1999; Kansas City Star (MO), “Antenna Failure Prevents Mir Test: Two Cosmonauts Give Up After Trying To Fix It for Six Hours,” 24 July 1999.)
In the second-longest spacewalk in NASA’s history, lasting 8 hours and 15 minutes, Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld successfully replaced all six of HST’s gyroscopes and had “just enough time to equip each of the telescope’s six batteries with a voltage regulator to prevent overheating.” NASA believed corroded wires had caused the gyroscope failures. To avoid repeating the failure, engineers used pressurized nitrogen rather than air to force fluid into the new gyroscopes. Smith and Grunsfeld alternated working inside the tight space housing the gyroscopes. Because of his long arms, NASA assigned the 6-foot-3.5-inch-tall (1.9-meter-tall) Smith, who had worked on HST during its last service call in 1997, the task of replacing the two sets of gyroscopes on the sides, which were more difficult to reach. The spacewalk lasted 2 hours longer than scheduled. Although Smith and Grunsfeld went to work an hour early and quickly organizing their tools in the cargo bay, the pair needed extra time to open coolant-line valves on a disabled infrared camera and encountered difficulty latching the doors of the cargo bay holding the equipment.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Hubble Gets a Transplant: Initial Check Says New Parts Are Working,” Los Angeles Times, 23 December 1999, Associated Press, “Crew Replaces All 6 Hubble Gyroscopes,” Washington Times, 23 December 1999.)
NASA announced the inauguration of a program focused on designing a probe that could collide with a comet traveling at speeds of more than 22,000 miles (35,000 kilometers) per hour. Researchers had created the Deep Impact Mission program in the belief that the collision might enable measurement of the materials comprising the comet. The plan called for a 770-pound (349-kilogram) impactor, featuring cameras and an infrared spectrometer, to collect data from the comet. NASA selected Michael A’Hearn of the University of Maryland as Project Leader, with NASA’s JPL and Ball Aerospace Technology Corporation as the designers of the probe. The effort targeted Comet Tempel 1, discovered in 1867, which orbits Earth every five and one- half years. Following in the wake of several comet-related discoveries, the Deep Impact Mission focused on analyzing the composition of comets and determining how they might have affected the rest of the universe. NASA had designated a budget of US$279 million for the project.(NASA, “NASA Gives Green Light for Deep Impact Mission Development,” news release 01-99, 24 May 2001. 67 SpaceRef.com, “Galileo Millennium Mission Status,” 24 May 2001, http://www.spaceref.com/news/ viewsr.html?pid=2913 (accessed 30 July 2001); NASA, “Galileo Gets One Last Close Encounter with Jupiter’s Callisto,” news release 01-97, 22 May 2001.)
Michael A. Chowdry, the founder and chairperson of Atlas Air Inc., and Jeff Cole, the aerospace editor for the Wall Street Journal, died in a plane crash, which occurred minutes after takeoff from the Front Range Airport in Watkins, Colorado. Chowdry had formed Atlas Air in 1992, to lease jumbo cargo jets and to provide flight crews to the airfreight industry. Since 1999, readers of the Wall Street Journal had known Cole for his detailed and insightful coverage of the defense and aerospace industries. After interviewing Chowdry, Cole had accepted his invitation to ride aboard a Czech fighter jet. Chowdry was piloting the jet when it crashed.(Wall Street Journal, “Crash Kills Atlas Air Chairman and Journal’s Aerospace Editor,” 25 January 2001.)
William W. Parsons Jr. replaced Roy S. Estess as Director of SSC. Parsons had joined NASA in 1990 as a Launch Site Support Manager at NASA’s KSC, later serving in various positions at NASA’s KSC, SSC, and JSC. Estess had come to SSC in 1966 as a test engineer and had served as the Center’s Director from 1989 to 2002.(NASA, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 26 September 2008); NASA SSC, “William (Bill) W. Parsons Jr. Director, 2002–2003,” http://www.ssc.nasa.gov/about/history/personalities/parsons.html (accessed 26 September 2008); NASA SSC, “Roy S. Estess, Director, 1989–2002,” http://www.ssc.nasa.gov/about/ history/personalities/estess.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
NASA appointed John H. Campbell as Senior Manager at WFF and Director of GSFC Suborbital and Special Orbital Projects Directorate. In 1987 Campbell had begun his NASA career as a Systems Engineering Manager for the Flight Systems Software Branch, at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland. In the years before his appointment at WFF, NASA had awarded Campbell its Distinguished Service Medal, Outstanding Leadership Medal, and Exceptional Achievement Medal.(Inside Wallops, “Wallops Senior Manager Appointed,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 29 July 2002).)
NASA scientist Robert Michael Hornstein died of a brain tumor at the age of 57. Hornstein had worked for NASA since 1968, directing its worldwide network of antennas used for communicating with orbiting spacecraft. Hornstein, who had joined NASA during the Apollo program to design programs for ground tracking systems, was “recognized for helping save the Apollo 9 mission from being aborted shortly after launch when he modified tracking software to compensate for a computer malfunction in the launch vehicle.” As Ground Networks Director, Hornstein had helped administer network-tracking facilities during Space Shuttle orbits, the Voyager program, the Galileo recovery effort and mission to Jupiter, the Magellan program, and the international Halley’s Comet tracking program. He had helped manage the upgrade of Deep Space Network facilities in Australia, California, and Spain and had acted as NASA’s primary representative in arranging cooperative tracking efforts with other countries. NASA had awarded Hornstein its Outstanding Leadership Award and Exceptional Service Medal, and the Soviet Union had honored him with membership in its Federation of Cosmonautics.(Washington Post, “Robert Hornstein; NASA Scientist Ran Tracking System,” 28 March 2003.)
X Prize contestant SpaceShipOne successfully carried out its first glide flight after the White Knight carrier craft towed it to an altitude of 47,000 feet (14,326 meters) and released it. Pilot Michael W. Melvill guided the craft to a desert landing. Scaled Composites, which had built SpaceShipOne, issued a report of the test indicating that the two vehicles had separated cleanly, that handling qualities of the craft had correlated closely with ground-based simulations, and that on-board avionics and cockpit displays had performed flawlessly.(Leonard David, “X Prize Contestant Scaled Composites’ SpaceShipOne Flies,” Space News, 9 August 2003.)
Edward J. Weiler became Director of NASA’s GSFC, taking over from Alphonso V. Diaz. Weiler, who had joined NASA in 1978, had served as Chief Scientist for the HST from 1979 to 1998 and as Associate Administrator for NASA’s Space Science Enterprise from 1998 to July 2004. Diaz, who had served as Director of GSFC since 12 January 1998, became NASA’s Associate Administrator of Science.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 1 May 2009); NASA, “Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate: Edward J. Weiler,” 7 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/about/highlights/weiler_biography.html (accessed 1 May 2009); NASA, “Alphonso Diaz: Associate Administrator, Science,” 4 November 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/about/highlights/diaz_bio.html (accessed 1 May 2009).)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Gennady I. Padalka performed a spacewalk to conduct maintenance tasks and to prepare the ISS for the future arrival of a new cargo spacecraft. During the nearly 51⁄2-hour spacewalk, Fincke and Padalka replaced a component of the ISS’s cooling system, installed safety equipment for future spacewalks, and set up three antennas to aid the docking of ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), a new ISS cargo ship scheduled for launch in 2005.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-029,” news release SS04-029, 3 September 2004.)
NASA-funded researchers announced that they had found the most distant object orbiting the Sun yet discovered. Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology had led a team of scientists to discover a small body of rock and ice located 8 billion miles (13 billion kilometers) from Earth. They had named the object Sedna after the Inuit goddess of the ocean. Sedna was the largest object found in the solar system since Pluto’s discovery in 1930. However, astronomers reported that they could not designate Sedna as a planet because, like Pluto, Sedna is too smallwith an estimated diameter of 1,100 miles (1,770 kilometers)and possesses an irregular orbit. The scientists stated that the discovery might also have been the first observation of a region called the Oort Cloud, which is located outside of Pluto’s orbit. Astronomers had long hypothesized the existence of this region of small frozen objects, the source of comets that enter Earth’s solar system. The team had discovered Sedna using the Samuel Oschin Telescope at the California Institute of Technology’s Palomar Observatory.(NASA, “Most Distant Object in Solar System Discovered,” news release 04-091, 15 March 2009; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Scientists Discover Icy Planetoid Beyond Pluto,” Los Angeles Times, 16 March 2009.)
A group of astronomers led by Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of a new planet in the solar system. The scientists had temporarily called the planet 2003 UB313 until the International Astronomic Union could formally approve the name that the scientists had proposed, but had not yet disclosed to the public. Although the scientists did not yet know the planet’s exact size, they believed it was larger than Pluto, which astronomers estimate is 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) in diameter. In addition, the newly discovered planet, which the scientists believed to be composed of rock and ice, was the furthest known object in the solar system, with a 560-year elliptical orbit around the Sun at distances ranging from 3.3 to 9 billion miles (5.3 to 14 billion kilometers) from the Sun. By comparison, Pluto’s orbit ranges from 2.7 to 4.6 billion miles (4.3 to 7.4 billion kilometers) from the Sun. The astronomers had also discovered that the orbit of 2003 UB313 is quite different from that of most planets in the solar system―it possesses an orbit skewed at an angle 44o from Earth’s orbit, whereas most planets orbit in planes that are close to that of Earth.(Kenneth Chang and Dennis Overbye, “Planet or Not, Pluto Has Far-Out Rival,” New York Times, 30 July 2005; NASA, “World Book at NASA: Pluto,” http://www.nasa.gov/worldbook/pluto_worldbook.html (accessed 2 July 2009); Richard A. Kerr, “Newfound ‘Tenth Planet’ Puts Pluto Behind the Eight Ball,” Science 309, 5736 (5 August 2005): 859.)
Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA’s Fiscal Year 2006 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 17 February 2005. route to their destination and assisted traffic managers in managing in-flight aircraft collaboratively; and new communication and visualization technologies, which helped airline industry personnel better understand air-traffic patterns and future trends. Michael R. Landis, Manager of the AATT project, remarked that NASA would incorporate many of the technologies and concepts developed by the AATT project into the Next Generation Air Transportation System, the initiative of the government and industry to modernize the National Airspace System.(NASA, “NASA Developed Tools for Successful Air Travel Program,” news release 05-058, 24 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05058_Improving_Air_Travel.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
NASA announced the completion of the most extensive global topographic map ever created, using data collected during Endeavour’s Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) in February 2000. NASA and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) had processed the collected data for more than four years, creating digital elevation maps that encompassed 80 percent of Earth’s landmass and revealed, for the first time, large, detailed swaths of topography previously obscured by persistent cloud cover. The data covered Australia and New Zealand in unprecedented, uniform detail, as well as the more than 1,000 islands comprising much of Polynesia and Melanesia in the South Pacific and the islands in the South Indian and Atlantic oceans, including many that geographers had never topographically mapped. The low topography typical of the islands makes them vulnerable to tidal effects, storm surges, and long- term rise in sea level. Mission Project Scientist at NASA’s JPL, Michael Kobrick, remarked that the maps would help mitigate the effects of future disasters of the magnitude of the Indian Ocean tsunami, because scientists would now be able to see where rising waters would go. Kobrick also commented that the SRTM was among the most significant missions the Shuttle had performed and, probably, the most significant mapping mission of any single type.(NASA, “NASA Goes ‘Down Under’ for Shuttle Mapping Mission Finale,” news release 05-007, 6 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05007_srtm_update.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
Officials of the Personal Spaceflight Federation announced the newly formed organization’s establishment. The Federation’s stated purpose was to design and uphold the standards and processes necessary to ensure public safety, while promoting the growth of the private spaceflight industry. Pursuant to landmark legislation signed by President George W. Bush in December 2004Pub. L. No. 108-492, the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004the industry group planned to work with federal regulators to draft rules and standards for suborbital space tourism. The new federation brought together visionary space entrepreneurs, including SpaceShipOne designer Burt Rutan, whose team had won the US$10 million X Prize in October 2004 for conducting the first private suborbital spaceflight, and video-game developer John D. Carmack II, whose Armadillo Aerospace team had been among the leading contenders for the X Prize. Executive Director of the X Prize Foundation Gregg E. Maryniak, serving as the Federation’s spokesperson, remarked on the law’s new mandate that government and industry work together to develop safety standards. Maryniak stated that the Federation believed strongly that private industry must devise a suborbital product considerably safer than that of the current civil space program.(Personal Spaceflight Federation, “Space Entrepreneurs Resolve To Create Industry Group To Promote Safety Standards and Growth of the Personal Spaceflight Industry,” news release, 8 February 2005, http://www.commercialspaceflight.org/pressreleases/PSF%20Press%20Release%20- %20Original%20Announcement.pdf (accessed 27 August 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Racers Unite in Federation: Industry Group Will Follow Up on New Law,” MSNBC.com, 9 February 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6936543/ (accessed 28 August 2009).)
NASA announced that it would remove the potentially problematic foam insulation ramps from the Space Shuttles’ external fuel tanks before the next Shuttle launch, which NASA had scheduled for 2006. NASA had examined the foam ramps after a portion of foam had separated from Discovery during its July 2005 launch, nearly striking the Shuttle. The event was similar to the one that had contributed to the destruction of Columbia in 2003. Engineers had designed the foam ramps―formally called Protuberance Air Loads (PALs)―to protect Shuttle tanks’ fuel- pressurization lines and electrical cables from potentially damaging winds during launch. NASA technicians remained unsure of why the foam ramp had separated from Discovery, but inspections conducted in November 2005 had revealed small cracks in a PAL. The PAL with the cracks was on a tank that NASA had tested before Discovery’s launch but had not used for that mission.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Plans To Remove Some Foam from Shuttle,” New York Times, 16 December 2005; Michael Cabbage, “Shuttle To Lose Fuel-Tank Foam,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 December 2005.)
NASA’s Deep Impact team of scientists, led by Michael F. A’Hearn of the University of Maryland, reported in the online edition of Science that they had found the first conclusive evidence of water ice on the surface of a comet. Jointly sponsored by NASA’s JPL and the University of Maryland, Deep Impact had crashed a space probe into the comet Tempel 1 on 4 July 2005 and had taken samples of the resulting debris. Through a spectral analysis of data about the comet, which the probe had collected before the crash, the scientists had determined the existence of three patches of ice covering 300,000 square feet (27,871 square meters), approximately 6 percent of Tempel 1’s total surface area. The team concluded that the exposed ice had come from larger reservoirs just below the comet’s surface. While scientists had long known that ice is a component of comets, this report marked the first discovery of ice on a comet’s exterior surface. Scientists speculate that comets might have been the first vector for the delivery of water and carbon-based molecules to Earth, providing the building blocks for life.(Reuters, “Deep Impact Probe Shows Ice on Comet’s Surface,” 2 February 2006; Brown University, “NASA’s ‘Deep Impact’ Team Reports First Evidence of Cometary Ice,” press release, 2 February 2006, http://www.brown. edu/Administration/News_Bureau/2005-06/05-072.html (accessed 27 August 2010); Ker Than, “Water Ice Detected on Comet’s Surface,” Space.com, 2 February 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060202_comet_ice.html (accessed 31 August 2010); see also Jessica M. Sunshine et al., “Exposed Water Ice Deposits on the Surface of Comet 9P/Tempel 1,” Science 311, no. 5766 (10 March 2006): 1453.)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing on an NRC report recommending a strategy for the federal government’s involvement in civil aeronautics, with particular emphasis on NASA’s future research priorities. The NRC had released the report, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future, in June 2006. Major General William W. Hoover, co-chair of NRC’s Committee on the Decadal Survey, testified that the NRC report would provide the executive branch with a “useful foundation” for developing a national aeronautics policy. Hoover urged NASA to allocate funding for research and technology more equitably, between NASA personnel and universities or industry, and to facilitate collaborative research with other federal agencies supporting aeronautics research, such as the FAA. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator for NASA’s Aeronautics Mission Directorate, testified that NASA’s aeronautics-research portfolio aligned closely with the research priorities outlined in the report. Porter also stated that, although NASA had worked with private industry in aeronautics research, NASA did not want to duplicate private-sector research or to pursue research that private industry was better equipped to conduct.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The National Academy of Sciences’ Decadal Plans for Aeronautics: A Blueprint for NASA? 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 26 September 2006 (statement of Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator, Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, NASA), http://science.house.gov/commdocs/hearings/space06/sept%2026/Porter.pdf (accessed 30 September 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The National Academy of Sciences’ Decadal Plans for Aeronautics: A Blueprint for NASA? 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 26 September 2006 (statement of William Hoover, National Research Council, the National Academies), http://science.house.gov/ commdocs/hearings/space06/sept%2026/Hoover.pdf (accessed 30 September 2010).)
An independent scientific panel, convened by the National Academy of Sciences’ (NAS’s) NRC, issued a report evaluating the results of a controversial 1999 study conducted by climatologist Michael E. Mann. Mann and his researchers had concluded that the warming of the Northern Hemisphere during the last decades of the twentieth century had no precedent within the past 1,000 years, and that the 1990s—particularly 1998—were the warmest years during that period. The study included a graph that had acquired the nickname “hockey stick,” becoming an environmentalist icon. The graph depicted little temperature variation in the Northern Hemisphere for almost 1,000 years, followed by a sharp upward hook representing recent rising temperatures. NAS had prepared the report, Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the Last 2,000 Years, at the request of House Science Committee Chairman Sherwood L. Boehlert (R- NY). The panel had found “sufficient evidence from tree rings, retreating glaciers, and other ‘proxies’ of past surface temperatures to say with a high level of confidence that the last few decades of the twentieth century were warmer than any comparable period in the last 400 years.” Although this conclusion vindicated the main argument of Mann’s study for the most part, the panel cautioned that scientists had found less empirical evidence proving that Northern Hemisphere warming had no precedent before 1600. The panel also stated that “because of larger uncertainties in temperature reconstructions for decades and individual years, and because not all proxies record temperatures for such short timescales,” they had less confidence in the team’s conclusions about the 1990s.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the 2006 Nobel Prize in Physics to NASA scientist John C. Mather and University of California, Berkeley, scientist George F. Smoot. The pair received the award for research that strongly supported the Big Bang Theory as the definitive explanation of the universe’s origin. Mather and Smoot had used data from NASA’s Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to observe the universe 380,000 years after its inception. They had determined that the temperature of the cosmic microwave background—essentially, the Big Bang’s afterglow—was approximately -455oF. Their observations matched earlier predictions made by other scientists and indicated that nearly all of the universe’s radiant energy—the energy of light and other electromagnetic waves—had been released during the first year after the Big Bang. The pair also discovered slight temperature variations in this relatively uniform light, indicating the density differences in matter that had led to the creation of stars, galaxies, and the universe’s hierarchical structure.(Nobel Foundation, “The Nobel Prize in Physics 2006,” 3 October 2006, http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/ physics/laureates/2006/press.html (accessed 31 March 2010); NASA, “NASA Scientist John C. Mather Wins 2006 Nobel Physics Prize,” news release 06-327, 3 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_ 06327_Mather_Nobel_prize.html (accessed 31 March 2010).)
NASA awarded its Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal posthumously to astronomer and astrophysicist John N. Bahcall, who had died in August 2005 of a rare blood disorder. NASA honored Bahcall for his work developing the HST, along with astronomers Lyman S. Spitzer Jr. and George B. Field, and for his “extraordinary service to NASA’s astronomy program,” including “groundbreaking work in the 1960s toward explaining the scientific mysteries of the sun.” Bahcall had also received the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, and the National Medal of Science.(NASA, “NASA Honors Distinguished Astronomer with Medal,” news release 06-005, 10 January 2006, http://nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06005_Bahcall_AAS_Award.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
NASA released images that its New Horizons spacecraft had captured 28 February 2007, when the craft passed within 1.4 million miles (2.2 million kilometers) of Jupiter on its way to Pluto. The images provided “never-before-seen perspectives” of the giant planet’s atmosphere, rings, moons, and magnetosphere, including the first close-up scans of Jupiter’s second-largest storm Little Red Spot, which had formed during the previous decade when three smaller storms merged. Harold A. Weaver Jr., New Horizons Project Scientist for the John Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, remarked that the image was “the best look ever of a storm like this in its infancy.” New Horizons had also captured the clearest images to date of the tenuous Jovian ring system, including images revealing a series of unexpected arcs and clumps
A team of scientists led by Hope A. Ishii and John P. Bradley of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory announced in the journal Science that material they had analyzed from the comet Wild 2 more closely resembled the material composition of an asteroid than they had expected. Using Livermore’s scanning transmission electron microscope SuperSTEM, the scientists had assessed a sample of the comet’s tail—NASA’s Stardust craft had gathered the sample in 2004. Scientists had long thought that primitive outer nebula material composed comets, so the Livermore team had expected to find an abundance of that material. However, they had found very little primitive outer nebula material, instead finding larger-than-expected quantities of the newer, inner solar nebula matter common in asteroids. The researchers pointed out that this surprising discovery emphasized that asteroids and comets do not comprise distinctly different entities but, instead, exist along a continuum in regard to their material composition.(John Johnson Jr., “NASA’s Stardust Upends Comet Theory,” Los Angeles Times, 25 January 2008; see also Hope A. Ishii et al., “Comparison of Comet 81P/Wild 2 Dust with Interplanetary Dust from Comets,” Science 319, no. 5862 (25 January 2008): 447−450.)
NASA announced that it had awarded a total of US$97,000 in prizes at the 2008 General Aviation Technology Challenge, one of NASA’s seven Centennial Challenges offering technology prize competitions for independent inventors. The General Aviation Technology Challenge took place from 4 August 2008 through 10 August 2008 at the Sonoma County Airport in Santa Rosa, California. The contest encouraged inventors to design aircraft that were easier to fly, less expensive, safer, and less of a disturbance to both the environment and the communities surrounding airports. NASA provided the prize money, and the Comparative Aircraft Flight Efficiency (CAFE) Foundation managed the contest. Frank Vance Turner’s team from El Dorado Hills, California, won the largest prize, a US$50,000 purse for the airplane with the best safety features. Turner’s team also won prizes for the shortest takeoff distance and best angle of climb. In addition, the Turner team shared a prize for lowest cabin noise with John A. Dunham’s team from Carson City, Nevada. Dunham’s team also won the community noise prize. John Robert “Bob” Basham won a prize for the best glide ratio. NASA had offered a US$50,000 prize for any aircraft with a fuel efficiency of less than 30 miles (48.3 kilometers) per gallon, but none of the contestant aircraft met the requirement. NASA planned to use the unawarded prize money in the 2009 competition.(NASA, “Prizes Awarded at NASA’s General Aviation Technology Challange,” news release 08-206, 12 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08206_Centennial_Challenges_ Cafe_400_Winners.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
