After exceeding even the most optimistic predictions made during its primary mission, the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft concluded its initial research maneuvers and began extended operations. The initial mission had returned to Earth 1.2 gigabits of data and more than 9,000 images of the Martian landscape. Project Manager of the Mars Pathfinder Mission Brian Muirhead said that the mission had not only had gathered an impressive amount of data, but also validated NASA’s new approach to exploring space. “This mission demonstrated a reliable and low-cost system for placing science payloads on the surface of Mars,” he stated. “We’ve validated NASA’s commitment to low-cost planetary exploration.” After completing the planned 30-day mission and traveling 171 feet (52 meters) across Mars’s landscape, the rover Sojourner remained in excellent condition. Operators gave Sojourner a two-day rest period to recharge its battery, before it began an extended exploration of the planet.(NASA, “Mars Pathfinder Results Generating New Picture of Mars as Mission Moves into Extended Operation,” news release 97-174, 8 August 1997; Los Angeles Times, “Mars Mission ‘100 Percent Success’, NASA Says,” Los Angeles Times, 9 August 1997.)
NASA researchers announced the discovery of wildly oscillating weather patterns on Mars. In yet another use for the HST images, scientists tracked much colder, cloudier, harsher weather conditions than they had expected. R. Todd Clancy of the Space Science Institute attributed Mars’s chaotic weather to a combination of factors, including the planet’s thin atmosphere and elliptical orbit and the ice and dust clouds surrounding it. When the planet’s orbit places it closest to the Sun, large windstorms push dust into the atmosphere; the dust absorbs sunlight, causing the air to heat, and Mars’s temperature to rise as high as 30°F (-1°C). HST images seemed to demonstrate further that, when the planet is farthest from the Sun, the dust storms remain at low altitudes, and ice clouds surround the planet, causing temperatures to plunge precipitously. The findings were of particular importance to NASA’s ongoing Mars Pathfinder Project, with Pathfinder’s entrance into the Martian atmosphere planned for July 1997.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Space Telescope Finds Big Shifts in Weather on Mars,” New York Times, 21 May 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Kaleidoscopic Mars Shows Its True Colors,” USA Today, 21 May 1997; Associated Press, “Hubble Finds Climate on Mars Harsher than Scientists Thought,” 21 May 1997.)
In a once-in-a-century occurrence, eight planets lined up in the sky “like pearls on a string” from west to east. Astronomers could view, in one line of sight, Pluto, followed by Mercury, Mars, Venus, Neptune, Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturn⎯with a crescent Moon visible as well. Jack Horkheimer, host of public television’s Star Hustler described the event as “naked-eye astronomy at its best,” a boon for amateurs. According to computer calculations, the orbits of the planets would not line up in such a pleasing manner for observers on the Earth for at least another century.(Associated Press, “Planets in Once-in-Century Lineup,” 2 December 1997.)
After altering the spacecraft’s path to move it farther away from Mars’s violent winds, NASA launched Mars Global Surveyor from its safe elliptical orbit of the Red Planet, sending the spacecraft into the planet’s harsh atmosphere. NASA officials indicated that, because of the change in flight plans, Mars Global Surveyor would begin its mapping mission of Mars in 1999, one year later than originally planned. The change of plan highlighted both the difficulty of exploring Mars and NASA’s ability to adapt to difficult conditions. When Mars’s atmosphere had proven more hostile than previously anticipated, mission controllers had proven able to readjust Surveyor’s orbit. In effect, the move had placed Surveyor in a holding pattern, keeping it from harm. Once conditions had improved, however, NASA would not be able simply to proceed as planned. Because Surveyor ran on solar power, the mission planners must wait for Mars and the Sun to realign, to provide energy for the craft. However, although NASA would have to postpone the mission for one year, the delay would provide an added benefit, allowing NASA’s researchers to set Surveyor on a circular orbit that would actually bring Surveyor closer to the planet than originally projected.(John Noble Wilford, “Mars Map Will Come a Year Late,” New York Times, 11 November 1997; Mark Carreau, “Mars Map Still on Tap,” Houston Chronicle, 11 November 1997; A. J. Hostetler, “Surveyor Has New Course,” Times-Dispatch (Richmond, VA), 13 November 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
A panel of scientists at the National Research Council issued a report warning NASA of the slight possibility that a mission to Mars might actually bring microbes back to the United States. Although their report clearly stated that the so-called Microbe Peril was unlikely, the panel argued, nevertheless, that a probe returning from an exploratory mission to Mars could possibly serve as a conduit to bring Martian germs back to Earth. The panel issued its warning because of NASA’s plan to send a mission to Mars to obtain samples of substances on the planet, and because NASA scientists had recently identified signs of possible microscopic life on a meteorite. The panel’s report stated, “If life forms ever existed on Mars, either by having been formed in an independent origin or having been transferred there from Earth, it is possible that they could have continued to exist up to the present time.”
After a four-month mission, NASA officials announced that Mission Control had halted communications with Mars Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner. Sojourner’s batteries were nearly drained, and many of the rover’s instruments had frozen in Mars’s harsh climate. Mission controllers expected the rover simply to come to a halt on Mars’s vast plains, ceasing signal transmissions altogether. Nevertheless, NASA considered the US$266 million mission largely successful. The mission had lasted much longer than planned, transmitting, from the surface of the Red Planet to Earth, nearly 10,000 pictures of the Martian landscape, including images showing evidence of erosion, as well as more than 1.2 billion bits of data. Sojourner’s remarkable service, even in the midst of harsh dust storms and temperatures reaching
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder, a remote-controlled, ultra-lightweight aircraft, set a new world record for highest altitude for a solar-powered aircraft. AeroVironment Pathfinder reached an altitude of 67,350 feet (20,500 meters), shattering the previous record of 50,500 feet (15,400 meters). The experiment took place at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility in Kauai, Hawaii. Engineers had designed Pathfinder to fly at extremely high altitudes, to supply researchers with atmospheric and environmental data that other planes could not gather. In traveling to such heights, Pathfinder experienced temperatures as low as -100°F (-73°C). After climbing for about 6 hours, the aircraft ascended into record-breaking territory, flying for more than 90 minutes at an altitude above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). A partnership formed under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Alliance, involving NASA, aerospace companies, and members of the scientific community, was responsible for developing AeroVironment Pathfinder.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Surpasses Propeller Altitude Record,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 146, no. 25 (16 June 1997): 53; NASA, “Pathfinder Sets New World Record,” news release 97-132, 12 June 1997. 267 NASA, “Hubble Is First To Spot Colliding Supernovas,” news release 97-129, 10 June 1997.)
NASA successfully landed the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft on Mars, exactly seven months after its launch from Earth. Project managers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) called the landing “near perfect,” celebrating the beginning of the “second era in the exploration of Mars.” The Mars Pathfinder Mission was the first to attempt a planetary landing on initial orbit, and Pathfinder’s safe landing followed a journey in which the spacecraft traveled at speeds of up to 16,600 miles (26,800 kilometers) per hour. Although NASA made its first successful flyby of Mars in 1965, in recent years it had taken a new approach to exploring the Red Planet. NASA achieved the development and deployment of Mars Pathfinder for US$266 million, a bargain compared to the US$1 billion cost of the failed Mars Observer. Because of its tightening budget, NASA had adopted a course of planning several simple, but targeted excursions, using low-cost spacecraft, rather than mounting a few complex and expensive missions. Pathfinder landed almost exactly at the point aimed for and immediately transmitted signals back to Earth announcing its safe landing. Officials at JPL noticed a slight complication, when early images revealed that some of the airbags used to cushion the craft’s landing had bunched up around the door that Sojourner⎯the rover set to explore the planet⎯would use to exit Pathfinder. NASA’s engineers clarified, however, that the temporary problem would not compromise the rover’s planned exploration.(John Noble Wilford, “Landing Called Near Perfect by NASA,” New York Times, 5 July 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Lands Today on the Planet of Dreams,” New York Times, 4 July 1997; Tony Knight, “Pathfinder Zeroes in on Red Planet,” Los Angeles Daily News, 4 July 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 3.)
Mars Global Surveyor fired its engine enabling Mars’s gravitational pull to capture it. Researchers from NASA’s JPL declared that the spacecraft had behaved exactly as planned during the crucial entry to Mars’s gravitational field. Experts predicted that the mission would produce 700 million bits of data, more than the amount acquired in all previous Mars missions combined. The mapping mission continued a new era of Mars exploration for NASA, involving dozens of probes surveying the planet’s surface and atmosphere.(Kathy Sawyer, “New Visitor from Earth Poised for Mars Orbit,” Washington Post, 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Everything ‘Perfect’ as Surveyor Craft in Countdown to Mars Orbit,” 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Global Surveyor,” 12 September 1997.)
Jurgen H. Rahe, NASA’s Science Program Director for Exploration of the Solar System, died when a tree collapsed on the car he was driving during a severe storm in Maryland. Rahe, 57 years old, had enjoyed a distinguished career in the field of astronomy and at NASA. At the time of his death, he was responsible for overseeing visionary NASA programs, such as the Galileo Mission to Jupiter and the much-anticipated July 1997 landing of Mars Pathfinder. Rahe had guided NASA’s efforts to make more frequent and cost-effective exploratory missions of the solar system. According to one colleague, Rahe had presided over the planetary exploration program’s “unparalleled period of major discoveries.” Before his tenure at NASA, Rahe held tenured positions at California Institute of Technology and Germany’s University of Erlangen- Nuremberg.(Associated Press, “Obituary: Jurgen Rahe, 57, NASA Official,” 20 June 1997; NASA, “NASA Mourns Dr. Jurgen H. Rahe, Solar System Exploration Science Program Director,” news release 97-137, 19 June 1997.)
New support emerged for NASA scientists’ claim that a meteorite discovered in August 1996 held fossil evidence of primitive Martian life. In an article in Science, a group of researchers from California Institute of Technology and McGill University used magnetic studies to demonstrate that the findings on the meteorite were not, as some critics had contended, the result of a high-temperature environment that would have made life impossible. “What we are able to show from the magnetic studies is that these things [the fossil remnant that had excited the interest of Johnson Space Center geologists] couldn’t have been heated even to the boiling point of water.” Although the scientists did not explicitly support NASA’s earlier claim that the remnant provided evidence for bacterial life, the team’s discovery opened the intriguing possibility that remnants of primitive life could migrate from one planet to another.(Joseph L. Kirschvink et al., “Paleomagnetic Evidence of a Low-Temperature Origin of Carbonate in the Martian Meteorite ALH84001,” Science 275, no. 5306 (14 March 1997): 1629−1634; Mark Carreau, “California Scientists Back NASA’s Theory of Life on Mars,” Houston Chronicle, 14 March 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Study Backs Idea that Meteorite Hints of Life on Mars,” New York Times, 14 March 1997.)
Following on the heels of Mars Pathfinder’s successful mission to map the surface of Mars, two researchers used sonar information and satellite images to create a highly detailed map of the global ocean floor, another largely unexplored area. David T. Sandwell of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Walter H. F. Smith of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration improved by 30 times the precision of the world’s most exact ocean maps. Their new map, revealing ridges and canyons never before delineated, helped explain ocean currents and tides across the world. The new mapping technology interested oil companies, looking for clues to the location of fossil fuel deposits, and fishermen seeking likely habitats of fish.(Robert Lee Hotz, “Map Dramatically Deepens Learning About Sea Floor,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997.)
The Rasmussen Research Group reported that seven out of 10 Americans had seen at least one image of Mars obtained through the Mars Pathfinder Mission, denoting a remarkable level of public awareness of NASA’s mission to the Red Planet. The researchers also reported that nearly half of all Americans believed that an American would land on Mars within 10 years. Despite the widespread interest and optimism regarding the project, only 41 percent of those polled saw merit in the mission.(Mark Carreau, “Mars Trip a Monster Summer Hit,” Houston Chronicle, 2 August 1997.)
-50°F (-6°C), had excited scientists and public alike. Mars Pathfinder Web sites had received more than 565 million hits during the mission’s tenure. Using the treasure trove of information Pathfinder had gathered, scientists had concluded that Mars’s surface had many similarities to that of Earth. Perhaps the most compelling was the evidence compiled during the mission in support of the theory that, at one time, Mars had water on its surface. In addition, the mission’s research team concluded that water and wind had played crucial roles in shaping the planet’s surface. Mission controllers spoke of their gratitude for the data gathered, which would keep scientists busy for years, as well as about their excitement at the possibility of building upon Mars Pathfinder’s success in future missions.(Paul Hoversten, “Mars Pathfinder Comes to Quiet End Today,” USA Today, 4 November 1997; Reuters, “NASA Announces End of Mars Pathfinder Mission,” 5 November 1997.)
Mars Global Surveyor passed a critical test on its journey toward the Red Planet, when it successfully opened valves allowing high-pressure rocket propellant to enter its fuel lines. The same task had thwarted the 1993 Mars Observer at a similar juncture during its trip to Mars. Mars Global Surveyor had traveled for 10 months and for more than 435 million miles (700 million kilometers) to reach Mars. According to Glenn E. Cunningham of NASA’s JPL, the process of transforming Global Surveyor from a high-speed-travel spacecraft into a slow-moving craft subject to Mars’s gravitational pull was “a nail-biter.” Without the powerful propellant, the transition could not occur, which would have ended any hope of the mission’s gathering data. With the opening of the valves complete, NASA scientists were optimistic that the US$250 million probe would descend slowly into a tight orbit of Mars, yielding new information about the planet.
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
Two Yemeni men filed a lawsuit against NASA, claiming that NASA had committed trespassing violations when it landed Pathfinder on Mars. The men claimed that their ancient ancestors had deeded the planet to them as an inheritance, requesting that Yemen’s prosecutor-general bring U.S. Ambassador David G. Newton to court to stop the violation. Although no legal restitution was expected, the lawsuit highlighted the excitement surrounding NASA’s Mars mission and the widespread interest in the Red Planet’s exploration.(Reuters, “Get Off Our Planet, Yemeni Men Tell U.S.,” 25 July 1997.)
NASA reported receiving 265 million hits on its Web site during the four days following Mars Pathfinder’s landing. In response to what some observers called the “biggest event in computer network history,” NASA buttressed its own computers with donated equipment from corporate sponsors, so that the government site could handle the high volume of viewers. The Internet statistics validated the widespread popularity of the mission to Mars. The CNN network dedicated nearly half of its programming to the Pathfinder story on the day of the Mars landing, doubling its network ratings. Entrepreneurs sold a variety of Mars- and Pathfinder-themed products, and visitors jammed the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC. USA Today summed up the success of the Mars Pathfinder Mission: “NASA’s successful landing on the Red Planet has set off a Marsfest on the blue one.”(NASA, “Pathfinder Gets Hit Hard on the Internet,” news release I97-8, 9 July 1997; Martha T. Moore, “Mars Mania Invades Earth,” USA Today, 9 July 1997; Associated Press, “‘Mars Live’ Draws Millions to Web Site,” 9 July 1997; United Press International, “Mars Tops Internet Hit List,” 8 July 1997.)
NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder⎯distinct from Mars Pathfinder⎯broke the record for highest-flying, propeller-powered aircraft in a flight from the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, Hawaii. After climbing for nearly 7 hours, AeroVironment Pathfinder reached its record altitude, maintaining its height for about 13 minutes. Even at its peak distance from Earth, a span of more than 67 nautical miles (124 kilometers), AeroVironment Pathfinder transmitted data without any problems. The successful test was part of the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Program at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center.
After more than nine days without sending a signal, Mars Pathfinder’s main transmitter resiliently delivered a message to Earth. To anxious project managers, the message was a welcome relief. The breakdown in the spacecraft’s communication to NASA controllers had necessitated NASA’s activating a contingency plan for Sojourner. The rover had stopped gathering data and reverted to slowly circling its parent spacecraft, waiting to receive directions, a pattern that some scientists feared would be the long-term fate of the rover. The spacecraft’s aging batteries had caused the breakdown in communication of data. However, in spite of the malfunction, NASA officials reiterated that the mission had fulfilled its objectives, emphasizing that solving the problem of communicating with the craft while it was resting on the Red Planet would benefit future explorations of Mars.(Associated Press, “Lacking Signal, Mars Vehicle Is Left To Be Roving in Circles,” 7 October 1997; Associated Press, “Pathfinder Checks in After Weeks of Silence,” 8 October 1997.)
Sojourner, the roving vehicle carried to Mars aboard Pathfinder, began prospecting the surface of the Red Planet approximately two days after Pathfinder’s safe landing. NASA engineers and enthralled scientists described the scene of the six-wheeled, microwave-sized Sojourner, slowly descending the ramp of Pathfinder, as similar to Neil A. Armstrong’s “giant leap” in 1969. Richard A. Cook, managing the mission from JPL, set off a raucous celebration of NASA engineers when he announced, “The rover is on the surface of Mars. We’ve got some great images back, and all the scientists are in heaven.” Weather reports gathered by the Pathfinder reported that Sojourner was working in temperatures as high as 8° below 0°F (-22°C), as well as in wind and dust storms. Sojourner, named for black abolitionist Sojourner Truth, headed for a dark rock near Pathfinder, as its first object of close study. NASA scientists, who had named the rock Barnacle Bill because of its craggy appearance, used similarly whimsical terms to keep track of the various geological objects studied by Sojourner. Sojourner’s success, after some minor complication upon landing, encouraged mission scientists and drew wide acclaim from the media. Scientists began to speculate almost immediately, about whether the mission could possibly confirm or deny the existence of life on the planet.(John Noble Wilford, “On the Surface of Mars, Sojourner Rolls to Work,” New York Times, 7 July 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Data from Mars Indicate It Could Have Supported Life,” 7 July 1997; Peter N. Spotts, “Tiny Land Rover Begins Relaying Detailed Data About Surface of Red Planet,” Christian Science Monitor, 7 July 1997. 280 Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Aircraft Hits 71,500 Ft.,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 147, no. 3 (21 July 1997): 40; NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Sets New Record; Prepares To Monitor Deforestation of Hawaiian Island,” news release 97-153, 14 July 1997.)
NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid known⎯only three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogel’s large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the material’s extreme insulating capability⎯a 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel “a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.”(NASA, “NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows,” news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, “Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns,” New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs,” 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, “Fear of Martians,” Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)
As Mars Pathfinder and its surveyor Sojourner triumphantly explored the surface of Mars, NASA named as Software of the Year the Dynamics Algorithms for Real-Time Simulation (DARTS) software⎯a program used on the Pathfinder mission. Abhinandan Jain, Guillermo Rodriguez, and Guy K. Man of JPL had created the software to provide real-time simulations to test other software and hardware. DARTS allowed NASA mission managers to test procedures in a cost-effective manner.(NASA, “Software Used on Mars Pathfinder Wins NASA’s Software of the Year Award,” news release 97-154, 16 July 1997.)
NASA dedicated a plaque in memory of Ellison S. Onizuka, celebrating his record of achieving the highest altitude for propeller-driven aircraft. Onizuka had been Hawaii’s first astronaut and a member of the Shuttle crew aboard Challenger when it exploded in 1986. NASA’s recognition of Onizuka’s achievement, more than a decade later, occurred during the same year that the remotely controlled AeroVironment Pathfinder broke a distance record for unpiloted space travel, topping 71,000 miles (114,000 kilometers) during its 7 July 1997 flight. NASA honored Onizuka for his part in “reaching for the heavens and striving for excellence,” noting that his achievement had contributed to that of Pathfinder. NASA dedicated the plaque honoring Onizuka at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, where the record-setting Pathfinder plane had set flight on its historic mission.(NASA, “NASA Solar-Powered Altitude Record To Be Dedicated to Challenger Astronaut,” news release N97- 087, 3 December 1997.)
Mars Pathfinder scientists announced that Mars appeared to have a crust, a mantle, and an iron core⎯attributes similar to those of Earth. The researchers suggested that Mars may once have been warm and wet, although they remained unable to determine whether Mars had a molten core, such as that of Earth or Mercury, or a “dead” core, such as that of the Earth’s Moon. The findings contributed to growing evidence that Mars might be more than a solid ball of rock and that the planet might once have had water and life. Signs of possible erosion and weathering encouraged such hypotheses, as well, although scientists clarified that proof of such theories was still probably years away.(K. C. Cole, “Internal Structure of Mars, Earth Similar, Scientists Say,” Houston Chronicle, 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Once Warm and Wet, Data Suggests,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Three Mars Layers Suggests Life on Planet Was Possible,” 9 October 1997.)
Astronomers using the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii announced the discovery of the most distant object ever observed from Earth. The discovery team comprised researchers from the University of Groningen in the Netherlands and the University of California at Santa Cruz. The scientists’ calculations indicated that the distant light they had discovered was an infant galaxy, approximately 13 billion light-years from Earth. Formally named Red Arc in CL1358-62, the discovery gave astronomers a glimpse into the universe as it had existed when only 7 percent of its present age. Lead researcher Garth D. Illingworth described the images as “a pathfinder for deciphering what is happening in young galaxies.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Discover Most Distant Object,” New York Times, 31 July 1997.)
