NASA re-extended the missions of its Mars rovers by an additional six months. The two mobile robotic geological laboratories, Spirit and Opportunity, had landed on Mars in January 2004. The robotic rovers had successfully completed their primary three-month mission in April 2004, and NASA had extended their mission by five months. Because the rovers remained operable and continued to provide important scientific data on Mars, NASA officials had decided to provide funding to cover an additional six months of rover operations.(NASA, “Rovers Missions Renewed as Mars Emerges from Behind Sun,” news release 04-307, 21 September 2004.)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASA’s JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickering’s tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, “NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL,” news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
NASA launched its MESSENGER spacecraft on a seven-year mission to study Mercury, the closest planet to the Sun. MESSENGER―Mercury Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, and Ranging―launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:16 a.m. (EDT). Six countries had provided equipment for the spacecraft, which would photograph Mercury’s surface and analyze the planet’s magnetic field and mineral composition. Project scientists planned to use the resulting data to determine whether Mercury’s composition is similar to that of Earth, Mars, and Venus. Although the spacecraft was not the first to photograph Mercury―NASA’s Mariner 10 had photographed the planet during flybys in 1974 and 1975―MESSENGER was the first spacecraft designed to examine Mercury while orbiting the planet.(Mark Carreau, “Messenger Leaves on 7-Year Voyage,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 2004; NASA, “NASA Sending a Messenger to Mercury,” news release 04-215, 15 July 2004.)
NASA announced that the Mars Exploration Rover Spirit was malfunctioning because of problems related to its flash memory that could take several weeks to repair. Flash memory, a type of memory commonly installed in electronic devices, such as digital cameras, retains data when the device’s power is off. The mobile robotic geological laboratory Spirit had landed on Mars on 3 January 2004 and had performed satisfactorily until it had abruptly terminated communications with NASA on 21 January 2004. On 23 January 2004, Spirit had reestablished contact with NASA, but, according to major newspapers, NASA scientists doubted that the robotic spacecraft would regain full functionality.(Mark Carreau, “NASA Declares Spirit Rover Broken,” Houston Chronicle, 24 January 2004; NASA, “Spirit Condition Upgraded as Twin Rover Nears Mars,” news release 04-036, 24 January 2004.)
At a hearing held by the U.S. House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, officials from NASA and the Pentagon stated that they expect to work together on President Bush’s exploration strategy for Mars and the Moon, without altering the traditional divisions between the two organizations. According to officials, NASA and the Pentagon would cooperate on technical issues of concern to both agencies, including the development of lightweight fabrication systems and systems for unpiloted docking of spacecraft. The two agencies would also explore sharing launch systems, including NASA’s possible use of the Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rockets, which the Pentagon had developed to launch its own satellites. According to major media, House subcommittee members were interested in the possibility of saving money through the collaboration between NASA and the Pentagon, but they were also concerned about the possibility of the two agencies repeating their previous collaborative failures. As an example of such a failed collaboration, they cited the Advanced Launch System project, a collaborative project between the two agencies during the 1980s and 1990s.(Mark Carreau, “NASA, Military To Work Closely on Space Effort,” Houston Chronicle, 19 March 2004. 190)
NASA reported that its Mars Exploration Rovers had discovered geological evidence indicating that Mars had once had water. The rover Spirit had found a volcanic rock containing fissures filled with material that could have crystallized from water. A few days earlier, on 2 March 2004, the rover Opportunity, operating nearly 6,600 miles (10,622 kilometers) from Spirit, had found minerals and geological features that appeared to have been leached by groundwater or to have been formed by sediment in what was previously a body of water. However, scientists were unable to conclude from the two rovers’ findings when Mars had actually had water in the past or whether the water had been located above or below the planet’s surface.(Guy Gugliotta, “Mars Rover Finds Signs of Water,” Washington Post, 7 March 2004; NASA, “Opportunity Rover Finds Strong Evidence Meridiani Planam Was Wet,” news release 04-077, 2 March 2004.)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., “The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J,” Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129–131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, “Bush Aims for ‘Worlds Beyond Our Own’,” Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, “Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base,” New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, “The Vision for Space Exploration,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA approved a five-month extension of the Mars Exploration Rovers’ mission nearly two weeks before its originally scheduled end on 26 April 2004. NASA had originally planned for the mission to last three months but had decided to extend it because the robotic rovers―Opportunity and Spirit―had satisfied all of their primary mission criteria, achieving several successes, such as discovering evidence that Mars had once had water. According to officials, NASA planned to provide US$15 million to continue the rovers’ operations, doubling the mission’s duration at less than 2 percent of the overall mission’s cost.(NASA, “NASA Extends Mars Rovers’ Mission,” news release 04-122, 8 March 2004.)
A commission composed of officials from ESA and the British National Space Centre released the results of their investigation into the loss of the Beagle 2 spacecraft, the first European spacecraft designed to explore the surface of Mars. On 19 December 2003, the Beagle 2 had successfully separated from ESA’s Mars Express, the spacecraft that had carried the Beagle 2 to its orbit of Mars. However, subsequently, Beagle 2 had failed to send any signals to mission engineers, and its eventual fate remained unknown. Although its report did not identify any single technical issue that had caused the mission loss, the investigating panel did provide 19 recommendations for future missions. These recommendations, implicitly critical of the Beagle 2 mission, suggested that future missions should have adequate funding and adequate testing, and that an agency with appropriate capabilities and resources should manage the missions.
ESA’s Mars Express orbiter relayed information between ground-based NASA engineers and NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, the first in-orbit communication between ESA and NASA spacecraft and the first successful international communications network outside of Earth. As part of their general efforts to cooperate in space exploration, the two space agencies had planned the information relay to enable future cooperative use of their communications technologies during Mars missions. In this particular communication sequence, Spirit’s operation personnel at NASA’s JPL transferred commands for the rover to ESA’s Space Operations Centre in Germany, which then transmitted the instructions to the Mars Express. The Express successfully commanded Spirit and, subsequently, relayed telemetry information from the rover to JPL via the Space Operations Centre.(NASA, “International Interplanetary Networking Succeeds,” news release 04-060, 12 February 2004.)
NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity landed on Mars nearly three weeks after its twin rover Spirit had landed on the planet. NASA had created the two mobile robotic rovers to explore rocks and soils on Mars to determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to sustain life. NASA had designed the mission so that the rovers would explore Mars simultaneously, on nearly opposite sides of the planet.(NASA, “NASA Hears from Opportunity Rover on Mars,” news release 04-037, 25 January 2004.)
ESA reported that Mars Express had discovered the first direct evidence of water on Mars. Whereas some previous research had suggested that water might be present on Mars, Mars Express had detected the presence of actual water ice covered by a layer of frozen carbon dioxide at the planet’s south pole. The spacecraft had also found that the amount of carbon dioxide in Mars’s atmosphere was inadequate to have warmed the planet sufficiently for the formation of liquid water and the support of life on the planet’s surface. Scientists regarded the findings as crucial in determining whether Mars could have supported life in the past.(ESA, “Mars Express Sees Its First WaterScientific Results,” ESA news release 6-2004, 23 January 2004; Jean- Pierre Bibring, “Perennial Water Ice Identified in the South Polar Cap of Mars,” Nature 428, no. 6983 (8 April 2004): 627–630.)
NASA announced it would undergo an internal reorganization to meet its new objectives under the Vision for Space Exploration, the blueprint for American space policy that President George W. Bush had released one day before. The reorganization included the creation of a new office to develop a new CEV and other technologies for future missions to the Moon and Mars. NASA named Craig E. Steidle to oversee the new Office of Exploration Systems. Furthermore, NASA renamed its Office of Aerospace Technology, which had previously been responsible for spacecraft development. Under its new nameOffice of Aeronauticsit would have responsibility for developing aviation technologies. J. Victor Lebacqz, former Acting Associate Administrator of the Office of Aerospace Technology, became Associate Administrator of the new Office of Aeronautics.(Patty Reinert, “New NASA Office To Focus on Advancing Bush Space Agenda,” Houston Chronicle, 16 January 2004; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Creating Office for Missions to the Moon and Beyond,” New York Times, 16 January 2004.)
ESA and UK Science Minister Lord David Sainsbury announced that ESA and the United Kingdom would conduct a joint inquiry into the failure of the Beagle 2 Mars lander. ESA Inspector-General René Bonnefoy would oversee the inquiry, which would investigate the reasons for the mission’s failure and establish lessons that ESA could apply in future missions. Beagle 2, a component of ESA’s Mars Express mission, had failed to communicate with ESA after the time of its scheduled landing on Mars on 25 December 2003. The Beagle 2 Management Board had declared the spacecraft lost on 6 February 2004.(ESA, “UK and ESA Announce Beagle 2 Inquiry―Investigation To Learn Lessons from Mars Lander,” ESA news release 9-2004, 11 February 2004.)
NASA succeeded in landing the first of two robotic laboratories on the planet Mars. The robotic rover Spirit was one of two mobile laboratoriesMars Exploration Roversthat NASA had designed to collect and analyze geological samples on Mars. Analysis of the samples would help scientists determine whether the planet had previously possessed water and the ability to support life. The twin rovers, part of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program, would land at sites on opposite sides of the planet, where scientists believed that liquid water might have existed in the past. To conduct geological research on the planet, NASA scientists had equipped each rover with a microscopic imager, a panoramic camera, and a variety of spectrometers. NASA had scheduled Opportunity, the second rover, to land on Mars later in January.(NASA, “Spirit Lands on Mars and Sends Postcards,” news release 2004-003, 4 January 2004; NASA, “Mars Exploration Rover Mission: Summary,” http://marsrover.nasa.gov/overview/ (accessed 11 January 2009).)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bush’s new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The President’s Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Exploration’s goals―to explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, “NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business,” New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASA’s new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASA’s lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASA’s programs, including formulating the programs’ scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist,” news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
a comet’s nucleus and to place a probe on a comet’s surfaceto study the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. Rosetta, equipped with solar arrays spanning 105 feet (32 meters) and relying on solar cells for its power supply, was also the first probe designed to travel past Mars. Scientists hoped that, in studying comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenkoa remnant of a primitive nebula from which Earth’s solar system emergedRosetta would help them understand more about the role of comets in forming the solar system and contributing to the development of life on Earth.(ESA, “Rosetta Begins Its 10-Year Journey to the Origins of the Solar System,” ESA news release 14-2004, 2 March 2004; Warren E. Leary, “Intricate European Mission Goes Hunting for a Comet,” New York Times, 24 February 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
