2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
Participants in a simulated mission to Mars, the Mars-500 project at the Russian Institute of Biomedical Problems (IMBP) in Moscow, completed a 105-day session locked in a series of hermetically sealed tubes. The project was a joint venture between ESA and the IMPB. In addition to the isolation, the simulation experiment included communication delays of up to 20 minutes and unexpected emergency situations. Since 31 March 2009, the Mars-500 crew, comprising four Russians, a German soldier, and a French airline pilot, had conducted approximately 70 experiments testing psychological and physical reactions to long-term isolation. The international team of scientists, representing Europe and the United States, was seeking ways to help subjects avoid mental breakdowns and other consequences that could result from prolonged monotony. For this experiment, researchers locked participants into a Soviet-era isolation chamber and observed their responses. Mission physician Aleksei V. Baranov described daily life for the crew members participating in the experiment, explaining that their work did not stop from day to day. During the rare moments when a crew member was free to relax, he remembered that he was away from home, far from loved ones, and that the schedule required that he wake up early to work every day. Baranov added that individuals find preparing for unceasing, monotonous work psychologically difficult. The experiment was the precursor to a longer simulation planned for early 2010, in which the researchers planned to isolate another six- member crew in the same capsule for 520 days.
Global Aerospace Corporation announced that it had received funding through NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program to develop a Hypersonic Control Modeling and Simulation Tool (HyperCMST) focusing on a type of ballute (balloon plus parachute). Goodyear Aerospace had invented the large, inflatable devices in 1958, to enable the use of atmospheric drag to decelerate spacecraft. However, unlike most ballute concepts, HyperCMST would encompass more than a drag-only device with no steering capability. Global Aerospace intended to use the HyperCMST to develop a new type of ballute, called a lifting-towed-toroidal ballute. A spacecraft could be able to steer the toroidal ballute using tethers between the spacecraft and the ballute. For example, a ballute-assisted orbit capture of a lander vehicle above the surface of Mars would use a toroidal ballute and inflation tubes connected to the lander via multiple tethers. The spacecraft would tow the ballute using tethers, rather than using some form of rigid attachment device. The spacecraft would jettison the ballute once it had achieved the desired capture orbit. The tethers, which the spacecraft could manipulate, would create aerodynamic lift, making control of the ballute system possible.(Global Aerospace Corporation, “Control of Hypersonic Vehicles for Planetary Capture and Entry Missions,” news release 15 April 2009, http://www.gaerospace.com/press-releases/apr2009.html (accessed 23 May 2011); Bill Christensen, “Ballutes Studied for Hypersonic Space Vehicles,” Space.com, 21 April 2009, http://www.space.com/ 6602-ballutes-studied-hypersonic-space-vehicles.html (accessed 24 May 2011).)
NASA announced that a team of NASA and university scientists had achieved the first definitive detection of methane in the Martian atmosphere, confirming that Mars is either biologically or geologically active. Using NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility and the W. M. Keck telescope at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the team had detected three spectral features called absorption lines—a definitive signature of methane. Michael J. Mumma of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, lead author of an article in Science Express, explained that the Martian atmosphere quickly destroys methane in a number of ways. According to Mumma, the discovery of substantial plumes of methane in the northern hemisphere of Mars in 2003 indicated that an ongoing process was releasing the gas. The plumes had dispersed, covering the entire planet, and had dissipated within three years. Mumma explained further that the research team did not have enough information to determine whether a biological process, a geological process, or a combination of the two was producing the methane.(NASA, “Discovery of Methane Reveals Mars Is Not a Dead Planet,” news release 09-006, 15 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-006_Mars_Methane.html (accessed 14 January 2011); Dan Vergano, “Methane Plumes Spotted on Mars May Be a Sign of Life,” USA Today, 16 January 2009.)
NASA and Google announced the release of the new Mars mode in Google Earth, the latest benefit to result from a Space Act Agreement that NASA’s ARC had signed with Google in November 2006. The Agreement established a collaborative effort intended to make NASA data sets available to the world. The Mars mode provided a rich, immersive three-dimensional view of Mars, to help the public understand Mars science while simultaneously providing researchers with a platform for sharing data, much as Google Earth did for Earth scientists. NASA and its partners—Google, Carnegie Mellon University, Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), and other institutions—had produced the data to make the Mars mode in Google Earth possible.(NASA, “NASA and Google Launch Virtual Exploration of Mars,” news release 09-024, 2 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-024_Google_Mars_map.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA announced that it had selected the two scientific investigations that NASA would undertake in partnership with ESA. NASA and ESA planned to use NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) of radio telescopes to track part of ESA’s ExoMars mission, scheduled to launch in 2016. ESA’s ExoMars mission consisted of a fixed lander and a rover that would collect soil samples on Mars for detailed analysis. The Lander Radio-Science on ExoMars (LaRa) would relay data from the lander back to the DSN, enabling scientists to measure and to analyze variations in the length of the day and in the location of the planet’s rotational axis. The ExoMars mission data would help researchers further dissect the structure of the Martian interior, including the size of Mars’s core. For the second investigation, named Strofio, ESA and NASA would use a unique mass spectrometer. Part of ESA’s BepiColombo mission, scheduled for launch in 2013, Strofio would determine the mass of atoms and molecules, helping to reveal the composition of Mercury’s atmosphere. NASA had selected LaRa and Strofio from among eight proposals that researchers had submitted in December 2008, in response to NASA’s new Stand Alone Mission of Opportunity (Salmon). NASA had required Salmon proposals to address planetary scientific research objectives for nonagency missions and to accomplish scientific research goals, including data archiving and analysis, for less than US$35 million. Scientists expected LaRa to cost US$6.6 million and Strofio, US$31.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Future Projects To Study Mars and Mercury,” contract release C09-020, 4 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09_020_NASA_Salmon_Awards.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
NASA and Microsoft Corporation announced plans to make planetary images and data available to the public via the Internet under a Space Act Agreement. The project required NASA and Microsoft jointly to develop the technology and infrastructure necessary to enable the public to explore NASA content using the WorldWide Telescope, Microsoft’s online virtual telescope for exploring the universe. Online since 2008, WorldWide Telescope combined images from ground- and space-based telescopes to simulate the experience of peering into the cosmos. The agreement directed NASA’s ARC in Moffett Field, California, to process and host more than 100 terabytes of data, which WorldWide Telescope would incorporate later in 2009. The data would feature imagery from NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which NASA had launched in 2005 to examine Mars using several instruments, including a high-resolution camera. Since 2006, MRO had returned more data than all other Mars missions combined. NASA planned to launch its Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) in May 2009. After LRO images became publicly available later in 2009, NASA intended to include those images in the WorldWide Telescope project. The agreement built on a prior collaboration with Microsoft, in which NASA had developed three-dimensional, interactive Microsoft Photosynth collections of the Space Shuttle launchpad and other KSC facilities.(NASA, “NASA and Microsoft To Make Universe of Data Available to the Public,” news release 09-067, 24 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-067_Microsoft_WorldWide_ Telescope.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Microsoft’s WorldWide Telescope To Focus on Mars,” 25 March 2009.)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the system’s artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Division’s Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASA’s Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
Based on data that NASA’s rover Opportunity had collected in the Victoria impact crater, researchers reported new findings in the journal Science, providing further evidence that water had once existed on Mars. Before arriving at Victoria, Opportunity had explored the Eagle and Endurance craters, revealing distinctive sediment layers in Endurance, along with evidence that water had been a factor in actively shaping those layers. Scientists had decided to send Opportunity to Victoria because of the crater’s 400-foot (122-meter) depth. They hoped that exploration of Victoria would shed more light on the Meridiani Planum region. Opportunity had spent two years driving along the crater’s edge and then had traveled down into the crater. The rover had found layers of sulfate-rich sandstone like that of the Endurance crater, “with evidence that water had weathered away minerals in the rocks, then evaporated, leaving behind salts that eventually solidified into rocks again.” The findings indicated that water had acted at both the Endurance and the Victoria sites, suggesting that water had acted across the entire Meridiani region. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Lead Scientist for the Mars Exploration Rover Project, remarked that this evidence was probably the most significant finding of the Victoria expedition.(Andrea Thompson, “Entire Region of Mars Likely Shaped by Water,” Space.com, 21 May 2009, http://www. space.com/6739-entire-region-mars-shaped-water.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Jessica Berman, “NASA Scientists Find More Evidence of Water on Mars,” Voice of America, 22 May 2009.)
