Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator, announced that communications satellites developed by private companies on a commercial basis would be launched by NASA at cost to assist private Industry in developing a communications network.
,000	to 6,000 miles) active communications satellite development to "stimulate those developments which promise early benefits to cur citizens.”
Navy TRANSIT II-A, an experimental navigation satellite with two payloads (navigation and radiation measurement), successfully launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star vehicle. This was the first time that two Instrumented satellites have been placed Into orbit at the same time. (See Appendix A.)
First known weather observation sateUlte, TIROS I (Television Infra-Red Observation Satellite), launched Into orbit by Thor-Able, and took pictures of earth’s cloud cover on a global scale from 450 miles above until June 29. TIROS I was balled as ushering In “a new era of meteorological observing.” (See Appendix A.)
MIDAS II test satellite successfully launched into orbit from AMR by an Atlas-Agcnn launch vehicle, a test of an USAF surveillance system designed to provide warning of long-rango missile launching, the first anti-missile early-warning satellite.
Space Technology Labora-tories was selected by NASA for contract negotiations for an orbiting geophysical observatory (OGO) satellite program. To be managed by GSFC, OGO will be NASA's first standardized satellite, often referred to as the "streetcar" satellite, capable of placing 50 different geophysi-cal experiments on any one flight.
Explorer satellite launched by Juno II but did not orbit.
NASA’s ECHO X, the first passive communications satcUite, successfully launched Into orbit by a Thor-Delta. It reflected a radio message from tbe President across the Nation, thus demonstrating the feasibility of global radio communications via satellites. Tbe 100-foot-diameter aluminized Mylar-plastic sphere was the most visible and largest sateiUte launched to date. (See Appendix A.)
Wirephoto of President Eisenhower transmitted from Cedar Rapids, Iowa, to Dallas, Tex., via ECHO I satellite.
NASA and Wenther Bureau issued joint Invitation to scientists of 21 nations to participate in meteorological research connected with future Tiros satellite.
FCO received formal application of American Telephone & Telegraph for authority to operate a communications satellite.
While over Blossom Point, Md., simultaneously with a Class 1 solar flare, TRANSIT II-A satellite transmitted 6 minutes of clear reception showing history of development of ultraviolet and X-ray emission in relation to ionospheric behavior and to solar-radio noise.
IGY Warning Center reported that solar flares were causing “extremely severe" magnetic disturbance of the earth’s atmosphere, an event detected by EXPLORER VII and later analyzed as greatest burst of solar radiation in tbe satellite’s 13 months of operation.
To date, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had photographed approximately 17,200 satellite passages with the Baker-Nunn Optical Network, and had recorded 17,000 visual observations by Moonwatch.
EXPLORER VIII launched into an eUlptlcal orbit from AMR by four-stage Juno It, containing instrumentation for detailed measurements of tbe ionosphere. This was tbe 10th time that JPL-developed upper stage rocket clusters had successfully placed satellites or deep space probes into orbit. (Sec Appendix A.)
Atmosphere entry simulator at NASA Ames Research Center completed first successful launch and recovery of test model launched at satellite speed of 17,000 mph. First proposed by A. Eggers In 1955, lt bad previously provided important Information at ballistic speeds. Throughout 1959-00, Ames scientists contributed to understanding of flight characteristics nt altitudes over 100 miles, using low density research apparatus. During 1960: NASA Lewis Re-, search Center completed flight safety research program involving over 30 full-scale experimental crushes and laboratory studies leading to improved criteria for survivability.
Rate of spin of TIROS I satellite was Increased by ground command.
TRANSIT III-A navlga- . tlon satellite, with two Instrumented pay-loads, was destroyed 40 minutes after launch from AMR by Thor-Ablc-Star booster. During November: Under arrangements of tbe AACB (Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board), NASA will utilize existing NASA tracking stations for initial Ceutaur development vehicles and switch to the Advent network (which Is to be planned, funded, and constructed by DOD) when Centaur is operational, perhaps ns early as tbe fourth of 10 development launchings of Centaur.
Attempt to launch a Beacon satellite with a four-stage solld-propeUant Scout from Wallops Station did not succeed due to failure of second stage.
Scientists from Great Britain and NASA completed a series of meetings leading to planning for British scientific satellite to be flown on a Scout vehicle.
Navy TRANSIT I-B launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star with navigation payload experiment at Cape Canaveral. Flight demonstrated the first engine restart In space and the feasibility of using satellites as navigational aids. (See Appendix A.)
Japanese Space Development Connell recommended initiation of basic studies for launching an earth satellite.
Delegates of 11 Western European nations approved an agreement aimed at establishing an organization for space research. Proposed intergovernmental agency would concentrate on satellites rather than rockets for launch vehicles.
Department of Defense announced that "mystery satellite” in near-polar orbit since last January may be ejected DISCOVERER V recovery capsule launched August 1959.
Bell Telephone outlined to FCO a plan for worldwide service based upon a network of 50 satellites In polar orbit at 3,000-mile altitude.
Post Office Department transmitted a “speed mall'1 letter from Washington to Newark, N.J., by bouncing microwave transmission off ECHO I. Early November: NASA-DOD Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board (AACB) and cognizant members agreed that NASA could drop tbe tracking light geodetic satellite and utilize other space projects to obtain geodetic data for tbe scientific community.
To date, the United States had successfully launched 31 earth satellites (9 of 16 still In orbit were still transmitting) and 2 deep space probes into orbit around the sun. The U.S.S.R. bad launched seven satellites (one of which remained in orbit) and one deep space probe. Tbe U.S.S.R. had also launched one lunar Impact mission (LUNIK II), while LUNIK III had passed once around tbe moon and then went into earth orbit before decaying. During 1960: World Lata Center A, Rockets and Satellites, of tbe National Academy of Sciences, continued to provide a means for international exchange of scientific data.
The 300-kw(e) static reactor electric power system attained first criticality. SNAP 10, utilizing thermoelectric conversion with no moving parts, was being developed for satellite application.
COURIER I-B active communications satellite successfully placed into orbit by Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from Cape Canaveral. After completing one orbit it received and recorded a transcribed message to the United Nations by President Eisenhower transmitted from Fort Monmouth, N.J., and retransmitted it to another earth station lu Puerto Rico. This marked the 100th launch of the Douglas Thor, military and scientific combined, and a Thor record of 60 percent of the U.S. satellites boosted into orbit.
Interagency meeting on the establishment of an operational metero-loglcal satellite system was held at NASA Headquarters.
Joint NASA-AEC Nuclear Propulsion Office (NPO) created at Germantown, Md., with Harold B. Finger as Manager. During August: NASA suspended work on geodetic satellite program pending determination of whether it was to be a civilian or military program.
TIROS II weather satellite launched by Thor-Delta at AMR, the 14th successful U.S. satellite launched to date in 19G0. (Sec Appendix A.)
Echo satellite, a 100-foot passive reflector sphere, faUed to orbit with first complete three-stage Thor-Delta launch vehicle.
First letter carried by satellite mall (31 orbits and a distance of about a million miles), a letter from USAF Chief of Staff to the Secretary of Defense carried In capsule recovered from DISCO VBRER XVII.
DOB announced that NASA, USAF, USA, and USN were jointly building a geodetic satellite to map the earth accurately.
TIROS I weather satellite spotted a tornado storm system In the vicinity of Wichita FaUs, Tex.
First manmade object recovered from an orbiting satellite, the 65-pound instrumented capsule of DISCOVERER XIII recovered from the ecean off Hawaii after 16 orbits. Silken 50-star American flag it carried was presented to the President on August 15.
United States and Britain announced cooperative satellite project using a Scout launch vehicle and several British experiments.
