Three-day meeting of Satellite Panel of the World Meteorological Organization concluded at Washington, D.C., minus participation by the Soviet member.
In press conference at Hyannis Port, Mass., U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson, said: “Russia’s scientific contribution to the conquest of outer space commands our admiration. Orbiting a new astronaut for a longer period of time is another step forward * * * this event [Vostok II] sharpens the need for some international action to regulate the use of outer space for peaceful purposes, and to keep the arms race from spreading to that field. The President has recently announced his proposal for cooperative sharing of communications and weather satellites. We hope the Russians won’t delay longer in joining us in cooperation.”
Unnamed USAF satellite launched from Point Arguello, Calif. The announcement said it was powered by an Atlas-Agena B combination and that the satellite was “carrying a number of classified test components.”
USAF launched an unnamed satellite with an Atlas-Agena booster from Point Arguello, Calif., in first unannounced U.S. satellite launching.
President Kennedy directed the National Aeronautics and Space Council to undertake a full study of the Nation’s communications satellite policy, stated that leadership in science and technology should be exercised to achieve worldwide communications through the use of satellites at the earliest practicable date. While no commitments as to an operational system should be made, the President stated that the Government would “conduct and encourage research and development to advance the state of the art and to give maximum assurance of rapid and continuing scientific and technological progress.”
NASA outlined specifications for a low-altitude active communications satellite Project Relay at Goddard Space Flight Center.
NASA Juno II launched S-45 I ionosphere beacon satellite which did not achieve orbit due to malfunction shortly after booster separation.
Explorer XIII (S-55A) placed into orbit by NASA Scout from Wallops, a micrometeorite counting satellite developed by Langley Research Center and Goddard Space Flight Center.
West German Post Office indicated that it would construct near Munich a ground station capable of handling up to 600 phone calls simultaneously for operations in late 1963 or early 1964 with Telstar and Relay type satellites.
NASA Administrator Webb, in congressional testimony, pointed out that the Tiros cloud-cover program was known to the entire world, involved no surveillance, and promised great benefit to all nations. He pointed out that data from Tiros satellites had been made available to all, including the Soviet Union.
USAF announced that amateur radio communications satellite, assembled by Project Oscar Association, would be flown piggyback in future Discoverer vehicle.
Navy Transit IV-B and Traac (Transit Research Attitude Control) satellites launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star at Atlantic Missile Range.
In Scout launching of micrometeorite counter satellite (S-55) from Wallops Station, third stage did not ignite, and the vehicle was destroyed.
Industry proposal to FCC for organizing a commercial communications satellite system critically reviewed in hearings of the Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Committee.
Recovery of capsule of Discoverer XXXI was called off as capsule and satellite (launched Sept. 17, 1961) failed to separate and both remained in orbit.
Discoverer XXXVI was launched by the USAF into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., with a piggyback 10-pound Oscar (orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio) satellite aboard in addition to the Discoverer payload. Oscar was the first satellite built by private citizens to be put in orbit, transmitted Morse signal to world amateur radio operators.
White House issued statement by President Kennedy on “Communication Satellite Policy,” which outlined governmental responsibilities for research and development “to give maximum assurance of rapid and continuous scientific and technological progress,” and which affirmed that “private ownership and operation of the U.S. portion of the system is favored” within eight policy requirements. The President’s statement said that through this country’s leadership, communications through the use of space satellites should be developed “for global benefit at the earliest practicable date.” He invited “all nations to participate in a communication satellite system in the interest of world peace and closer brotherhood among peoples throughout the world.” And, during present phase of research and development, “no arrangements between the Government and private industry [should] contain any commitments as to an operational system.” In conclusion, the President said that “I am anxious that development of this new technology to bring the farthest corner of the globe within reach by voice and visual communication, fairly and equitably available for use, proceed with all possible promptness.”
NASA entered letter contract with RCA for four additional Tiros weather satellites to extend the program.
Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testified before the House Appropriations Committee that getting the same information contained in the cloud structure photographs taken by the Tiros I weather satellite would have required thousands of weather ships over the Pacific. With Tiros I, he said, “for the first time man had a complete look at the weather over a large segment of the Earth’s surface.”
An Atlas intended for 9,000-mile flight into the Indian Ocean plunged into the Atlantic only 200 miles from Cape Canaveral. Mid-March: Up to this time, approximately 78 percent of the wide-angle photographs relayed from Tiros II (weather satellite) were considered usable for current weather analysis.
NASA and United Kingdom agreed to establish joint program to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
NASA announced that the first station in a network of data-gathering stations for use with second-generation satellites had been completed near Fairbanks, Alaska. Site for the second of the $5 million installations, each with a high-gain antenna 85 feet in diameter, was announced to be Rosman, N.C., 40 miles southwest of Asheville.
Orientation of Tiros II made it impossible to obtain Northern Hemisphere pictures and malfunctions made remote picture taking undesirable, so that use of satellite’s cameras was suspended until orbit precession again made Northern Hemisphere pictures possible.
Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, Harlan Cleveland, outlined in a speech at St. Louis University the seven-point program that the United States will propose to the United Nations General Assembly for guaranteeing peace and world cooperation in space: (1) Explicit confirmation that the U.N. Charter applies to the limits of space exploration; (2) a declaration that space and heavenly bodies are not subject to claim of national sovereignty; (3) an international system for registering of all objects launched into space; (4) a specialized space unit in the United Nations Secretariat ; (5) a world weather watch using satellites; (6) a cooperative search for ways toward weather modification; and (7) a global system of communications to link the world by telegraph, telephone, radio, and television.
In a letter to the President, 35 Members of Congress urged that a decision on the Nation’s satellite communication system be delayed to determine “whether such a system should be publicly or privately owned and under what circumstances.”
Over 100 foreign weather services were invited jointly by NASA and the U.S. Weather Bureau to participate in the Tiros III experiment for a 9-week period beginning today. The program provides cooperating services with an opportunity to conduct special meteorological observations synchronized with passes of the satellite.
In reviewing NASA’s communications satellite programs, Administrator Webb pointed out that it had been speculated that the satellite system “may have progressed enough by 1964 that we shall be able to watch the Tokyo Olympic Games on television at home.”
At 280th session of disarmament conference at Geneva, Arthur H. Dean presented U.S. proposal that a system of space satellites for patrolling a ban on nuclear testing be fully operational 6 years after ratification of such a ban. Such a space patrol could “open up a new frontier of knowledge for the benefit of mankind.”
Navy Transit III-B with Lofti piggyback satellite placed into orbit by Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle, but satellites did not separate.
NASA and Weather Bureau invited over 100 of the world’s weather services to participate in the Tiros III satellite experiment by conducting special ground-based observations synchronized with passes of the satellite.
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a speech in Cleveland that the United States would follow its first manned orbital flight in January 1962 with similar manned orbital flights every 60 days. These would gather data on effects of weightlessness, needed to determine the pacing of the two-man flight program later on. Mr. Webb also forecast the launching of 200 sounding rockets, 20 scientific satellites, and 2 deep-space probes in 1962.
France announced plans to launch its first satellite by the end of 1964.
French Foreign Ministry announced that West German Government had agreed in principle to participate in 12-nation program to construct launch satellites.
James E. Webb nominated as Administrator of NASA by President Kennedy. January 30-February 2: Conference of 12 European nations held at Strasbourg to discuss a British and French proposal for a European satellite launcher development program.
Congress appropriated funds to the U.S. Weather Bureau for implementation of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. To phase in as early as technology warrants and to continue expanding the operational capability through the early Nimbus launchings by NASA, the system planned to be fully operational by 1966 as Nimbus system became operational. The system would include data acquisition stations in northern latitudes, communications for transmitting the data, and a National Meteorological Center to receive, process, analyze, and disseminate the derived information over domestic and international weather circuits.
Project Ice Way was established near Thule by the Geophysics Research Directorate of the Cambridge Research Laboratories to test the feasibility of landing heavy aircraft on ice runways. The tests, completed in June 1961, demonstrated the strength and other engineering qualities of the ice runways constructed of natural sea water or reinforced with strands of Fiber-glas. Early January: Because of the danger of a power drain in connection with remote (tape recorder) operation, the wide-angle camera of Tiros II was turned on only for direct readout, while satellite passed over Fort Monmouth and Point Arguello.
Nine-nation Western European Conference in London announced decision to launch a satellite in mid-1965, using a British Blue Streak first stage, a French Veronique second stage, and a West German third stage, from the Woomera range in Australia.
Vice President Johnson announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council had reached unanimous agreement on the national communications satellite policy, and unspecified recommendation transmitted to President Kennedy.
FCC first allocated radio frequencies to private industry (ITT) for experiments in bouncing signals off the Moon and artificial satellites.
Scientists from the United Kingdom and NASA announced agreement on the scientific instrumentation of a second United Kingdom satellite to be launched by NASA with a Scout vehicle..
First test inflation of 135-foot rigidized inflatable balloon • satellite hi' ■dirigibte’>bang&T, conducted by NASA Langley Research Center and G. T. Schjeldahl Co. at Weeksville, N.C.
White House statement of President Eisenhower issued, stating that “the early establishment of a communication satellite system which can be used on a commercial basis is a national objective.”
NASA ■''selected. RCA to construct the Relay experimental communications satellite to test the feasibility of transoceanic telephone, telegraph, and television communications using an active repeater satellite.
President Kennedy stated in his state of the Union address to Congress: “This administration intends to explore promptly all possible areas of cooperation with the Soviet Union and other nations ‘to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors.’ Specifically, I now invite all nations—including the Soviet Union—to join with us in developing a weather prediction program, in a new communication satellite program, and in preparation for probing the distant planets of Mars and Venus, probes which may some day unlock the deepest secrets of the universe.”
Navy told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that Polaris could be used as a mobile satellite launch vehicle.
DOD announced that the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) had selected Space Technology Laboratory (STL) to develop satellite system under Project Vela for detection of clandestine nuclear weapons in outer space.
In article in New York Times, Mr. George J. Feldman, consultant to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined several areas of international space law that urgently require solution, including sovereignty in space, liability for damage from spacecraft, conflicts of interest arising from space experiments, sovereignty claims on celestial bodies, and the international allocation of satellite radio frequencies. Communications satellites make latter point particularly critical, as well as posing an unprecedented problem in American contract and antitrust law.
Senate Small Business Committee concluded critical hearings on the FCC’s handling of the communications satellite project.
First launching of three active satellites in one shot, and the first launching of a satellite with nuclear power, when a Thor-Able-Star launched Transit IV-A (equipped with an atomic radioisotope-powered battery of the Snap series), and two accompanying satellites, Injun and Greb III, from Atlantic Missile Range. Transit IV is forerunner of a navigation satellite system, while Injun gathers data on the radiation belts, and Greb III gathers data on X-ray radiation from the Sun.
NASA Argo D-4 launched from Wallops Station carried United States-Canadian topside sounding satellite payload to 560-mile altitude.
NASA awarded contract to General Electric for an investigation of means of storing solar heat energy in satellites.
Midas III (missile defense alarm system) launched into polar orbit from Pacific Missile Range, with record 1,850-mile-high orbit and was heaviest U.S. satellite launched to date. Second-stage Agena B was restarted at apogee of first orbit.
Project West Ford received approval in National Aeronautics and Space Council policy statement released at the National Academy of Sciences by Presidential Scientific Adviser Jerome B. Wiesner. Conceived at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory, project proposed placement of 350-million copper threads (0.7-inch long and 0.001-inch diameter) into a 5-mile wide and 24-mile long belt around the Earth from a satellite, which would serve as reflector antennas for extremely short wave lengths (8,000 megacycles), perhaps expanding usable frequency channels.
NASA Explorer IX placed in orbit by four-stage Scout booster from Wallops Station, the first satellite launching from Wallops, and the first satellite boosted by a solid-fuel rocket. Explorer IX was a 12-foot diameter sphere after inflation at orbital altitude.
Capsule of Discoverer XXXII recovered by C-130 piloted by Capt. Warren Schensted, U.S. Air Force, the sixth aerial recovery of an ejected satellite capsule and Schensted’s second catch. Capsule contained test objects including seed corn.
Explorer XIII, popularly referred to as the “beer can satellite” because of its micrometeorite counting structure, completed its 15th orbit.
Kordylewski, of the Cracow Observatory in Poland, was reported to have photographed two cloudlike objects, possibly natural satellites of the Earth.
Secretary of Defense McNamara issued directive (5160.34) assigning research, development, and operational responsibilities for DOD reconnaissance, mapping, and geodetic programs. The USAF was assigned responsibility for reconnaissance satellite systems as well as research and development of instrumentation and data processing associated with these satellite systems. The U.S. Army was assigned responsibility for establishment and management of a worldwide master geodetic control system, and necessary R. & D. and library support, while the USAF was made responsible for launch and recovery of geodetic payloads. The U.S. Navy was assigned responsibility for R. & D. and operation of all oceanographic and geodetic programs at sea.
With successful launch of Explorer XII on August 15, NASA Delta launch vehicles had successfully launched five satellites out of six attempts, the only failure being the first attempt. Delta’s high reliability record began with Echo I on August 12, 1960, and includes Tiros II and III, and Explorers X and XII. Built by prime contractor Douglas Aircraft, the NASA Delta launch vehicle consists of a Thor first stage (Rocketdyne MB-3 liquid engine), Aerojet-General second stage (AJ-10-118, an improved Vanguard second stage), and an ABL third stage (X-248 spin-stabilized version of Vanguard third stage).
NASA distributed to the world scientific community, through COSPAR, a detailed description of the next planned Beacon satellite experiment.
President Kennedy assigned Vice President Johnson the task of unifying the Nation’s communications satellite programs, in a letter which stressed urgency and “highest priority” for the public interest.
Discoverer XXXII was placed into polar orbit; its capsule contained components of USAF satellite systems. This marked the 100th successful firing of the Thor booster rocket.
NASA announced indefinite suspension of the programing of the wide-angle camera in Tiros II, the experimental weather observation satellite launched on November 23, 1960.
Echo I completed its 3,697th orbit after 9 months. When this first passive communications “balloon satellite” was launched on August 12, 1960, it was not expected to have a long life span.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory scientists reported that Discoverer XVII nose cone (launched November 12, 1960, from Pacific Missile Range) had picked up tritium—product of a solar flare in which hydrogen and helium combine at high energies. While recovered satellite capsules often pick up some tritium, capsule of Discoverer XVII had 100 times the normal amount.
Explorer XII (S-3) placed into highly eccentric orbit by Thor-Delta from Atlantic Missile Range, which would provide detailed evaluation of behavior of energetic particles between 170- and 50-000-mile altitude. Under Goddard Space Flight Center, this “windmill” satellite carried six experiments developed by Ames Research Center, State University of Iowa, University of New Hampshire, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Several days were required to confirm orbit.
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
A.T. & T. stated that it hoped to orbit experimental communications satellite by May 1962, and would share use or ownership of a satellite system with other common carriers.
NASA’s Explorer XII satellite returned voluminous data revising previous information on the Van Allen radiation belts and showing them to be no substantial problem to manned space flight. Launched on August 15, 1961, and transmitting until December 6, 1961, Explorer XII returned information amounting to 5,636 telemetry tapes (2,400 feet each). Of principal interest was its finding that the Van Allen belts consist of a preponderance of protons over electrons in a ratio of 1,000 to 1. Since the protons are of less than 1 million electron volts energy, they do not themselves offer a serious radiation problem and serve to slow the velocity of other radiation.
Varvarov, in Soviet newspaper, Ekonomicheskaya Gazeta, denounced the U.S. space program as using outer space for military purposes and cluttering the cosmos with an unnecessarily large number of satellites. Especially critical of the Discoverer series, the article said: “* * * the United States, pursuing an intensive arms race, is setting up an elaborate system of cosmic military intelligence communications and navigation. * * * Actually, this is banditry on an international scale. * * *”
Senator Robert Kerr announced that he would introduce legislation to authorize private ownership of the U.S. portion of the proposed worldwide communications satellite system. His bill would create the “Satellite Communications Corp.” which the participating firms would buy.
White House released its reply to letter of August 27 signed by 35 Members of Congress which expressed concern over the private ownership of an operational communications satellite system. The White House memorandum stated that “any decisions as to control should preserve as much flexibility as possible,” and reemphasized the administration policies including “maximum competition” in any system of private ownership.
FCC-NASA memorandum of understanding for delineating and coordinating civil communication space activities signed. It stated that “earliest practicable realization of a commercially operable communication satellite system is a national objective.”
Ranger I test satellite of unmanned lunar spacecraft, launched from Atlantic Missile Range by Atlas D-Agena B into low parking orbit, but did not attain its programed eccentric orbit.
At autumn meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Los Angeles, Dr. Hilde Kallmann-Biji reported on Committee on Space Research report by an international studies group on data discovered by Soviet and American satellites as well as sounding rocket observations including those of Britain and West Germany. Findings indicated that 500 miles in space, temperatures may fluctuate 1,000° F., and that the Earth’s upper atmosphere has distinct day and night variations in density and pressure. During October: A series of some 50 supersonic flights to analyze the characteristics, intensity, and air and ground effects of supersonic booms began at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., under joint sponsorship of the USAF, FAA, and NASA.
..... Soviet and bloc delegates from Czechoslovakia and Poland, who had previously accepted invitations, did not attend the NASA-Weather Bureau International Meteorological Satellite Workshop held in Washington; telegram from Andre Zolotukhin received by Dr. Reichelderfer stated that “our representatives unable to participate,” but requested “dispatch of relevant papers if possible.”
NASA and France agreed to establish joint program to test communications satellites to be launched by NASA in 1962 and 1963 in Projects Relay and Rebound.
Three-week meeting of the executive council of the U.N. World Meteorological Organization in Geneva concluded, at which 18 national representatives (including A. A. Zolotoukhin of the U.S.S.R.) discussed general basis for international use of weather satellites. Dr. Francis W. Reich elderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, was a U.S. representative. During May: Army Chemical Corps Biological Laboratories completed preliminary tests of microorganisms in a simulated space vacuum at the National Research Corp.
USAF Samos II, a 4,100-pound test satellite containing photographic equipment, placed in orbit by Atlas-Agena A from Point Arguello, Calif.
NASA announced that it had ordered 14 additional Delta launch vehicles (Douglas Thor first stage, Aerojet-General AJ10-U8 second stage, and Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory third stage) for Relay, Syncom, Telstar, and Tiros satellites. Five of the first six of the twelve Deltas successfully launched Echo I, Tiros II and III, and Explorers X and XII.
NASA Tiros III weather satellite successfully launched into near-circular orbit by Thor-Delta from Cape Canaveral.
NASA negotiated $400,000 contract with G. T. Schjeldahl Co. to design, develop, fabricate, and test rigidized inflatable spheres for Project Echo, the passive communications satellite program.
Explorer XI, a gamma-ray satellite, was successfully launched into orbit by NASA Juno II from Cape Canaveral.
NASA announced negotiation of a contract with Hughes Aircraft for construction of three experimental synchronous communications satellites.
Solar flare studied by Explorer XII and Injun I, readings within a few hours indicated energetic protons with velocities of near 10,000 kilometers per second, while 2 days after the solar flare both satellites saw a sudden increase in the intensity of low-energy protons (c. 10 mev) concurrently with a magnetic storm on Earth and bright aurora at low altitude. It was concluded that low-energy protons traveled slowly from the Sun with the magnetic stormcloud.
NASA and the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. signed a cooperative agreement for the development and testing of two, possibly four, active communication satellites during 1962. A.T. & T. would design and build the TSX satellites at its own expense, and would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launchings by Thor-Delta vehicles at Cape Canaveral. Relationship between this contract and the overall NASA communications satellite program aimed at early development of an operational system was explained at a NASA press conference.
The United States presented an outline for a program for cooperation and control in outer space to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in New York. This was the first committee meeting held since its membership was expanded from 18 to 24 nations by the General Assembly 2 years ago, the 7 Communist members refusing to attend until today. U.N. Delegate Charles W. Yost urged consideration of the U.S. proposals before the life of this Committee expired at the end of the year. The U.S. proposals were: acknowledge that international law and U.N. Charter extend to outer space; establish central registry for all space launchings and satellites; and share all information from weather satellites.
Federal Communications Commission allocated a radio frequency to the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to establish the first space satellite communications link between Europe and the United States on an experimental basis, a program calling for NASA launching of a series of experimental communication satellites capable of relaying telephone calls, television programs, and other messages across the Atlantic.
Four-stage Javelin fired to 560-mile altitude from Wallops Island, testing extension of two 75-foot antenna arms on radio command at altitude, a test flight in the United States-Canadian Alouette satellite development.
Navy announced that Injun and Greb satellites placed in orbit with Transit IV-A had not separated and were thus not functioning at full efficiency. During June: National Academy of Sciences established the Geophysics Research Board (GRB) in 1960 in response to a request from the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). By June 1961, it had four active panels to consider specific international programs: World Magnetic Survey (WMS); International Year of the Quiet Sun (IQSY); International Exchange of Scientific Data; and Solid Earth Problems.
NASA and United Kingdom’s Space Sciences Committee agreed on experiments to be included in the second United Kingdom satellite (launched by NASA’s Scout), the experiments being galactic noise, atmospheric ozone, and micrometeoroids.
Naval Research Laboratory reported that Lofti, small piggyback satellite on Transit III-B launched on February 21, demonstrated that very low frequency radio signals pass through the ionosphere into space, thus opening new area for communications development.
Its instruments recording a magnetic impulse, Explorer X became the first satellite to measure the shock wave generated by a solar flare.
The Ad Hoc Carrier Committee established by the FCC to make an industry proposal on the development and operation of commercial communications satellites recommended a nonprofit corporation be formed, to be owned by companies engaged in international communications, with the U.S. Government having one more representative on the board of directors than any one company. Western Union filed a minority statement proposing a public stock company arrangement to prevent dominance of the corporation by any one company.
First invention award under the authority of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 given to Dr. Frank T. McClure of the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins for his satellite Doppler navigation system, the $3,000 award being presented by NASA Administrator Glennan at NASA headquarters.
Launching of NASA ionosphere beacon satellite (S-45 II) at i Atlantic Missile Range unsuccessful when Juno II power supply failed and prevented ignition of second stage.
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory reported that Echo I satellite may remain in orbit another 3 years.
