Reported in New York Times that U.S. had notified the U.S.S.R. of its willingness to sign an agreement to cooperate in the peaceful exploration and utilization of space. Within the past 3 weeks, U.S. State Department had sent note to Moscow calling for formal signature of a bilateral agreement on joint weather and communications satellites and study of the earth’s magnetic fields.
In Izvestia, Soviet correspondent V. Matveyev said that the background of U.S. satellite telstar showed that progress in the development of productive forces in the U.S. was being usurped by the modern capitalist states in the interests of the monopolies.
Senators Joseph S. Clark of Pennsylvania and Wayne Morse of Oregon, leaders of the Senate opposition to pending communications satellite bill, stated on radio and television interview that they still insisted the communications satellite system must be owned and controlled by the Government. However, they added that they were not committed to Government operation, and that they were “perfectly willing to consider working out a lease or a license” with at&t, rca, or any other communications company.
dod announced plans to support nasa Syncom communications satellite operations in early 1963. U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency (satcom), Ft. Monmouth, N.J., would send signals to activate and test the first U.S. synchronous-orbit satellite.
Technical difficulties with third stage of Thor-Delta booster postponed launching of Oso satellite at amb.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster, from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Filibuster on communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) continued in Senate, with opponents filing between 75 and 100 amendments by noon. An amendment submitted by Senator Wayne Morse would permit “the enlargement of nasa so we can apply to the satellite system the contract, lease, and license system which has permitted the Department of Defense to do such a remarkable job with defense contracts. . . .”
fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow invited U.S.S.R. to cooperate in an international television system using high-altitude communications satellites. A high-altitude system would have advantages over low-altitude system such as Telstar, he said in Look magazine, but “we now lack the launching power to make it go.” He proposed that Soviet rockets be used to launch U.S. communications satellites into high-altitude orbits, and added that “this would be a very dramatic area of cooperation for peaceful purposes in space.”
Pilot course in the practical engineering aspects of space satellites began at Texas a&m College under an agreement with nasa.
Navy Astronautics Group established at pmr its first space satellite command, to operate the Transit navigational satellite system. In addition to the headquarters at Point Mugu, the command will eventually encompass a satellite command and ejection station, computer center, operations control center, and satellite tracking facility at Point Mugu, and other tracking facilities at Winter Harbor, Maine; Minneapolis, Minn.; and Wahiawa on Oahu, Hawaii.
Institute of the Aerospace Sciences awarded: the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, carrying a $5,000 honorarium, to Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center, for his “outstanding leadership in technical development of spacecraft for manned space flight”; the Lawrence B. Sperry Award to Douglas G. Harvey for design, development, and testing of the first two nuclear auxiliary powerplants placed in orbit; and the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award to Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., chief of Vehicle Environment Division at nasa’s Ames Research Center, for his work on solving problems of space vehicle re-entry and alleviating heat problems at hypersonic, satellite, and escape speeds.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended that Project Anna mapping satellite program be transferred from jurisdiction of dod to nasa. The satellite was designed to give extremely accurate measurements of the shape of the earth, its magnetic field, and distances from one point to another on earth.
Successful ground tests of Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) subsystem reported by nasa. To be flight-tested on a Tiros satellite next year, apt would eventually enable weather stations to obtain local cloud-cover pictures directly from orbiting weather satellites, thus making possible a world-wide weather satellite service.
George M. Kohler of General Electric Co. suggested to the iaf meeting in Bulgaria that a worldwide, intensive program be established to use asteroids as scientific bases for space exploration. Kohler estimated that between 10 million and 10 billion objects 30 ft. to 300 ft. in diameter pass within 20 million mi. of the earth each year, and that a good number of them probably come much closer—perhaps within several thousand miles. He called for (1) careful search for closer asteroids with special electronic telescopes; (2) landing unmanned spacecraft on asteroids; and (3) steering asteroids into earth orbit, to be hollowed out and used as manned satellite bases.
Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Systems, told subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that he doubted the launch schedule for first Nimbus satellite could be accelerated and stated that the Nimbus program had never been considered “urgent.”
Dr. S. Fred Singer, director of National Weather Satellite Center, said he was recommending an operational Tiros weather satellite system by next June because of Tiros’ “quite astounding” ability. tiros v was first to spot five of the ten major tropical storms around the world in August. He added that scheduled launch of sixth Tiros satellite would not be delayed by the man-made radiation belt.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee returned the communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) to the Senate floor, after defeating amendments sought by opponents of the bill. Senate filibuster against the communications satellite bill was resumed.
Dr. Harry Wexler, meteorological research director of U.S. Weather Bureau since 1955, died unexpectedly. Holder of distinguished service citations from the Air Force, Navy, Commerce Department, and National Civil Service League, Dr. Wexler had been with the Weather Bureau since 1934. With Col. Floyd Wood as pilot, he made the first aircraft penetration of an Atlantic hurricane, in September 1944. In June 1961, Dr. Wexler and Prof. Viktor A. Bugaev of the U.S.S.R. were principal figures in drafting plans for cooperative use of satellites to improve weather forecasting.
Seven newspaper pages were transmitted by facsimile from Westrex Corp. laboratories, New York; to Andover, Maine; to telstar satellite; and back in successful 12-minute communications experiment.
explorer xiv satellite was launched into orbit by Thor-Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral on mission to study natural and man-made radiation in space, nasa spokesmen said satellite appeared to be following the planned orbital path (53,000-mi. apogee, 185-mi. perigee, 31-hr. period), but scientists could not confirm the exact orbital figures for several days (later confirmed as 61,000-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 36.1-hr. period). The 89-lb. satellite was injected into orbit at nearly 24,000-mph speed by the three-stage Thor-Delta. This was Delta’s 12th straight successful satellite launching.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xi into orbit (572-mi. apogee, 152-mi. perigee, 96.1-min. period); one of series of satellites to study radiation belts, propagation of radio waves in the ionosphere, and the sun.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb.
At nasa press conference, scientists described preliminary scientific results obtained by explorer xii: based on study of 10 per cent of the data, it now appears that instead of the two radiation belts (previously called the inner and outer Van Allen belts) there is one magnetosphere extending roughly from 400 miles above the earth to 30,000 to 40,000 miles out. In this magnetosphere there is only a handful of matter but a very wide range of charged particles trapped by the earth’s magnetic field. Density of electrons is now considered to be 108/cm2/sec as opposed to the 1011 derived from previous satellites. Radiation levels of protons in the lower portion of the magnetosphere were found to be the same as reported by previous satellites, so that the magnetosphere still poses a formidable radiation problem to extended manned flight. At about 10 earth radii the magnetosphere ends abruptly. Above it is an extended area, about 20,000	km. across, of electromagnetic turbulence and featuring very low energy particles on the order of 1 to 20 kilovolts. Beyond this is thought to be true interplanetary space.
usaf announced Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Development would be focal point for space projects within the Air Staff. Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, dc/s for r&d, would be responsible for such projects as Midas, Titan III, Dyna Soar, communications satellites, and nasa liaison and support.
relay satellite’s 136-mc beacon was detected by tracking stations at Santiago, Johannesburg, and Woomera, indicating the beacon spontaneously turned itself on.	_
In his State of the Union message to the Congress, President Kennedy said: “With the approval of this Congress, we have undertaken in the past year a great new effort in outer space. Our aim is not simply to be first on the moon, any more than Charles Lindbergh’s real aim was to be first to Paris. His aim was to develop the techniques and the authority of this country and other countries in the field of the air and the atmosphere. “And our objective in making this effort, which we hope wlli place one of our citizens on the moon, is to develop in a new frontier of science, commerce and cooperation, the position of the United States and the free world. This nation belongs among the first to explore it. And among the first, if not the first, we shall be. “We are offering know-how and cooperation to the United Nations. Our satellites wlli soon be providing other nations with improved weather observations. And I shall soon send to the Congress a measure to govern the financing and operation of an international communications satellite system, in a manner consistent with the public interest and our foreign policy. “But peace in space will help us naught once peace on earth is gone . . . .”
ariel i (S-51), the first international satellite, launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral by Thor-Delta booster. The 132-lb. spacecraft was built by gsfc of nasa and carried six British experiments to make integrated measurements in the ionosphere. Three experiments measured electron density, temperatures, and composition of positive ions in the ionosphere, while two experiments were designed to monitor the intensity of radiation from the sun in the ultraviolet and x-ray bands of the solar corona. The sixth experiment was designed to measure cosmic rays, supported by simultaneous experiments from ground and by aircraft and balloon flights.
French government announced first satellite, weighing 150 lbs., wollid be launched in March 1965 and would be followed by others three and four times as large.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. announced in U.N. their bilateral agreement to cooperate in space exploration programs of weather observation, magnetic-field study, and satellite communications. In meteorology, agreement called for experimental phase extending through 1964 “during the development of experimental weather satellites” by both countries; second phase would begin approximately 1964-65 with coordinated launchings by both countries of weather satellite system for operational use. In magnetic survey, agreement called for U.S. and U.S.S.R. each to launch a satellite equipped with magnetometers during International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), 1964-65. Both countries agreed to use the intervening years to continue their own magnetic measurement research and to exchange the data obtained. In satellite communications, agreement called for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to cooperate during coming year in communications experiments via U.S. passive communications satellite Echo A-12. Future negotiations would consider cooperative efforts in experimental system of active-repeater satellites. Agreement provided that “the results of these cooperative experiments would be made freely available to all interested states,” U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson said. Agreement was product of Geneva negotiations between U.S. team headed by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Soviet team headed by Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, conducted in spring of 1962.
13-min. radio program relayed from New York via telstar satellite to Europe, where it was broadcast by Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty to audiences in U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries. Program featured message on U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear disarmament by Senator Hubert H. Humphrey.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, at Wilton, Conn., stated that peaceful uses of outer space was still the National goal but that the U.S. would be “ill-advised if we did not hedge our bets.” He said that a satellite interception system would get serious attention if another nation was developing such a capability. “We ought to be ready,” he said in a press conference, “to anticipate the ability of the Soviets at some time to use space offensively.”
Signals from ariel satellite had been received during past week by tracking stations, ariel had stopped transmitting after U.S. high-altitude nuclear test because of radiation damage to the satellite’s solar cells. Although resumed transmission was not continuous, it did demonstrate Ariel’s regained capability to return scientific data from space. Transmission apparently occurred whenever the satellite stayed in sunlight long enough for its damaged solar cells to absorb sufficient solar energy to power its electronic equipment.
nasa’s tiros vi weather satellite was placed in orbit by three-stage Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral at 4:45 PM edt (apogee, 442 mi.; perigee, 425 mi.; period, 98.7 min.; inclination, ranging between 58.3° north and south latitude). Orbit was believed too low for satellite’s 9,120 solar cells to be unduly damaged by artificial radiation zone created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July. By midafternoon, pictures taken by tiros vi’s two television cameras were being incorporated with ground data into conventional weather forecasts. Weather Bureau reported quality of the photographs was “as good, if not better than that of any taken by the five previous Tiros satellites.” The launching marked the sixth straight success in Tiros program and the eleventh straight successful satellite launching by the Delta rocket.
Man’s conquest of space accelerated on a broad front. The U.S. achieved manned orbital flight three times, provided man with his first close-up of another planet with mariner ii’s fly-by of Venus, brought global communications a step closer with the orbiting of the first active repeater communications satellite telstar i, and saw the X-15 exceed its design speed and altitude (4,104 mph and 58.7 mi.). U.S.S.R. achieved first dual manned space flight in an effort that racked up an impressive total of 112 orbits, and launched a space probe toward Mars. During the year the U.S. successfully launched a total of 61 satellites, deep-space probes, and probes, the U.S.S.R. 17, accord-according to the U.N. Public Registry. Of the U.S. total, 20 were launched by nasa, 41 by dod.
Sir Bernard Lovell of Jodrell Bank in an interview with London Daily Telegraph:	. . Although the Russians may have [space] superiority purely in the sense of rocketry, the Americans have tremendous superiority over the Russians in their ability to instrument their space vehicles and in the extraction of space information. “If you made an assessment of the scientific information we have obtained about the earth’s environment from space vehicles, you could find that this was very heavily biased in favour of the Americans. They have mounted more sophisticated experiments in their satellites and space probes and they have made them work much better.” During 1962: Dr. Louis Smullni of mit’s Lincoln Laboratories succeeded in detecting a laser reflection from the moon, although at too low a signal level and too long a pulse length for quantitative measurements. This was considered a first step in use of laser reflection for scientific research.
oso i (Orbiting Solar Observatory) was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral, marking the seventh straight success for the Thor-Delta booster. The 458-lb. satellite, with an apogee of 370 mi. and a perigee of 340 mi., immediately began sending back signals on the sun’s radiation in the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma ray regions from its position above the filtering action of the earth’s atmosphere. By an intricate positioning apparatus, oso’s 13 instruments were focused constantly on the sun with a pointing accuracy of 1 minute of arc. This was the first of a series of Osos to be launched by nasa in the next 11-year sun cycle.
Announced that the opening ceremony of the Roman Catholic Church ecumenical council on October 11 would be televised in the Vatican and relayed to the U.S. via telstar satellite. September 20: World’s largest movable radiotelescope, located at National Radio Astronomy Observatory (nrao), Green Bank, W.	Va., was turned on at midnight for the first time. The 300-ft.-diameter telescope, built for $800,000 in about one year, was expected to be trained on Venus as its first operational target.
In speech before the Aviation and Space Writers Association meeting in San Francisco, Dr. Harry Goett, Director of gsfc, reviewed the events in the life of scientific satellites after they are placed into orbit. Once in orbit, he said, a scientific satellite “does not have striking news value. . . . “Except for manned space projects there is no single personality on whom the spotlight can be concentrated; the job of putting together the cosmic jigsaw puzzle of space from the bits and pieces obtained from our satellites is one that engages the effort of many people throughout the scientific community; and this jigsaw puzzle goes together so gradually that there are no singular events which merit a headline. I suspect that there are Nobel prizes in the making, but it is going to be difficult to determine who should get the medal.” Dr. Goett, reviewing the scientific accomplishments in space, said that the general public needs to understand this part of the space effort “on the basis of its real accomplishments and potentialities.” He said that this was a real challenge to the space writers.
Research Center for Celestial Mechanics at Yale University announced by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and the Office of Naval Research, to be headed by Dr. Dirk Brouwer, Director of the Yale Observatory. The facility, to be opened on July 1, will seek new approaches for problems involving earth satellites, lunar and interplanetary probes, and the predetermination of trajectories for interplanetary vehicles.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, told Joint Computer Conference in Philadelphia: “. . . It is no exaggeration to say that we could never have succeeded in orbiting and tracking even the simplest satellite without the availability of computers. . . . And it is certainly true that one of the major pacing elements in our rate of progress toward achieving the national goals in space will be the development of progressively more advanced computers and computer techniques to help cope with the even greater tasks ahead. “. . . [Data processing] systems of the future, as we see them, will involve compatible combinations of computer and ancillary devices, some of which will be spaceborne, some stationed on celestial bodies other than the earth, and some of course wlli still be here on earth. “Such computer systems wlli be required to perform navigational and attitude control tasks; edit and store scientific and engineering data; make calculations of a conventional nature; time sequences of operations; feed displays; and trigger alarms. “A task for the future is to extend . . . [the computer’s pre-launch checkout] function to spacecraft for launching from orbit, for landing on celestial bodies, and for take-off from remote planets for return to earth. . . . What we are looking for are systems which are fully automatic and fast. ... “It is apparent that in general a rather complete distribution range of computing burden wlli exist. In some missions, such as close-to-earth satellite, earthbased computing equipment wlli perform most of the processing required. Other missions, such as one bound for Pluto, will require the autonomous activity of a highly redundant, self-adaptive, self-checking computer complex aboard the spacecraft. “A vital need, therefore, is determination of the optimum nature, disposition and use of computing equipment. ... “Eventually ... we may have large numbers of vehicles simultaneously operating in space. ... In such a situation we wlli need sophisticated and very comprehensive Flight Control Centers, with compatible computer systems aboard the spacecraft, to handle information on flight status, command control, navigation, and program sequences. ...”
A cooperative program for testing Relay and Telstar communications satellites by nasa and communications organizations in the U.S., Europe, and South America was announced by nasa. Providing ground stations and conducting the communications experiments would be at&t, it&t, British General Post Office, French National Center for Telecommunications Studies, West German Post Office, Brazilian Department of Posts and Telegraphs, and Telespazio of Italy. The foreign organizations would participate on a voluntary basis with no exchange of funds by the governments, nasa would provide ground stations with orbital data on the satellites.
Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz said in San Francisco that Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s “extraordinary intransigence” was responsible for deadlocked negotiations with the International Association of Machinists which resulted in two-day strike (iam strikers returned to work today). Three-man board of inquiry appointed by the President began their investigation of the “union shop” conflict. During November: In letter to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb advised Congress of plans to reprogram $10,426,000 in FY 1963 funds to begin construction of facllities at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr). Of this sum, $1,717,000 was needed for Little Joe launch-complex construction; $9,084,000 was for site development and support facilities. During November: Goodyear Aircraft Corp. announced development of tunnel to simulate conditions encountered by satellites, missile nose cones, and recovery packages during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere.
In meeting of U.N. Committee for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. offered to U.S.S.R. a 14-lb. metal chunk, believed to be part of sputnik iv, that had landed in Wisconsin September 5. Soviet delegate to the U.N. Platon D. Morozov rejected the offer, saying “We do not know to whom it belongs.” He said it was not necessary to make dramatic gestures to show that falling satellite fragments could do harm, and charged the U.S. with “dramatic staging” to divert the Committee from Soviet proposals on legal principles for use of outer space. Displaying the chunk following the meeting, U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said the object weighed 20 lbs. when it fell from the sky, but U.S. scientists of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had retained a six-lb. piece for further examination.
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite using a ThorAgena launch vehicle.
usaf launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., a satellite employing a Thor-Agena B booster combination, nasa Satellite Situation Report indicated this satellite attained orbit and decayed on July 7, 1962.	'
Tiros launch at amr postponed due to technical difficulties. February 7: In a special message to the Congress, President Kennedy proposed the creation of a “Communications Satellite Corporation” to be financed through the sale of stock to communications companies and the general public. This privately-owned corporation wollid have the responsibility to develop, own, and operate communications relay stations in space. The President declared that the creation of a satellite communication system wollid be “a measure of immense long-range importance.”
Satellite Communications Corporation” bills were introduced by Senator Robert Kerr (S. 2650) and by Rep. George Miller (H.R. 9696), which would amend the nasa Act by adding a new section which would declare that it is “the policy of the United States to provide leadership in the establishment of a worldwide communications system involving the use of space satellites.” The section would create a “Satellite Communication Corporation” which would be privately owned and managed, and which would develop and operate a communications satellite system.
At Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on the Administration’s FY 1963 budget request for the space program, Dr. Harold Brown, dod Director of Research and Engineering, testified that dod is “developing the technologies which contribute to military and unmanned orbital systems able to rendezvous with satellites and then land at pre-selected locations on earth.” Dr. Brown assured the committee that dod has “no intention to pre-empt those areas which are within the proper purview” of nasa.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Because of this great breadth and scope of space science, and because of the many basic scientific problems that it encompasses, our country must have a sound and vigorous space science program if we intend to maintain our position of leadership in world science . . . “The space science of today is needed to sow the seeds for the harvest of future applications of space knowledge and technology. The weather, communications, and navigation satellites of today grew out of the scientific engineering and research of the past decades. Their perfection, and the development of new applications, will rest upon the space science and engineering of today and the years to come.”
usn transit v-a navigational satellite launched from Point Arguello, Calif., into near-perfect polar orbit (apogee, 395 nautical mi.; perigee, 375 nautical mi.; period, 99.06 min.; inclination, 90.7° to the equator), but satellite’s radio receiver failed to function in first five attempts to transmit data to the satellite, transit v-a was to have been the first operational satellite in system of four satellites, but now it would be useful as test vehicle rather than operational satellite. This was first time in Transit series that the radio command system had failed to work. The satellite was launched into orbit by four-stage Blue Scout rocket by usaf for usn.
General Dynamics/Astronautics announced results of its molecular erosion-rate tests of low-altitude satellites showed erosion due to molecular bombardment was less than one billionth of an inch per year.
nasa announced that echo i, the 100-ft. balloon-type passive commullications satellite launched on August 12, 1960, had recently become increasingly difficllit for observers to see. The sphere now presented olliy ){to its original size, due either to shrinkage or distortion during its year and a half in orbit.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena B from Point Arguello, Calif.
Soviet News Agency Tass reported that cosmos i satellite was transmitting a steady stream of technical data.
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) formally came into being when a convention was signed in London between Great Britain, France, West Germany, and Italy to develop the rocket vehicle to launch a satellite from Woomera, Australia, in 1965. First stage would be the British Blue Streak rocket, second stage the French Veronique, third stage would be developed by West Germany. The Netherlands, Belgium, and Australia were expected to join the organization soon.
nasa scientists reported to cospar session that data from explorer ix indicated that the upper atmosphere was heated by sun spot activity. In 1957 and 1958, when solar activity was at the maximum of its 11.1-year cycle, air density at a height of 350 miles was 10 times higher than in 1961 when activity was nearer its minimum. This suggests that “with a decrease in solar activity the upper atmosphere becomes cooler and shrinks to the earth, so that the air density at a given altitude decreases.” Report on explorer ix, the 12-ft. inflated satellite sensitive to density changes, was made by William J. O’Sullivan, Claude W. Coffee, Jr., and Gerald M. Keating.
usn Transit navigational satellite system was described by Capt. Alton B. Moody (usnr) of nasa, at National Electronics Conference in Chicago. The system of four Transit satellites in polar orbits, to be operational by end of 1962, was designed primarily to provide naval craft with constant, accurate navigational fix around the world.
Dr. James A. Van Allen, Chairman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the State University of Iowa, summarized the satellite and space probe findings about the structure of the geomagnetic field surrounding the earth. Describing the inner zone as relatively stable in intensity of charged particles and caused by a combination of internal and external forces, he said the outer zone showed fluctuations in intensity “by factors of 100 to as much as 1,000,” said these were complexly related to solar flares and geomagnetic storms. The only convincing explanation for the origin of the outer zone yet made is “the capture of ionized solar gas which sweeps by the earth in great clouds from time to time. . . . But the detailed mechanism for producing the observed energy spectrum remains obscure and the nature of this mechanism is perhaps the most interesting unresolved problem in the subject of trapped radiation.”
Dr. Mia G. Masevich, Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Astronomical Council, published first serious mention of echo i in a leading non-technical Russian magazine (Ogonyok). Virtually nothing has been said about echo i in the Soviet press since its launch in August 1960, although it has remained in orbit longer than any Soviet satellite and was visible to Soviet citizens.
Adlai E. Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N., stated in letter to the Senate that the communications satellite bill “provides the President and the executive branch of this Government with adequate control and influence to ensure that the instrument proposed here can be fitted or adapted to an international system when we learn enough to design one.”
anna ib geodetic satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Able-Star vehicle from Cape Canaveral (apogee, 727 mi.; perigee, 670 mi.; inclination, 50° to the equator). Mounted on the 350-lb., 36-in. spherical satellite were four high-intensity lights that would flash on and off; by comparing simultaneous observations of the satellite from various points on earth, scientists could measure earth’s size, shape, and surface features with accuracy never before possible. The light beacons were to be activated by ground command within three days, after orbital data were precisely analysed, anna (Army-Navy-NASA-Air Force) was developed and launched by military services, with Johns Hopkins’ Applied Physics Laboratory as prime contractor; nasa cooperated in tracking and in dissemination of orbital data to the international scientific community for worldwide use of the man-made star for geodetic purposes.
Chairman of fcc, Newton N. Minow, said on “Meet the Press” TV program: “There are some optimists who think we can see the Japanese Olympics in 1964. I would personally think that is stretching it a bit, although the technology certainly will permit us to have a working communications satellite system within three or four years. This is the reason why we are are pushing to have legislation passed—it has passed the House and is now pending in the Senate—to determine national policy as to how the communications system will work. As always in this country technology is ahead of public policy. This time we want to keep our national legislative policy abreast of science.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying before the Senate Committee on Commerce, supported the President’s blli setting up a commullications satellite corporation and approved of the Senate amendments, except for a caution on the one that wollid direct the fcc to encourage communications common carriers to build and own their own ground stations. Mr. Webb summarized nasa's responsibllities under the blli: (1) to advise fcc on the technical characteristics of the system; (2) to advise fcc on the technical feasibility of attaining the desired technical characteristics; (3) to coordinate its space communications r&d work with that of the corporation; (4) to furnish launching facllities, vehicles, and services in connection with the development and operation of the system; (5) to furnish other services on a reimbursable basis; and (6) to advise the Secretary of State on technical feasibllity of the system providing communications service to a particlliar point in the world.
Plans for first live transatlantic TV programs in mid-July announced. To be produced by 3 U.S. networks and the 16-nation European Broadcasting Union (ebu), the programs would be transmitted by at&t’s Telstar satellite.
Re-entry and disintegration of sputnik iv reported by Edward A. Hallbach, director of Milwaukee Astronomical Society. Hall-bach and others observed the satellite as it broke into about 24 pieces, most of which fell from orbit toward Green Bay, Wise., area and Lake Michigan. Law officers in a wide area of northern Wisconsin reported seeing flaming objects at about the same time. sputnik iv was launched by U.S.S.R. on May 15, 1960.
Representative Joseph E. Karth, chairman of a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced that hearings on four communications satellite systems would begin August 15, to determine whether duplication existed among the projects (Relay, Syncom, Advent, and Telstar).
The seven Mercury astronauts were presented with Distinguished Service Awards from the Lower Virginia Peninsula in ceremonies at the Manned Spacecraft Center Hq. at Langley afb, Va. June 2; usaf announced that oscar ii satellite had been launched piggyback on an unidentified satellite on June 1, on behalf of the American Radio Relay League. With a 92-minute period, the 10-lb. satellite broadcasts “Hi” in Morse code on 144.993 megacycles for use by amateur radio operators. Unlike oscar i launched on December 10, 1961, advance notice was not given the Project Oscar Association on the launching of oscar ii.
Senate voted (63-27) to invoke cloture rule on communications satellite debate, cutting off the filibuster against the bill and limiting each Senator to an hour of speaking time.
Testimony of Feb. 27 by Prof. James A. Van Allen before the House Committee on Appropriations on the relative worth of instrumented unmanned satellites versus manned satellites was released. Van Allen was misquoted on the wire news services to the effect that manned space flight was of limited scientific value in the future.
Space science might provide an answer within five years to the question of whether gravitation is growing weaker with time, Dr. Robert H. Dicke, Professor of Physics at Princeton University’s Palmer Physical Laboratory, said in a lecture for the Voice of America. This new theory of gravitation, not in accord with Einstein’s theory of gravitation, could be tested with a satellite that was instrumented to act as a “gravitational clock” and checked against an atomic clock.
Senators Estes Kefauver and Wayne Morse proposed legislation calling for a government-owned corporation to operate space satellite communications network.
usaf announced that an unnamed satellite had been launched by a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Coordination of international arrangements for exchange and dissemination of weather data, including weather satellite information, was on the agenda of the third session of the U.N.’s Commission for Synoptic Meteorology as it opened a 26-day session in Washington. Technical experts from more than 100 nations had been invited.
House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Panel on Science and Technology recommended that Project Anna, dod’s geodetic satellite, be declared an international scientific satellite.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would conduct experiments using laser in tracking S-66 ionosphere beacon satellite, to be launched in polar orbit early next year. Laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) would be tested as “potentially vastly more accurate than current tracking methods and requiring no electrical power from the satellite.” Laser device, emitting beam ){6 of a degree wide, would be mounted on tracking telescope at nasa Wallops Station. Laser signals to satellite would be received on passive reflector and bounced back to earth.
First International Symposium on Rocket and Satellite Meteorology opened in Washington, D.C. Attended bv some 500 delegates from more than 20 nations, the conference was sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization, the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, and the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions. It was hoped that the symposium would lead to an international sounding rocket program during the International Year of the Quiet Sun in 1964-65.
Details of Project Anna, flashing-light geodetic satellite, were given to the international Committee on Space Research (cospar) meeting in Washington by Mark M. Macomber of onw. Previously classified, two Anna satellites have been built and when placed into orbit wlli provide means to calibrate three different satellite tracking systems and provide accurate reference points in space (flashing light photographed at precise times against known star background), nasa will now not have to develop a geodetic satellite to provide open scientific information.
Senate Commerce Committee tentatively approved the space communications satellite corporation bill after adopting 32 amendments, one virtually identical to the bill passed by the House on May 3.
usaf announced the launching of an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite with AtlasAgena from Point Arguello, Calif.
telstar, the first privately financed satellite, launched into orbit from amr by nasa Delta booster, telstar (apogee: 3,503 mi.; perigee: 593 mi.; inclination: 44.79 degrees; period: 157.8 min.) was funded by the American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (at&t) under a nasa-at&t agreement of July 27, 1961: Bell Telephone Laboratories design and build satellites at own expense; at&t reimburse nasa for Delta launch vehicles, launch, and tracking services (approximately $3 million per launch); Bell System conduct the communications experiments and nasa provide telemetry; and both nasa and at&t analyze data and results, to be made available by nasa to the world scientific community.
Report at American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies forum that Western Europe was planning 440 sounding rocket, 22 satellite, and 2 moon probe launchings by 1970.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in London press conference, said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. was leading the U.S. in space exploration. “We have been putting all kinds of satellites in the air for meteorological readings and other scientific information, ...” but the U.S. has not been indulging in “the same kind of spectacular” as the U.S.S.R. “I think we should develop achievement upon achievement until it should be almost a matter of course for us to go to the moon, rather than indulge in the spectacular.”
In extended action on the floor of the Senate, Senators Russell B. Long, Albert Gore, Estes Kefauver, and Wayne Morse opposed the passage of the Administration’s amended communications satellite system bill (S. 2814) previously brought out of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Senator Long charged that the Senate had been subjected to lobbying “the like of which the Congress had never seen before” on the private ownership of the proposed communications satellite system, and he was questioned by Senator John O. Pastore, the bill’s floor manager.
dod postponed launch of Anna geodetic satellite to Oct. 24, for undisclosed reason.
Washington Evening Star reported that usaf had orbited or attempted to orbit 24 unmanned, unidentified satellites since autumn 1961 when dod adopted its policy of not issuing details of satellite launchings.
National Bureau of Standards and U.S. Naval Observatory increased the standard frequency transmissions by 2 parts in 1 billion to allow for higher precision in scientific measurements, radio communications and navigation, and satellite tracking.
usaf announced launch of an unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle from Vandenberg afb.
oso i began transmitting real-time data on solar observation after five weeks of intermittent transmittal, nasa scientists speculated that the cause of the reduction in the satellite’s rate of spin from 50 rpm to 42 rpm, which caused the transmitter to restart, was either a result of bearing friction within the turning wheel or the slowing down of the satellite’s rotation because of its position with respect to the Earth’s magnetic field.
U.S.S.R. announced successful launch of cosmos x into earth orbit (apogee, 208 mi.; perigee, 126 mi.; inclination, 65° from the equator; period, 90.2 min.). Tass said the satellite’s many scientific instruments to measure radiation and other spatial conditions were functioning normally.
S-IV stage of Saturn C-l launch vehicle was successfully staticfired for first time in 10-sec. test at Sacramento, Calif., facility of Douglas Aircraft Co. First flight test of the liquid-hydrogen/ liquid-oxygen-powered upper stage would be made in 1963. August 17: U.S. Senate passed Administration communications satellite bill (66 to 11 vote), ending 20-day debate and liberal bloc opposition which had invoked seldom-used anti-filibuster rules. Bill was returned to the House, which had previously passed a slightly different version.
Closed-door sessions of the 13 directors of Communications Satellite Corp. were reported in Drew Pearson’s column, discussions on the revolution in communications made by satellites and the international complications involved.
Fifty-five delegates from the U.N. toured the Atlantic Missile Range at the invitation of the State Department. Six Communist countries were represented, but delegates from the U.S.S.R. had declined at the last minute. Among the sights were the U.S.-U.K. satellite scheduled for launch that day but postponed because of trouble in the second stage of the Thor-Delta booster, the Saturn rocket being prepared for launching, and the Project Mercury site and control room.
Scientists again attempted to turn on relay communications equipment, but the satellite’s power level was still too low.
Attempt to launch Anna geodetic satellite by Thor-Able-Star rocket was unsuccessful.
dod announced plans to develop Titan III launch vehicle powered by both solid and liquid rocket fuels and capable of thrust greater than 2.5 mlliion pounds. To become operational by 1965, Titan III would be used primarily to launch X-20 (Dyna Soar) manned spacecraft as well as heavy mllitary satellites. Martin-Marietta Corp. was selected as prime contractor for Titan III, to cost between $500 million and $1 billion.
Prof. Vassily V. Parin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that fruit flies carried aloft in Soviet spacecraft had shown a “considerable increase in gene mutations,” in a report on space biology to cospar meeting in Washington. Evident to some observers was that the Russians have conducted a wide range of biological experiments in their satellite program.
Dr. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center, testifying before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed reports that Nimbus meteorological satellite system was 6 to 12 mo. behind schedule. Dr. Singer recommended the U.S. keep at least two Tiros satellites in orbit until Nimbus was ready.
dod announced reassignment of responsibilities for the dod Communications Satellite Program. The Air Force was assigned responsibility for the development, production, and launch of all space devices, consistent with the general policy for the development of military space systems announced in March 1961. The Army was assigned responsibility for the development and operation of the ground environment except for that portion of the ground environment associated with launch and control of satellites themselves. Defense Communications Agency (dca) was assigned task of integrating ground and space components. First effect was the transfer to the Air Force of overall systems management of Project Advent, a responsibility of the Army since September 1960 when it was transferred from arpa.
nasa announced 19 experiments would be included on Pogo satellite (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) to be orbited by Thor-Agena vehicle launched from Pacific Missile Range. Pogo would be second in Ogo (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) series and first Ogo in polar orbit; it was scheduled for launch in early 1964.
President Kennedy signed into law the communications satellite bill, which would establish a private corporation in charge of U.S. portion of future global communications satellite network. Satellite corporation board of directors would include six named by communications industry, six elected by public stockholders, and three selected by the President.
Analysis of the metal chunk believed to have been part of Soviet satellite sputnik iv showed the object had greater radiation level than any other object previously recovered from space, aec scientists at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (N. Mex.) said one reason for high radiation was that the chunk was analyzed soon after being found, whereas previous objects had not been analyzed until at least three weeks after being found. Radiation expert Dr. Ernest C. Anderson of Los Alamos reported that the object had same sort of radioactivity shown by natural iron meteorites, evidence that the object was part of a spacecraft that had been orbiting for long time above the atmosphere, sputnik iv went into orbit May 15, 1960, and disintegrated September 5, 1962, over the U.S. Los Alamos forwarded 14-lb. chunk to U.S. delegation to U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had kept a 6-lb. slice of the original object for further examination.
relay communications satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle from Cape Canaveral (about 800-mi. perigee; 4,600-mi. apogee; 3 hr., 5 min. period). Built by rca for nasa, relay was designed to be first active repeater satellite linking three continents—North America, South America, and Europe. Efforts to turn on relay’s communications equipment (by nasa test station at Nutley, N.J.) were unsuccessful, the satellite’s onboard battery power being too low to operate the transponders. nasa said telemetry data indicated “abnormal drain upon the power supply” was probable cause of low voltage; relay communications experiments were postponed indefinitely. Objectives of nasa Project Relay were to test intercontinental microwave communications by low-altitude active repeater satellites, measure energy levels of space radiation in its orbital path, and determine extent of radiation damage to solar cells and electronic components.
Prof. Pierre Auger, executive secretary of the Preparatory Committee of the European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo), stated that plans called for the expenditure of $100 million a year. Program headquartered in Paris would parallel the work of the U.S.’s nasa, sans man-in-space activity. An important part of its program would be cooperation with other international and national organizations, especially nasa, from which satellites and launchers might be obtained. A new firing range at Kiruna, Sweden, is envisaged for firings in the northern auroral zone.
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, predicted in interview that in 20 years “we’ll be well advanced in the use of nuclear power in space both for propulsion of rockets and for auxiliary power within orbiting satellites. “Around the year 1982 we wlli have already made, or be seriously planning, a manned journey to one of the near planets. And we’ll be using nuclear energy rather routinely in satellites as an auxiliary source of electric power. “For example, by then, we’ll probably be able to have [world] television broadcasts relayed by satellites brought directly into homes, . . . Within 20 years it might be possible to get reception direct from a satellite wherever a television set was located, even in the darkest part of Africa .... “I feel that even such predictions as I have outlined may be too conservative in the sense that there may be spectacular developments that we do not even foresee . . . .”
nasa announced plans to launch two Project Echo ballons during October. To be filled with helium while on the ground near White Sands Missile Range, N.M., one ballon would be Echo I-type measuring 100 ft. m diameter and the other would be Advanced Echo type measuring 135-ft. in diameter. They would reach respective altitudes of approximately 128,000 ft. and 115.000	ft. in short flights over the range. Purpose of launches was to determine skin smoothness for the Advanced Echo balloon satellite, to be orbited in 1963.
New York Times reported f'that more than 20 fragments from sputnik iv had been recovered in Wisconsin. Launched May 15, 1960, the Soviet satellite had re-entered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 5, 1962, and disintegrated over Wisconsin.
William H. Evans was appointed by nasa as Director of the Pacific Launch Operations Office, Lompoc, Calif. In this assignment he represents nasa in its relationships with pmr, coordinates use of range facilities, and provides necessary services and support for nasa technical programs and projects at pmr. Prior to his association with nasa since January 1961, Evans was Head of the Satellite and Space Vehicles Division of pmr, and before 1957 had served with the Naval Air Missile Test Center at Point Mugu since 1946.
Thor-Agena D booster launched usaf satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Ground signal station at Nutley, N.J., turned on relay satellite’s communications transponders and sent signals to the satellite; telemetry indicated relay received signals, but relay failed to return transmission to Nutley, Andover (Me.), or Pleumeur-Bodou (France) stations. All onboard systems were turned off except command receivers.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
House Commerce Committee reported out a commercial communications satellite blli similar to the Senate measure, including a provision “encouraging” communications companies to build and operate their own ground stations.
usaf announced it would build a new phased-array radar system that would have a multiple-track capability and quicker reflexes than present radar for the detection, tracking, identification, and cataloging of satellites. Contractor woud be Bendix Aviation Corp.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Air Force Association convention in Las Vegas that “the objective of our [national space] policy is to obtain and maintain leadership in space activities for the benefit of man’s freedom, man’s well-being, man’s understanding, and man’s scientific progress. The details of the policy are not quite so clear, as those who have studied our budgets and public documents have reason to know. It is clear, however, that our policy includes going to the moon during this decade. It includes developing an operational communications satellite system as well as navigation and meteorological systems on a world-wide basis. The specifics are less clear as to the roles of man in space and what can and should be done to maintain peace in outer space. This lack of clarity, however, is partly due to the difficulty of knowing what can be done and what cannot be done. Continuing efforts wlli be made to clarify policy, while keeping it necessarily flexible. . . .” September 21: Replying to September 20 statement by aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg regarding U.S. nuclear propulsion capabilities for a 1970 Mars mission, nasa spokesman said: “There is no such approved program for such a flight at this time, but the joint aec-nasa program is aimed at giving such a capability, and at this time it appears it may be feasible to conduct such a flight.”
oscar ii (Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio) re-entered earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated, after 295 orbits since launch Juno 1.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos iv, presumably another in the recent series of scientific satellites. Orbital data: apogee, 206 mi.; perigee, 186 mi.; period, 90.6 min.; and inclination, 65°. No other details were announced.
The National Center for Space Studies of France, headed by Pierre Auger, released a summary of its 1962 space program: launching of sounding rockets containing a rat and later a cat to 125 miles altitude; research observations of the sun and various planets; and telecommunications experiments. France would also cooperate in a joint satellite project with the U.S. and participate in the European Organization for Space Research.
A single communications satellite in stationary equatorial orbit could connect 92 per cent of world’s telephones, Dr. Herbert Trotter, Jr., president of General Telephone & Electronics, Inc., told U.S. Independent Telephone Association in Chicago.
Edward R. Murrow, Director of usia, testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: “Having contributed to developing the [communications satellite] system, Government should not be on a parity of payment with other commercial users. We strongly believe that affordable rates for our agency’s use is an appropriate partial repayment for that national investment.” He replied, in answer to question, that he would endorse the bill as it was.
nasa selected Dalmo-Victor Co. and Amelco, Inc., to negotiate for r&d and production services for initial systems of Satan (satellite automatic tracking antenna). New antenna system would orient itself automatically to orbiting spacecraft and would be a major improvement in nasa’s worldwide Minitrack system.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena B booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists have agreed on a proposal to establish a “world weather watch” for improved collection, analysis, and dissemination of world weather information by means of conventional weather techniques and weather satellites. Dr. Harry Wexler, Director of Research, U.S. Weather Bureau, and Dr. Viktor A. Bugaev, Assistant Director of the Hydrometeorological Service, U.S.S.R., drafted the plan at the World Meteorological Organization headquarters in Geneva. Plan would call for expanded and improved weather observation by both conventional and satellite means, the establishment of world and regional weather centers to collect, analyze, and disseminate weather information, including participation by underdeveloped countries through pooling of their resources to develop regional weather forecasting centers. Soviet participation was indicated by Dr. Konstantin T. Logvinov, Deputy Director of U.S.S.R.’s Hydrometeorological Service. He indicated possibility of Soviet weather satellites, although he said U.S.S.R. was not as advanced as U.S. in this area—“We are just learning from American experience”—and establishment in U.S.S.R. of a ground station to receive cloud-cover photos from satellites. The proposed global weather plan was to be submitted to the WTorld Meteorological Organization May 22 and then to the U.N.
at&t announced that second Telstar communications satellite would be launched next spring, one which would attempt to avoid or overcome radiation damage which shortened the life of telstar i. telstar i transmitted the first live intercontinental television after launch on July 10, but developed malfunctions in power sources on November 29.
sigma 7 (MA-8) launching was relayed to Western Europe via telstar satellite. European TV network Eurovision broadcast the launching sequence to 17 countries. Televised launch was also viewed by millions of Americans.
Premier Khrushchev claimed that the U.S.S.R. had a new “invulnerable global rocket,” announced the orbiting of cosmos i (the 16th Russian satellite), and stated that the U.S.S.R. would carry out new atmospheric nuclear tests if the U.S. resumes its atmospheric tests. Tass released a news story on the new satellite, giving its orbital data as apogee, 609 mi.; perigee, 135 mi.; period, 96 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equator. A scientific payload included measurements of meteoric impacts, low-energy solar radiation, earth’s radiation belts, cosmic rays, earth’s magnetic field, short-wave radiation from sun and other celestial sources, and atmospheric cloud patterns.
Day-long procedural quorum calls in the U.S. Senate prompted by filibuster tactics of liberal opponents of the Administration’s communications satellite bill.
usaf launched a satellite with a Blue Scout booster, from Point Arguello; according to U.N. Public Registry, did not achieve orbit.
Unnamed dod spokesman said dod was preparing a list of exceptions to its ban against disclosing information on military space shots. New list of exceptions would provide for information about both launch and subsequent performance of usaf, usn, and U.S. Army scientific research vehicles. Specifically included were X-20 (Dyna Soar) manned space vehicle; Project West Ford (orbiting metallic filaments); space projects to gain scientific data; Transit navigational satellite; Project Anna geodetic satellite; and U.S. Army scientific rocket launchings from White Sands Missile Range, N.M.
Atom Affairs Ministry, West Germany, announced work on third stage of Western Europe’s first space rocket would soon begin in West Germany. First stage would be developed from U.K. Blue Streak missile, second stage from French Veronique. Satellite to be launched by the three-stage vehicle would be built by Italy. First model would be completed in 1966.
Announced that the Nippon Electric Co. of Japan (nec) was constructing several nec-1 active repeater communications satellites to be launched by nasa Scout or Thor-Delta boosters during the Olympic Games in Japan in 1964.
U.S. Weather Bureau announced development of infrared spectrometer, to be flight-tested in new balloons during next six months. The 100-lb. “flying thermometer” was planned for use in Nimbus weather satellites.	_
usaf announced special instruments on unidentified military test satellites had confirmed artificial radiation belt densities calculated from earlier injun and telstah data. Radiation of new belt, created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear test in July, was composed primarily of electrons. Radiation sharply increases above 400-mi. altitude at the geomagnetic equator and reaches peak intensities of 100 to 1,000 times normal levels at altitude above 1,000 mi. Lt. Col. Albert C. Trakowski (usaf) stated in press conference that Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., could have been killed if his MA-8 space flight had taken him above 400-mi. altitude. Answering questions about usaf report on the artificial radiation belt, Col. Trakowski said the lifetime of the belt “cannot be forecast at present—it wlli be long.”
Canadian satellite alouette was placed in polar orbit by Thor-Agena B vehicle launched by nasa from Vandenberg afb. Initial orbital data: apogee, 619.2 mi.; perigee, 597 mi.; inclination, 80.84° to the equator; period, 105.4 min. Named for Canadian high-flying songbird, alouette was first satellite both designed and built by a nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. Launching was nasa’s first into polar orbit, first from pmr, and first use of Thor-Agena B combination. To sustain its experiments in study of the ionosphere, the 320-lb. alouette had two crossed antennae, one 150 ft. long and the other 75 ft. long.
nasa announced that ariel i, the U.S.-U.K. ionosphere satellite launched on April 26, was functioning well except for one experiment, the solar ultraviolet detector. Telemetry signals were being received by fifteen ground stations around the world, and the tape recorder, which recorded on each orbit, was being commanded successfully about twelve times a day.
Transatlantic telephone conversation via telstar satellite, from at&t President Eugene McNeely to Jacques Marette, French Communications Minister. On next 'orbit, McNeely spoke with Sir Ronald German, director-general of the British Post Office. Technicians had unofficially tallied on transatlantic circuit via telstar the day before, July 12.
nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the selection of Motorola, Inc., Military Electronics Division, of Scottsdale, Ariz., as contractor for research and development on the Goddard range and range-rate tracking system. Intended for tracking satellites in near-space and cislunar space, the system will measure spacecraft position to within a few feet and velocity to within fractions of a foot per second by measurements of carrier and side-tone modulations.
Agreement establishing U.S.-Italy cooperative space program, signed in May, was confirmed in Rome by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Italian Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni. The Memorandum of Understanding between nasa and the Italian Space Commission provided for three-phase program, expected to culminate in launching of a scientific satellite into equatorial orbit. Generally, nasa would provide the Scout rockets and personnel training; Italians would launch the vehicle with its Italian payload and would be responsible for data acquisition as well as for towable launch platform located in equatorial waters.
dod established conflict-of-interest ruling on industry’s role in dod research contracts. New policy specified that a company serving as technical adviser in a research program was ineligible to compete for contracts in the hardware production phase. Ruling was first established in Project Advent communications satellite project.
Modulation from ariel i satellite appeared on the carrier approximately 10 days out of the 31. Data received indicated the x-ray experiment had failed.
“Big Shot” suborbital inflation test of 135-foot diameter sphere in Echo II program was conducted from amr. The 44-inch cannister containing the uninflated balloon that would be larger and more rigid than echo i was separated at altitude from a specially stabilized Thor booster which carried both TV and 16-mm movie cameras. These cameras monitored the separation of the cannister and inflation of the “balloon satellite,” showed the too-rapid inflation that ripped the balloon apart at 250-miles altitude; capsule with movie film re-entered and was later recovered by skin divers.
Pope John XXIII at Vatican summer palace stated to several thousand pilgrims that U.S. telstar satellite had “helped strengthen brotherhood among peoples,” its use “marked a new stage of peaceful progress.”
dod announced launch of Anna geodetic satellite would be attempted
European Broadcasting Union in Brussels undertook detailed planning for intercontinental TV experimentation and programing via nasa’s Project Relay and at&t’s Telstar satellites to be launched in late summer of 1962. Construction of stations for participation in the tests were reported underway in England, France, West Germany, and Italy.
Soviet aircraft designer Artem Mikoyan was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. would have a “rocket plane” within this decade. Aircraft was described as wide-winged, stainless-steel covered, and powered by multistage rocket. After launching, craft would fly ballistic trajectory reaching height of 150-222 km. and later re-enter earth’s atmosphere, for intercontinental transport of mail, freight, and, later, passengers. Rocket planes also would be principal transportation between earth and earth satellites.
Fifth anniversary of the Space Age, inaugurated with the orbiting of first manmade satellite, sputnik i, by the U.S.S.R. According to the Goddard Satellite Situation Report of October 10, 1962, the first half decade of the Space Age saw the orbiting of 134 satellites, lunar probes, and space probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 26 (6 still in orbit), the U.S. 108 (48 still in orbit). Of U.S. total, nasa orbited 36 (24 still in orbit), dod 72 (24 still in orbit). Two of the nasa launches must also be credited to the nations contributing the experiments or the payload—U.K. for ariel and Canada for alouette. Of the U.S. total, three were manned orbital spacecraft, as were four of the U.S.S.R.’s. Totals for manned space flight—U.S.: 12 orbits, with 19 hrs., 3 min. flight time; U.S.S.R.: 130 orbits, with 192 hrs., 41 min. flight time. October 4: Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (usaf) flew X-15 No. 3 to altitude of 106,000 ft. and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 4.91), in 10-min. flight to check out the craft’s adaptive control system. A secondary objective was to further evaluate X-15 performance with ventral fin removed. All flight objectives were achieved.
Launching of dod geodetic satellite Anna was postponed indefinitely for undisclosed reasons.
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, told National Rocket Club that ariel (U.K.-U.S.) satellite was “just beginning to show signs of trouble.” Launched April 26, 1962, the satellite was designed for one year of transmitting life. Wasielewski said some of the experiments aboard the satellite were “not doing as well as some others,” that the radio signals from some of the experiments were fading.
Use of missiles and earth-orbiting satellites in forest-fire detection was forecast by R. C. Howard of British Columbia Forest Products, Ltd., speaking in Vancouver to annual convention of Canadian Institute of Forestry. Howard said satellites wollid report fires to computer center which wollid evaluate the fire, permitting foresters to dispatch missile with built-in-fire extinguisher.
Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield, on behalf of himself and Minority Leader Everett M. Dirksen, filed a cloture petition intended to break the Senate filibuster against Administration-backed communications satellite bill.
U.S.S.R. had declined the offer of U.S. networks to use telstar satellite for relaying live telecasts of orbiting Soviet cosmonauts, said Russell Tomabene, Chairman of the U.S. joint network committee coordinating transatlantic telstar programs.
International Telephone & Telegraph Corp. (itat), announced plans for nasa Project Relay satellite communication experiment to link North and South America. To be launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral this year, the satellite would relay 12 telephone calls at once, from itat ground relay station in Nutley, N.J., to portable ground station near Rio de Janeiro. The satellite, built by rca for nasa, would also transmit TV from North America to Europe via ground stations at Andover, Me.; Goon-hilly Downs, England; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France. In another set of experiments, Relay would establish telephone communications between Brazil and England. Relay would radiate microwave signal of 10 watts, compared to telstar’s 2-watt signal.
dod announced International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. (it&t) had leased to usaf two transportable ground communications stations for operational training of communications personnel. The units would be used in new program to provide data on problems of using satellites for communications support.
Roger Seydoux, French ambassador to U.N., announced that France planned to launch its first satellite by 1965, and that France would continue its space activities “at the rhythm required by the present day world.”
nasa reported radiation satellite explorer xv, launched Oct. 27, was spinning at rate of 73 rpm instead of desired 10 rpm because of failure of despin weights to deploy. Preliminary data indicated all experiments were functioning and that all received data were of good quality. Effect of high spin rate on experimental results was under analysis.
usaf superpressure balloon made a record-breaking nineteen-day flight at a constant altitude of 68,000 feet in a test conducted by Cambridge Research Laboratories. The balloon was launched from Kindley afb, Bermuda, and landed by radio command in the Pacific, near Iwo Jima, 3,600 miles west of Hawaii, covering a total of 9,300 miles. During May: Checkout was completed and the University of Alaska assumed responsibility for the Alaska Data Acquisition Facility near Fairbanks. Part of the gsfc system, the Alaskan facility is an 85-ft. dish and its associated electronics system will be used on tracking and data acquisition of polar-orbiting Nimbus, Ego (Eccentric Geophysical Observatory), and Pogo (Polar-Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) satellites of gsfc.
Goddard Space Flight Center officials reported that they had received “indications the voltage had recovered somewhat” in relay satellite, but doubted that its communications mission would be accomplished.
Italian Space Research Commission announced Italy would attempt to orbit its first satellite in 1963. The 200-lb. scientific satellite wollid be launched from a platform floating in the Indian Ocean and would measure air density variations caused by solar radiation.
Navy, in conjunction with Weather Bureau and Canada, launched a major ice reconnaissance effort in the Gulf of St. Lawrence as part of a project to develop procedures and techniques for interpreting satellite readouts of ice formation. Called Project Tirec, the effort was timed to coincide with the successful launch of tiros iv.
In address to the Institute of Radio Engineers in New York, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden stated: “The costs of satellites and space probes are so great that every possible step must be taken to assure success. In our scientific experiments we insist that the bench prototype developed by the physicist be redesigned by engineers to meet the environmental requirements, that the engineered prototype be tested on vibrators, in vacuum and temperature chambers and other ground equipment simulating the space environment beyond the required conditions, and that, if possible, the equipment be tested on the less expensive sounding rockets prior to use on the more expensive satellites. . . . “To state the matter another way, we desire assured and demonstrated performances and reliability. The cost of the necessary engineering and tests is small compared to the cost of a single failure. We do not wish to be the first to use the newest and most advanced device nor the last to give up the obsolete. A moderately conservative engineering approach with adequate analysis and test is indicated as the best design philosophy.”
Speaking on the Senate floor, Senator Estes Kefauver reiterated Ms belief that the communications satellite blli (H.R. 11040) “proposed the most gigantic giveaway in the history of this country. It wollid turn over to a govemmentally created private monopoly the benefits of hundreds of mlliions of dollars of taxpayers’ money which have been invested in the development of space and satellite communications technology. ...”
Transatlantic use of telstar communications satellite was discontinued for about seven weeks. During this period, telstar’s orbit brought it too briefly on line of sight with North America and Europe for useful transmission, at&t said the situation would recur every six months. Domestic transmissions would be suspended only from Nov. 26 to Dec. 2, during which time ground equipment would be “tuned up.”
Newsmen in London and New York exchanged news items and conversations in the first two-way transatlantic telephone connection via telstar communications satellite. Reuters transmitted its first news report to the world press via satellite.
Orbital data from satellites have suggested that scientists do not really know the shape of the earth, Dr. George P. Woollard, Director of the Geophysics and Polar Research Center of the University of Wisconsin, said in a Voice of America broadcast. Such studies have indicated that the earth may have not olliy the “flattened ‘tomato shape’ that has been assumed since the time of Isaac Newton but also a superimposed ‘pear shape.’ ” Citing the number of forces that can operate on a satellite, thus requiring extremely careful analysis of its data, Dr. Woollard pointed out that the Committee on Geodesy of the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences had recommended the launching of a specially instrumented geodetic-research satellite to resolve some of the questionable areas of influence on magnetic readings.
Reported from New York that three-day U.S.-British discussions on U.N. problems had devoted considerable time to problems of “the law of outer space.” U.S. representatives indicated that the U.N. resolution of December covering “international cooperation and the peaceful uses of outer space” had extended international law to space. In view of this, the U.N. resolution destroyed any argument that surveillance satellites violate international law, as orbiting satellites are legally no different from operating a destroyer in international waters.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center selected Rohr Aircraft Corp. to negotiate for the manufacture and erection of three 85-foot-diameter parabolic antenna systems to be located at Pisgah National Forest (Rosman, N.C.), Fairbanks, Alaska, and an undetermined location in eastern Canada. When completed, these facilities in addition to similar system completed at Gilmore Creek, Alaska, would serve as the core of nasa’s wide-band satellite instrumentation network. They would receive and record telemetry from large “second generation” satellites including Nimbus and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
dod announced award of $12.2 million contract to it&t for systems engineering and technical advice in development of communications satellite systems.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, urged in speech before aaas that scientists be among the next group of astronauts selected for training. “I have a complete and utter conviction that we should take a scientist and make a flyer out of him rather than the other way around.” In interview, Dr. Newell outlined tentative nasa plans for 1963 launchings: 6-8 communications satellites, three weather satellites; 8 scientific satellites; at least one manned orbital flight; initial unmanned flight-test of Gemini capsule; three lunar impacts; Apollo capsule boilerplate tests of emergency flight conditions; three Saturn launch vehicle flight-tests; two electrical rocket-engine flight-tests; three re-entry heating tests.
Dr. James A. Van Allen, State University of Iowa physicist, criticized Government report on atmospheric radiation resulting from U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, which stated radiation levels were much higher than had been predicted and would last longer than had been predicted. Dr. Van Allen charged the Government report was a “hasty and ill-considered” interpretation of the facts; he predicted the bulk of artificially formed radiation would no longer be detectable by summer of 1963. Dr. Van Allen said President’s Science Advisory Committee ignored findings from injun satellite (which he used to study effects of the explosion) and relied instead on data from telstar satellite, launched after the nuclear test. Scientist James W. Warwick of University of Colorado, basing his conclusions on radio measurements from ground stations in Hawaii and the Philippines, said his studies were in general agreement with those of Van Allen and his coworkers and were “inconsistent” with Government estimates .based on telstar data. The two scientists were in Philadelphia for session of American Association for the Advancement of Science.
ferret super-sensitive robot-inspector satellite developed by Lockheed Aircraft and rca for U.S., reported in orbit by Newsweek. ferret was reported capable of tapping microwave telephone messages and pinpointing missile launching sites by their radio guidance signals. Newsweek said satellite was aimed particularly at Baikonur, major Soviet rocket-testing base.
nasa awarded $1,000 to nasa engineers for inventions contributing to the advancement of aeronautical and space science and technology. Langley Research Center’s Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., and H. Douglas Garner split a $1,000 award for conceiving a simple, lightweight attitude control system to control the axis of a spinning vehicle. Goddard Space Flight Center’s James S. Albus received a $1,000 award for his digital solar aspect sensor that has been flown in several Explorer satellites.
Reported that the Soviet Union was seeking through diplomatic channels to establish a space satellite tracking station in Australia, offering assurances that the station wollid not be used for military purposes or for the introduction of weapons.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, using an Atlas-Agena launch vehicle.
Assistant Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach testified before the Senate Commerce Committee that the compromise communications satellite blli, while generally acceptable to the Administration, wollid place control of the system in the communications industry. “There is real danger,” he said, “that ground stations, if separately owned by the carriers, may because of their high cost represent an obstacle to technical growth so as prematurely to freeze the type of system.” The compromise bill, approved by the Senate Space Committee two weeks ago, provided for a 50-50 split of the stock in the satellite corporation between the communications industry and other companies and investors.
Scientists at Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ. sent operating commands to anna satellite, and three minutes later anna responded by flashing its lights five times to show the message had been received. Satellite’s blinking beacons were designed to aid scientists make precise measurements of the earth and to determine its gravitational field.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
Subcommittee of the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly Committee headed by Sen. Estes Kefauver opened hearings on propriety of establishing a privately-owned communications satellite system.
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, in news conference, stated that U.S.S.R. was “substantially ahead” in some phases of military space development but the U.S. was acting to overtake the lead. Confirming reports that dod space budget wollid not be increased, McNamara added: “Lest you interpret that as an indication that the Russian flight was not a great one, or lest you interpret it as my belief that the Russians didn’t do anything we collidn’t do, let me hasten to add that we have not accomplished what they have accomplished to date. “We are behind in certain space developments, particularly those associated with large booster capabilities.” He cited development of Titan III booster as a major step toward overtaking the Soviet Union. Titan III would have between two and three times the thrust of the Soviet boosters used to launch manned Vostok satellites. Secretary of Defense McNamara stated that dod FY 1964 funding would include increases for development of 120-in., 156-in., and 260-in. solid-propellant rocket motors. 120-in. motors would be used in Titan III launch vehicles.
nasa selected Hughes Aircraft Co. for negotiating a $2.5 million, 6-month study contract on advanced Syncom satellite. The contract covered satellite subsystems which would require long leadtime developmental and feasibility work. Second-generation Syncom would be 500-lb., spin-stabilized satellite capable of relaying hundreds of telephone calls or several TV channels. (First-generation Syncom, for which Hughes is prime contractor, is limited to single telephone channel relay.) Syncom project is under technical direction of gsfc.
Bell Telephone Laboratories reported telstar communications satellite’s refusal to respond to transmitter cut-off commands had been followed by the satellite’s turning off its command receiver. Bell scientists expected to correct telstar communications system by remote control.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Sen. John J. Sparkman of Alabama as acting chairman) announced plans for hearings on international aspects of the communications satellite bill. Plans called for testimony by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, other State Department officials, and representatives of Defense Department, Commerce Department, and Justice Department, as well as
explorer xiv was relaying “excellent quality preliminary data,” nasa announced. The satellite, launched Oct. 2, was traveling in highly eccentric earth orbit: apogee, 61,000 mi.; perigee, 175 mi.; period, 36.1 hrs. Speed at perigee was 23,700 mph; at apogee, 1,500 mph. nasa said it would be some time before analysis of telemetry data on the radiation belts could be correlated.
British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament that Britain wollid spend $1,960,000 in the coming year on development of satellite communications.
Space General Corp. reported development of aspect-insensitive antenna system for satellites and spacecraft. System, which automatically points toward its transmission source on earth, could reduce number of communications satellites in worldwide network “by a factor of four or five,” according to Space General.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, announced jointly with Soviet representative Anatoly Blagan-ravov in Geneva that a U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement had been reached to coordinate launchings of weather satellites to provide information for the “world weather watch” of the World Meteorological Organization (wmo) . Also announced was agreement on a joint effort to map the earth’s magnetic field; talks were continuing on joint cooperation in the field of communications satellites. Announcement was made after two weeks of talks on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation in Geneva, which grew out of the exchange of letters between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev in March.
Governments of U.S. and Canada jointly announced cooperative venture to build data acquisition station for Nimbus meteorological satellite at Ingomish, Nova Scotia. Successor to Tiros weather satellite program, Nimbus satellites will record meteorological data, including TV pictures, and relay the data back to earth on command; they will travel in near-polar orbit and thus be able to “see” the entire earth every 24 hours. Ingomish station would be staffed mainly with Canadian personnel and would be completed in 1964.
usaf reported that “an Air Force satellite had provided the first continuous data on the actual size and intensity of the inner belt” of proton radiation over the Equator at altitudes of 600 to 3,000 miles. Stating only that the data was acquired from a 23-lb. experiment aboard an Agena, the report said radiation intensity at the center of the belt was 600,000 proton particles passing through one sq. inch per second, previously estimated at 100,000.
Soviet Union announced launching of cosmos ii satellite (975-mile apogee, 133-mile perigee, 49° inclination, 102.5-minute period). cosmos ii reportedly had the same instrumentation as cosmos i launched on March 16: investigation of radio transmission, radiation belts, magnetic field of the earth, distribution and formation of cloud cover, and to test “elements of space vehicle construction.”
In a recent tightening of dod policy on information about military satellite launchings, officials were reported to have stated that in future even the Discoverer flights would not be so identified. Any information beyond bare announcement of launch of an unidentified satellite would be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Replying to a charge that U K. was playing a declining role in development of satellite communications, Postmaster General Reginald Bevins told Parliament: “I assure you that the British Government is fully alive to the possibilities of satellite communications and when it comes to an operational system, we shall not be left out in the cold.” He predicted a global system of satellite communications within this decade.
Representatives of Australia, Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Britain signed an agreement for the establishment of the European Satellite Launcher Development Organization in London.
explorer ix, launched on February 16, 1961, provided new and refined information on the density of the upper atmosphere, a press conference of nasa and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory scientists reported. They confirmed a figure previously released—that the density of the atmosphere at 420 mi. was 3 x 10-17 grams per cubic centimeter, or 1/40 million millionth of that at sea level, explorer ix density values were about 10 times lower than those computed in 1959 from earlier satellites. Most of this decrease is attributed to the decrease in solar activity since the peak of the solar cycle in 1958 and 1959. Changes were also clearly related to the 27-day rotational period of the sun and to the occasional violent solar storms that affect the earth’s atmosphere. explorer ix, a 12-ft. aluminum-foil sphere painted with white “polka dots,” was expected to have an orbital life of two more years. As it spiraled down into denser atmosphere, it was expected to provide much more information on density at altitudes down to 100 mi.
Reported that telemetry equipment developed for missiles and earthorbiting satellites was available to automobile engineers to help make cars quieter. To check noise and vibration accurately, car manufacturers could use two-channel electronic telemetry system that picked up sounds made by test cars and transmitted signals to receiver in another vehicle.
Washington Post reported that Thrust-Augmented Thor (tat) booster wollid be used with Agena D upper stage to orbit first of new Discoverer satellite series.
Internationa] Edition of New York Times contained articles (about 5,000 words) transmitted from New York to Paris via telstar satellite.
U.S.S.R. had shown a “change in attitude in recent weeks” on cooperating with the U.S. on development and use of a weather satellite system, Dr. Francis W. Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
U.S. Weather Bureau announced that the formation of the season’s first hurricane wollid be detected by one or all of its battery of ships, planes, radar, and Tiros weather satellites. Last year tiros iii discovered Hurricane Esther as it was forming in the Atlantic Ocean. Altogether, the Weather Bureau said, tiros iii had seen 5 hurricanes and one tropical storm in the Atlantic, two hurricanes and a tropical storm in the eastern Pacllic, and 9 typhoons in the central and western Pacllic. In preparation for 1962 season, the Weather Bureau arranged to transmit satellite cloud-photographs by photo-facsimile to warnllig centers in San Juan, New Orleans, and Miami, where they wlli be used in forecasting and tracking tropical storms.
First ground-controlled flashes from anna geodetic satellite were delayed because delivery of command equipment to Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory had been delayed.
Bell Telephone Laboratories (btl) announced that Telstar, first privately owned communications satellite, would be launched July 10 from Cape Canaveral, btl built the satellite, purchased the Thor-Delta launch vehicle from nasa, and would reimburse nasa for launching and tracking costs.
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would photograph cloud formations during his forthcoming orbital flight MA-8, it was announced. Cdr. Schirra’s special 2’(-lb. hand camera would be used to test techniques for the advanced Nimbus weather satellite.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite employing a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with a Blue Scout booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
Spokesman for American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (at&t) said telstar communications satellite was still operating despite almost three months of intense radiation exposure.
Dr. John A. Simpson, of the University of Chicago’s Enrico Fermi Institute for Nuclear Studies, said in a Voice of America broadcast that space probes and satellites have offered the scientist the first tools for direct measurement and study of electrodynamics in the interplanetary medium, explorer x, for example, had recorded a density of protons in space substantially below predicted values and “almost one million billion times less than the best vacuum that man creates in the laboratory. “Such experiments in space emphasize the fact that there occur phonemena in nature which cannot be scaled down without losing the essence of their physical properties.”
nasa announced selection of Westinghouse Electric Coro, as contractor for constructing and testing prototypes and flight models of the S-52 U.S.-U.K. scientific satellite. Second of the three satellites in this program, S-52 was scheduled for launch from Wallops Station, Va., m 1963, would contain 3 major experiments for measurement of galactic radio noise, of vertical distribution of ozone, and of micrometeorite flux.
France carried out six successful missile tests in the Sahara during the previous week. Two of the launchings were of Agate missiles, with which France has planned to develop a missile striking force and eventually to launch a satellite.
The Senate Committee on Commerce concluded its hearings on S. 2814 to establish a commercial communications satellite system.
Lt. Col. Joseph A. Connor, Jr. (usaf) of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight received Air Force Legion of Merit for establishing and directing nuclear safety board for transit iv-a satellite. Lt. Col. Connor’s work on the project was done more than a year ago when he was assigned to the aec.
In testimony before Subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, Dr. Homer E. Newell reviewed history of nasa’s geodetic satellite project, which had been requested in the FY 1960 budget. In mid-1960, dod recommended the geodetic satellite program be classified, which was approved by the Unmanned Space Panel of the nasa/dod aacb in August 1960. Thus was created Project Anna, declassified at the cospar meeting in Washington on April 27, 1962.
Launch of usaf Titan I on 5,000-mile flight down pmr marked the 100th missile fired from Vandenberg afb, Calif., launchings which included 21 Thor irbm’s, 32 Atlas icbm’s, five Titan icbm’s, and 42 satellites.
telstar satellite was used to relay exchange of reports of action on New York and Paris stock exchanges, in 10-min. test transmission of telephone call between Michael W. McCarthy, chairman of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, and Smith, Inc., to Frederick J. Sears, manager of Merrill Lynch’s Paris office.
Hughes Aircraft Co. reported final assembly of Syncom synchronous communications satellite had been completed. Spacecraft was undergoing final checkout before delivery to nasa at Cape Canaveral, where it wollid be launched early 1963.
Disclosed that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. differed on the total width of microwave bands to be assigned to communications satellites. U.S. proposed two bands with total width of about 3,000 megacycles, but U.S.S.R. favored a much narrower band of frequencies which would include those used by military and would be subject to considerable interference. To date, only informal proposals were made, and the negotiations to work out frequencies for satellite communications were still in the future.
Thirteen incorporators named by President Kennedy to set up communications satellite corporation elected Philip L. Graham as chairman. Graham is president of The Washington Post Co. and board chairman of Newsweek.
usaf launched its fifth unidentified satellite employing an AtlasAgena B booster, from Point Arguello, Calif. In Washington, the State Department said the satellite would be registered with the U.N. if it went into orbit and stayed in sustained orbit.
usaf announced launching of unnamed satellite employing a Thor-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
U.S.S.R. placed scientific satellite cosmos ix into orbit (apogee, 219 mi.; perigee, 187 mi.; period, 90.9 min.), in series to study ionosphere, radiation belts, and effect of meteorites on spaceships.
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
In private audience with Pope John XXIII, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson presented the Pope with a small model of telstar communications satellite.
In speech to the Oregon Department of Planning and Development, nasa Administrator James E. Webb pointed out that “one of the dominant features of our age is the snort time lag between scientific discovery and practical applications.” The practical benefits of the U.S. space program would, he said, be early derived in three major ways: (1) satellites will be put to work on a global basis to report the weather, transmit messages and worldwide television programs, and to serve as electronic lighthouses in the sky; (2) in pushing our space program, we are making many technological advances which can be utilized to improve industrial processes and raise our standard of living; and (3) the money we spend on space activities stimulates business in general and our industrial pioneering in particular.
House approved Senate version of communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) in vote of 371-10, under suspension of House rules to permit neither further changes nor conference on the measure. The bill, which would establish a corporation responsible for U.S. commercial communications satellites, was sent to the White House.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, told House Military Operations subcommittee that the Midas early warning satellite would “take longer to develop than initially forecast.” He said that usaf and dod had been overly optimistic about the reliability that could be expected from components and about technical features of the system.
Vice Adm. William F. Raborn (usn) wrote in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings that ability to control weather might bring about greater changes in warfare than did explosion of first nuclear bomb, adding: “The capabllity to change the direction of destructive storms and guide them toward enemy concentration may exist in the future arsenal of the Navy tactical commander. . . . We already have taken our first steps toward developing an environmental warfare capability. We are using satellite weather from tiros ii for current tactical operations and more accurate long-range weather predictions. . . . Some experiments in fog dissipation have shown promise, and some exploratory research has been conducted on ways to change the heading of major storms. . . .” Admiral Raborn said usn was planning 10-year study of the atmosphere (“atmos”) which would be coordinated with separate research on oceans. During December: Soviet Prof. V. Nikiforov, in article entitled “Chemistry in the Cosmos and on the Moon” which appeared in Soviet journal Aviation and Cosmonautics, suggested use of a chemical foam envelope on the moon to protect cosmonauts from great temperature changes, solar radiation, and materials on the lunar surface.
nasa and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced the selection of Military Electronics Division of Motorola, Inc., as contractor to manufacture and test radio equipment in the first two phases of a program to augment the Deep Space Instrumentation Facility by providing “S” band capability for stations at Goldstone, Calif.; Woomera, Australia; and Johannesburg, South Africa. With these stations located some 120° apart around the earth, dsif would have a high-gain, narrow-beam-width, high-frequency system, with very little interference from cosmic noise and would provide much improved telemetering and tracking of satellites as far out as the moon and nearby planets.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the U.S. “can be the leader in the establishment of a communications satellite system to serve the communications needs of the world, thus demonstrating our technical capabilities and our desire to utilize these capabilities for the benefit of all mankind. ... I urge that the Committee report the blli favorably.”
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported nasa was considering substituting piggyback satellite for Agena D target in Project Gemini rendezvous maneuvers. Dr. Joseph F. Shea, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Systems, was quoted as saying nasa could save both time and money by such substitution, usaf plans for Blue Gemini project were not yet firm, pending nasa’s decision, usaf hoped to buy four of nasa’s 12 two-man Gemini capsules for use in its own manned space flight training using Agena D as rendezvous target for two-man Gemini crew, dod had not yet approved any Blue Gemini funds for FY 1964.
J. G. Morse of Martin-Marietta Corp. told Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington that the Government should begin immediately to develop nuclear power systems for communications satellites. Morse suggested that only nuclear power in form of radioactive chemical or isotopic generators could satisfy communications satellite needs—systems in power range of 60 to 300 watts, with operational lifetimes of more than 10 years.
explorer xvi (S-55b) launched into orbit by four-stage Scout vehicle from nasa Wallops Station (initial orbital data: apogee, 733 mi.; perigee, 466 mi.; period, 104 min.; inclination, 52° to the equator), began measuring micrometeoroids in space. Satellite was designed to measure micrometeoroid puncture hazards directly by means of samples of spacecraft structural surfaces, measure particles having different momentums; and compare the performance of protected and unprotected solar cells. Cylindrical satellite was 24-in. in diameter and 76-in. in length; total weight in orbit was 222 lbs., including Scout fourth-stage motor case which was an integral part of the satellite assembly.
First commercial transmission of live TV via satellite and first transatlantic TV transmission, when telstar experimental communications satellite of at&t demonstrated vast new capabilities. Pictures were telecast from at&t center near Andover, Me., to telstar, then received and placed on all three major TV networks in the U.S. TV signals also were relayed from Andover, Me., to telstar, and then relayed to French antenna at Pleu-meur-Bodou on the Brittany peninsula and the British station at Goonhilly, Cornwall. In American relay experiment via telstar, at*t Board Chairman Fred Kappel in Maine called Vice President Johnson in Washington. In the first successful transatlantic TV transmission, picture of waving American flag was transmitted via telstar to both France and Britain, while transmission was also picked up at both Andover and Holmedel, N.J., and relayed to American TV networks. First voice transmission from space was the Christmas message of President Eisenhower which was broadcast from usaf Project Score satellite on December 18, 1960. echo i, passive communications satellite, provided a reflector for a host of communication experiments after its launch on August 12, 1960. The moon also had been used as a reflector in communications experiments, the first being a radar reflection on January 11, 1946, by the Army Signal Corps.
Vice President Johnson sent a congratulatory telegram to members of the oscar amateur radio satellite team: “For me this project is symbolic of the type of freedom for which this country stands— freedom of enterprise and freedom of participation on the part of individuals throughout the world.” oscar i was launched with discoverer xxxvi on December 12, 1961.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Michael E.	Lipschutz discovered diamonds in meteorite that fell in India 90 years ago, the findings published in Science. Dr. Lipschutz, an astrochemist, is first lieutenant in U.S. Army on active duty with nasa. His research was made with minute portion of the Dvalpur meteorite, which fell to earth May 8, 1872. Dr. Lip-scnutz observed two sizes of diamond crystallites in the meteorite—a few large crystals and many small ciystals. He concluded that diamonds in Dyalpur meteorite were formed by shock when meteorite’s parent body collided with another body in space. December 17: Although relay power supply remained low, Nutlev, N.J., ground station was able to obtain about 10 min. of usable telemetry data from the nasa satellite. Engineers were conducting intensive analysis of telemetry data in effort to diagnose cause of relay’s low battery voltage.
usaf launched Thor-Agena from Vandenberg afb, with unidentified satellite to be placed in polar orbit.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
Bernard Strassberg was appointed director of the fcc Office of Satellite Communications.
Weather Bureau announced weather data gathered by Tiros satellite was relayed to France via telstar satellite.
Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), flown with Thor-Agena launching alouette satellite on Sept. 29, measured low-frequency vibrations to Agena stage and spacecraft interfaces during Thor boost phase, it was reported. Tave provided “. . . data verifying the techniques used by Goddard and Lockheed in predicting the launch vibration environment of the Thor-Agena B rocket. Demonstration that these techniques were sound is most important in designing future experiments and structures for the Thor Agena vehicles,” Goddard project experimenter James Nagy said. Goddard Space Flight Center had designed, built, tested, and shipped 200-lb. Tave in only 20 days.
Edward R. Murrow, Director of usia, quoted on floor of the House by Congressman Ryan as stating that the Voice of America cannot financially afford to use telstar satellite for its overseas transmissions if the rates charged were the same as rates charged for use of undersea cables.
Army announced installation of new 102-foot antenna near Fort Dix built in conjunction with dod’s Project Advent, one link in development of a microwave radio-relay system for global communications using active-repeater satellites in a 22,300-mile-high orbit.
Combined U.S.-U.S.S.R. proposal for $100 million world-wide weather research program, including the use of earth satellites, was presented to a panel of the World Meteorological Organization (wmo) by Harry Wexler, Research Director of the U.S. Weather Bureau, and Viktor Bogayev, Ass’t. Director of the Soviet Hydrometrical Service, in Geneva, Switzerland. Proposed plan, if approved by the wmo Executive Committee, would then be considered by unesco.
dod activated nrl’s huge radar system near Chesapeake Beach, Md. Central feature of system was 150-ft.-diameter antenna, capable of obtaining signals from small aircraft or satellites from as far as 1,200 miles away and of receiving very strong signals from the moon (240,000 miles away). Radar wollid be used solely for research purposes.
dod removed secrecy classification from the satellite Anna, a joint geodetic satellite designed to enable measurement of intercontinental distances and the shape of the earth.
nasa witnesses appeared before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on communication satellites system. Deputy nasa Administrator Dryden stated that the U.S. wollid nave operational satellite commullications within five years.
dod announced it had canceled plans for immediate development of detector-interceptor satellite (unofficially called “Project Saint”), and that the project was being “re-oriented towards achieving longer-term” objectives. Official explanation was that Saint had been “bypassed by technological developments.”
usaf announced launch of unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb. This was 100th launch with Thor as space booster, 93 of which were considered successful. To date, Thor launched more satellites and probes into space than all other boosters combined, including pioneer i space probe, explorer vi scientific satellite, pioneer v space probe, and tiros i weather satellite as Thor-Able vehicle; and echo i balloon-satellite, oso i, ariel, telstar, and four Tiros satellites as Thor-Delta. Thor-Able-Star (Vanguard-derived upper stages) combination launched series of usn navigation satellites, Army communications satellites, and tri-service anna geodetic satellite. With Agena upper stage, Thor boosted series of usaf satellites as well as Canadian alouette satellite for nasa.
House of Representatives defeated by voice vote a bill sponsored by Rep. William F. Ryan which would have provided for Government ownership of the U.S. portion of a communications satellite system.
At aaas convention in Philadelphia, Dr. P. J. Coleman, ucla scientist, reported on the findings of mariner ii in the vicinity of the planet Venus. Coleman reported on the magnetometer experiment which showed no rise in the average value of the magnetic field above the “interplanetary value” during the fly-by of Venus: “The sensitivity, or lower limit, of the field’s change that could be observed on the magnetometer was five gamma . . . During the encounter, no changes were observed of this magnitude—five gamma—which might be attributed to Venus.” Observations thus far, he said, suggest that planets and satellites such as the moon that rotate slower than the earth have small magnetic fields.
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Systems, told House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics that nasa was “endeavoring to assist in determining as rapidly as possible which of the various system designs . . . should be used in the establishment of operational communications satellite systems.” He described various “orbital configurations proposed for communications satellites” and reviewed passive satellites (Echo) and active-repeater satellites (Telstar, Relay, Syncom). “From these experiments and others which will follow, we will obtain engineering data upon which to base operational system designs. . . . “Satellites of the near future must be designed to exhibit reliability and dependability, unattended in the space environment for many years, if we are to have economically viable communications systems.”
Announced that American Cable & Radio Corp., subsidiary of it&t, would conduct the first experiments in sending teletype messages between the U.S. and Great Britain via telstar communications satellite. Tests would be made between August 20 and September 7, in cooperation with at&t and British Post Office Department.
A very eventful day in space exploration: launched into orbit were ariel i, cosmos iv, and two unidentified usaf satellites; ranger iv impacted the far side of the moon; and a U.S.-Japa-nese probe was launched from Wallops.
Medium-angle camera on tiros vi meteorological satellite stopped transmitting pictures, during orbit 1,074, but satellite’s wide-angle camera was still sending pictures of “excellent quality.” Through orbit 1,073, the medium-angle, Tegea-lens camera took 12,337 cloud-cover pictures of which 11,131 or 90.2% were usable for weather analysis.
First attempted live radio broadcast between U.S. and Europe via telstar satellite was unsuccessful because of failing radio connections between Boston broadcasting station and Andover, Maine, relay station. Boston station received, but could not understand, Swedish message; Sweden station did not receive message from Boston, telstar performed perfectly, however.
Among the 22 scientists and engineers honored at Franklin Institute’s Medal Day ceremony, Philadelphia, were: Dr. Wernher von Braun, co-recipient of an Elliott Cresson Medal for his contributions to design and development of liquid-propellant rocket engines; Dr. James G. Baker, co-recipient of a Cresson Medal for his contributions to design of cameras for satellite tracking and aerial mapping; Dr. Wilbur H. Goss, recipient of Howard N. Potts Medal for engineering designs and technical supervision leading to development of first successful supersonic ramjet; and Dr. Charles H. Townes and Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow, recipients of a Stuart Ballantine Medal for their concept of an operable solid-stage, optical maser.
Management of Project Anna geodetic satellite program was transferred from dod to nasa. anna i-b, launched Oct. 31, would remain a responsibility of dod, with nasa scientific direction, but further launchings would be planned and executed by nasa.
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Department of Defense “strongly supports the objective of establishing a civil communications satellite system as expeditiously as practicable.”
In NAS-sponsored lecture on “Geomagnetism” for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. James P. Heppner of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said: “Each new space experiment adds to the list of unanswered questions about our electromagnetic environment.” He pointed to the changes in the scientific concepts of the boundary of the earth’s atmosphere and of relationships between the earth’s magnetic field and solar radiation that have resulted from data already acquired by satellites and probes. • Soviet officials indicated that newsmen may be allowed to cover the next Soviet space shot, a report later denied.
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee unanimously approved a bill for ownership and operation of the Nation’s commercial communications satellites.
explorer xv energetic particles satellite (S-3b) placed in orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: apogee, 10,960 mi.; perigee, 193.7 mi.; period, 315.3 min.; inclination, 18.02° to the equator; velocity at apogee, 6,015 mph; velocity at perigee, 21,598 mph. Launched to study artificial radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, the 98-lb. satellite was similar to explorer xii and explorer xiv which successfully measured energetic particles of natural radiation belts. Although satellite achieved orbit within predicted estimated range, it was spinning on its axis about 10 times faster than the planned 10-rpm rate. Unnamed spokesman said: “We have a high spin rate. It may well be that we’ll receive acceptable data from the main experiments, with some secondary experiments not able to function. . . . We won’t know for certain until we have made a thorough study of data over a period of days.” explorer xv carried experiments on magnetic field, ion-electron, electron flux, and distribution in pitch angle of electrons; transmitter; optical attitude sensor; and solar cells, including solar-cell damage experiment. Launching marked 13th successful satel-lite-orbitingby NASA-developed Delta vehicle.
U.S.S.R. announced launching of cosmos vi into earth orbit (apogee: 250 mi.; perigee: 126 mi.; period: 90.6 min.; inclination: 49°). As with other unmanned satellites in the Cosmos series which began on March 16, 1962, cosmos vi was stated to be a scientific satellite instrumented to explore radiation and other hazards to manned space flight.
Tiros weather satellites have been of major assistance in improving forecasts for airline operations. Mr. Silvio Simplicio, supervis-llig forecaster at New York International Airport, said: “We can do a job nowadays we never thought we could do years ago . . . With the aid of the Tiros satellites we never had it so good, and with the Nimbus meteorological satellite now undergoing tests, we expect even better results.”
Dr.Fred P. Adler, Director of Space Systems Div. of Hughes Aircraft Co., told House subcommittee of Committee on Science and Astronautics that the U.S. should not make a “major investment” in the Telstar communications satellite system until the Syncom system was proven or disproven. Dr. Adler said Hughes’ Syncom could perform better tha at&t’s Telstar and at one third the cost.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster, the fourth unidentified satellite reported launched from Vandenberg afb in ten days.
Each of the series of weather satellites, Tiros, Nimbus, and Aeros, would not only provide an advance in capability but would extend observations into vital new areas, Morton J. Stoller, nasa’s Director of Applications, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Speaking of Nimbus and Aeros, he said: “With one Nimbus in orbit, about half a day passes before we again see the same area. This will be a reasonably satisfactory time for the observation of such systems as cyclonic storms and hurricanes whose normal life is considerably greater than 12 hours. But, if we attempt to observe thunderstorm cells or tornadoes, systems whose life is appreciably less than 12 hours and often less than 6 hours wlli usually form, move and die without ever being detected. It is for this reason that the Aeros satellite with its capability for focusing on small short-lived storm systems and tracking them continuously, is considered to be an integral component of the eventual operational system.”
President Kennedy nominated 13 men to form satellite communications corporation, under terms of communications satellite law passed in August. The names of the nominees, who would serve only until establishment of corporation’s operating procedures and arrangement for stock sale, were sent to the Senate for confirmation.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 230-lb. payload to 116-mi. altitude before landing in Atlantic Ocean 59 mi. from launch site. Flight tested performance of three photometers developed for use in Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) satellite to be launched by nasa in 1964. Other instrumentation obtained data from the comparatively young stars Gamma Cassiopeia and Delta Persei, for use in star-evolution study being conducted by University of Wisconsin. Launch was under management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.
U.S.S.R. representative to U.N.’s Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space pledged that U.S.S.R. would cooperate “by deeds” in international programs on space. Promised reports to U.N. on Soviet satellite and rocket launchings, cooperation on communications satellites but on the basis of “international regional agreements.”
Testifying before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on communications satellite bill, Secretary of State Dean Rusk stated: “Most of the discussion of the foreign policy provisions of the bill has centered on whether they delegate to the corporation a part of the President’s authority to engage in international negotiations on behalf of the United States Government. Let me state most emphatically that they do not. . . . “I can assure the committee that we in the State Department are fully aware of the broad range of questions involving foreign policy interests that may arise in connection with this satellite communications system.”
In Paris, delegates from 10 nations—France, Britain, West Germany, Italy, Spam, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, and Sweden—signed a convention creating the European Space Research Organization (esro). Denmark and Norway nave indicated their intention of joining later. Prof. Pierre V. Auger of France was named Director-General of the new organization. With an eight-year budget of $300 mlliion, esro plans to carry out some 500 space experiments beginning with 10 sounding rockets in 1963, and the first European satellites in 1967. Launching vehicles will be supplied by another organization, the European Council for the Construction of Spatial Vehicles, which was created last March.
usaf announced it had placed in orbit 1.47-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellite (trs), launched piggyback aboard unidentified satellite using Thor-Agena vehicle, trs was orbited to map radiation in space and radio its findings back to earth. nasa communications and telemetry stations were supporting this usaf project.
Incorporators of communications satellite corp., authorized by the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, decided temporary headquarters for the new company would be established in Washington, D.C. Also at the meeting held in N.Y.C., the incorporators discussed name for the corp.; considered names of 50 persons for its management; and discussed budgetary requirements. Next meeting of group was set for Dec. 21, in N.Y.C.
Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.), Chairman of special House Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Government news management which is unique in peacetime.” He objected strongly to handling of news about military space launches: “All launches by military agencies, whether they are for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . All information about the billions of dollars spent by the military in space research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public information voice.” Moss recalled last September when nasa said that six Russian attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed. Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of news management that causes grave concern. ... If we cover up Russian successes ... we can certainly cover up our failures. This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people.”
House of Representatives passed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962 by a vote of 354 to 9, one creating machinery to operate the U.S. portion of a worldwide communications satellite system. Act (H.R. 11040) declared that it is the policy of the U.S. “to establish as soon as practicable a commercial communications satellite system ... in conjunction and cooperation with other countries ... to be responsible to public needs and national objectives, serve the communications needs of the United States and other countries, and contribute to world peace and understanding.” Act created a private corporation, one half of whose stock would be public owned, the remainder by communications companies. Three directors are to be appointed by the President, six elected by public stockholders and six by industry stockholders.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos iii, identified by Tass as another of the scientific satellites in a series to study weather, communications, and radiation. Orbital data: apogee, 448 mi. (720 km.); perigee, 142 (229 km.); period, 93.8; inclination, 48°59'.
In testimony before Senate subcommittee, Federal Communications Commissioner T.A.M. Craven reported that talks with Russian and other representatives had been encouraging on establishment of a global communications satellite system, fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow said that fcc “could live with” the proposed U.S. corporation with stock to be owned by the public and by communications companies. The fcc was, Minow stated, ill equipped to handle a Government-owned system.
Baltimore Sun published photograph of anna satellite taken by U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey tracking team, Spesuti Island (Chesapeake Bay), Md. Triggered by Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab., flashing lights onboard anna were photographed in project to aid geodetic studies; photographs would be made from points around the earth.
dod announced that Perkin-Elmer Corp. was completing a new 36-inch airborne telescope with 3-5 times as much resolution as any telescope on the ground. New instrument should finally answer the speculation about the so-called canals on Mars, the mysterious red spot on Jupiter, and perhaps the hidden surface of Venus. “This historic enterprise is only one more step forward, leading to large telescopes orbiting the earth in satellites and eventually constructed on the moon.”
Five-day filibuster in Senate against Administration-supported communications satellite bill was shelved under compromise agreement between bill’s supporters and opponents. Bill was referred to Foreign Relations Committee, which was ordered to report it back to the Senate not later than August 10.
Cleveland educators pointed out that the new transatlantic communications prompted by telstar and other satellites would be a tremendous incentive to foreign language study. Supervisor of Foreign Languages Eugene K. Dawson said: “I can think of nothing more exciting for our students than to hear direct broadcasts in the language they are studying.”
tiros ii was turned on late in April from unknown spurious source. An engineering investigation was run in early May before turning it off again. An analysis of the data indicated that at least some usable IR data was obtained. It was interesting to note that the IR electronics and tape recorder are still running after 17 months in orbit. Continued operation of the satellite was not feasible because of power problems.
nasa S-27 Project Officer reported Canadian alouette topside-sounder satellite was performing as expected. Launched Sept. 28, alouette was considered “a very successful experiment since it is producing not only ionospheric data but also information about the earth's magnetic field. . . . Operation of the satellite continues to be normal. . . .”
nasa’s tiros iv launched by a 3-stage Thor-Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral into a near-circular orbit with an apogee of 525 miles and perigee of 471. tiros iv featured the same basic types of equipment as in previous Tiros satellites, including cameras for cloud-cover photography and infrared sensors to measure temperatures at various levels in the atmosphere. Principal innovation was a camera with new type of wide-angle lens covering an area 450 miles on a side, which was expected to provide minimum distortion, nasa press conference reported that quality of tiros iv pictures was good.
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences reported out Communications Satellite Bill S. 2814, which was referred to the Senate Commerce Committee.
Senator Albert Gore (D-Tenn.) told U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee that U.S. was seeking following goals in space policy: “To be guided by the general principles already laid down by the United Nations for establishment of a regime of law in outer space, and to negotiate an extension of those principles by international agreement. “To conclude a treaty banning immediately the testing of any more nuclear weapons in outer space. “To preclude the placing in orbit of weapons of mass destruction. “To take all reasonable and practicable steps, including consultation with the world’s scientific community, to avoid space experiments with harmful effects. “To conduct a program which is as open as our security needs wlli permit and as cooperative as others are wlliing to make it. “To press forward with the establishment of an integrated global satellite communication system for commercial needs and a cooperative weather satellite system, both with broad international participation.”
Testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Sending communications satellite blli, Washington lawyer oseph L. Rauh, Jr., stated that the blli wollid “give away not only billions of taxpayers' money already spent to develop both space and space communications, but also the vast unknown discoveries of the future.” Another Washington lawyer, Benjamin V. Cohen, testified that the bill was “filled with pitfalls” and advised that its enactment now wollid be “premature.”
United Nations opened a public register on satellites in orbit. At the time of opening, it contained only the U.S. report submitted on March 5, which reported “72 U.S. space vehicles and associated objects in sustained orbit or space transit” as of February 15, 1962.
Beginning of third year of successful weather satellite operation by the U.S. nasa’s tiros i, launched on April 1, 1960, performed beyond all expectations, operated for 78 days, transmitted almost 23,000 cloud photos, of which some 19,000 were useful to meteorologists, tiros ii, launched November 23, 1960, transmitted more than 33,000 photos and one year after launch was still occasionally taking useful photos, tiros iii, launched July 12, 1961, took 24,000 cloud photos and was most spectacular as a “hurricane hunter.” tiros iv, launched February 8, 1962, has averaged 250 operationally-useful photos per day.
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos vii into orbit (apogee: 299 miles; perigee: 130 miles; period: 90.1 minutes; inclination: 65° to the equator), announcing that satellite would gather data on the “radiation hazards for long space flights.”
Second birthday of echo passive communication “balloon” satellite. Since launch, the mylar balloon had orbited the earth 9,000	times and traveled 277,257,677.67 miles; it had been used for approximately 150 communication experiments, echo proved that inflatable structures wollid survive for long periods in space, despite sensitivity to aerodynamic drag and solar radiation. Initial orbit was 1,049-mi. apogee and 945-mi. perigee; before first birthday, orbit was 1,350-mi. apogee and 580-mi. perigee; solar pressures caused orbit to become nearly circular again; then, on second birthday, orbit was 1,175-mi. apogee and 704-mi. perigee.
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
The Science Minister of France, Gaston Palewski, outlined plans for orbiting a satellite at a Cabinet meeting. The date had been set “almost to the hour” for the launching of the first French space satellite, although the actual date was kept secret, according to Information Minister Alain Peyrefitte.
Power supply onboard relay communications satellite remained too low to operate the satellite’s instrumentation properly.
Press conference held at nasa Hq. on the first international satellite, ariel i, with U.K. and U.S. participants. Orbital data was reported: 100.9 min. period; 242.1 st. mi. perigee; 745.4 st. mi. apogee; and 53.87° inclination to the equator. All experiments were reported as functioning. Dr. Robert Seamans, Associate Administrator, outlined nasa's International Program, and pointed to the initiation of the joint U.K.-U.S. S-51 satellite effort in 1959 and the international tracking network (8 non-U.S. stations) participating in the readout of ariel i. Sir Harrie Massey, chairman of the British National Committee on Space Research, pointed out the demands of science and space research for international cooperation.
usaf launched satellite from pmr with Thor-Agena booster.
Virginia State Exchange Clubs awarded Distinguished Virginian Award to William J. O’Sullivan, head of the Space Vehicle Group at Langley Research Center. Representative Thomas N. Downing, member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, made the presentation to O’Sullivan in recognition of his concept, design, and development work with the Echo satellite.
nasa Wallops Station launched Aerobee sounding rocket with GSFC-University of Colorado 208-lb. payload to an altitude of 68 miles, experiment orienting an ultraviolet spectrophotometer in the direction of the sun to study wave-length profile as a function of attitude and to calibrate instrumentation for future satellite flights.
tiros iv weather satellite was no longer transmitting pictures usable for global weather forecasting, although tiros iv was still taking “direct” pictures on command which were suitable for limited U.S. weather analysis. Infrared instrumentation was still providing information on the earth’s heat balance. Launched on
Advanced Syncom satellite, being developed for nasa by Hughes Aircraft Co., probably wollid carry four radio signal repeaters and could provide up to 300 two-way telephone channels or one TV channel. In 24-hour stationary orbit, one Advanced Syncom wollid be sufficient to link four continents (North America, South America, Europe, and Africa); three such satellites wollid provide worldwide coverage.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy answered a question on the possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space because of recent progress in formulating a joint proposal for the use of satellites for weather analysis: “We felt the best place to start was on weather, and any progress we can make on that would be very welcome. I must say that we strongly support any cooperative effort we could make on weather, predictions of storms, and all of the rest, and I hope it wlli lead to other areas of cooperation in space.”
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite with an AtlasAgena booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
In Voice of America broadcast, Dr. Leo Goldberg of the Harvard College Observatory reported that the accumulation of knowledge in solar physics is proceeding “at a fantastic rate, due to the inherent importance of the subject coupled with a sudden fusing of new instrumental techniques and theoretical ideas.” Dr. Goldberg noted that sun spots in the photosphere have been the object of intense study since Galileo but that “observations have not yet been synthesized to provide even an accurate description of their physical nature, let alone the mechanism of their origin.” Crediting high-altitude rockets for initial detection and occasional study of hidden solar radiation, detailed study requires continous observation of the sun on a 24-hour basis, which “can only be accomplished with the aid of one or more satellite observatories.”
Results of a usia poll in Britain showed that 82% of people questioned had identified telstar communications satellite by name, compared to 78% able to identify sputnik i in 1957. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science gnd Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to usia Director Edward R. Murrow, reported the survey’s results and said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
In editorial noting addition to fcc of 19 specialists to plan enforcement of communications satellite bill’s provisions for public interest protection, New York Times said: “the policymaking decisions confronting the fcc will become increasingly complex. How well and how wisely it discharges its duties will be of crucial importance in shaping the future of this mechanism [communications satellite] for bettering life through man’s conquest of space. . . . The march of science is sure to create many more situations in which the partnership of private and public efforts will entail a need for dependable instruments of Government regulation. This makes doubly urgent the successful exercise of the commission’s first test.”
nasa postponed launch of first Canadian satellite, Alouette, at Pt. Arguello.
Navy announced that transit v-a navigation satellite transmitter was now dead, which indicated that its power supply had failed completely, transit v had previously been unable to receive commands from the ground.
injun satellite was apparently unaffected by artificial radiation belt, reported Dr. Brian J. O’Brian, State University of Iowa physicist, injun orbits earth at about 500-mi. altitude, near center of the new radiation belt which had destroyed transmission from satellites ariel, transit iv-b, and traac. Dr. O’Brian speculated that injun transmission survived because satellite used low-efficiency solar cells, not as rapidly affected by radiation as high-efficiency cells used in ariel.
Establishment of joint aec-dod-nasa program for development of space nuclear reactor was announced by the three agencies. Col. Elwood M. Douthett (usaf) would head program office, responsible for research, technology, and component development phases of nuclear-electric power unit Snap-50/Spur. A 300-1,000 kw power unit capable of 10,000-hr. unattended operation, Snap-50/Spur would be unification of two existing projects: aec’s Snap (system for nuclear auxiliary power) and usaf’s Spur (space power unit reactor). Unit could be used as power source for “space missions, communications satellites, and other space applications.”
Composite I, the Navy’s 5-in-l satellite package, was launched from amr but failed to achieve orbit when the 2nd stage of the Thor-Able-Star booster rocket misfired.
aec displayed its latest radioisotope electrical power generator, Snap-9A, in exhibit at Whittier (Calif.) Civic Center. Designed to produce 20 watts of electrical power for several years, the nuclear generator was scheduled to power radio transmitters in usn Transit satellite to be launched into polar orbit within the next few months.
nasa announced 4,000-lb. micrometeorite satellite would be launched with Saturn test vehicles SA-8 and SA-9. Satellite, to unfold in space exposing surface area of 2,000 sq. ft., would be “bonus” experiment with chief missions of flight to be launch vehicle development test and atmospheric re-entry test of Apollo boilerplate spacecraft.
Nimbus meteorological satellite underwent rigorous test program at GE’s Missile and Space Vehicle Center at Valley Forge, Pa.
In talk at National Conference on Peaceful Uses of Space, William H.	Meckling, rand Corp. economist, stated that space-age economic payoffs are being exaggerated: “The exploration of space is a very exciting affair, indeed. ... If glamour displaces science in guiding national policy, however, the results may be disappointing. ... “A communications satellite system that charges prices not very much different from present prices and that must be constantly subsidized and protected from competition, is not much of an accomplishment. . . . “How much is it worth ... to have improved weather forecasts? In the absence of a market in which weather forecasts or weather information is sold, it is nearly impossible to answer such questions. . . . “Who is it in foreign nations that is impressed by our space accomplishments? How are their attitudes changed as a consequence? How does that change in behavior affect me as a citizen of the United States? . . .”
European Broadcasting Union ended a 20-nation conference in Seville, Spain, with an announcement that preliminary arrangements had been made for an international television service by use of communications satellites. Three U.S. television networks—cbs, nbc, and abc—would join with usia to operate the system from the U.S., transmitting from Andover, Maine, and the European receiving station would be the British General Post Office Facilities in Cornwall, which would relay the signals to other members of the European Broadcasting Union.
Announced that Anna 1-B geodetic satellite would not be launched until October because recently-created radiation belt might adversely affect Anna’s solar cells. Previously scheduled for August 14 launch, satellite would orbit in 600-mi. circular path where radiation of new belt reached peak intensity. Also reportedly postponed was launching of Canada’s S-27 Alouette satellite, planned for 625-mi. circular polar orbit. Center of peak electron intensity in the new belt had shifted from 16,000 mi. above the earth to 700 mi. Since its creation, the belt had decreased in intensity by about one hall; scientists expected the radiation would soon be dissipated.
International Committee on Space Research (cospar) meeting in Washington received summary reports of accomplishments of 1961 and plans for 1962 by the U.S. and U.S.S.R. A. A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences reported that the U.S.S.R. planned to send more men into orbit this year as well as several more unmanned scientific satellites, including one to study “the distribution and production of cloud systems in the atmosphere.” Dr. Richard W. Porter of the U.S. delegation specified that nasa planned to launch 22 instrumented satellites and space probes during the year. During 1961, Porter reported, the U.S. had launched: over 300 high-altitude research balloons; 866 weather rockets; more than 70 larger rockets not meant to carry payloads into orbit; and 31 instrumented satellites and deep-space probes.
dod announced anna geodetic satellite was functioning properly and its orbit was “near perfect.” anna’s flashing light system would be tested Nov. 4 with single series of five flashes triggered by onboard command. Full-scale operation of all systems would begin within a week with anna’s flashing light series triggered by ground command from Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, Md.
Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, speaking at Danish-Soviet Friendship Advancement Society in Copenhagen, attacked U.S. space projects. He charged U.S. launched satellites which spied on other countries, endangered space travel by its atmospheric nuclear tests, and put millions of copper needles in space, making space research difficult. He added: “I also know a certain country is considering plans to set up bases on the moon from which attacks on other parts of the world can be made.”
U.N. Space Registry revealed the U.S. had reported total of 66 satellite and spacecraft launchings as of Aug. 15, 1962. Of these, 25 were nasa launchings and 41 were U.S. military launchings. U.S. reports to U.N. Space Registry gave same data for nasa and military launchings: name of object; launch date; and satellite’s apogee, perigee, inclination, and period. U.S. reports also identified satellites in one of four categories: development of spaceflight technology; space research and exploration; practical applications of space technology; and non-functional objects.
White House officials announced the secrecy policy on launchings of military satellites was being re-examined.
First transmission of TV pictures in space, made via orbiting echo i. Signals beamed from mit’s Lincoln Laboratory at Camp Parks, Calif., bounced off echo i, and received at Millstone Hill near Westford, Mass. Picture telecast was that of the initials “M.I.T.” and travelled a distance between 3,000 and 4,000	miles, using equipment built for usaf Project Westford experiment. Since test used misshapen echo i, scientists felt that experiment should increase interest in passive satellites for communications once Echo II is orbited.
First “mystery” satellite in history of space exploration was launched, according to British magazine Flight International. Magazine said satellite orbited at height of 113 mi. and reentered earth’s atmosphere 12 days later. Satellite was listed as belonging to usaf, but spokesman said this was a “scientific guess based on our assessment of previous satellite launchings.” Launching was not confirmed, and no official U.S. listing included such a satellite.
cosmos iv, Soviet satellite launched on April 26, was successfully landed in a predetermined area, according to Tass announcement. All equipment for research into the upper atmosphere and space worked well during the 1,250,000-mile flight, Tass said.
mit scientists, headed by Prof. Louis Smullin, fired 13 separate bursts of light (using a ruby crystal maser) through 12-inch telescope at smooth area of the moon, then “caught” the reflection 2% seconds later in a 48-inch telescope. Ruby crystal rod was about six inches long and the red light would have been visible on the moon. Technique demonstrated was hailed as promising “a means of delivering power over vast distances to orbiting satellites.”
nasa announced that two technical notes propose new concept on the mechanics of solar heating of the upper atmosphere. Dr. Isadore Harris (TN-D-1443) and Dr. Wolfgang Priester (TN-D-1444) of Goddard Space Flight Center proposed that corpuscular radiation (i.e., solar wind) in association with hydromagnetic waves may be the energy source required to explain the results obtained from orbiting satellites. Harris’ note provided for the first time a diurnal picture of the thermosphere (120 to 2,050 kilometers above the earth’s surface). Priester’s note postulated the physical properties scientists are likely to encounter during a complete 11-year solar cycle when upper atmospheric conditions change according to solar flare activity.
First east-to-west transatlantic TV transmission, French station at Pleumeur-Bodou reflecting eight-minute telecast off 170-lb. telstar satellite in 15th orbit to at&t facility at Andover, Me. Program featured the French Communications Minister Jacques M. Marette and several entertainers. British Broadcasting Company announced that French transmission violated agreement with Britain and other European Broadcasting Union nations.
nasa and the Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperative testing of NASA-launched communications satellites. Japanese Ministry would make available a ground station for communication via artificial satellites; nasa wollid arrange for use of experimental communications satellites locally by Japan as well as jointly by U.S.-Japan.	_
John Rubel, Director of dod Office of Research and Development, testified before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that it was “highly doubtful that dod would undertake a new weather satellite program at this time,” and stated the military interest in weather satellite development was adequately protected by existing nasa and Weather Bureau programs.
Launching of telstar marked tenth straight successful flight of the 3-stage Delta rocket. The history of Delta goes back to the Thor-Able and the earlier Vanguard, from which it acquired its upper stages. Originally designed as an interim booster when nasa ordered twelve Deltas from Douglas Aircraft in April 1959, it achieved what nasa Administrator Webb called “the greatest level of reliability of any of our launch vehicles . . . .” The following satellites were orbited by Delta boosters: echo i, tiros ii, iii, iv, and v; explorers x and xii; oso i; ariel i; and
usaf launched unnamed satellite from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena B booster.
usaf launched two unidentified satellites, one boosted by a fourstage Blue Scout, the other by an Atlas-Agena B, both from pmr. U.N. Public Registry stated Blue Scout did not attain orbit.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy said: “I understand that part of today’s press conference is being relayed by the Telstar communications satellite to viewers across the Atlantic, and this is another indication of the extraordinary world in which we live. This satellite must be high enough to carry messages from both sides of the world, which is of course a very essential requirement for peace, and I think this understanding which will inevitably come from the speedier communications is bound to increase the well-being and security of all people here and those across the ocean. So we’re glad to participate in this operation developed by private industry, launched by Government, in admirable cooperation.”
nasa announced it would launch Canadian spacecraft Alouette (S-27) from Point Arguello, Calif., no earlier than September 26. Named for high-flying songbird of Canada, Alouette was first satellite to be both designed and built by a nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. The launching would mark nasa’s first orbiting attempt from Point Arguello and its first use of a Thor-Agena B launch vehicle.
nasa reported that power output of orbiting satellites ariel i, transit iv-b, and traac dropped after U.S. high-altitude nuclear blast on July 8, the energetic particles created by explosion damaging the satellites’ solar cells and thereby reducing their ability to convert sunlight into electricity. Many satellites, including telstar, showed no signs of damage from radiation. telstar’s solar cells survived because they were specially designed to withstand radiation in the Van Allen belts.
rca reported development of laser that directly converts sunlight into beams of coherent infrared radiation. Such devices would be potentially useful for communications, tracking, and geodetic measurement systems on board future spacecraft and satellites.
nasa announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded three three-month study contracts for design of an Advanced Oso (orbiting solar observatory) satellite, to be launched into polar orbit during 1965. Advanced Oso wollid aid development of method of predicting solar flares. Contractors were Republic Aviation Corp., Space Technology Laboratories, and Ball Brothers Research Corp.
cosmos xii satellite placed in orbit by U.S.S.R. Reported orbital data: 270-mi. apogee, 126.6-mi. perigee, 90.45-min. period, 65° inclination to the equator.
nasa officials said five experiments aboard explorer xv were working well but that two others had been adversely affected by satellite’s excessive spin rate. The two experiments were designed to determine decay rate of artificially created radiation.
General Thomas D. White, former usaf Chief of Staff, wrote in Newsweek article: “There are military requirements in space which this nation can fail to fulfill at its grave peril. ... I wish we would move faster on the satellite inspector and interception. We soon may need to verify what the Soviets have put into space; we may someday want to shoot it down. . . . Another intriguing concept . . . ought to have more steam and money behind it. This is the true ‘space plane.’ ”
Senate debate on legislation to permit private ownership of communications satellite systems began, with Sen. John O. Pastore as floor manager of the White House-backed bill.
The United Nations should tax commercial ventures in outer space, the ocean depths, and polar regions to obtain financial support, said Dr. Eugene Staley of the Stanford Research Institute in a memorandum to the United Nations. He also proposed that the U.N. should be given exclusive authority to license and regulate space traffic and satellites relaying telephone and television signals.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that the U.S.S. Skate and U.S.S. Seadragon, nuclear-powered submarines based in different oceans, had made underwater rendezvous beneath the ice at the North Pole. In answer to questions on the present and future significance of the flights of vostok iii and iv, President Kennedy said: “Well, we are second to the Soviet Union in long-range boosters. I have said from the beginning—we started late; we’ve been behind. It’s a tremendous job to build a booster of the size that the Soviet Union is talking about, and also of the much larger size which we're presently engaged in in the Saturn Program. “So we are behind. We’re going to be behind for a while. But I believe that before the end of this decade is out, that the United States will be ahead. But it’s costing us a tremendous amount of money. We’re putting a tremendous effort in research and development; but we just might as well realize that when we started—we started late. “Last year, as you know, we made a decision to go to the moon, with bipartisan support, and it’s going to take us quite a while to catch up with a very advanced program which the Soviets are directing . . . thereV no indication the Soviets are going to quit .... “But we’re in for some further periods when we’re going to be behind. And anybody who attempts to suggest that we’re not behind misleads the American people—we’re well behind—-but we are making a tremendous effort. “We increased, after I took office, after four months, we increased the budget for space by 50 per cent over that of my predecessor. The fact of the matter is that this year we submitted a space budget which was greater than the combined eight space budgets of the previous eight years .... “. . . we are spending for military purposes in space three times what we were in 1960—about $1,500,000,000. The two, at least at present, the two important points that should be kept in mind are the ability to build a large booster which can put a large satellite into atmosphere. That is being done, nasa is doing that, though there has been, of course, under Titan III contract, a booster program for the military. “In addition, the guidance, navigation, etc., that’s extremely important. That we are making a major effort in. And so that I recognize that there are those who oppose this program and then suddenly a month later say we ought to suddenly go ahead on a different basis. “The fact of the matter is that 40 per cent of the R and D funds in this country are being spent for space. That’s a tremendous amount of money and a tremendous concentration of our scientific effort. “I’m not saying that we can’t always do better. But I think the American people ought to understand it’s billions of dollars we’re talking about which I believe a month ago a prominent— mentioned as a great boondoggle. “I think it’s important, vital and there is a great interrelationship between military and peaceful uses of space. But we’re concentrating on the peaceful use of space which wlli also help us protect our security if that becomes essential. . . .”
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center (gsfc) announced it was training Italian scientists and engineers for the launching of Italy’s first satellite. The 165-lb. satellite would be launched by 1965 from platform in Indian Ocean off eastern coast of Africa.
A simple satellite plotter costing only a few hundred dollars and accurate to within 10 miles on any orbit was devised by Major William Gamble of the Canadian Defence Research Board. The Defence Research Board would use the device to give quick fixes on satellite orbits to radar stations.
usaf launched unidentified satellite (Alpha Theta) from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena booster.
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow testified before Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the Administration-backed communications satellite bill. Urging prompt passage of the bill, Kennedy said it was “one of the most important pieces of legislation offered by this Administration” and that he was “perfectly satisfied it wlli protect the public interest.” This was the eleventh time Minow had testified for the bill, which the House had passed on May 3 and which previously had been approved by two other Senate committees.
