U.S.S.R. unannounced launching (1963 1-A, 1-C), with fragments re-entering from Jan. 5 through Jan. 11. Launch reported by gsfc in Satellite Situation Report, June 15, 1963. (gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., June 15,1963)
nasa announced award of $97,000 study contract to Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., for preparation of plan to use satellites for collection of weather and oceanographic data from unmanned weather stations, buoys, and balloons. Data collection satellite would interrogate each station, store information on magnetic tape, then transmit it to ground retrieval station upon command, (nasa Release 63-116)
Both U.S. communications satellites, telstar i and relay i, came to life, telstar i, silent since Nov. 23, responded to signals sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories; later in the day, relay i, silent since first being orbited Dec. 13, responded twice to television test patterns sent from New Jersey and Maine. (Wash. Post, 1/4/63, Al)
The first live transmission of TV signals across the Pacific Ocean was accomplished via relay i communications satellite. The U.S. ground station in the Mohave desert transmitted the pictures, which were relayed by the satellite to Japan’s new Space Communications Laboratory north of Tokyo. Viewers in Japan saw and heard taped messages from Japanese Ambassador Ryuji Takeuchi and nasa Administrator Jame6 E. Webb, as well as scenic and cultural sequences. A message of greeting that President Kennedy had taped for the occasion was deleted when word came in of his assassination a few hours before the broadcast was to take place, abo- and nbc-tv shared in producing the program. ( nasa Release 63-256; NTT, 11/24/63,14)
Five New Jersey newspapermen held first press conference through space, using relay i communications satellite in 25-min. broadcast to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Photo of newsmen sent via relay i during conference was of good quality, Rio officials said. (AP, Santa Monica Evening Outlook, 4/17/63)
Third birthday of echo i balloon satellite, launched into orbit Aug. 12,1960. World’s first artificial passive communications satellite, the 100-ft. inflatable mylar sphere demonstrated use of radio wave reflection for global communications, echo i was still orbiting the earth, having traveled some 425 million mi., and was still usable for communication. nasa announced G. C. Schjeldahl Co. had been selected to build Echo II satellite, scheduled to be placed in orbit this winter. Under $362,000 contract Schjeldahl would build three models, one for static-inflation tests, one for orbital flight, and one for backup. echo ii would be larger and more rigid than its predecessor. (nasa Release 63-183; Rep. Joseph E. Karth, CR. 8/12/63, A5097; AP, NYT. 8/13/63)	_	_
U.S-S.R. and U.S. were reported by the Washington Post to have reached agreement on frequency allocation for communications satellites at the International Telecommunications Union-sponsored conference in Geneva. In previous years the Soviet Union had opposed any space activity by nongovernmental organizations, but in recent months had dropped its opposition to private firms, such as the U.S. ComSatCorp, operating in space. Original positions at the conference had seen the U.S. ask for reservation of 2,725 megacycles in a highly sought-after portion of the microwave spectrum, while the U.S.S.R. had favored only 1,600 me. Details of the compromise position would emerge when both nations went before the full convention. (Wash. Post, 11/5/63) pch-1, patrol craft hydrofoil built by Boeing, flight-tested by U.S. Navy at speeds of more than 45 knots. (AAA, January 1964, p. 5) Partial results announced by Univ. of Stockholm scientists from the U.S.-Swedish series of sounding rocket experiments made in July and Aug. 1963 showed extremely low temperatures to be associated with the presence of noctilucent clouds. Sounding rocket data from the Kronogard firings indicated that up to 35 mi. temperatures closely followed the profile found over the U.S. and other countries. The temperature increased from about — 50°C ( —58°F) at 10 mi. to slightly above 0°C (32°F) at 32 mi., where absorption of the sun’s ultraviolet radiation by ozone molecules causes a warming. Above this level, temperatures decreased again to a normal minimum at 50 mi. of 120°C ( —184°F). When noctilucent clouds were present at this altitude, however, the temperature dropped to what appears to be the lowest temperature ever recorded in nature— —143 °C (— 225° F). This would confirm earlier findings in 1962 that noctilucent clouds om COIRnOSed of cIAn^ tyqrfioloo orvoforl irifli ioa /\mba PaImca 63-248)r	* — v —	“	~ Laser beam bounced off the moon by Soviets was detected by Crimean Astrophysical Observatory. (AAA, January 1964, 5) Editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology by Editor Robert Hotz criticized the national space policy as “badly shredded” by President Kennedy’s recent statements, called for a new statement of policy “based on solid elements of national interest” before the FY 1965 budget debate begins in Congress. (Av. Wk., 11/4/63) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, spoke to the aiaa/ asd Vehicle Design and Propulsion Meeting in Dayton, Ohio, on the future of areonautical systems. He predicted a continued need for aircraft in the weapons inventory, cited particular improvement potential in cargo aircraft and V/Stol. Another potential was that “future space operations may require the use of recoverable boosters, for reasons of both efficiency and economy. The first stage of such a booster system would probably be a recoverable air-breathing vehicle.” Two technical areas of particular promise were identified as materials and propulsion. “We have identified new materials that are stronger, lighter, stiffer, and able to withstand higher temperatures. For example, new types of metallic fibers may be feasible in forming extremely strong, lightweight composite structures. If such projected applications prove to be practical, then we may be in for a revolution in aircraft design and fabrication. “There also appear to be high payoffs in the propulsion area. New technology should enable us to achieve better thrust-to-weight ratios and to move away from single point design. “. . . Engineers are almost always overly optimistic about the next two or three years and unduly conservative in their estimates of a 15-year period or more. There were study groups in the 1950’s that denied the practicality and feasibility of icbm’s, the turbofan, and hypersonic flight. Ten years ago, so-called ‘sound engineering judgment’ would not have forecast the present generation of systems. The point is that ‘engineering judgment’ does not always give the best evaluation of long-range predictions. The crucial question to ask is, ‘Does a new concept defy known scientific principles?’ If it does not, then the technical problems will eventually be overcome.” (afsc Release 310-R-9<)
usaf announced launch of unidentified satellite into polar orbit from Vandenberg afb using improved Thor-Agena booster (tat). This was second attempt and first successful launching of the improved Thor, thrust of which was uprated from 170,000 lbs. to about 330,000 lbs. by addition of three solid-propellant rocket motors to the liquid-fueled power plant, (dod Release 374-63)
nasa had launched only six of a projected 40 major satellites and probes so far in 1963, according to Aviation Week. Though all six had been successful, it was a big drop from the 18 launches in 1962. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., attributed some of the drop in the launch rate to “squaring away difficulties which existed before nasa was created or which developed in the early days of the agency.” He included Centaur and Nimbus in this category. “As for some of the other delays and postponements, I think they are due to our involvement in projects where we are doing things for the first time. In building spacecraft such as ego, and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, we are learning how to design, assemble and test advanced spacecraft—a new generation of spacecraft that are much more complex than the ones we have been flying so successfully.” (Av. Wk., 11/18/63, 30, 31)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, appearing before Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences, reviewed status of nasa space sciences programs. “During 1962, the nasa space exploration program entered a new phase of its evolution. We passed beyond the relatively simple satellites and probes which characterized our early years and are heavily engaged in the development of advanced spacecraft and launch vehicles to accomplish the more rewarding, but more difficult missions. In doing so, we met with both dramatic successes as well as some temporary delays. In general, however, the year was one of intense activity and excellent progress. . . .” (Testimony)
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
At Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, results from ariel i scientific satellite were presented. Data from ariel confirmed ionospheric temperature relationship with latitude as detected by alouette i. Solar x-ray detectors found solar flares are made up of two phases—(1) heating of sun’s corona above sunspot, increasing x-ray flux by factor of 10; and (2) quiet period marked by flux leveling off at accelerated level, followed by streams of electrons pushed into chromosphere, causing x-ray emissions at 500 times greater than normal. (Av. Wk., 3/25/63, 26)
United Arab Republic announced it planned to orbit a weather satellite this year. (Wash. Daily News, 4/23/63)
In editorial on “Apollo and Its Critics,” Aviation Week and Space Technology Editor Robert Hotz said: “Like all great pioneering ventures, the Apollo manned lunar landing program is the target of a continual barrage of carping. This anti-Apollo chorus usually reaches a crescendo in the spring, when the National Aeronautics and Space Administration budget is facing significant congressionl decisions, and dwindles to a barely audible pianissimo after every successful U.S. and Russian manned space flight. “This year the critics’ chorus is louder than ever and studded vvith many familiar faces ranging from ex-president Eisenhower, who still wishes the space age would dry up and blow away, to an esoteric wing of the scientific community which appears to be disturbed by the fact that non-scientist types, such as engineers and pilots, nave crept into the space program and are running their portion of it with vigor and enthusiasm directed toward specific goals that some scientists regard as unseemly. . . . “The scientific community has traditionally provided the most solid opposition to the manned space flight program, but there has been a steady rate of conversion from critics to supporters during the Mercury years. This has been helped by the fact that it has become obvious that nasa does not intend to neglect scientific exploration because of the Apollo priority. As the nasa program has unfolded with the years, it has become apparent that considerable scientific exploration by instrumented satellites and probes is a necessary preliminary to extending the parameters of manned space flight. It is also evident that manned space flight itself will offer a greater opportunity for scientific exploration of the universe than could ever be possible using only remotely controlled instruments and data transmission .... There are a great many valid, vital reasons why this nation must continue to press its exploration of space at the maximum feasible pace. “We intend to discuss them as the Apollo debate continues. But for the moment, there is no better summation of the purpose in this national effort than that stated by Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s director of manned space flight and the chief engineer of the Apollo program, when he said in a recent speech:
Dr. Eberhard Wahl, afsc scientist, announced development of Phototype Optical Surveillance System—electro-optical telescope capable of tracking spacecraft more than 3,000 mi. away. Telescope’s three main components: ‘27-in. optic for gathering light, electrooptical device for measuring light, and computer-command system for controlling tracking of satellites. (AP, NTT, 5/4/63, 26) _
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., on board a Thor-Agena booster. {M&R, 11/18/63,12)
relay i communications satellite, its power supply voltage and temperature returned to normal, responded to command signals turning on its telemetry transmitter and encoder, nasa planned to resume normal experimental operations with the satellite March 14. relay i had been turned off because of severe power drain encountered March 9. (nasa Release 63-56)
Bochum Institute for Satellite and Space Research, Germany, announced reception of 15-min. radio transmission on frequencies normally used by Soviet spacecraft. Commercial radio station in Paris broadcast that U.S.S.R. had placed a man into space but did not elaborate. Soviet news agency Tass made no mention of space launching, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/4/63)
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite transmitted 38 sec. of complete data, and officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center were hopeful the satellite might eventually resume normal operations, explorer xiv developed transmission difficulty Jan. 10, after 100 days of nearly continuous transmission. Project Manager Paul G. Marcotte of Goddard reported explorer xiv received less than 10 per cent degradation from space radiation since its launch Oct. 2; project officials did not believe radiation damage to be cause of satellite’s transmission malfunction. (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
tiros v meteorological satellite, launched June 19, 1962, entered its eleventh month of operation, surpassing previous longevity production record of tiros n. Since launch, tiros v had collected and transmitted more than 53,000 cloud-cover photographs of which more than 42,000 were meteorologically usable, (nasa Release 63-77)
The Rosman, N.C., tracking and data acquisition facility was dedicated by nasa. A key station in nasa’s Satellite Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (stadan), the 85-ft.-diameter parabolic antenna at Rosman would be used to track and receive the large flow of telemetered data from the large orbiting observatories and would relay the data by telephone and radio to gsfc for processing and analysis, (nasa Release 63-240)
Letter from Harold S. Geneen, it&t President, to Sen. Warren G. Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee, and Rep. Oren Harris, Chairman of House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, was made public. Replying to rca Chairman David Sarnoff’s April 2 letter to Leo D. Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, and to Former fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow’s May 31 letter to President Kennedy, Geneen said he “must respectfully disagree with General Samoff’s suggestion that the merger [of international communications carriers] should be compulsory and include all international communications facilities, both voice and record, under the Communications Satellite Corporation.” Reasons against such merger: it would run counter to historical Government opposition to monopoly in any field; it&t believed that private enterprise should not abandon field to which it has made substantial contribution; and it&t believed that ComSatCorp was established as “a private corporation and intended ... to be a carrier’s carrier” rather than competition for carriers using its services. “The real problem, as we see it, is rather to strengthen competition than abandon it ... . “We have also urged that the international record communication carriers be permitted to merge, as a means of offsetting American Telephone and Telegraph’s dominant position in international voice communications . . . .” at&t also issued statement opposing rca Chairman Sarnoff’s proposal to create single communications company: “. . . The present arrangement ... is a good one. It is based on the principles of good service and sound economics and is working well. We see no reason to experiment with substitutes of doubtful merit . . . .” (Smith, NYT, 6/20/63) Ju/ne 19: faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told aiaa meeting in Los Angeles: “First, technically, a superior supersonic transport is feasible. “Second, it is an expensive aircraft to develop, but not fantastically so, and certainly not beyond the resources of the greatest industrialized nation in the world. “Third, there is a market for an American transport of perhaps 200 to 250 first-round orders. If we do not develop an American sst, then the entire market, which could be something like 400 planes during perhaps a decade of first-round buying, will fall to our overseas competitors. Among the purchasers would be the airlines of the U.S., which would be forced to purchase planes produced overseas in order to remain competitive. “Fourth, in the event that we did not proceed with sst development, the Nation would default its position of preeminence in international commercial aviation—with all that would entail in practical terms and in less measurable terms of confidence and prestige . . . .” (Text)
Reported that State Dept, officials were “dismayed” and surprised Kv ronArfc frnm T ArtHnn Hiqf TT TT Cnvommpnf liorl onTPhrl tn ^	---- ^	^ 'y ~~ —"	~ establish independent space communications system with 12 British companies. U.S. was hoping its Communications Satellite Corp. could become the U.S. participant in a global communications system, a noncompetitive, nonduplieative, and cooperative system. State Dept, cabled London to request clarification as to whether U.K. was actually moving to establish a competitive— and potentially duplicating—space communications system. (Finney, NTT [West. Ed.], 3/13/63)
A Russian Embassy official in Washington quietly collected from the U.S. State Department the Russian satellite fragment that fell in Manitowoc, Wis., on September 5, 1962. U.S.S.R. had previously ignored U.S. offer, made at U.N. last fall, to return the re-entered fragment. (TVos A Post, 1/8/63,1)
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Cdr. of afssd, reported to ias that AF Systems Command considered three fundamental projects as “space programs of prime military necessity: rendezvous and inspection, space station development, and communications satellites.” (Av. IF*., 1/28/63,26f) 741-623 O—64-3 Chemist Harold C. Urey said that only about three per cent (about $15 billion) of this country’s gnp was spent on education, and that amount “should be doubled.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/24/63, A4)
U.S. proposal for a major international effort to establish worldwide weather forecasting system was presented by Richard N. Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, at meeting of American Geophysical Union and American Meteorological Society, in Washington. Proposed system would collect and analyze weather data on regional and global—rather than national—basis; it would call for expansion of ground weather stations and launching of w eather satellites to obtain global views of weather patterns. He noted that recent U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement for coordinated weather satellite launchings would “give increased significance to this international effort.” (Finney, NYT, 4/20/63)
dod launched unidentified satellite from pmr employing Thor-Agena D launch vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
dod launched two unidentified satellites and Tetrahedral Research Satellite (trs n) using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle. 3-lb. trs n was to measure charged particle intensity in Van Allen belts. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev formally welcomed Cosmonauts Valery F. Bykovsky and Valentina V. Tereshkova in ceremony before crowds in Moscow’s Red Square. Later, in Kremlin reception, the cosmonauts were awarded Hero of the Soviet Union and Pilot-Astronaut citations as well as Order of Lenin and Gold Star medals. (Topping, NYT, 6/23/63,1,8) Jv/ne 33: explorer xiv was eclipsed by the moon—a possible first in satellite history. Satellite was some 70,000 km. from the earth with apogee portion in the sun’s direction when a 19-min. shadow occurred between approximately 0151 and 0210 UT. (gsfc Historian)
Data from explorer xvii indicated the earth is surrounded by belt of neutral helium atoms, scientists of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said at American Geophysical Union meeting. Based on preliminary data received one day after launch, Goddard scientists said explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite had sent back more than eight hours of scientific information on physics and chemistry of tenuous gases making up the earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 63-79)
A solar array characteristics test was run on the orbiting syncom: n synchronous-orbit communciations satellite. The test (on Nov. 22) found a power loss of 20% from the effects of solar radiation on the solar cells during four months in orbit. The text confirmed the desirability of changing the next Syncom satellite—Syncom -c__„ /„________ii„ “liUlll ^Jj 11 ACIIO .1 .000*111. tjuai V£j OOVCl oliuco tu u/ p CCllO with ,012-in. quartz cover slides. The newer n/p cells had shown in ground evaluation to last up to 20 times longer than conventional p/n cells, (gsfc Historian; Goddard News, 12/2/63, 2) Reported in Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering that a “hitchhiker” satellite called Satar (Satellite-Aerospace Research) would be built and tested by General Dynamics. A bullet-shaped spacecraft 12 ft. long and 30 in. in diameter, Satar would be incorporated in Atlas missiles used for training missions. It would consist of a payload section capable of accommodating “several hundred pounds of experiments” and a propulsion section including a solid-propellant motor, guidance, attitude control, and related equipment. Satar would be released after Atlas burnout and coast about 15 min. before its own engine ignited to send it into orbit. First flight was scheduled for next spring. {A&AE, Nov. 1963,158)
Dr. Dwain W. Warner, curator of ornithology at Minnesota Museum of Natural History, proposed in Natural History magazine that scientific satellites be used in tracking animal migrations. Dr. Warner proposed animals be tagged with transistor radios and batteries weighing y2 to 2 oz; satellite in 200-mi. polar orbit would pick up signals and transmit them to scientists who could plot animals’ locations and correlate them with other data from satellites. Transistors had been successfully tested with small animals and large birds, but tracking by ground stations was hindered by horizon line; satellite with 24 ground receiving stations could provide constant contact with migratory creatures. (AP, Balt. Sum,, 2/6/63)
Preliminary results of the first lunar contact with the new Lincoln Laboratory high-resolution radartelescope were reported at the 44th annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union by Vernon L. Lynn. The report was jointly authored with M. D. Sohi-gian and E. A. Crocker, also of Lincoln Laboratory. Lynn said that the first radar reflections from the lunar surface obtained at a frequency of 35,000 me., more than four times that of previous radar probes, suggest that the moon’s surface is fairly rough with respect to the dimensions of the 8.6-mm. waves employed. In addition to the advantage of being able to view a smaller area than previously possible, the new radartelescope would provide data on the absorption and reflection characteristics of the lunar surface at a new wavelength, offering additional clues to its composition and roughness. (Av. Wk., 5/6/63,91) During April: Alexander Kakunin, Soviet Vice-Minister for Communications, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. would soon launch synchronous system of communications satellites for transmitting television worldwide. Using Cosmos satellites, the service would be called “cosmosvision.” (M&R, 4/8/63,9)
nasa spokesman was quoted bjr Missiles and Rockets as saying that nasa would switch many of its satellite programs from the Delta launch vehicle to the Thrust Augmented Delta (tad), tad would use the Delta second stage with the usAF-developed Thrust Augmented Thor (tat) ,which uses three strap-on solid rockets to raise thrust from 170,000 lbs, to 330,000 lbs. and provide 200 lbs. increase in payload in a 300-mi. orbit. Many nasa programs had been pushing the payload limit of the Delta, Those benefiting from the new booster were reported to be Syncom, the Bios satellites, Oso, Tiros, and the Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp). (M<&R, 10/21/63,15)
164-lb. payload sent to 127-mi. altitude with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station in experiment to obtain nighttime electromagnetic noise and propagation data. Included in payload were three sweeping receivers and a broadband receiver of the type to be included in Eogo satellite (Eccentric Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) next year. Preliminary telemetry evaluation indicated all experiment objectives were met. (Wallops Release 63-65)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director nasa Goddard Institute of Space Studies, speaking at the American Society of Newspaper Editors, attempted to explain the “scientific effort” in the context of the entire space program: “I think, personally, that there is also a powerful general stimulus wbich comes from the need for developing new ideas and technologies to operate in and master a new environment. One must go back to the explorations of the late 15th Century to find a parallel to what we are about to witness in the next 30 to 50 years. Those explorations 450 years ago and their results awakened interest in the world and an intellectual ferment which were the necessary foundations for the development of a scientific revolution. “The ideas of a scientific revolution could not have flowered in a static society with fixed ideas of what could and could not be done. It took the explorations of the 15th and early 16th centuries to shake established notions enough to permit the birth of modem scientific thought. In a subtle and deep sense, this is one of the reasons for the interest of the scientist in the exploration elements of the space program .... “I think that the history of the last 100 years demonstrates that we need not expect a very long wait before space research will feed back into everyday affairs and play a role in them. “In the 19th century, the lag was rather long. The Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell published a treatise on electromagnetism in 1864, but not until 1901 did Marconi transmit the first wireless signal across the Atlantic. “More recently, in 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron in England. Fermi set the first atomic pile critical at Stagg Field in Chicago in 1942, only 10 years from the basic discovery to a very formidable application. “Still more recently, Bardeen and Brattain and Shockley at the Bell Labs discovered the transistor in 1948 and only six years later the first transistorized power amplifier appeared on the market .... “. . . the exploration of the moon has a very special role to play, precisely for the reason that would make one think the moon is uninteresting scientifically—specifically because the moon is a relatively lifeless body. It has no atmosphere, no oceans, nothing to wear away the record of the history of the solar system, and of whatever has occurred to the surface of the moon since its birth. “On the earth, record of even tremendous surface events disappear within 10 to 50 million years, a very short time compared to the age of the planet, and mountains form and are turned over. With the action of weather, everything changes and disappears as the millions of years go by. That is probably also true on Mars and Venus which resemble the earth in this respect. But the moon has no oceans, no atmosphere, no mountain-building activity that we can discern. For this reason, the moon is a kind of Rosetta Stone of the solar system from which we can read the past. That is why it is so interesting to the scientist. He has the opportunity to find there the record of the early history of the solar system. “To the student of the origin of the earth, the moon is even more interesting scientifically than Mars or Venus. “. . . if the moon and the planets were formed out of gas and dust in the condensation that surrounded the primitive sun, then we can expect such condensation to accompany the birth of every star. There are one hundred billion stars in our galaxy alone. Nearly every one of them we expect to have a planetary system around it. Some small fraction of those planets will be at the right distances from their suns, from their stars, and of the right size to have conditions favorable to the development of physical life as we know it. “If that is the case, it follows that life must be a relatively commonplace thing, physical life in the universe . . . “. . . there is one small instrument on the Tiros which has not achieved as much attention as it deserves. The size of a quarter, it is a black disc which detects the infrared energy radiated from the top of the atmosphere. That is the energy which is reflected back into space from the earth. We can accurately estimate the energy coming to the earth from the sun and we can take the difference between the two and calculate the amount of energy remaining in the atmosphere. “This energy deposited in the atmosphere constitutes the driving force that generates weather activity. With the aid of satellites, for the first time we can measure the energy difference and hope to break through from the day-to-day forecasting, which depends on immediately preceding events, to the week-long or two-week forecasts.” (Text)
Bell Telephone Laboratories announced telstar i communications satellite disconnected its storage batteries and stopped communicating, apparently after misinterpreting a ground command. As in previous communications blackout in November, shutoff occurred as telstar’s changing orbit brought it into strong sections of radiation belt. This pattern led Bell engineers to “suspect that the continued inhibiting effects of radiation on transistors” is to blame, according to Bell spokesman Bruce Stasser. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/21/63, AS)
explorer xix was launched by nasa from pmr on a Scout booster. The 17.8-lb. polka-dot balloon satellite was placed in orbit by a new fourth stage (X-258) of the Scout booster. Apogee was lower than planned and resulted in an orbital period almost six min. less than planned. This, plus a very weak signal from the tracking beacon on the satellite, caused several days’ delay in confirming satellite inflation and in defining the orbital data. Optical ana radar tracking confirmed orbital data as: apogee, 1,488 mi.; perigee, 366 mi.; period, 115.8 min.; inclination, 78.62°. explores xix, like explorer ix, is an atmospheric density satellite. Because of its large surface area and very low mass such a satellite is very sensitive to fluctuations in density in the upper atmosphere. These changes, largely caused by variations in solar radiation, can be measured by fluctuations in the satellite’s orbit, explorer xix was launched into polar orbit and, when tracked by nasa and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory for a good portion of an H-yr. solar cycle, should provide atmospheric density data on the earth’s high latitudes comparable to those provided by explorer ix for the lower latitudes, (ex. xix Project Office, Lauc, W. J. O’Sullivan; nasa Releases 63-271 and 281)
Delta Day at Cape Canaveral, the nasa Group Achievement Award presented to Delta Project Group of Goddard Space Flight Center, manager of Delta space vehicle for nasa. At Delta Day ceremony, nasa Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell remarked that the “Delta Team has had 16 times at bat, and a hitting streak of 15 in a row, for a batting average of .937. That is good hitting .... We would wish that all launch vehicles could boast of records equal to that of Delta. The scientific community would, I am sure, wish me to express its appreciation with a hearty ‘Well done!’ ” Directing additional remarks to Delta Launch Team at Cape Canaveral, Dr. Newell said: “You have turned out the most cost-effective launch vehicle in the nasa stable. It has given us the highest return on the investment of any vehicle we have, and that is of fundamental interest to us. “About 26% of all nasa attempts to place a satellite of any kind in orbit have been made with Delta, and 45% of our successful earth satellites placed in orbit have been put there by Delta. At this point in time, as new as we are in our space effort, that is an impressive record . . . .” (nasa Release 63-39; Text)
relay i communications satellite transmitted its first transatlantic television programs, sending British and French viewers clear pictures of ceremonial unveiling of Mona Lisa in Washington and 10 min. of network program “Today.” (upi, Wash. Post, 1/10/63^.3)
Canadian government authorized four additional satellites for ionospheric research in joint U.S.-Canadian space program. {M&R, 3/11/63, 9) During March: Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the soldier and statesman for whom nasa Marshall Space Flight Center was named, donated to the center the Executive Order naming nasa's Huntsville, Ala., facility and the fountain pen used by President Dwight D. Eisenhower for signing it. (Chattanooga Times, 3/10/63)
In speech reprinted in the Cong. Record, William O. Bennett, VP for research and engineering of the Bulova Watch Co., cited 145 examples of “technological fallout” from space research that have been produced in consumer byproducts. He also pointed to the development of the electronic timepiece (not developed in space research) powered by a mercury cell which was used in four families of satellites. {CR, 4/30/63, A2595-96)
At Fourth Congress of the World Meteorological Organization, being held in Geneva, U.S. delegation circulated paper describing plans to orbit a Nimbus weather satellite in 1963, the satellite to provide daily photographic observations of the globe. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 4/8/63)
usaf launched unidentified satellite for geophysics research purposes from nasa Wallops Station, Va., using Scout booster. (AP, Wash,. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rept.)
European space organization, Eurospace, issued report recommending program of communications satellites, time-keeping and navinational satellite, and rocket development. Report said Europe’s first operational communications satellite could be launched by 1968 and suggested a network of 12 communications satellites or, as alternative, two stationary satellites, in equatorial orbit] a light satellite orbiting at about 625-mi. altitude as time-keepmg and navigational aid; development of launch vehicles based on existing models of European nations and eldo (European Launcher Development Organization); and studies on equatorial launching site. Eurospace is private association of 125 members representing industries, professional bodies, and industrial associations from nine countries—Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and West Germany. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/9/63; NYT, 4/9/63)
usaf announced it would attempt second Project West Ford orbiting belt of 400 million copper filaments “in the near future.” First such attempt, Oct. 21, 1961, was unsuccessful because container failed to eject the needles, mit Lincoln Laboratory, conducting experiment for usaf, said in fact sheet that “no other communication method suggested to date, by satellite or otherwise, offers comparable reliability, in terms of global coverage with virtually complete invulnerability to destruction or jamming . . . .” (dod Release 637-63; Finney, NYT, 5/7/63, 29; Laurence, NYT, 5/12/63, E9)
usaf Space Systems Div. requested proposals from 34 firms for development of medium-altitude communications satellite system. (M&R, 2/4/63,11)
More than 400 German scientists and technicians were reported to be working for Egyptian government on first Egyptian-made rocket and nuclear warhead. First group of German atomic scientists arrived in Egypt in 1954, Israeli sources said. (London Sunday 741-623 0—64--8 Times, in Wash. Post, 3/24/63, A17; London Observer News Service, in Wash. Post, 3/24/63, A17) Mardh 25: Three major U.S. television networks each broadcast seven-minute programs from Paris to New York via relay i communications satellite. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/63)
S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite Center of U.S. Weather Bureau, was awarded first Astronautics Space Research Medal of British Interplanetary Society. {A&AE, 8/63,119)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station, Va., sending a 200-lb. payload 115 mi. into the upper atmosphere to measure ultraviolet radiation. Experiment was part of a continuing program to develop techniques for measuring ultraviolet dayglow and from the measurements determining the physical processes taking place in the upper atmosphere. Such techniques would also be useful as instrumentation on satellites studying the atmospheres of other planets. (Wallops Release 63-103)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified satellite and a hitchhiker radiation monitoring satellite that separated in orbit on July 1,1963. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/27/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1/27/64)
January 15: telstar communications satellite relayed pictures of opening of East German Communist party congress to television viewers in U.S. (Chicago Trib., 1/16/63)
nasa launched an Aerobee rocket to an altitude of 123.5 mi. over White Sands Missile Range, N.M., with a 245-lb. payload to study solar radiation. Three telescopes with automatic camera attached to each took x-ray photos of sun at exposures ranging from 3/io sec. to 100 sec. Equipment was designed to obtain an optical image of the sun from its own low-energy x-rays and would be used in future scientific satellites, gsfc cooperated with American Science and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., in the experiment. The payload was recovered 55 mi. downrange. (Wash. Post. 10/16/63; AP, NYT, 10/16/63, 2; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 11/14/63)
dod announced solar radiation i satellite, orbited June 22,1960, with transit n-A, was turned on again on Feb. 25, after 22 months of silence, (dod Release 321-63)
usaf placed into orbit two 1.5-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellites (trs), and a 50-lb. Project West Ford satellite, launched pickaback aboard an unidentified satellite using an Atlas-Agena B booster, trs’s were to measure solar cell radiation damage. West Ford satellite was ejected on the same day of its launch. The satellite was to place a ring of metal fibers in a belt around the earth for passive communications experiments; experiments were successful and effect of 400 million copper filament belt on radioastronomy was found to be negligible. Natural decay of belt expected as planned, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/11/63; Press Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)	_
Communications Satellite Corp. issued to industry a Request for Proposals for Engineering Design of a Commercial Communications Satellite, to include satellite design for either a medium-altitude system or a synchronous-orbit system. The RfP’s were directed to development of ComSatCorp’s basic comsat system, with initial global coverage to be achieved not later than 1967 for medium-altitude system or 1968 for synchronous-orbit system. Design proposals, due Feb. 10, would be evaluated and ComSatCorp would select one or more for six-month design contracts. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
General B. A, Sohriever (afsc), addressing Armed Forces Dinner in Louisville, Ky., said: “I am convinced that we must.. . investigate the military potential of space systems. We simply cannot afford to leave the space frontier unguarded. Satellite systems promise to strengthen our present defenses in a number Of ways. For example, they show definite potential for improved warning, communications, and navigation systems. “We may also need to develop the ability to defend ourselves against space-borne weapons. The Soviets have threatened many times to use their space technology for military purposes. Until we know for sure that they will not carry out these threats, it is logical to pursue the development of ways to identify, inspect and rendezvous with a non-cooperative object in space . . . .” (Text, afsc Release 35-R-41)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from pmr using Thor-Agena D launch vehicle. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64) August 26: Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted to the House the conference report and statement on bill (H.R. 7500) to authorize FY 1964 appropriations to nasa. As reported, bill would authorize total appropriations of $5,350,820,400. Report was submitted to Senate August 28. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/ 133)	...	.	.
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced award of contract to Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for computer services to facilitate ComSatCorp’s comparative global satellite communications system studies. (ComSatCorp Release)
Dr. Richard Sharp of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. told American Geophysical Union meeting in Boulder, Colo., that a polar-orbiting satellite had discovered last May that most of the Aurora Borealis is invisible to the naked eye. The seemingly thin sheets of shimmering light actually are several hundred miles thick. The satellite studies also confirmed that auroral light is produced by electrons. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 12/31/63,20)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from pmr using Thor-Agena vehicle, (upi, Chic. Tnb., 4/27/63)
Navy Bureau of Weapons’ astronautics group approved a study by the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and recommended that the Thor-Able-Star be substituted for the Scout as the launch vehicle for the Navy Transit navigational satellites. Navy had been dissatisfied with the reliability record of the nasa Scout boosters in the Transit program. {Av. Wk., 11/25/63, 23)
tiros vii meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Debra, fourth hurricane of season, headed north in Atlantic southeast of Bermuda. (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/23/63)
Astronomers at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory announced it was virtually impossible for explorer xix balloon satellite to be sighted by the naked eye, because even in the most favorable conditions the satellite appears only of the fourth magnitude (on borderline of visibility). So far, all sightings reported to the Observatory were from the Southern Hemisphere and jvere assisted by powerful binoculars or telescopes. (AP, NYT, 12/31/63, 4)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb, Calif., on a Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster, (mi, Wash. Post, 10/30/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
Addressing the Kokomo (Ind.) Chamber of Commerce, nasa Adminstrator James E. Webb remarked: “We are in a continuing competition for world leadership, and leadership in space has become an important element in this struggle .... “It is logical that aggressive elements in the Soviet Union may hope to enter a new period of forward thrust by some startling breakthrough in space technology. The only way we can make sure that this does not happen—the only way to safeguard our technological frontiers—is to pursue an active program of research and development over the entire range of space technology. This includes manned space flight, the development of nuclear-powered rockets, electric propulsion for spacecraft, advanced communications, satellite observ ations of the global weather picture, lunar and planetary exploration, and acquisition of new understanding of the basic forces operating in our solar system and the universe. The space frontier has many salients, many different points of activity. We must not lag behind in any area of space technology or our ability to deter aggression, in space and on earth, may be jeopardized .... “Most of those who question the value of the lunar program fail to appreciate that it involves much more than a single expedition to the moon before 1970. Although the moon is the ultimate objective of the Apollo program, its main purpose is to develop our space competence—our space muscle and space skills —at the most rapid pace consistent with good management, crew safety, and the efficient use of funds .... “Do we conclude that a vigorous effort to develop knowledge and capability in space science and technology, particularly given the long lead times involved in this development, is fruitless and extravagant until military requirements are clearly defined ? Do we fly in the face of history and assert that the enormous economic potential of space research and exploration does not exist simply because we cannot pinpoint all of the precise benefits which such research will produce and which all the lessons of history tell us are there? Or do we, in the tradition which has made nils uuuiiliy great, grasp the opportunity to cross a challenging new’ frontier and insure that the nation will not sacrifice the opportunity or risk the hazards which lie beyond?” (Text) .
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya ZvezJa (Red Star) quoted Edward Teller (U.S. nuclear physicist), Gen. L. Lemnitzer (usa), and other Americans regarding U.S. plans to “militarize the moon, including the delivery of an ‘absolute’ weapon there for the conduct of interplanetary nuclear war.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 1/4/63,3) Januai'y 5: relay i communications satellite made two successful intercontinental television test transmissions between Andover, Me., and Goonhilly, England, one for 23 min. and the other for an hour; teletype tests were also successfully made from Nutley, N.J., to Fucino, Italy, nasa said relay i’s power difficulty had apparently corrected itself, but “project officials have experienced difficulties with relay responding properly to commands. Tests during the past three days were possible by employing special operational procedures and altering command sequences to the satellite. Experiments will continue to evaluate the satellite’s communications and command systems.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/6/63, A8)	_
stncom ii communications satellite relayed its first live telephone conversations, a transmission between President Kennedy and Nigerian Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa Balewa and other messages between U.S., Nigerian, and U.N. officials. Arranged by usia, the demonstration program originated from the White House and Voice of America studios in Washington and from ground station aboard usns Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (Goddard News, 8/26/63, 3; Av. Week, 9/2/63, 24)
U.S.S.R. placed cosmos xv scientific earth satellite in orbit (apogee 317 km.; perigee, 173 km.; period, 89.77 min.; inclination to equator, 65°). Tass said onboard the satellite was “scientific equipment intended for continuing the space research according to the program announced by Tass on 16 March 1962.” Onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 4/23/63, afss-t Trans.)
Secretaiy of Commerce Luther H. Hodges released letter of commendation to Francis W. Reichelderfer, retiring as Chief of Weather Bureau, which said: “. . . When you took your post 25 years ago, the Bureau established its first network of radio-sonde upper air observations. On your departure you are leaving a legacy of the world’s largest and most sophisticated weather system, one that is already effectively using such modem tools as satellites and computers. “During your tour of duty, your leadership and inspiration guided meteorologists throughout the world to work toward the common goal of a truly global weather system. Your plans to expand your international activities will, I am sure, contribute much to world cooperation and advancement in atmospheric sciences . . . .” (Commerce Dept. Release G-63-142)
usaf awarded contract to Goodyear Aerospace to study and develop a post-Echo passive communications satellite. Ten ft. in diameter, the satellites would be a wire grid covered with a plastic film. Once inflation in orbit had occurred, the plastic film would dissipate under ultraviolet radiation from the sun, and the circular wire grid would be left. It was thought that greater reflectivity could be achieved with the wire grid than with solid-skin spheres such as Echo and that they would have a more stable orbit since they would not be as subject to the solar wind. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/30/63, 172)	_
usaf satellite (1962 Beta Kappa-1), launched Oct. 26, 1962, to study artificial radiation, had discovered evidence that radiation from U.S. Starfish high-altitude nuclear test would last up to 10 years, Project Director Dr. Ludwig Katz of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories disclosed. The previously unidentified satellite, called “starad,” was built at dod request when it became apparent artificial radiation might be damaging orbiting satellites, carried nine different instruments for measuring the artificial radiation, usaf spokesmen said, in their opinion, data from this satellite were influential in Dr. James A. Van Allen’s reversal of his previous position that the radiation would last only a year (see March 15). Dr. Katz said the satellite found there had been little decrease in artifical radiation’s intensity since the satellite was launched. “The decay of the belt is so small that a lifetime of five to ten years would not surprise me.” starad also detected increased radiation from Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions of Oct. 28 and Nov. 1. It transmitted until Jan. 18 when its batteries deteriorated. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63; Wash. Post, 4/7/63; Av. Wk., 4/15/63,26)
nasa Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed accomplishments of nasa’s international program and some future trends of U.S. space program in presentation to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He described U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement for cooperation in weather satellite program and mutual experiments with Echo II passive-reflector satellite, and said: “The agreement itself provides for the usual sixty-day period during which each nation may change its mind on details and suggest changes. This gives an opportunity for review by various agencies within both governments, and changes can then be made without embarrassment. For that reason, the text of the agreement will not be released until two months from March 20 . . . .” Dr. Dryden said Soviet maneuvers in Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were ‘‘a small cloud on the horizon” threatening “that this effort toward scientific cooperation may be terminated.” He suggested that some scientists in Soviet Academy were non-Communist Party members and were eager for international contacts and cooperation; they apparently were allowed to discuss scientific and technical matters not involving politics. But possibility existed that “political elements” might “shut off” moves toward international cooperation—evidenced by Soviet “tendency to hint that scientific cooperation may not be so easy unless there is agreement on legal matters.” (Testimony; NYT, 4/28/63,41)
Senator Clinton Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences, questioned nasa FY 1964 request of $55 million for space communications research. He indicated he would oppose spending Federal funds to support research that would ultimately benefit Communications Satellite Corp. and would question the incorporators about possible overlapping of spending. (Space Bus. Daily, 3/12/63,305)
usaf announced orbiting on June 27 of 176-lb. hitchhiker satellite to measure distribution and energies of radiation particles in earth’s magnetic field and upper atmosphere. Ejected from another satellite (unidentified) launched from Vandenberg afb June 27, hitchhiker was propelled by its own engine into elliptical orbit July 1:208-mi. perigee, 2,568-mi. apogee, 132-min. period, 82° inclination to the equator, (dod Release 1042-63)
Air Force said that “an improved Thor booster combination of liquid and solid propellants,” launched with unnamed satellite from Vandenberg afb, was deliberately destroyed when it veered off course. Improved Thor had increased thrust from 170,000-lbs. to about 330,000-lbs.—almost double its earlier power and almost equal to the early Atlas, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/63)
Chief of nasa Future Applications Satellites Capt. Alton B. Moody (usnr), addressing graduating class of U.S. Naval Academy, described nonmilitary navigation satellite system being studied by nasa. One such system could provide position determination, air traffic control, ship surveillance, search and rescue, fleet monitoring, and weather routing services. (Text)
F. J. Krieger, rand Corp. specialist on Soviet astronautics, said in report for usaf Project Rand that Soviet Cosmos satellites probably are “para-military” spacecraft of two types: (1) recoverable vehicle as large as Vostok spacecraft and (2) 4,400-lb., non-recoverable vehicle launched from another site and with different booster. Krieger also stated his belief that U.S.S.R. had six attempted probe launchings end in failure between August 25 and January 4 caused by inability to get fourth stage out of parking orbit. First three were attempted Venus probes; next two, Mars probes; last one, moon probe, (rand Memorandum RMOKAK TkT» *	A	TTT 7 j /Cia //**>	f\r\\ OUtfU—r JAj 111 II. V. YY tC^^/ZV/ oo, zz)
ComSatCorp incorporator George J. Feldman said at Conference on Space Science and Space Law, Univ. of Oklahoma: “The reality of a viable [satellite] communication system remains to be accomplished with the accompaniment of hard work, hard and yet imaginative intelligence, and cooperation, nationally and internationally .... “The choice of system ... in turn is of importance to the international users. How do they participate? Do they own stations? Do they furnish personnel? What about their own research and development? And in addition to the economics there is the political national interest and national pride in participation . . . “The communication satellite has arrived of experimental age. It will be brought into being as a working system. The United States has no monopoly on its creation. There are others who are capable of doing it. There is strong worldwide interest. The corporation is beginning to tackle the formidable problems in earnest enthusiasm, and I may say in the spirit of the kind of dedication that accompanies a pioneering effort of responsibility. The expert group being assembled can make a substantial contribution of national benefit, as it researches and develops its program. It is time to give this effort the understanding required, for much is at stake for all . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/63, A4188-89) Jv/rue 19: tiros vn (A-52) meteorological satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: 405-mi. apogee, 388-mi. perigee, 97-min. period, 58.2° inclination to equator. On satellite’s first orbit, Command and Data Acquisition Station at Wallops Island, Va., obtained direct pictures from Camera 2 showing cloud vortex over Newfoundland and set Camera 1 to read out pictures on next orbit. First pictures were transmitted within an hour to Cape Canaveral, Fla.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.; and National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md. In addition to two wide-angle TV cameras, tiros vn carried infrared sensors and electron temperature probe. Orbiting marked 18th straight successful satellite-orbiting by Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (nasa Release; Wallops Release 63-59; upi, NTT, 6/20/63, 3)
U.S. worldwide tracking network was not able to locate stncom i communications satellite; radio contact with the satellite had been lost Feb. 14, seconds after onboard rocket had fired to transfer stncom i from its highly elliptical orbit into near-synchronous orbit. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/63)
Dr. Simon Ramo, of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, was quoted as being skeptical of feasibility of using artificial satellites for militarily aggressive purposes, saying: “We often hear the mistaken impression that a bomb dropped from a satellite will fall to earth. Of course, it won’t. It will reach the earth only if it is pushed away from the satellite with the right amount of force and with controlled direction. The whole launching operation (from a satellite) is more difficult that that of launching an icbm from a point on earth. Also, the flight will take very much longer....” (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/11/63)
Senator John O. Pastore (D.-R.I.), chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee’s Communications Subcommittee, questioned the wisdom of continued Government financing of experimental communications .satellites: “We were led to believe that practically all this work would be done by the private [communications satellite] corporation.” {Wash. Post, 2/20/63, A8)
Conference on artificial satellites held at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, Va., sponsored by vpi in cooperation with National Science Foundation and nasa Langley Research Center. 13 nasa scientists and engineers were among the featured speakers. ( XT A C * T?ol QOCp AO 1 7	\ ^ j.. ilu.l AtV/iGiVOU WW X I Cl J Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, said in introductory lecture: “Those who argue that we should dispense with the frills of science and space exploration, and concentrate on the necessities of military development, forget that we can’t really say what the military necessities in space will be. Our crystal ball is not that good, and it would be foolhardy to pretend that it is. We do not wish to develop a Maginot line in space, only to have it flanked by forces of greater flexibility. We need to develop in a broad way our space capability so that we shall have the ability to move in any direction required by future events to meet any threats along whatever lines may develop. “. . . Out of this broad activity in space will come the ability of the United States to use space and to operate in space either as it may chose to do voluntarily or may find itself compelled to do in its own defense. The development of our ability to operate in space, including manned space flight, gives to our country another dimension in which to meet the challenges—both opportunities and threats—of the future. We can do engineering in space, advance our science in a way that cannot be accomplished at the surface of the earth, and extend the range of practical applications for the benefit of man. And, if necessary, we can thwart the attempts of any enemy to use space against us. “In this day and age we cannot afford to ignore this last point. In our own self interest, and for the safety of our country, we cannot permit others to develop space capabilities that we cannot match, and that may, therefore, be used disastrously against us. “This is a capability we must have to ensure our survival in the space age as the independent, self-determining nation that our forefathers set us up to be, and that we have always insisted on is is the capability that we shall have from the development of the ability to investigate scientifically with satellites and space probes, and from space applications, from the ability to perform manned space flight and manned space operations, from the vast complex of manufacturing and assembly plants, launchings complexes, tracking and telemetering facilities, and from the invaluable experience that this initial stage in the space program will give us. “This is the most significant point about the present era in space. This is the most important aspect of the present activity in space. “We are now laying the groundwork for whatever role we may have to play in space in the future. We are ensuring that no one will ever be in a position to use space against us while we, helpless and frustrated through lack of the necessary space capability, have to take what comes . . . .” (Text) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess of Goddard Space Flight Center told Conference August 14 that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in 1962 provided new information for determining path and rate of decay of high-energy electrons, thus providing better understanding of the Van Allen radiation belts. “While the nuclear explosion shortened the lives of some satellites and increased the intensity of radiation around the globe, it had a valuable side effect. “To students of the Van Allen belt, it was almost like having a controlled experiment in space . . . .” (AP, NYT, 8/15/63, anna i geodetic satellite’s flashing beacons had resumed after more than two months of blackout, Richard B. Kershner of Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory disclosed in Aug. 15 press conference. In Blacksburg for Artificial Satellites Conference, Kershner said: “We have no explanation for the lights coming back on two weeks ago. We don’t like to believe in space gremlins, but we’ve reached the point where that’s as good an explanation as any.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 8/16/63) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, addressed banquet. Dr. Thompson called on educators attending the conference to join with nasa and other research organizations to develop new and more effective means for accelerating effective distribution and assimilation of newly acquired research information. He cited prospective establishment of Virfinia Associated Research Center (varc) adjacent to the lshc pace Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport News, Va., as a new and imaginative device to promote flow of knowledge between a major laboratory and three outstanding Virginia institutions of higher learning. (LaRc Release) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Chief of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Flight Operations Div., said Aug. 16: “The first U.S. manned spaceflight program [Project Mercury] was designed to (1) put a man into earth orbit, (2) observe his reactions to the space environment, and (3) bring him back to Earth safely at a point where he could be readily recovered. All of these objectives have been accomplished, and some have produced more information than we expected to receive . . . .” Discussing the stringent reliability requirements of manned space flight: “The smallest mistake in a man-rated system can bring totally unexpected results. The unexpected is the rule in the unknown, and if man is going to live in the region beyond our atmosphere, he is going to live under new rules or not at all. We have been aware of these rules . . . but they have not been brought to our attention so vividly as they have in the manned flight program .... “The manned space flight program has added greatly to our knowledge of the universe around us and demonstrated that man has a proper role in exploring it. There are many unknowns that lie ahead in space, but we are reassured because we are confident in overcoming them by using man’s capabilities to the fullest ... . We now depend on man in the loop to back up automatic systems rather than using automatic systems alone to insure that the mission is accomplished .... We have arrived at what we think is the proper mixture of that formula. Man is the deciding element; but we cannot ignore the usefulness of the automatic systems.” Kraft told news conference that two engine problems were encountered in the Titan II booster for Project Gemini. Titan II’s first stage generated chugging oscillation which could cause “the pilots to have their eyeballs shook out.” Second stage engine was producing only about 90% of desired thrust. Both problems apparently were associated with turbine drive mechanisms (msc Release 63-126; AP, Chic. Trib., 8/17/63) Gerald M. Truszynski, nasa Deputy Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, discussed satellite data recovery and tracking system for manned satellite program. He described the manned space flight network used in Project Mercury and the augmentations planned for support of Project Gemini, concluding: “. . . while certain equipment augmentations will be effected, many of the techniques learned during the Mercury program, particularly in terms of procedures required to assure positive Network support, will be utilized in Gemini and in this way, an ever-increasing background of know-how will be available for the extremely complex missions which will be encountered in the manned lunar landing program shortly to be upon us.” August 13: Spokesman for Westinghouse Defense Center, which was preparing program definition study of nonmilitary navigational satellite under nasa contract, predicted navigation by satellite could become reality “in three or four years .... Using electronic sensors, the system would determine automatically the position of each ship or aircraft with respect to known references and relay this information to a ground station. This station would then compute the navigation ‘fix’ and relay this information to the user via the satellite . . . .”	(Space Bus. Daily, 8/13/63, 230)
nasa and French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) jointly announced signing of Memorandum of Understanding for a cooperative U.S.-France program to investigate propagation of vlf electromagnetic waves. First phase of the program would consist of two electromagnetic-field experiments with French-instrumented payloads to be launched from nasa Wallops Station. Second phase, to be implemented upon mutual consent that Phase I had proved the experiments to be scientifically and technically feasible, would consist of orbiting of scientific satellite, designed and built by France, with a Scout vehicle. (Memo of Understanding; nasa Release 63-49) 741-623 0—64--7
Television photographs of Lt. Col. Valery F. Bykovsky (U.S.S.R.) in orbiting spacecraft were viewed by U.S. television audience. Soviet-bloc TV system Intervision’s broadcast of photographs from space was received in Helsinki, where telecast was put onto Western Europe TV system Eurovision. Telecast was taped and edited in London, then sent to Goonhilly Downs for transmission via telstar n communications satellite to receiving station in Andover, Me.; there it was sent to New York, where all three U.S. networks picked it up. {NYT, 6/15/63, 35)
nasa announced agreement with Australian Government for establishment of deep space tracking facility about 11 mi. southwest of Canberra; a manned space flight and scientific satellite tracking station at Carnarvon; and a smaller station at Darwin, (nasa Release 63-47)
nasa announced that tiros vi weather satellite was no longer sending usable cloud-cover pictures, after 13 months of successful operation ana some o i ,ow pictures. \ naba AW3ie<»oo uu—Z&Z)
telstar n was successfully tracked for 18 min. by ground station northeast of Tokyo. Satellite microwave beacon signal was turned on by ground station at Andover, Maine. No communications tests were conducted, but tracking exercises between Tokyo and Andover were to continue through July 20, in preparation for communications experiments to be conducted “during the next period of mutual visibility, beginning in April 1964. (Bell Lab. Release, 7/9/63 in SID, August 1963; Reuters, NTT, 7/8/63,36)
relay i communications satellite was turned off because of severe drain on the onboard power supply, a difficulty similar to that encountered during first week after launch. Power drain was encountered March 9 after relay i’s orbit had been in earth’s shadow for five weeks and spacecraft temperatures were low. When satellite was exposed again to constant sunlight, a voltage regulator switch became too hot to operate properly and power drain occurred, nasa and rca engineers were hopeful that onboard batteries could be recharged by power from solar cells during period of rest. Between January 3 and March 9, relay i had operated successfully in about 500 communications experiments, including first voice, facsimile, and teletype links via satellite between U.S. and South America, (nasa Release, 63-54)
Demonstration of transatlantic typesetting was conducted between Chicago and Groonhilly Downs, England, via ground computer and relax i communications satellite. Originating from Chicago conference of American Newspaper Publishers Association Research Institute, dispatch was received in final typeset form. In second phase of demonstration, articles were similarly sent from London and Rio de Janeiro and were received in Chicago. (Wehrwein, NTT, 6/11/63) nasa announced selection of Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., for negotiation of contract for design and fabrication of four Pioneer interplanetary space probes. First launching in series was scheduled for early 1965 with Delta launch vehicle, (nasa Release 63-131; Ames Research 63-24)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D from Pt. Arguello with unidentified satellite. (M&R, 9/16/63, 11-12)
usaf launched unidentified satellite using Thor-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/30/63, 4)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in cooperation with nbc and rca, accomplished 'first known transmission of television in color via relay i communications satellite. 15-min. sequence of movie Kidnapped was relayed by relay from 4,000-mi. high orbit, and was scheduled to be shown on Walt Disney's program on March 24. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A5)
nasa announced first television experiments via stncom ii communications satellite had been conducted. Test pattern signals sent Sept. 23 were followed by TV pictures Sept. 24 and 25; because of bandwidth limitations, no audio was sent. Officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said transmissions were of good quality. Transmissions originated at Fort Dix, N.J., ground station, were sent to syncom n 22,300 mi. above the earth, and retransmitted to at&t ground station at Andover, Me. (nasa Release 63-216)
General Electric Co. announced usaf Titan II “carries a re-entry vehicle which would ‘significantly increase’ this country’s ability to penetrate antimissile defenses.” (Witkiin, y7/29/63) July 29: nasa announced syncom u communications satellite was performing “extremely well,” drifting westward at rate of 4.5° per day. Orbital data: 22,800-mi. apogee, 22,110-mi. perigee, 1,454min. period (slightly more than 24 hours), syncom ii was expected to be on station above Brazil in about three weeks. (AP, NYT, 7/30/63)
Communications satellites have been used for some time by at&t to transmit a small portion of the overseas telephone calls that normally would have gone by underwater cable. After each call the telephone company would call up the user and ask him about the quality of his call. None of the users were told that they had talked via satellite, since part of the experiment was to test the user’s psychological reactions and these might have been affected by such knowledge. Although the communications satellites are not licensed for commercial use, at&t would pay the U.S. government a fee for the time used for the experiments. Only the medium-altitude Telstar and Relay satellites were used. (Finney, NYT, 11/24/63, 16)
Unidentified usn satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle launched from Vandenberg afb. Satellite was first to be completely powered by nuclear generator, a 27-lb. Snap-9A (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) which will produce 25 watts of power continuously for five years. Press sources unofficially identified the satellite as transit v-b. The Navy later disclosed that a second satellite weighing 120 lbs. had been launched pickaback style along with the 160-lb. nuclear-powered satellite. This sun-powered satellite carried several radiation detectors and six transistors in a test of means of protecting these devices from radiation damage. (Finney, NYT, 9/15/63, 75; Hill, NYT, 10/1/63, 1, 76; Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 37; Wash. Post, 1/10/64) September 1S8: Article by commentator Stanislav Kondrashov, first published mention in U.S.S.R. of President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar exploration, appeared in Soviet magazine Za Rubezhom. Article said: “American propaganda ... is pushing to the forefront the President’s idea of sending a joint Soviet-U.S. team to the moon. “In lavish headlines American newspapers describe the grandiose character of the project, although it seems it is somewhat premature.... “Leaving aside judgment of the President’s lunar project, it should be noticed that the hard emphasis on it is hardly worthwhile. “It distracts attention from joint earthly exploits directed at attaining peace and reduction of world tension. . . .” (upi, Wash. Post, 9/29/63)
In International Geophysics Bulletin, nasa proposed contributions to iqsy (1964-65) were outlined. Prominently among them: sounding rockets; ionosphere explorers and monitors; atmospheric structure satellite; Oso, Ego, Pogo satellites; Imp, Pioneer, Mariner, and Surveyor probes. (IG Bulletin, 1/63, 12-19) During January: Engineers Joint Council issued report. The Nation’s Engineering Research Needs, 1965-85, which concluded: (1) present system of allocating resources to U.S. r&d is producing imbalance in technical effort; (2) non-defense agencies of Government do not have adequate research programs relating to problems in public sector of the economy; (3) r&d by private industry is influenced heavily by Government r&d allocations; and (4) r&d efforts applied to creating new materials and products have been highly successful, but have not been matched by development of systems to utilize these products and materials efficiently. ejc recommended: (1) periodic review of U.S. r&d allocations and “their compatibility with national goals”; (2) council and professional societies make periodic studies of technical and social problems to which engineering profession should make significant contributions, but “for which engineering programs and institutions appear to be inadequate”; (3) educational institutions and professional societies expand their programs of systems engineering “aimed at optimizing the technical engineering and social systems within which improved materials and devices perform their designed functions.” (Industrial Research, 1/63, 5)
nasa reported relay i communications satellite’s low battery voltage had been result of faulty voltage regulator in one of its twin transponders. Continued tests by rca and nasa engineers pinpointed the difficulty and also discovered that the regulator fails to function properly when it becomes too hot or too cold. Despite the difficulty engineers would attempt live television transmission via relay i by sending special command signals to the satellite and concentrating on the remaining good transponder. (Wash. Post, 1/9/63, C8)
European interest in a cooperative communications satellite effort was continuing. The U.K. and 12 other European countries met on the subject in Paris in May 1963 and in London in July. Various committees were formed to study the technical, economic, and political problems involved and these committees were to report to a meeting to be held in Rome on Nov. 27. The general direction of the discussions has been toward some sort of partnership between the European countries and the U.S. ComSatCorp. (Farnsworth, NYT, 11/3/63,12F)
U.S. Weather Bureau announced it was purchasing 11 ground stations capable of receiving cloud pictures directly from Nimbus meteorological satellites, to be launched by nasa beginning late this year. The stations would receive cloud pictures of their local areas taken by automatic picture transmission (apt) subsystem in the weather satellite, apt device would take and transmit cloud picture automatically every 208 sec., each photograph showing area of about l,000-mi.-by-l,000-mi. Meteorologists expected to make immediate use of Nimbus cloud pictures. (Dept, of Commerce Release WB 63-3)
Hughes Aircraft Co., nasa contractor for Syncom communications satellite, outlined design features of military synchronous communication satellite for usaf Space Systems Div. and Aerospace Corp. {Av. Wk., 9/9/63, 23)
Enea Bossi, international aviation pioneer, died in Dayton, Ohio. Native of Milan, Bossi built and flew his own airplane in 1908; he designed first Italian seaplane. After coming to U.S. in 1919, Bossi designed first U.S. stainless steel plane, most successful manpowered aircraft, and an early helicopter. He also invented vacuum fuel-intake system used in U.S. automobiles during 1920’s. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/12/63)	...	. ,January 10: explorer xiv energetic particles satellite developed radio transmission difficulty, not repairable by remote control. Exact cause of difficulty, apparently in one of the binary counters of satellite’s encoder system, was not determined, (nasa explorer xrv Program. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, speaking editorially in Astronautics arid Aerospace Engineering magazine, April 1963, emphasized that: “As satellites extend man’s vision into new dimensions, weather forecasting will make major advances as a science, until we see reliable predictions a season ahead. “This will have far-reaching economic benefits for all. Following are some estimates of cost-savings, assuming that we can predict weather accurately only five days in advance: $2% billion a year in agriculture; $45 million in the lumber industry; $100 million in surface transportation; $75 million in retail marketing; and $3 billion in water-resources management. These estimates of savings are for just the United States. Worldwide benefits would be many times as great.” (A&AE, Apr., 1963)
Tass reported that a leading Soviet space scientist, Prof. Gleb Chebotarev, claimed U.S.S.R. would put satellites in orbit around the moon. Mars, and Venus “in the near future .... The regions of outer space around the moon, Venus, Mars and Mercury where stable movement of artificial satellites is possible have been determined by means of electric machines at the Theoretical Astronomy Institute.” (un, NTT, 11/21/63)
By this date, 53 communications companies had filed with Federal Communications Commission for authorization to purchase common carrier stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (Av. Wk., 4/1/63, 30)
Addressing U.N. General Assembly, President Kennedy listed results of U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations: “We have, in recent years, agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban treaty, on an emergency communications link between our capitals, on a statement of principles for disarmament, on an increase in cultural exchange, on cooperation in outer space, on the peaceful exploration of the Antarctic, and on tempering last year’s crisis over Cuba .... “Finally, in a field where the United States and the Soviet Union have a special capacity—the field of space—there is room for new cooperation, for further joint efforts in the regulation and exploration of space. I include among these possibilities a joint expedition to the moon. “Space offers no problem of sovereignty; by resolution of this Assembly, the members of the United Nations have foresworn any claims to territorial rights in outer space or on celestial bodies, and declared that international law and the U.N. charter will apply. Why, therefore, should man’s first flight to the moon be a matter of national competition ? “Why should the United States and the Soviet Union, in preparing for such expeditions, become involved in immense duplications of research, construction and expenditure? Surely we should explore whether the scientists and astronauts of our two countries—indeed, of all the world—cannot work together in the conquest of space, sending some day in this decade to the moon, not the representatives of a single nation, but the representatives of all humanity. “All these and other new steps toward peaceful cooperation may be possible. Most of them will require on our part full consultation with our allies, for their interests are as much involved as our own, and we will never make an agreement at their expense. “Most of them will require long and careful negotiations. And most of them will require a new approach to the cold war—a desire not to ‘bury’ one’s adversary but to compete in a host of peaceful arenas, in ideas, in production, and m service to all humanity. “The contest will continue, the contest between those who envision a monolithic world and those who believe in diversity, but it should be a contest in leadership instead of destruction, a contest in achievement instead of intimidation. Speaking for the United States of America, I welcome such a contest. For we believe that truth is stronger than error, and that freedom is more enduring than coercion. And in the contest for a better life, all the world can be the winner . . . .” In addition to urging U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations, President Kennedy urged U.N. to work on five major projects, among them “a global system of satellites [which] could provide communication and weather information for all comers of the earth.” (Text, Wash. Post, 9/21/63, A10)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition resumed hearings on nasa FY 1964 budget authorization, with testimony by Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., and Leo D. Welch, Chairman. Asked whether ComSat Corp. would conduct its own r&d or depend upon NASA-sponsored research, Mr. Welch said, “We plan to do both. We plan to contract for design studies, [and] we obviously plan to take advantage of the work done by nasa.” Mr. Welch said space communications system may link U.S., Europe, Japan, and Latin America by 1967. Dr. Charyk said ComSatCorp. expected initial planning to take about a year and development of hardware about another three years, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/1/63) 741-603 0—64-----12 April30: dod announced U.S. would deploy icbm’s at rate of one a day during rest of 1963. Announcement came as 100th Minuteman site was turned over to sac at Malmstrom afb, Mont, (dod Release 612-63)
U.K. Office of the Minister for Science announced contract had been awarded to British Aircraft Corp., Ltd., for development and construction of UK-3 (S-53) satellite, nasa would launch the experimental satellite into orbit in about four years. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/63)
Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, in address at Queens College, Charlotte, N.C., said photographs made by U.S. military satellites were providing excellent studies of Soviet military installations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/5/63)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition, described the four areas of nasa’s applications program— communications systems, meteorological systems, future applications satellites, and industrial applications: “The space research and development effort is so broad that there will be ideas and innovations in almost every field. Products, based upon space development and produced using techniques and materials created for space use, may become increasingly evident with time in the everyday life of the nation. “The applications program ranges over a very broad spectrum of scientific and industrial activity. We are concerned with investigations from purely scientific interest in atmospheric physics to problems associated with commercial communications satellites. It is a very challenging area of work and it is most satisfying to our people to find that great benefits are accruing to the nation from meteorological and communications satellite developments, and now from industrial applications as well.” (Testimony)
dod plans to orbit its first two experimental satellites for detecting nuclear tests in outer space reported by New York Times. The Project Vela satellites, under jurisdiction of dod’s Advanced Research Projects Agency, were expected to be capable of detecting unshielded nuclear tests as small as 10 kllotons and as far away as 180,000,000 mi. from earth. To be launched this fall, satellites would orbit earth at 50,000-60,000 mi. (NYT, 8/7/63, 12)
Soviet press agency Tass announced cosmos xviii satellite had been placed in orbit (apogee, 187 mi.; perigee, 130 mi.; period, 89.44 min.; inclination, 65°01' to the equator). Onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 5/25/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
Project Mercury flight MA-9 postponed at T-13 in launch countdown because of technical failure in computer converter at Bermuda tracking station. Earlier, at T-60, countdown was halted for 129 min. to repair faulty fuel pump in gantry’s diesel engine, which had failed to start. Eight-min. recapitulation of prelaunch activities for Project Mercury flight MA-9, Cape Canaveral, was telecast to European viewers via relay i communications satellite shortly after flight was postponed, (nasa Release 63-104; NYT, 5/15/63)
In speech to the North Carolina Citizens Association at Raleigh, gsfc Director Harry J. Goett reviewed, the scientific exploration of space, its meaning, and future. He concluded: “From a scientific point of view it may matter little how quickly we come to understand sun-earth relationships, whether Nimbus [weather satellite] gets launched this year or next, or whether we land a man on the moon during this decade or not. But there is no doubt that our national prestige demands that the United States lead the world in the hard-won knowledge and technolog}' in the important areas of geophysics, solar physics and interplanetary science that have been opened by the advent of the space age. We must continue an aggressive program to assure that the United States retains its leadership. . . . “Our future in the exploration of space does not hold any simple panaceas, scientifically, technologically, and financially. But neither did the development of the United States come easy nor has the future ever been an easy one for a free people seeking truth and knowledge, and the preservation of freedom.” (Text)
gsfc awarded contract to Yale Univ. to design and develop a worldwide radio monitoring network for study of planet Jupiter. Four stations would comprise the global network, located at approximately every 90° longitude around the earth— one at gsfc in Greenbelt, Md., and the other three at U.S. satellite tracking stations in Hartesbeesthoek, South Africa; Carnarvon, Australia; and South Point, Hawaii. Primary duty of the stations would be to maintain a 24-hr. radio monitor of the mysterious low-frequency radio noises sporadically emitted from the planet. The data should provide information on Jupiter’s magnetosphere, the interplanetary medium, and the earth’s ionosphere. (gsfc Release G-25-6'3)
Reported that a U.S. military satellite, launched by Agena, had established a record 46 days of operation under continued attitude stabilization. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/14/63)
nasa announced explorer xvi meteoroid-detection satellite, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had ceased transmitting usable experimental data on July 25, 1963. Throughout its 7i/> months of transmitting useful data, explorer xvi fulfilled all its primary objectives. The satellite reported these results (one mil equals 1,000th of an inch): 44 penetrations of one-mil beryllium-copper; 11 penetrations of two-mil beryllium copper; 6 penetrations of one-mil stainless steel; one penetration of two-mil copper; and one* penetration of three-mil copper. There were no penetrations of five-mil beryllium-copper or six-mil stainless steel. One cadmium-sulfide cell was penetrated in such a way that sunlight Qnfnrnf at? if on J rsndorsd it mopfiRibls, AJorg than 15,000 niftte-oroid hits were recorded by microphone impact sensors which covered about one-tenth of total exposed experiment surface. These sensors did not measure penetration, (nasa Release 63203; Lane Release)
nasa Director of International Programs Arnold Frutkin discussed U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative meteorological satellite program in Aviation Week and Space Technology interview. Beginning late next year, nasa would launch Nimbus meteorological satellites into polar orbit and U.S.S.R. would launch polar orbiting satellites. Paths of two satellites would be phased so that they are 90° apart, so that one satellite of each pair will cross each spot on globe every six hours. (Av. Wk., 8/12/63)
cosmos xix transmissions have beenpicked up by the Sohio Research Center near Cleveland, Ohio. The Center said that Russian satellites normally have an on-off switch which the Russians can activate for transmission as the satellite passes over Russian territory. They theorized that the switch might have stuck, causing the satellite to transmit continuously. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 10/6/63)
John H. Rubel, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told House Committee on Science aqd Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition that dod planned to initiate a communications satellite program definition study in May or June, the program based on goal of putting 24-30 operational satellites into orbit by end of 1965. “Approximately six satellites will be launched per booster, using the . . . Atlas-Agena D. The six satellites will be ejected at slightly different velocities into an approximately 6,000-mi.-altitude circular polar orbit, where they will gradually spread out. The successive clusters will be injected into orbital planes spaced 45 deg. apart.” System would be developed jointly by usaf and Army, usaf being responsible for space-related activities and Army for ground stations. (Av. Wk., 4/15/63,27)
Hook-up of three global satellite tracking networks into a single central console at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was announced. Console allows combinations of operators at 51 communications points around the world in the satellite tracking and data acquisition network, the manned space flight tracking network, and the deep space instrumentation facilities. (AP, NTT, 12/11/63)
Special camera for optical tracking of satellites at Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern, England, described in London Times. Camera weighed 8y2 tons, had focal length of 24 in. with aperture of f/1. According to Ministry of Aviation, the instrument had been working since last November and had photographed Discoverer and Anna satellites in orbit. A second identical camera would be operating at Malvern in several weeks. (London Times, 2/20/63,15, and 2/22/63,22)
Researchers at Technology Audit Corp. continued, under nasa contract extension, to study possible use of a satellite as a navigation aid for advanced aircraft such as the supersonic transport. (M&R, 12/9/63,9)
nasa announced it and Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved Memorandum of Understanding providing for implementation of cooperative space agreement reached June 1962 in Geneva. Memorandum outlined procedures for U.S.-U.S.S.R. exchange of meterological data from weather satellites operated by each country, joint communications experiments using Echo II passive reflector satellite, and contributions of geomagnetic data from special respective satellites to WTorld Magnetic Survey in 1965. Memorandum of Understanding was drafted at meetings between U.S. negotiators, led by nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Soviet negotiators led by Academician Anatoli A. Blagonravov, Chairman of Commission of Exploration and Utilization of Outer Space of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Memorandum of Understanding; nasa Release 63-i86)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite using Blue Scout booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/16/63; M&R, 6/24/63,10)
President Kennedy accepted “with great regret” the resignation of Philip L. Graham as an incorporator of Space Communications Corp., established by legislation to direct U.S. communications satellite activities. Graham had served as chairman of the 13-man board of incorporators. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/26/63, A9)
U.S. Dept, of Commerce translation of article, “How to Fly to Mars, by Soviet scientist Prof. G. Chebotarev, was reported. “The ‘Mars-1’ interplanetary station was launched from a heavy satellite in a circular earth satellite orbit; the velocity of the satellite was 4.9 miles a second. The rocket was launched from this satellite at a velocity of 3.1 miles a second, but the rocket left the orbit at 8 miles a second. 741-683 0—64“It headed toward Mars in a hyperbolic trajectory and left the earth’s sphere of attraction at 4 miles a second. For it to assume an orbital path around Mars the station would have to be braked to a velocity of 3.2 miles a second . . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/12/63, A5)	_
nasa announced publication of “Handbook on Space Radiation Effects to Solar Cell Power Systems,” prepared for nasa by Exotech, Inc., of Alexandria, Va. The handbook and the recently published transcript of Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, held m Wash. ington earlier this year, were expected to help industry produce more durable, radiation-resistant solar-cell systems for satellites. (nasa Release 63-187)
U.S. and Brazil announced signing of memorandum of understanding for cooperation in satellite studies of the ionosphere. Signed by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Aldo Vieira da Rosa, of Brazilian Commission for Space Activities, agreement provided for establishment of three radioreceiving stations straddling geomagnetic equator—at Belem, San Jose dos Campos, and Natal. Initial project would involve readout of telemetry data from S-66 ionospheric satellite, to be launched by nasa in 1963. Under agreement, Brazil would build, equip, and operate stations with nasa lending scientific equipment. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/3/63)
Letter from David Samoff, rca Board Chairman, to Leo D. Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, was disclosed by Drew Pearson in Washington Post. Referring to new technology of transoceanic transistorized cables, Samoff said: “In my view, the transistorized cable does not alter the fundamental premise that early development of an operational communications satellite system is vital to our national prestige and to continued U.S. leadership in both communications and space technology. “Nevertheless, a second premise—that the facilities of a global satellite system will be needed to meet the expected growth of commercial demand for oversea communications services beyond 1965—now needs careful reevaluation in terms of the possible effects upon the [Communications] Satellite Corporation of this latest technological breakthrough. . . . “One transistorized cable, laid across the North Atlantic, could connect areas possessing nearly 90 percent of all the world’s present telephones .... “One new transistorized cable will have a capacity almost double that of all existing transoceanic cables. . . . “We should now consider an amendment to the present law which would enable the satellite corporation to acquire through purchase the international telephone and telegraph facilities and operations, both present and planned, of all American carriers. “Unification of all the Nation’s international communication facilities and operations—satellites, cables, and radios—would in my opinion assure the satellite corporation’s commercial success, best serve our overall national interests, provide the most flexible and economical service to the public, and maintain America’s leadership in world communications . . . .” (Wash. Post, 5/28/63; Letter, 4/2/63, in CR, 5/28/63, 9207-09)
Physicist S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite Center, said at American Geophysical Union meeting that the millions of tiny copper dipoles to be placed in orbit in usaf Project West Ford could remain aloft for as long as a century. Dr. Singer added that he did not regard the orbiting copper dipoles as threat to scientific observations, but he criticized secrecy surrounding first attempted West Ford launching. He urged freer and earlier public discussion of proposed space projects and suggested that U.S. invite scientists from other nations to discuss proposed U.S. scientific experiments with possible global consequences. (Wash. Post, 4/19/63; AP, Balt. Sim, 4/19/63)
Because of weather conditions at Cape Canaveral, launching of Syncom communications satellite was postponed from Feb. 13 to Feb. 14. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A6)
usaf selected General Electric Co. and Philco Corp. with Space Technology Laboratories (jointly) to compete for development of dod medium-altitude communications satellite. Under two-month contracts, each contractor would propose technical approach, refine cost estimates, and develop internal management structures. Then, should dod decide to proceed with such a comsat system employing 20-30 satellites, one of the contractors would be selected to conduct development phase of usaf portion, (dod xveiease oi-t—<jo)
U.S.S.R. has not yet named delegates for working groups to work out details implementing U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreements reached this year by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Academician A. A. Blagonravov, Howard Simons reported in Washington Post. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had agreed on coordinated communications satellite exiiiiij'iictiC mapping cooperation. JJCl UllVUlD^ also pointed out Soviet lack of definite response to proposal for negotiations leading to U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar exploration, presented by President Kennedy Sept. 20 and reiterated this month by President Johnson. ^Simons, Wash. Post, 12/26/63)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxm into earth orbit (apogee, 381 mi.; perigee, 149 mi.; period, 92.9 min.; inclination to the equator, 49°), the satellite carrying scientific instrumentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in accordance with March 16, 1962, Tass announcement. Tass said onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 12/14/63, 1, atbs-t Trans.)
nasa and dod announced signing of agreement establishing areas of responsibility in nonmilitary applications of Navy’s Transit navigational satellite system. Under agreement, nasa would determine suitability of Transit equipment for nonmilitary use and necessity for additional equipment. Navy would continue to be responsible for technical direction of Transit system and for r&d in support of military applications of the system, but would also provide nasa with necessary information, specifications, and equipment for meeting nonmilitary requirements, nasa and Navy would coordinate r&d “for mutual benefit and to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.” (dod Release 315-63)
usaf launched three Atlases from Vandenberg afb: Atlas D fired down the Pacific Missile Range in Abres (advanced ballistic reentry system) test; Atlas-Agena D booster rocket combination launched an unidentified satellite; and Atlas F fired down the pmr with mock nuclear warhead. (NYT, 12/19/63, 18)
Brig. Gen. Charles H. Roadman (usaf) , nasa Director of Aerospace Medicine, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics' Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. Replying to press criticism of nasa plans to use pure oxygen in Project Gemini spacecraft, General Roadman said: “. . . in our investigations to date we have no physiological information that would permit us to say that 100% oxygen from a physiological standpoint is contraindicated in a two-week mission. This is not to say that there are not many physiologists who would like more information concerning 100% oxygen over a time period, which we thoroughly support . . . .” (Transcript) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in keynote address May 6, cited recommendation by Iowa Summer Study that one or more scientists be included in Project Apollo lunar flights: “To those who have the responsibility for success in reaching the moon, it has appeared that the nature of the Apollo effort requires the training of astronauts who have substantial experience as test pilots in high speed jet aircraft, and to the extent possible engineering training as well. “Meanwhile, it is apparent that the view of the scientists that trained scientific personnel should participate is valid, and that at the earliest appropriate stage in the program scientists will be included on Apollo missions. So far as we can now tell we are obligated to utilize astronauts with the maximum of test-flight experience and highly conditioned reflexes on the first flight of the most difficult of all undertakings. Should training and experience in intermediate flights indicate otherwise we will, of course, take this into consideration in determining the stage of development in manned space flight at which a scientist-astronaut will directly participate. “In its effort to insure maximum scientific benefit from the manned space flight program nasa is doing several things: “First, manned space flights are being used to take scientific measurements in order that they will provide results beyond crew training and technological experience. “Second, efforts have already begun to provide scientific training for the present group of astronauts including geological field trips to enhance their capacity for scientific observation. “Third, a manned space science working group has been established [within nasa] .... This group is already at work in the planning of a program for training scientists for space flight . . . .’’ (Text) Dr. David H. Stoddard, Assistant Director of Medical Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed human factors in manned space flight and said “we are confident that the biomedical needs of our currently approved manned space flight program can be met from within the scope of our existing technology.” (Text) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, reviewed U.S. manned space flight program. Describing Project Gemini, he said:	. . the Gemini is more than an experimental spacecraft. At the end of its scheduled developmental flight program, it will be available for missions ranging from scientific and engineering experiments to the ferrying of astronauts to and from a permanent space laboratory. The end goal of Gemini is, therefore, an operational spacecraft which can be launched by relatively small boosters. We expect Gemini to be a useful space vehicle for several years .... The Gemini spacecraft will reach operational status by 1966 . . . .” (Text)	. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn), Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said: “The nation’s program to achieve pre-eminence in space and to insure that, the United States occupies first place among the nations of this world in science, in technology and in conquest of space is critically dependent on the power of the rocket. “You may have heard much about the ‘booster gap’ and the effect this situation has had on our position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union started well ahead of us in the development of large rockets, so necessary for manned flight. The Soviets have been ahead of us, and are still ahead of us in their ability to launch reliably large masses to Earth orbit. “However, with the acceleration of our own progress and by the establishment of our program on a sound engineering basis we can, we believe, surpass the Soviets in time and clearly establish and demonstrate United States pre-eminence in manned space flight. . . .” (Text) Reviewing nasa space program, Director of nasa Office of Programs D. D. Wyatt said: “In its broadest context the nasa program can be classified into three complementary parts. First, we have those phases of the program which are aimed at the exploration of the very nature of space .... “The second major element of our program is aimed at the earliest practical utilization of space for the benefit of mankind .... “Complementing our programs to understand and define space is a third major program element aimed at developing and improving the highly complex technologies which will enhance our future capabilities in space . . . .” (Text) John E. Naugle, Director of nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, said: “. . . the scientific program which we have in nasa is a logical extension of the research work which has been underway in laboratories on the earth since the time of Galileo. Just as astronomers once carried their telescopes to the top of a mountain to see better, now we carry telescopes beyond the earth on rockets and satellites. By doing this we see entirely new phenomena and enable scientists to broaden their studies in certain scientific disicplines . . . .” He then discussed scientific results from each of the six scientific satellites launched by nasa since beginning of 1962 (oso i, explorer xiv, explorer xv, alouette i, ariel, and explorer xvii).	(Text) nasa Director of International Programs Arnold W. Frutkin said in May 7 address delivered by J. H. Barnes, nasa Chief of Cooperative Programs, Office of International Programs: “What other nations are doing in space and in particular, what they are doing together, is in fact small when compared with the resources going directly into national programs in the US and the ussr. Yet, what has been accomplished provides substantial evidence of the feasibility, the benefits, and the promise of joint action by the nations in this new field . . . .” (Text) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, described scientific spacecraft now under development, and said: “We must continually assess our progress .... The flight performance of our spacecraft has been increasing dramatically .... The useful life of unmanned spacecraft launched in 1962 has exceed six months and is still rising because most of those intended for long life are still operating successfully. “Our progress with launch vehicles has been equally gratifying. In 1962, 82% of all major nasa launchings were successful. This performance has been paced by the remarkable Thor-Delta which has successfully launched 16 out of 17 spacecraft. In addition, the huge Saturn has scored 4 out of 4 perfect flights. During this time period, both the Thor-Delta and the Scout payloads were increased over 60% at no increase in their $2.5 million and $1 million price tags. These dramatic increases in performance, life, and reliability of spacecraft and launch vehicles represent by far the most effective way to achieve economy in the space program . . . .” (Text) nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said: “There are four principal areas where a continuing and driving program of advanced research is required if this nation is to achieve pre-eminence in aeronautical and space activities in the decades to come. These are energy conversion and propulsion; materials and structures; control, guidance and communications; and space sciences and the environment of space.” (Text) Louis B. C. Fong, Director of nasa Office of Technology Utilization, said on May 8 that the “basic objectives of the [nasa] Technology Utilization Program are:
nasa announced it had awarded letter contract to rca AstroElectronics Div. for fabrication and test of additional Tiros weather satellites; negotiations of final contract were continuing for total purchase of seven satellites—three r&d type, two operational, and two backup. Before this order, eight Tiros satellites had been funded in r&d phase of the program; six had been placed in orbit since April 1960 and two would be launched in 1963. (nasa Release 63-29)
Radar contact with copper dipoles launched in usaf Project West Ford confirmed they were successfully ejected into orbit from unidentified usaf satellite, mit Lincoln Laboratoiy announced. Fibers were still in compact cloud circling earth every 166 min. in near-polar orbit, some 2,000 mi. high and at approximately 87° to equator; on May 13 dipoles had begun to spread in elongated cloud. Fibers were expected to spread along circular orbital path, some 40,000 mi. in circumference, to form ring around earth. Orbital ring would be used in bouncing radio signals back to earth over long distances, (dod Release 666-63; NYT, 5/13/63, 1; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/13/63, A3; Sullivan, NYT, 5/14/63,18)
Harvard College Observatory reported that astronomers at Boyden Observatory at Bloemfontein, South Africa, had photographed syncom i satellite missing since February 14. The Observatory’s photographs indicated syncom i probably was in orbit about 22,000-mi. high, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A8)
tiros vm (A-53) meteorological satellite was placed in orbit by nasa, using a Thor-Delta booster at amr. Initial orbital data: apogee, 474 mi.; perigee, 431 mi.; period, 99.3 min.; inclination, 58.49°. tiros vm, in addition to the usual wide-angle TV camera transmitting cloud-cover pictures once an orbit to a rather sophisticated ground station, featured the first orbiting of the automatic picture transmission system (aft), designed to provide real-time local weather information to any area in the world by means of a simple, inexpensive ($32,000) ground station. apt equipment in the satellite was a 24-lb. package including a new wide-angle (108°) Tegea-lens TV camera, with its storage and slow-scan transmission system. Preliminary results from the new systen, wereexcellent. („«* Ke.ease •»», -<> Ticking
Various Russian sources had listed a variety of possible uses for the Polet type of maneuverable satellite, according to Space Business Daily. Space expert Vladimir Dobronravov had said that the spacecraft would be used for rendezvous and docking experiments. Tass mentioned the potential for reconnaissance, weather, or communications satellite. M. Litvin-Sedoi said it was a test of a system for construction of an orbiting space platform. {Space Bus. Daily, 11/5/63,201)
Photograph was sent from New York to London, Paris, and Rome via relay i communications satellite, and back to New York via transatlantic cable—in total of 11 minutes. This was first demonstration in which the three European capitals simultaneously received a picture and the first in which relay i sent a picture to Italy. Experiment was made by Associated Press in cooperation with nasa and the it&t Federal Laboratories, Nutley, N.J. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63)
Bv its 1,842nd orbit, relay i communications satellite had been used in 930 wideband experiments; 409 narrowband experiments; 95 demonstrations (TV and narrowband). Transponder had been operated for 190 hrs. over period of 454 operations. (gsfc Historian, Memo, 8/14/63)
President John F. Kennedy addressed the centennial meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington: “. . . it took the First World War to bring science into central contact with government policy, and it took the Second World War to make scientific counsel an indispensable function of government .... “Every time you scientists make a major invention, we politicians have to invent a new institution to cope with it—and almost invariably, these days, it must be an international institution. I am not just thinking of the fact that when you people figure out how to build a global satellite communication system, we have to figure out a global organization to manage it. I am thinking, as well, that scientific advance provided the rationale for the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization—that splitting the atom leads not only to a nuclear arms race but to the establishment of the International Atomic Energy Agency—that the need for scientific exploration of Antarctica leads to an international treaty providing free access to the area without regard to territorial claims—that the scientific possibility of a World Weather Watch requires the attention of the World Meteorological Organization—that the exploration of international oceans leads to the establishment of an Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission .... The ocean, the atmosphere and outer space belong not to one nation or to one ideology but to all mankind. “. . . ours is a century of scientific conquest and scientific triumph. If scientific discovery has not been an unalloyed blessing, if it has conferred on mankind the power not only to create but also to annihilate, it has at the same time provided humanity with a supreme challenge and a supreme testing. If the challenge and the testing are too much for humanity, then we are all doomed. But my own faith is plain and clear. I believe that the power of science and the responsibility of science have offered mankind a new opportunity not only for intellectual growth but for moral discipline—not only for the acquisition of knowledge but for the strengthening of nerve and will.” (CR, 10/28/63, 19279-80)
Hughes Aircraft Co., prime contractor for syncom n communica Ar»o onfnllif a nnnAiinrtAil fli.. nono outuxuiA/^ ciimvuiiv^u liiv cTTnoliT»AT>Aiio	finnr c*ofol 11fa Vvo/1 oj xivm viivuo 'vi	ouxviiito nwu accumulated more message time than all other communications satellites combined, stncom n was launched July 26, maneuvered into 24-hr. station Aug. 15. {Space Bus. Daily, 8/28/63, 306)
Marshal Sergei S. Biryusov, Soviet Commander of the Strategic Rocket Force, said in article published for Soviet Armed Forces Day: “The problem of destruction of hostile rockets in flight was successfully solved in the Soviet Union .... It has now [also] become possible at a command from earth to launch rockets from satellites at any desirable time and at any point of the satellite’s trajectory.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, A3; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A16) February 22:	In ceremony on the 45th anniversary of the Soviet Armed Forces, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky said: “I maintain emphatically that in retaliation to the 344 missiles with which Mr. McNamara is threatening us, we shall deal a simultaneous blow of several times more missiles and such a tremendous nuclear yield that it will wipe off the earth all targets, industrial and administrative-political centers of the United States, will destroy completely the countries which have made available their territories for American war bases . . . .” Marshal Malinovsky said that Soviet rocket crews are required to show 95 per cent proficiency and that there are no Soviet planes equipped to drop bombs, only those equipped to fire rockets. Premier Khrushchev attended the Kremlin ceremony wearing the uniform of a lieutenant general. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, 1)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations began in Rome on technical details of a three-year agreement signed at Geneva in June 1962, for exchange of data to be gained from separate satellite launchings. Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, headed U.S. scientific delegation, and Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences headed the Russian delegation. Joint space research program would include coordination on meteorology and communications studies, and charting of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A3)
at&t informed ComSatCorp that it would prefer to rely on satellites rather than additional undersea cables to meet transatlantic communications needs in the near future. In letter from James E. Dingman, at&t Executive Vice President, made public Dec. 10 by ComStatCorp, atat’s basic position was reiterated: need exists for both cable and satellite circuits; however, at&t would prefer to use satellite circuits across the Atlantic until there are approximately as many satellite channels as cable circuits. (ComSatCorp Release w/ltr)
Soviet scientist Anatoli A. Blagonravov said in Izvestia article that dual flights of Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich in August 1962 proved that, from a medical point of view, manned flight to the moon is now possible. Neither cosmonaut has shown physiological disturbances since the prolonged space flights, he said; flights proved man could avoid dangerous radiation and could work in outer space over long periods. Reviewing Cosmos series of 12 scientific satellites, to date, begun by Soviets in March 1962, Blagonravov said they could be considered a preliminary stage in creating “inhabited” satellites. (Av. Wk., 1/21/63,59)
usaf announced plans to test fuel cell in space by sending new type of electrical power system into orbit in a satellite within next few months. Working model of the fuel cell, developed by Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co., was displayed at afa convention in Washington. (Finney, NTT, 9/12/63,14)
telstar ii communications satellite resumed operating for first time since July 16. Satellite received and transmitted sound and television picture test sent by Bell Telephone Laboratories on telstar ii’s 622nd orbit. Cause of the satellite’s restoration, like its silence, was not known. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/13/63; NYT. 8/13/63,12)
U.S. is recovering more than three of every four satellites launched in its orbit-recovery program, according to Maj. Gen. Benjamin I. Funk, afssd Commander, writing in Bell Aerosystems Co. magazine: “In the recovery of satellites from orbit, we achieved a 75 per cent success record last year, and this rate has since improved even more.” (Troan, Wash. Daily News, 12/5/63)
International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. (it&t) announced it had filed application with fcc for authority to purchase stock in newly-formed Communications Satellite Corp. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/15/63, C6)
Three-minute portion of U.S. color television program received in France via telstar ii communications satellite, nbc transmitted the program, Bell Telephone Hour, from New York to the satellite through Andover, Me., ground station. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/9/63)
Cleveland Clinic kept a calf alive for 20 hours after its heart had been replaced by a mechanical heart system. The controls to drive the pump of this mechanical heart were designed for the Clinic by nasa Lewis Research Center pump specialists. (Lewis Chronology, 11) November 9; usaf’s Rome Air Development Center (radc), Griffiss afb, N.Y., would take part in the tracking and experimentation with nasa’s Echo II passive communications satellite scheduled for launching shortly. A 60-ft.-diameter steerable parabolic antenna had been erected at the Center’s Passive Satellite Research Terminal near Rome N.Y. The terminal would be able to transmit on S and X bands for 5,000-mi. tracking and communications range, usaf would investigate passive communications satellites for their possibilities as a relatively nonjammable military communications system. {A-N-AF Joum. & Reg., 11 /!)/63, 28)
British sources reported U.S. would disclose details of its space launch vehicles to European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) in exchange for cooperative work on joint space projects. (Manchester Guardian, Wash. Post, 1/3/63) January 4; telstar i communications satellite transmitted 10-min. television pictures across the Atlantic, the satellite’s first transatlantic transmission since Nov. 23 when radiation damaged onboard circuits. Eugene S. O’Neill, director of satellite communications for Bell Telephone Laboratories, said btl scientists “tricked telstar’s decoders into receiving commands” by changing the command signals slightly. Remote-control repair was performed after btl constructed laboratory model of telstar i with its faulty circuits and experimented with it to devise corrective signals, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/5/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, Al, A3)
With President Kennedy^ return to Washington from Europe, nasa communications satellite relay i marked end of its busiest programing period, relay was “booked solid” during past weeks to cover President’s trip, death of Pope John XXIII, and election of Pope Paul VI. During its six months of operation, relay i had been used for 85 public communications demonstrations, including transmission of television, voice, radio-photo, and teletype, (nasa Release 63-144)
At Delta Day ceremony, Cape Canaveral, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., announced nasa had ordered 14 more Delta space vehicles from prime contractor Douglas Aircraft Co., most of which were expected to be used in launching additional nasa communications satellites and meteorological satellites as well as new scientific satellites, (nasa Release 63-39)
Dr. Milton Clauser, former Vice President of Space Technology Laboratories, and Dr. J. P. Ruina? former Director of dod Advanced Research Projects Agency, joined Communications Satellite Corp. as consultants. (ComSatCorp. Release)
U.K. announced it had established a space research station for satellite observation at the Sembawang naval air station in Singapore, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 11/15/65)
fcc Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between U.S. and rest of the world. Last year 5 million telephone calls were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities probably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million international communications system will be in operation by 1970. New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63) August 15: stncom ii communications satellite was successfully maneuvered into synchronous position 55° west longitude, over Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from westward drift speed of 1.2° per day to nearly zero drift by firing of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide jets occurred Aug. 11, when syncom ii was slowed from 7° drift per day to 2.7° drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was reduced to 1.2° drift. Firings were directed by engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed from ground station at Lakehurst, N.J. stncom n was now stationed about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling at speed of about 6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equator to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator, nasa Administrator James E. Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the culmination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space flight.” (nasa “stncom n Fact Sheet”; nasa Release 63-185)
Aviation Week reported that usaf and usn were pressing nasa to improve the reliability of the Scout launch vehicle. The Navy was said to have had only 50% success with it in their Transit navigational satellite program, usaf was said to have had a little better performance but only because it had undertaken a complete and expensive checkout of components. Government-furnished equipment was said to be especially unreliable. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63,34)
nasa announced it would sponsor study to determine interest in system of “practical” satellites to collect data from remote areas of the earth. If warranted, study would be followed by a feasibility and design study. A possible use of data collection satellite was in oceanography, using instrumented floating buoys distributed over ocean surface to measure characteristics of the sea. Satellite would interrogate each buoy, store information, then transmit it upon command. Similar application was tracking of icebergs, using transponders planted on ice formations. Study would be under cognizance of nasa Future Applications Satellites unit, which was also investigating nonmilitary uses of navigational satellites, (nasa Release 63-55) • Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) questioned whether a planned space electronics research center should be located in Boston or in fact, whether one was needed at all. He said New Jersey has outstanding qualifications for such a center and it and other states should be considered a possible location—if the center is actually needed, nasa has already selected the Boston area as the site of the center. (Boston Herald, 3/18/63)
Fifth anniversary of nasa. Ceremonies throughout the week included open house at Wallops Station, Va., Sept. 29 and 30; Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington; Project Mercury Summary Report Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex., Oct. 3 and 4; and nasa Fifth Anniversary Banquet in Washington Oct. 5. In its fifth year of space operations (October 1, 1962-October 1, 1963), nasa launched 12 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 10 were successful, 1 partially successful, and one unsuccessful. The X-15 rocket research aircraft set a new altitude record of 350,000 ft. and began its follow-on flights involving space research. The Mercury program added a 6-orbit flight and was concluded with a 22-orbit flight. Among other successful flights were four scientific satellites, two communications satellites, the first and second synchronous-orbit communications satellites, and another weather satellite. The fifth scientific lunar probe (ranger v) was unsuccessful and led to a reworking of the remaining Ranger probes. Project Apollo flight testing was begun. In its five years of space operations, nasa had launched a total of 68 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 39 were successful, 9 partially successful, ajid 20 unsuccessful, for an overall average of 2y2 successes for every failure. The rate of improvement ranged from 1 success per failure in 1958-59 and 1959-60, to 2 to 1 in 1960-61, to 5 to 1 in 1961-62, . to 12 to 1 in 1962-63.	(hhr-14)
usaf announced launching unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, NYT, 9/25/63, 14)
Satellite Symposium, held by nasa in Washington, D.C., Dr. Van Allen said data from injun iii and explorer xiv satellites showed intensity at center of artificial belt had decreased only by a factor of two. As recently as last December, Dr. Van Allen had reiterated his view that the bulk of artificial radiation would disappear by summer 1963. However, based on newly available data, Dr. Van Allen said artificial radiation would decrease in intensity by factor of three or four until period of increased solar activity (around 1967) when decay rate should increase. He also said electrons in artificial belt have higher energies (up to a few mev) than natural space electrons, making them easier for scientists to study. {Av. Wk. 3/25/63, 27; Wash. Post, 3/16/63; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/16/63)
In the Washington Post, Howard Simons reviewed reconnaissance satellites, referring to previously released information and statements regarding a so-called “Samos” project, and inferring that “Samos” satellites were now onerational. (Wash. Post. 12/8/63, Ei-5)	"	'	'
U.S. television audiences witnessed first public appearance of Pope Paul VI via relax communications satellite, (cbs TV)
West German scientists outlined plans for German space program at Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart. Program includes: communications satellite to be placed in polar orbit; high-energy rocket propulsion stage; space transport system ; space probe rocket with paraglider landing system to allow recovery and reuse. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/26/63,13)
Frederick R. Kappel, Chairman of the Board of at&t, was presented Silver Quill Award of National Business Publications at 12th annual State-of-the-Nation dinner, Washington. In accepting the award, Mr. Kappel said that at&t’s telstar communications satellite had “provided basic assurance that satellite communications are indeed feasible and practical, and that design and construction of commercial satellites, and ground stations to work with them, can now be approached pretty much as a straight engineering project. There is no scientific obstacle to designing a commercial system immediately, and bringing it into being as soon as the satellites could be manufactured and put into orbit, say in 2 or 3 years . . . .” {CR, 2/11/63, A656)
First public demonstration of communications exchange via synchronous satellite, when two U.S. wire services and Nigerian newsmen exchanged news stories of about 300 words each via syncom ii communications satellite, hovering 22,823 mi. over Western Africa. Photographs of President Kennedy and Nigerian Governor General Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe also were exchanged. Transmissions were made from nasa station at Lake-hurst, N.J., and usns Kingsport communications ship in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/63; nasa Release 63-171)
U.S.S.R. has failed in at least 13 attempts to send probes to Mars, Venus, and the moon since October 1960j Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported, and these failures were chiefly caused by inability of fourth stage to send the payload out of parking orbit. A&AE concluded, “it seems clear that the Russians have need for an improved upper stage to launch deep-space vehicles, and that Polyot I fills the bill.” (A&AE, 12/63,90) During 1963: Man’s conquest of space moved from spectacular hazard toward routine accomplishment, from the exhilarating peaks and slumps of first-generation hardware and experiments to the steadily improving reliability and capability of second- and third-generation launch vehicles and satellites, nasa launched 13 major space shots, with mission results of 11 successes, 1 partial success and 1 unsuccessful, compared with the 1962 record of 19 successes, 4 partial successes, and 3 unsuccessful. Project Mercury ended with L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; Project Apollo began its flight tests with two unmanned capsule tests. Communications satellites demonstrated near-synchronous orbit and Saturn and Centaur boosters moved toward operational status with successful test flights. U.S.S.R. conducted a 129-orbit tandem flight and orbited an unmanned prototype of a new manned maneuverable space capsule, nasa Administrator James E. Webb cited as nasa’s greatest specific accomplishment of 1963 the fact that his key staff people in Headquarters and the Centers had “learned to supervise the efforts at hand,” that he now has “the men matched with the job and the job matched with the men.” (nasa hhr-8 ; hhr-10 ; Space Bus. Daily, 1/3/64,10) During 1963: During the year the bud delivered two Minuteman wings to the Strategic Air Command, making an average of one icbm delivered per day in 1963. (afsc Release 312-R-114,1/1/64, 1) .
Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Systems, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. He discussed the Tiros meteorological satellite system and described the Nimbus advanced meteorological satellite, first of which would be launched in 1963, and said: “Each one of these five elements—orientation, coverage, direct local readout, lifetime and growth potential, represents a major advance over Tiros. Nimbus, including all these, represents an extremely large step forward beyond the Tiros capability. The Nimbus technical difficulties of the past were associated with the development of these five elements. Wre now believe that our major difficulties are behind us. . . .” He described the meteorological sounding rocket program, and said: “In the large meteorological sounding rocket program, it is planned to fire approximately 45 per year. These will be distributed at various latitudes to measure the atmospheric structure in the various climatic regions from the Arctic to the Tropics. “The small meteorological sounding rocket program is aimed at providing a standardized flight article which will meet the requirements at an overall minimum cost. Approximately 100 rockets will be launched per year in this program. (Testimony)
Hitchhiker radiation monitor satellite on dod unidentified satellite launched June 27, 1963, with Thor-Agena vehicle, was ejected and fired ki,ck motor to attain higher apogee. Satellite measuring magnetically trapped electrons and protons of all significant energy levels showed relation between solar flares and low-energy particles in solar plasma. No distinct division between inner and outer Van Allen belts was found, but instead a gradual transition. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
Addressing First World Conference on World Peace Through Law in Athens, nasa Communications Systems Director Leonard Jaffe described role of satellites in communications and said: “. . . Today, approximately 300 telephone channels are available across the North Atlantic. “Notwithstanding these recent and radical improvements in trans-Atlantic telephone service, we can predict the need for still more channels. Every time communication channels have increased, they have been loaded to capacity almost at once—new means for communication have never caused the abandonment of the old ones. During 1960 there were more than three million overseas telephone calls, and reliable estimates indicate a sevenfold increase in overseas calls during the next decade. Such an increase in traffic will overtax the current and planned undersea cables, and high frequency radio facilities. And our current communication facilities have no capability for transmitting television. . . . “Communications satellites should soon be providing a substantial increase in our capabilities for world-wide high quality common carrier communications, at least over those routes where the volume of traffic exceeds present or forecast capabilities, and is also great enough to justify the necessarily large investment in a communications satellite system. Eventually, we hope that communications satellite technology will be improved to the point where service can also be provided to areas not served by other means, either because of their isolation or because the traffic volume does not justify an investment in more conventional communication means. “The objective of the United States in this area was voiced by President Kennedy in a public statement, not too long ago, in which he said: ‘There is no more important field at the present time than communications, and we must grasp the advantages presented to us by the communications satellite to use this medium wisely and effectively to insure greater understanding among the peoples of the world.’ ” (Text)
Second Shotput suborbital sounding rocket flight in U.S.-Italian San Marco project was launched from nasa Wallops Station, the 177.5-lb. payload reaching 183-mi. altitude in flight to test instrumentation for San Marco satellite. Another purpose of launching was to determine whether Shotput despin difficulties of first San Marco launching had been corrected, and flight officials indicated the vehicle performed satisfactorily. Shortly after the Shotput launch, a related experiment was launched from Wallops Island using Nike-Cajun sounding rocket. Three mylar balloons were ejected from Nike-Cajun and tracked by radar, to provide air density data to aid in evaluating San Marco experiment. A third Shotput launching later this year would continue testing instrumentation performance and launch techniques for San Auaiuo piojcci^ vviiu/ii v>wuiu tuiiiunaic 111 iauiiLimig ui caicuuc into equatorial orbit from platform off east coast of Africa. San Marco is cooperative project of Italian National Research Council and nasa. (nasa Release 63-172; Wallops Release 63-75; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
gfso announced negotiations with Republic Aviation Corp. for Phase I contract for Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso). Aoso would be launched into a 300-mi. near-polar orbit for observations of x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet emissions of the sun. Phase I calls for one-year development of systems engineering ana detailed aesign of Ine satellite, ^gsfc Release G 22-63)
On his 66th birthday, Pope Paul VT recognized 175th anniversary of Georgetown Univ. by a special address broadcast to U.S. via teistar n communications satellite. (NYT, 9/27/63, 9; nbc-TV, 9/26/63)
Senator Warren Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee, in nomination hearings on incorporators of Space Communications Corp., said that the corporation would have no bearing on decisions regarding nasa research in communications satellites, but that nasa would have responsibility to justify continued communications research as being in the National interest. {Space Bus. Daily, 3/12/63,305)
George J. Feldman, a director and incorporator of Communications Satellite Corp., said in address before Federal Bar Association in Washington: “The execution of this national program [developing a commercial comsat system] and the task faced by the corporation is difficult, complex, and truly formidable and should be viewed by the objective witb understanding. This is the uncharted region of technology, international relationship and agreements, and national support .... “Up to this point the United States has been the innovator and leader in this field, with great benefit to our national prestige, and international standing and with the satisfaction of pioneering a part of the future. Having taken this pioneering step, we have now assumed our share of responsibility and the latter is the operative word . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/20/63, A3948-49)
injttn i satellite, silent since Dec. 25, responded to signals of State Univ. of Iowa scientists, who did not know cause of the cosmic-ray satellite’s transmission interruption. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/30/63)
George J. Feldman, Communications Satellite Corp., incorporator nominee, said in address on international arrangements for satellite communications: “Last July 10, when Telstar went into orbit; communications via satellite literally entered the homes of millions of men. and women. This historic event symbolized technical developments which open up unparalleled opportunities and will, in time, significantly affect the daily lives of people in many parts of the world. A new dimension has been added to communications by telephone, telegraph, radio and television. . . . “Cooperation on the international level, bilaterally and multilaterally, is a keystone of a successful communications satellite system and it is self-evident that the wider the range of the system, the more extensive will be the need for wider participation and agreement. . . . “The development of the communications satellite system is underway. It will involve intricate negotiation and arrangements, and there are many problems to be tackled. But technology has thrust greatness upon us and, as in some other manifestations of this technological revolution, we are summoned to the challenge. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/24/63, A2426)
usaf launched three unidentified satellites and a TetrahedraL Research Satellite (trs) from Pt. Arguello: a single unidentifiea satellite from a Thor-Agena D vehicle and the other two unidentified satellites with the trs from an Atlas-Agena B launch vehicle. The 1.5-lb. trs was to measure solar cell radiation damage. {Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; M&R, 7/29/63, 28)
Official opening of 1963 hurricane season, tiros vi meteorological satellite, launched September 18, 1962, was still operational and U.S. Weather Bureau said additional meteorological satellites may be orbited by nasa before end of season, Nov. 15. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 637)
Second Town Meeting of the World telecast by cbs-TV via telstar u satellite. The subject was “The Christian Revolution” and linked in a discussion church leaders in New York, London, and Rome. Program was only a partial technical success, since the audio signal for the speakers in Rome was missing for most of the program. (cbs-TV) October 16; Twin Vela Hotel satellites were launched by dod from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas-Agena vehicle, according to newspaper reports. The two satellites, designed to detect nuclear explosions m space to a distance of 100,000,000 mi., were launched mto an elliptical orbit of 57,000-mi. apogee, 230-mi. perigee. Some 18 hours after launch, one of the two satellites received a signal from Vandenberg afb which activated a rocket motor at apogee to kick the satellite into circular orbit at 57,000 mi. On Oct. 19, the same was done for the second satellite, so that both would orbit at 57,000 mi. but always be on opposite sides of the earth. Reports also indicated that a third satellite, known as “Pygmy” and weighing 2^2 llis., was included in the launch, would remain in elliptical orbit returning radiation readings across the depth of the Van Allen Belt. This function was said to be completely independent of the purpose of the twin Vela Hotel satellites. (Witkin, NYT, 10/18/63, 13; Wash. Post, 10/18/63; N.Y. Herald Tribune, 10/18/63; dod Release 1396-63)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted the Goddard Historical Prize Essay for 1962—“Early U.S. Satellite Proposals,” by R. Cargill Hall—into the Congressional Record. Chairman Miller pointed out that “in space affairs we cannot afford to be shortsighted or wrong” and asked that proposals of 1946-49 be considered in the light of the current discussion on the U.S. space program: “What if the United States had launched a satellite in 1952 or even 1954? Would history have been different? . . . Would not the image of the U.S. in the eyes of the rest of the world have been spared the historical blemish of Sputnik, the appearance that we were not the scientific and technological leader in the world ? ... If we would remain free and maintain peace on a small and troubled planet, America had better make sure that superior space science and technology are on our side.” Prize historical essay reviewed proposals by the U.S. Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics and the U.S. Air Force’s rand Corp. for for the launching of earth satellites, proposals turned down by Department of Defense officials as not having “scientific or military utility.” Goddard Historical Essay Competition is sponsored annually by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. {CR, 10/7/63, A6277-6284)
dod announced the transfer of the Naval Missile Facility at Point Arguello, Calif., and Navy tracking stations in the Pacific to the usaf and the establishment within the usaf of a central authority to act as single manager for icbm and space tracking activities, including amr, icbm and space activities at Point Arguello and Vandenberg afb, Calif., and the Air Force Satellite Control Facility, Sunnyvale, Calif, usaf also acquired on-orbit control of dod satellites except Navy navigational satellites and militaiy communications satellites, (dod Release 1494—63)
Communications Satellite Corp. set 1966 as target date to start commercial operation of global satellite communications network. {A&AE, Nov. 1963, 11)
usaf announced routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 1080-63) ■July 27: Eastward drifting of stncom n communications satellite was reversed by ground command firing of hydrogen peroxide jet controls onboard the satellite, stncom ii was now drifting westward at rate of 5° per day. After drifting into desired position, satellite would be stopped by onboard control jets so that it would be in synchronous position of 24-hour orbit. Command signals to stncom n were sent by U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency station aboard usns Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria, (nasa Release; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/28/63; AP, Wash. Post, 7/28/63)
Dr. S. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition that reports from Tiros weather satellites were being used by Soviet scientists in their weather research. Launching of a weather satellite “is probably an immediate Soviet objective.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. n/46, 3/28/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/27/63)
ComSatCorp was planning its initial offering of stock in the spring of 1964, probably on the order of $200 million. Half of this stock would by law have to be made available to the general public at no more than $100 per share, the remaining half being taken by the communications industry. Wall Street predicted that the stock would meet with unprecedented enthusiasm for a large issue by a new and speculative corporation. Meanwhile the ComSatCorp technical staff was still studying the technical and economic factors involved in establishing a global communications net “at the earliest practicable date” that Congress directed. Die goal was for an operating satellite system by 1966-67, employing either medium-altitude or synchronous-orbit satellites. (NYT, 11/3/63, IF)
50-lb. payload of ionospheric measuring instruments launched with Argo D-4 sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., into orbital path of alouette satellite. Preliminary data indicated measurements were made in upper ionosphere within two minutes of soundings taken from alouette. Payload reached peak altitude of 590 mi. Purpose of experiment was to obtain measurements of ion and electron temperatures and densities; data from payload instruments would be compared with similar data transmitted simultaneously by alouette. Analysis of data later confirmed that alouette i data were valid. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64, 128; Wallops Release 63-63)
Goddard Space Flight Center engineers directed radio signal sent from Lakehurst, N.J., to stncom ii communications satellite 22,000 mi. in space, signaling hydrogen peroxide jets onboard to fire and slow satellite’s drift westward from rate of about 7° to about 2° per day. With aid of additional maneuvers signaled from ground, syncom ii was expected to attain synchronous orbit within three days, appearing to hover over 55° west position and prescribing figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator. (AP, AFT7, 8/12/63)
County Judge Thaddeus Pruss ruled in Wisconsin that metal particles allegedly from sputnik iv satellite were to be returned to their finder, Thomas Williams, Brown Deer, Wis., said to be first known test case involving space law. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/18/63)
Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced a five-year space program that included development of Japanese boosters and launching of three satellites. It would be funded at $59,138,888 and employ some 300 Japanese engineers. Programs included a 60-km. weather observation rocket; a 150-km. two-stage weather observation rocket; 400-km. three-stage rockets; 1,200-km. two-stage rockets; navigation satellites, to be ready for launching by NASA in 1967. (M&R, 11/18/63,13)
The Senate Committee on Commerce confirmed the nominated incorporators of the Communications Satellite Corp.: Edward P. Kaiser, David M. Kennedy, Sidney J. Weinberg, Bruce G. Sund-lun, A. Byrne Litscligi, Beardsley Graham, Leonard Woodcock, Sam Harris, George Feldman, Leonard Marks, John T. Conner, George L. Killion, Leo D. Welch, and Joseph V. Charyk. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/13/63)
rca announced relay i communications satellite had operated succesfully for 203 days, setting record for performance and durability by a communications satellite, rca, which built satellite for nasa, said relay i had traveled estimated 156 million mi. and carried out more than 1,350 communications experiments and demonstrations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/29/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was showing interest in acquiring usaf Titan III boosters to launch future heavy payloads such as observatory satellites, according to Aviation Week. Webb was said to have discussed with dod’s Dr. Harold Brown the possibility of adding Titan III to the list of standard launch vehicles in the national space program. (Av. Wk., 11/18/63, 25)
syncom n 24-hour communications satellite used to relay oceanographic data from research vessel Geronimo in Gulf of Guinea off Africa to National Oceanographic Data Center in Washington, which compared the data with its records and sent back to the Geronimo the deviations to correct errors. Demonstration via syncom n was performed to determine practica-hilitv of nrovidinc research shins auicklv with information to correct errors. Line of transmission: from Geronimo to Kingsport in Lagos harbor, to syncom n some 22,300 mi. above Atlantic Ocean, to ground station at Lakehurst, N.J., along ground lines to nodc, and return. ( nasa Release 63-212) impetus of war; that, while insuring national security, its central purpose is to secure the peaceful uses of space for all mankind; that nasa is a civilian agency; and that it necessarily will require many years of sustained and costly effort. We have in fact set ourselves a hard challenge of national purpose and will: to sustain such a program through all of the troubles and difficulties that are inevitable in a research and development effort, an effort whose failures as well as. its successes are set before the world to see. This is a difficult undertaking; but if we succeed in these ways, then we will have accomplished much and learned more as a free society . . . .” In interview following his address, Webb commented on that day’s proposal by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko for summit meeting of leaders of the 18 nations participating in Geneva disarmament conference. Webb said Gromyko’s U.N. speech was the most recent example of growing awareness of U.S. advances in space technology. “. . . The image of America as a can-do nation in space has been increasing rapidly, and the Russians cannot fail to be influenced by that image.” (Text; St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/20/63)
In its first few days of operation, explorer xvii satellite had obtained data that more than tripled all previous direct measurements of the neutral gases in earth’s upper atmosphere, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Satellite was traveling. in elliptical orbit (578-mi. apogee, 153-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period) and was transmitting data of excellent quality and quantity. It had been commanded more than 75 times, and each time it responded with approximately four min. of data on density, pressure, composition, and temperature of upper atmosphere gases. New communications system, utilizing special data readout station at gsfc, was providing scientific and technical data from the satellite within minutes of its transmission, (gsfc Release)
President John F. Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery in a state funeral attended by the largest gathering of foreign dignitaries ever to visit Washington. Throughout the four days of stark events, the Nation and the world participated to a degree never before possible by means of round-the-clock TV coverage that raised that young medium to a new dimension for thoroughness, maturity, and sensitivity. relay i communications satellite enabled all of Europe, including the U.S.S.R., to view the funeral ceremonies. The satellite also provided transmission across the Pacific to Japan, where an estimated 95 million persons viewed the ceremonies. (NYT, 11/26/63)
General Telephone and Electronics Corp. filed application with fcc for authority to purchase stock in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP? NYT, 4/23/63)
U.S.-Canada agreement for cooperative testing of communications satellites launched by nasa was announced by nasa and Canada’s Dept, of Transport. Each cooperating national agency would provide a ground station to receive and transmit television and multichannel telephone and telegraphic signals via communications satellites, according to Memorandum of Understanding signed in April and made operative by exchange of notes today. - (nasa Release 63-194)
nasa announced award of four-month study contract to bca Astro-Electronics Div. for engineering evaluation of whether Tiros meteorological satellite could be modified to increase its cloud-cover photography capability, bca would evaluate Tiros “wheel configuration,” calling for two TV cameras mounted in satellite to point in opposite directions; satellite would be launched into polar orbit spinning on its side, pointed towards earth at all times. Such satellite could provide complete earth coverage every three days. ( nasa Release 63-115)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before Communications Subcommittee of Senate Commerce Committee that experiences of both telstar i and relax i communications satellites were being “used continuously to review projects such as Syncom .... in an attempt to achieve the 24-hour, synchronous orbit, as well as all of our other satellite projects. “I should like to add, finally, that the experience of Telstar and Relay to date have merely reinforced the opinion which I gave before this committee last year; that considerable research and development have yet to be performed before economic operational systems can be established . . . .” (Testimony)
Third anniversary of orbiting of tiros i, first U.S. meteorological satellite, which provided during its 78-day lifetime more than 19,000 usable cloud-cover photographs, tiros i was followed by five additional successful Tiros satellites, the last two of which—tiros v and vi—were still in operation after more than nine and six months respectively. To date, tiros v had transmitted more than 44,000 useful cloud-system photographs and tiros vi, more than 39,000. tiros v and vi photographed hurricanes and typhoons in July, August, and September 1962; in August alone, they discovered two Atlantic hurricanes and four Pacific typhoons. Since April 1, 1962, there were only seven days when a Tiros satellite was not in operation. Information gathered by satellites was being used in daily operations of Weather Bureau’s National Meteorological Center in weather analyses and forecasts for entire U.S. (nasa Release 63-65; Commerce Dept. Release WB 63-4)
relay i communications satellite was used to transmit electroencephalograms (“brain waves”) from Bristol, England, to Minneapolis, Minn., in demonstration experiment conducted in connection with meeting of National Academy of Neurology in Minneapolis, (nasa Release 63-85)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Leo D. Welch and President Joseph V. Charyk left Washington, D.C., for 10 days of discussions with Canadian and European communications officials. (Wash. Post, 5/24/63) Development of new helium isotope, Helium 2, was reported by Dr. 'f	and Tlr< T?ivlrvlFr\ _T SIaIvi. drian of Argentine Atomic Energy Commission. Finding opened “whole new vistas for the possibility of holding other experiments of this kind,” Dr. Bilamuk said. (AP, NYT, 5/16/63, 18)
White House announced that Leo D. Welch, retiring board chairman of Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, and Joseph V.	Charyk, Under Secretary of the Air Force, were being nominated by the President as incorporators of the Communications Satellite Corporation (esc). The esc announced that Welch had been selected to be chairman and chief executive while Charyk would become president and principal operating officer. Dr. Charyk became Chief Scientist of the usaf in 1959, was appointed in June 1959 as Ass’t Sec’y of usaf for r&d, and in January 1960 as Under Secretary. (AP, Wash, Post. 3/1/63, A8)
Biweekly Satellite Situation Report, by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, initiated practice of reporting only those objects launched by nasa, with no coverage in future of launchings by dod agencies or U.S.S.R. (Sat. Sit. Rpt., 1/16/63)
nasa announced stncom n communications satellite, now drifting westward over Atlantic Ocean at 22,800-mi. altitude, would be stopped when it reached desired position at 55° west longitude. At this location stncom n would be lowered into precise synchronous orbit, so that it would appear to trace elongated figure-8 pattern along 55°meridian to points 33° north and south of the equator, period 1,463 min., perigee 22,221 mi., apogee 22,912 mi., drift rate (degrees per day westward) 6.8. (nasa Release 63-168; gsfc Historian)
Alton B. Moody, Chief of Future Aplications Satellites in nasa Office of Applications, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. He summarized nasa accomplishments and plans in two areas—navigation satellite systems and data collection satellite systems—and said: “Both of these projects illustrate the operating procedure adopted for Future Applications. Before a flight program will be undertaken, several questions must be answered affirmatively: “1. Is there a requirement? “2. Is the requirement sufficient to justify the expenditure of the funds needed? “3. How would such a system operate? “4. Is the design feasible and within current state-of-the-art? By answering these questions serially, we are not committing funds very far downstream and can turn back at any point if the results are unfavorable.” (Testimony)
U.S.-Scandinavia approval of Memorandum of Understanding for testing of NASA-launched experimental communications satellites announced by nasa and Scandinavian Committee for Satellite Telecommunication. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, on official tour of Scandinavia, received in Copenhagen the Danish Government’s note of approval, making the Memorandum effective; Norway had approved Memorandum in note dated Sept. 11 and Sweden, in note dated July 25. Under agreement, Scandinavian Committee would provide ground station to receive multichannel telephone or telegraph signals transmitted from U.S. via orbiting communications satellite, (nasa Release 63-205)
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Sys-temSj testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics : “During fiscal year 1963 the feasibility of using active communications satellites to relay television, telephone conversations, teletype, facsimile, and data over transoceanic distances has been demonstrated with Telstar and Relay .... Aside from these demonstrations, which have public appeal, and are necessary to show that our satellites perform as we say they do, hundreds of engineering tests have been performed, the results of which will enable the United States to design better satellites and ground stations for an operational, global communications satellite system. In addition, we have accumulated a considerable amount of radiation data, and have obtained better information on the damage to solid state components, such as solar cells, transistors and diodes, from which we will profit in the design of all kinds of satellites in the future . . . .” (Testimony)
Televised White House ceremony, with President Kennedy signing bill making Sir Winston Churchill an honorary citizen of the U.S.j was transmitted to England and Europe via relay i communications satellite. Broadcast was viewed by millions of Britons and Sir Winston himself, and both audio and visual reception were considered perfect, (nasa Release 63-69; Wash. Post, 4/10/63)
U.K. sent television signals across the Atlantic for first time via relay i communications satellite. Signals sent from Goonhilly Downs to Nutley, N.J., were described as “very good” and “ex' ’	1	” ‘hey were also clearly received at ground Fucino. v	, igo Trtb., 1/8/63)
After 10 months of satisfactory operation in orbit, explorer xiv scientific satellite, with its six experiments to measure energetic particles and magnetic fields in space, was still functioning. During the 10 months, data acquisition stations received 6,003 hrs. of data from explorer xiv, of which more than 4,500 hrs. were digitized and 3,200 hrs. were sent to the six experimenters, (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 5)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
nasa syncom ii communications satellite launched into orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from amr, entering elliptical orbit (140-mi. perigee, 22,548-mi. apogee). Five hrs. 33 min. after launching, apogee-kick motor onboard fired for 21 sec., placing syncom ii in orbital path ranging from 22,300-mi. to 22,548-mi. altitude and adjusting its speed to near-synchronous 6,800 mph. Traveling in slightly lower than synchronous orbit and at less than synchronous speed, satellite began drifting eastward at rate of 7.5° per day. Ground signals would attempt to reverse drifting so that satellite would attain synchronous position over Brazil. Communications tests during syncom ii’s ascent into orbit were successful, including reception and transmission of “The Star Spangled Banner,” a voice message, and a teletype transmission. Once in synchronous position, syncom ii would provide telephone, teletype, and photo facsimile communications between Lakehurst, N.J., and Lagos Harbor, Nigeria, (nasa Release 63-152; NYT, 7/27/63; N.Y. Herald Trib.^ 7/27/63)
In hearings on U.S. space program, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony of Dr. Philip Abelson, Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Geophysical Laboratory; Dr. C. S. Pittendrigh, Princeton Univ. biology dept.; Dr. Simon Ramo, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of Calif, prof, of chemistry; and Dr. Polycarp Kusch, Columbia Univ. physicist. Dr. Abelson charged Project Apollo was harming future expansion of scientific knowledge and ‘‘taking away from our national security”; he declared that “manned space exploration has limited scientific value and has been accorded an importance which is quite unrealistic . . . .” Dr. Pittendrigh testified he approved of lunar exploration program chiefly because of its value toward eventual exploration of Mars. He cautioned that manned Mars landing should be made only after it is assured there would be no contamination by terrestrial organisms. Dr. Ramo expressed his approval of Project Apollo, but advised a “calm watch” to assure such a project would not begin to “dominate” U.S. technology and economy. Dr. Urey, taking issue with Dr. Abelson’s suggestion that Apollo costs were hindering U.S. science and education, said that “if we should decide not to do the space program we will probably do less for education than we would otherwise . . . .” Dr. Kusch testified he opposed high priority for Project Apollo because “we have great national needs that far outweigh the exploration of space.” He cited such necessities as conservation of natural resources, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/63) Jwne 10: usaf decision to recover manned spacecraft at Edwards, Holloman, and Wendover Air Force Bases was reported in Missiles and. Rochets. All mission command and control would be exercised by Satellite Test Center, Sunnyvale, Calif. Unnamed usaf spokesmen said first program operating under this arrangement would be X-20 (Dyna Soar) in its air-launched phases. (M&R, 6/10/63,34)
One-year anniversary of orbiting of tiros vi meteorological satellite, its year-long operational lifetime setting new record for weather satellites. On July 31, 1963, tiros vi discovered first hurricane (Arlene) of 1963 season in tropical Atlantic ; altogether, tiros vi photographed two hurricanes in Atlantic, two tropical storms in eastern Pacific, eight typhoons in central and western Pacific, as well as sand storms in Saudi Arabia and ice conditions in southern and northern hemispheres. Along with tiros v it supported Mercury space flights of Astronauts Schirra and Cooper. National Weather Satellite Center issued about 600 weather advisories around the world based on some of the 63,000 cloud-cover pictures from tiros vi. (nasa Release 63209; Commerce Dept. Release WB 63-11)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced selection of American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., and Radio Corp. of America to study multiple access techniques for communications satellites. Each company would study different ------- -1, „ _ J _: dppiuacil clilU. piOviut; uumoaiwip Willi	uata vn cAioung types of equipment for engineering information so that ComSatCorp could choose design of first operational commercial comsat system. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite June 28 from nasa Wallops Station, using Scout booster. Goddard Space Flight Center Satellite Situation Report listed the satellite as “research satellite for geophysics.” (AP, Wash. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., 6/30/63)
nasa announced rca Service Co. had been selected to negotiate contract for operation and maintenance of satellite data-acquisition stations—two near Rosman, N.C., and two near Fairbanks, Alaska. One station at each location would be operational by Sept. 1963; other two stations were expected to be operational m 1964. Facilities would be first high-capacity data-acquisition stations, supporting Oao, Pogo, Ego, and Nimbus satellites, (nasa Release 63-138). ■June 19: nasa Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden received international aspects of the U.S. space program at a luncheon meeting of the National Capitol Section of the aiaa. Dr. Dryden was awarded the First Annual von Karman Memorial Citation and a letter from Vice President Johnson was read which said, in part: “A few more Hugh Diydens—appropriately placed about the globe—and we would have a world of peace, honor, and progress.” Preceding Dr. Dryden’s address Mr. Robert F. Packard of the State Department reviewed U.S. policy with regard to space. (Letter; Citation; Text)
nasa announced syncom n communications satellite achieved perfection of orbit probably unparalleled by any other previous satellite. At more than 22,000-mi. altitude, orbit varies from absolute circle by no more than 4.5 mi. Orbital period—23 hrs., 55 min., 54 sec.—is only 10.09 sec. shorter than mean sidereal day. Virtually stationary over 55th meridian of west longitude, syncom n is drifting eastward so slowly that it would take nearly a month to move a single degree. Drifting will be corrected periodically, and the communications satellite can be expected to remain on station and operating for more than two years. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/5/63)
nasa announced its first contract to study overall systems requirements for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) had been awarded to Republic Aviation Corp. Administered by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, contract called for four-month study to determine “technical systems needed for 24-hour surveillance of the earth’s cloud cover and to identify the major scientific and engineering advances required for the ground stations.” (nasa Release 63-18)
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric said in testimony before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “Our goal is to establish, at an early date, a developmental communications satellite system consisting of a minimum number of simple, reliable satellites together with a minimum number of widely spaced ground stations, which can be tested and evaluated as a ‘package’ within the framework of the established military communications network. This program would demonstrate the technical and operational characteristics of such a system as well as its compatibility with the existing communications complex. The ability to transmit signals between a satellite and two ground stations has already been demonstrated. But the ability of a ‘system,’ comprising a number of satellites and ground stations, to provide a reliable means of military communication has yet to be explored . . . .” (Testimony)
French plans to orbit four-pound “Satmos” satellite in 1964 revealed by unnamed French Government officials. To be launched by Army’s National Office of Space Research using four-stage Berenice rocket, satellite would provide data on re-entry from outer space, (upi, NTT, 9/8/63,42; M&R, 9/16/63,12)
stncom n communications satellite relayed transmission of speech and teletype between Fort Dix, N.J., and moving ship Kingsport about 40 mi. west of Lagos, Nigeria. This was first such transmission via a communications satellite to a moving ship at sea. This was first in series of experiments designed to test shipboard equipment and reception in fringe areas, (nasa Release 63-213)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, inserted in Congressional Record an art'cle from Missiles and Rockets, which said: “The United States has gained more knowledge of outer space than the Russians because we’ve done a better overall job with our unmanned satellite program. We are using unmanned vehicles to help predict weather around the world, to improve navigation, to make possible international television and other communications, and to keep track of what the enemy is doing to establish missiles and other weapon systems aimed at us. “Not only have we learned more about the planet Mars through unmanned space research, but we’ve gained much knowledge of the vast reaches of space in between and beyond .... We’ve pursued unmanned space research down far more streets and alleys than have the Soviets. “For the most part, our unmanned satellites are yielding knowledge that will assure success with manned flights into space in the future. For that reason, if no other, it is easy for the unmanned satellite program to be overlooked, its significance lost in the international competition of manned flights. This is a pity, for what we do in unmanned space exploration today is the very foundation on which we will build future manned space exploration. “In saying this we are not being partisan to the claim so often heard these days that we ought to forget about the manned program and explore space only with unmanned vehicles. We regard the controversy as a mere tempest in a teapot that will prove meaningless in time . . . .” (CR, 8/20/63)
nasa launched 85-lb. scientific payload to 208-mi. altitude at exact moment explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite passed over the Wallops Island, Va., launch site, an unusual “first” in nasa sounding rocket program. Launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket, experiment obtained temperature data on electron and neutral particles and measured ion and neutral particle densities. Data from this experiment would be compared with similar data obtained from explorer xvn as it passed over Wallops Island at 198-mi. altitude during its 236th orbit of earth. Miss distance was 35,000 yards. Preliminary evaluation by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientists indicated data were of excellent quality. (Wallops Release 63-40; Av. Wk., 5/6/63, 21)
dod launched two unidentified satellites on one Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
Britain’s Postmaster General, John Bevins, dismissed as unrealistic the idea of his country’s going it alone in putting communications satellites into orbit. He aid not say which course the Government would choose, except that he ruled out an all-British system. A satellite system, he said, cannot be established unless other countries are willing to put ground stations on their own territories and unless they are willing to put traffic over the system. (NYT, Western Edition, 3/27/63)
itu conference on communications frequency allocation concluded in Geneva on a successful note. Joseph McConnell, president of the Reynolds Metal Co. and head of the U.S. delegation, talked from Geneva via syncom n communications satellite about the results of the conference. Final agreement had set aside some 2,800 megacycles of the spectrum for use of space communications. This was somewhat more than the U.S. had requested, although not all of it in the portions of the spectrum that the U.S. had wanted, (nasa Press Conference Transcript; Wash. Post, 11/9/63)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
Thomas J. Watson, Jr., chairman of the board of International Business Machines Corp., speaking at the 46th annual meeting of the American Council on Education in Washington, D.C., expressed concern about the current course of education. “That concern has its origin just 6 years ago tomorrow. It was the day that the Soviet Union put Sputnik I in orbit. Do you remember the thoughts which flooded in on us that day? Thoughts of embarrassmefit—dismay—concern. ... We could even try to say that satellites were just stunts, that Sputnik was a silly hunk of iron. But try as we would to whistle m the dark, Americans finally had to reach the conclusion that the Russians had outdistanced us at least temporarily in the exploration of space, a pursuit which in our century might well become as important as the exploration of the oceans had been in the time of Columbus and Magellan.” Mr. Watson pointed out that the impact of sputnik on education “has thrown the sciences and the humanities badly out of balance. ... In the fiscal year of 1961, of all Federal funds for basic research, the physical and biological sciences got 97 percent. “There are many traditional reasons for reemphasizing the humanities—which today are more important than ever. “In the first place, a thorough grounding in the humanities is vital training for many leaders who can wisely manage people as well as sufficiently manage machines. This need exists in universities, in public service, and in business. “Secondly, as our planet continues to shrink, we will more and more have to become citizens of the world. We must acquire a better understanding of the language, history, and culture of people of other lands. With present day mass-destruction weapons, this understanding is not just desirable—it’s vital. “Finally, the greater our skills in the humanities—in literature and the arts—the greater our capacity for a constructive use of leisure time, which is bound to increase as machines lift old burdens from men’s shoulders and minds. “On this sixth anniversary of the flight of sputnik, we can be sure of one thing; no second sputnik will come along to jolt us into action, and do for American education in the humanities what the first Sputnik did for American education in the sciences.” {CR, 11/12/63, A7010-A7012)
usn made second attempt to place operational Transit navigational satellite into orbit from Pt. Arguello, Calif., Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported. A&AE said spacecraft failed to attain orbit because of malfunction in fourth stage of usaf Blue Scout booster. (A&AE, 5/63,141)
relay i satellite transmitted 12-min. Voice of America program as well as AP and upi news dispatches from Nutley, N.J., to Rio de Janeiro and back. Transmissions were reported perfect, even though ordinary high-frequency radio communication with Rio was not possible because of atmosphere conditions. (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/17/63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/18/63,4)
cosmos xvi launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit of 401-km. apogee, 207-km. perigee, 90.4-min. period, and 65°01' inclination to equator. Tass said the satellite contained “scientific equipment intended to continue the space research in accordance with the program announced . . . March 16, 1962.” (Tass, Pravda, 4/29/63, 3; afss-t Trans.)
U.S.-France Aerobee 150A sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Station, Va., in cooperative program between nasa and the French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) to study very low frequency (vlt) radio wave propagation in the ionosphere. The French were developing a technique to measure simultaneously electronic and magnetic vlf field strength and electron densities. If successful the technique would be used in a scientific satellite. The 197-lb. payload rose 116 mi. and transmitted seven min. of data before impacting 59 mi. down-range. This was repeat of unsuccessful attempt two days earlier when Aerobee 150A failed on launch. (Wallops Release 63-95)
telstar ii communications satellite went dead during its 450th orbit, and subsequent efforts to reactivate the satellite by radio signal were not successful. Cause of telstar ii’s failure was not known, but at&t said that telemetry data had given “no indication that radiation damage has caused the satellite to fail.” Efforts to turn on the satellite’s communications equipment were continuing. (Osmundsen, NTT, 7/18/63; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/18/63)	_	_
fcc Chairman E. William Henry said in year-end statement: “Continued experiments with ‘Telstar’, ‘Relay’ and ‘Syncom’ hold forth the promise that space satellites, in the next few years, can provide reliable and economic communications.” (tjpi, Wash. Post, 12/30/63)
Communications Satellite Corp. issued its first request for contract proposals—proposals for study of multiple access system for communications satellites. (ComSatCorp Release)
syncom n and relay i linked Rio de Janeiro and Lagos, Nigeria, in 20-min. voice conversation, first operation employing both communications satellites in single communications circuit and world’s first three-continent telephone conversation. Signal began from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, then to syncom n, which sent it to Lakehurst, N.J., ground station, then by overland wire to Nutley, N.J., ground station, then to relay i overhead which sent it to Rio de Janeiro ground station, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center engineers monitoring the conversation declared quality of transmission to be good, (gsfc Release G-17-63; AP, Wasfu Post, 9/14/63; N.Y. Herald Trb., 9/14/63) *
nasa announced Ames Research Center had requested industry proposals for six-week study contracts to determine feasibility of using earth satellites as orbital, recoverable biological laboratories. Such a biosatellite project would provide means of studying animal and plant responses to periods of prolonged weightlessness. Studies would consider spacecraft systems that could be used in series of six biosatellites with flight durations of from three to 30 days. Decision on flight programs would be made after evaluation of study contracts; nasa already had received, and was evaluating, suggestions of biological experiments that could be performed. ( nasa Release 63-46; Ames Release 63-9)
Dr- Vannevar Bush, honorary chairman of the corporation of mit. long-time scientific adviser to the Government, and Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development from 1941-46, wrote a letter to the New York Times on the manned lunar program. Noting that Premier Khrushchev said recently that a manned lunar landing would not be worth the cost in money or in lives, Dr. Bush stated: “This is an aspect of the space program which the American public has by no means faced.” That lives would be lost in the program was inevitable, he asserted, and would occur with the whole world watching. “What will happen when the tragedy occurs? The public is now in doubt on the program. They will be impatient as it proceeds very slowly, with little of popular appeal to report. When a grim tragedy occurs they may throw the whole experiment out the window. “I have just as much enthusiasm as the next man for the parts of the program which make sense: the communications and weather satellites, for example. But the whole program has been blown up to absurd dimensions. Instruments on the moon would gather scientific information, nearly as much as a man would, and the information would not be worth the cost. “To put a man on the moon is folly, engendered by childish enthusiasm. It will backfire on those who drive it ahead.” {NTT, 11/17/63, 8E)
Insignia for cosmonauts was announced by Soviet Defense Ministry in Krasnaya Zvezda. Insignia represented golden wings, in center of which was world globe girdled by golden satellite orbit extending across background of unfurled Soviet flag. Below globe was removable shield with number 1, 2, or 3, according to class of cosmonaut—third class, for one space flight; second or first class, for two or three space flights respectively. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/5/63, 1 apss-t Trans.)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite using AtlasAgena booster launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/11/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Governors’ Conference at Miami Beach, said: “In the world of today, we must recognize that the winds and the waves are with us. This is the time for us to steer straight and true toward the horizons we have for so long hoped to reach. “But we should also recognize that favoring winds are rising at home. Our record in space is a prime example. We started late. We moved too slowly at first. “But the record shows now that where the Soviet Union has successfully launched 43 payloads into orbit, the United States has launched 144. “Our ratio of sucesses to failures in launchings prior to 1961 was only 1 to 1—but it has now reached the ratio of 5 to 1. “The Soviet continues its lead in the ability to launch heavier weight into space. But we are pulling far ahead in developing practical uses of space with weather, communication, and navigation satellites. “We are not racing for prestige in space. We are engaged in a deadly serious race for peace—and for control of our own destiny. This is a race free men must win . . . .” (Text, CR, A4759-60)
nasa Director of Communications Systems, Leonard Jaffee, announced nasa would attempt to launch Syncom communications satellite into synchronous orbit with Delta vehicle no earlier than Feb. 13. Previously announced for no earlier than Feb. 6, Syncom launch was postponed “to insure that the [command and control] equipment is completely checked out” aboard usns Kingsport, stationed in Lagos Harbor, and on the launch vehicle at Cape Canaveral. (Teen. Background Briefing, 1/29/63)
gsfc selected two companies for negotiation of contracts pertaining to Nimbus weather satellite. $252,000 contract to General Electric Co. called for development of operating procedures for Nimbus control center as well as training of personnel to operate the center. $165,000 contract to rca Electron Tube and Semiconductor Div. required contractor to furnish solar cells for Nimbus satellites and Nimbus operational system, (gsfc Release G-19-63)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/30/63; M&R, 9/9/63, 13; Pres. R-pt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
Japanese newspaper Yomiuri reported Japanese Space Development Council was preparing to build navigational satellite for launching by U.S. within five years. Plan was to be submitted to Prime Minister Hayato Ikeda for approval. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 6/4/63)
nasa announced relay i communciations satellite had achieved all of its experiments and missions. Performance of relay i, launched by nasa December 13, “has been uniformly excellent” throughout about 500 communications tests and demonstrations in 660 orbits December 13-March 11. Although all planned demonstrations were completed, they would be continued while the satellite remained in operation, (nasa Release (>3-57)
Incorporation articles for Communications Satellite Corp. were filed by board of incorporators and approved by President Kennedy. Articles of incorporation provided two series of common stock: Series I, to be issued to the public, to aerospace industries, and to noncommunications companies; Series II, to be issued to communications common carriers with permission from fcc. Shares of stock were not expected to be issued for at least six months. Incorporators were serving as company directors until first annual meeting of stockholders—expected about six months after public offering of stock—when stockholders would elect 12 directors and President Kennedy would appoint three more. (Wall Street Journal, 2/4/63; AP, Newport News Daily Press, 2/2/63)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, presented before House Committee on Science and Astronautics an account of nasa’s use of FY 1963 funds. Explaining $170 million decrease in launch vehicle costs because of lunar-orbit-rendezvous decision, he said nasa had deferred developmental phase of Nova very large launch vehicle and was conducting “further studies on the requirements and design concepts of a large launch vehicle consistent with optimum post-lunar-landing usage .... We are continuing [M-lj engine developments [for Nova], since it is a long lead time component, but have reduced the level of contractor effort to reflect the removal of a firm operafinrml firmnrr	^ V1V11U1 l.lllllllg •	•	•	• Speaking on space sciences, Dr. Seamans said: “Extensive study of the biological science area has demonstrated that specific recoverable satellite flights should be undertaken for the purpose of acquiring data on the effects of space environment on living matter. We are, therefore, undertaking such a bio-satellite program and have increased our estimated funding requirements in this area by $13.9 million in this fiscal year.” On communications satellites, Dr. Seamans said: “We re-examined our Communication Satellite program quite carefully in the light of the creation of the Communication Satellite Corporation and the reoriented activities of the dod following the cancellation of the Advent project. From this programmatic re-examination we have concluded that principal nasa effort should be focused on the research and development problems associated with the synchronous altitude class of communication satellite. We have, therefore, dropped the low altitude mutliple passive satellite project, Rebound, and advanced intermediate active satellite projects from hardware development consideration at this time. As a result of these decisions, we reduced our communication satellite program by $35.2 million . . . .” (Testimony)
WICUOU	AJ\J ) nasa announced it would negotiate contract with Fairchild Stratos Corp. for two meteoroid detection satellites to be launched by Saturn I vehicles. Once in orbit, the two-ton satellite would extend its two “wings” totaling 96-ft. length and providing area of more than 2,000 sq. ft. exposure to possible meteoroid hits. Aluminum skin of wings would be electrically charged; penetration of skin by meteoroid would trigger an electrical pulse which would be recorded and radioed back to earth. First of the satellites was scheduled for launch in late 1965. (nasa Release 63-24)
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Systems, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition: “nasa program objectives in this area . . . [communications satellite systems] are first, to insure the full development and realization of communications satellite potentials through continued research, development and flight test and second, to assist in the early establishment of operational communications satellite systems. The fact that communications satellites are feasible has certainly been demonstrated with the Echo, Telstar, and Relay satellites. Much information and experience has been gained as a result of the last year’s experiments with regard to the satellites, the space environment, and with the earth-based elements of such systems. Much remains, however, to be done before economically practical systems can be established, but a sound foundation has been laid and all of the established interests are cooperating to the fullest extent in the research and developmental programs. “In all areas of satellite applications, nasa has many interactions with other organizations. Typical interactions already in existence in the area of communications satellites are those with the Department of Defense, and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. Shortly, a continuing liaison will be initiated with the new Communications Satellite Corporation . . . .” (Testimony)
explorer xvi meteoroid detector satellite recorded 16 punctures by meteoroids dur®% its first 29 days in orbit, nasa reported. Charles T. D’Aiutolo, manager of meteoroid research programs in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said that with explorer xvi “we have established conclusively that there are micrometeoroids out there which can penetrate thin surfaces.” Other spacecraft had reported hits by cosmic debris, but this was first time actual punctures were recorded. If explorer xvi continued as expected to report meteoroid data for a full year, it should enable scientists to determine whether meteoroids are hazardous to spacecraft—both manned and unmanned. D’Aiutolo said the satellite, which exposed 25 sq. ft. of surface to meteoroid impacts, was not large enough to provide good statistical data on larger and rarer particles in space. (Earlier this month, nasa announced plans to orbit two meteoroid-detector satellites, each with exposure surface of more than 2,000 sq. ft. See Feb. 5.) (Langley Release, 2/19/63; upi, Wash. Post, 2/14/63, Al)
Lt. Gen. Leslie R. Groves (usa, Ret.), speaking at panel meeting (“Satellite Sanity—Lunar Lunacy”) of National Association of Manufacturers’ 68th Congress, criticized Project Apollo as a wasted effort, value of which would be only prestige. He charged the lunar landing program was too expensive and, if continued, would bankrupt the nation. nasa Administrator James E. Webb, attending the meeting, was invited by presiding officer Paul Bachman to the platform to answer General Groves. Mr. Webb defended values and costs of the national space program. In his remarks, Mr. Webb pointed out that the national debt ($300 billion) is only half of the annual gnp ($600 billion), so he didn’t think the country was bankrupt. He defended the use of manned instead of instrumented spacecraft and remarked, “I for one don’t think there is any doubt that man and his brain is superior to a machine.” Supporting Mr. Webb’s defense were panel members Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of Goddard Institute of Space Studies, and Walter L. Lingle, Jr., nasa Deputy Associate Administrator. (Halley, NYT, 12/7/63)
cosmos xxiv earth satellite orbited by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 254 mi.; perigee, 131 mi.; period, 90.5 min.; inclination to the equator, 65°). Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation for “continuing the study of outer space” in accordance with program announced March 16,1962, and the onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/20/68, 1, atss-t Trans.)
usaf launched a Thor-Agena D booster carrying an unidentified satellite, from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Also launched that day was a Minuteman icbm in what was termed a routine training launch. (AP, W ash. E ve. S tar, 11/28/63)
Informants said in Cairo that Egyptian scientists were interested in obtaining a satellite tracking station from U.S. (AP, Wash. Post, 8/20/63)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. press conference in Rome, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, chief U.S. negotiator, and Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced signing of an accord for a joint weather satellite program and called for broader American-Russian cooperation in space activities. Agreements were reached under space cooperation accord signed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. last June, and after ten days of closed-door negotiations by teams of specialists. Agreement would become effective after a 60-day waiting period pending possible changes by either Government. Under the joint weather satellite program, each nation would launch a satellite on a different orbit to collect meteorological data, while a 24-hr. cable and radio communications network would be established for exchange of information and cloud-cover pictures, such data to be made public throughout the world. Launching of Echo II later in 1963 would provide basis for communications experiments which could lead to a global communications network, including the exchange of radio and TV programs. Both nasa Deputy Administrator Dryden and Blagonravov expressed hope that the accord just negotiated would lead to broader agreements. Blagonravov was quoted as saying that “the first step is always the hardest.” Dryden was quoted regarding the Warsaw meetings later this year on probes of Mars and Venus as saying: “I hope there will be future coordination to avoid duplication.” (Text; AP, Wash. Post, 3/21/63,1)
Voice and teletype messages exchanged via syncom ii communications satellite between ground station at Paso Robles, Calif., and communications ship Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. The test spanned 7,700 mi., greatest surface distance ever spanned between two points on earth via a communications satellite, (nasa “syncom ii Fact Sheet”; N.Y. Herald Tnb., 8/10/63)
nasa syncom i communications satellite launched into orbit by Thor-Delta vehicle from amr, entering a highly elliptical orbit. About five hours later, apogee-kick motor was fired for about 20 seconds in maneuver designed to place the satellite into near-synchronous, 24-hour orbit 22,300-mi. above the earth. At about the time the apogee-kick motor completed burning, ground stations lost contact with the satellite and could not confirm a synchronous orbit, nasa officials assumed that “the satellite’s spin axis was misaligned at the time of the apogee motor firing. Because of this they have been unable to determine whether the satellite is damaged.” Attempts to make contact with stncom were continued. stncom i was to have hovered at a nearly fixed longitude over the Atlantic Ocean and traced every 24 hours a figure-8 pattern approximately 30° north and 30° south of the equator; this path would be close enough to true synchronous orbit—Stationary hovering at speed equal to that of earth’s rotation—to determine if synchronous orbital communications satellites were feasible. Experiments with 6tncom were to have included telephone and teletype communications transmitted between New Jersey and Lagos Harbor, Nigeria. Syncom was nasa project, supported by dod ground stations and communications experiments, (nasa Statement, 2/14/63; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/63, Al; nasa Syncom Release, 1/29/63)
Preliminary test of instrumentation to be used in joint Italian-U.S. San Marco Project was made with launching of two-stage Shotput sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station, the rocket carrying 180-lb. instrumented payload to 265-mi. altitude. Flight was first in three-phase project being conducted by Italian Commission for Space Research and nasa, to be followed by further tests of San Marco instrumentation with launching of Shotput vehicle from towable platform in Indian Ocean and to be culminated in launching of scientific satellite into equatorial orbit from the platform. Basic objective of San Marco Project was to obtain high-altitude measurements of atmospheric and ionospheric characteristics in equatorial region, (nasa Release 6376; Wash- Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
Tremendous atmospheric explosion in Kimberley Mountains of Western Australia was reported by observers, who saw trail of smoke and ball of orange flame and heard the explosion. Australian Weather Office spokesman said cause was unknown but suggested possibility of artificial satellite’s exploding during atmospheric re-entry. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 8/21/63)
nasa Langley Research Center announced award of contract to Univ. of Virginia for developing “research apparatus and techniques for laboratory studies of drag on satellites.” Under one-year contract, U. of Va. would develop suitable laboratory equipment and make laboratory measurements of molecular impact forces exerted on samples of spacecraft materials. (Langley Release)
nasa Acting Director of Office of Applications, Leonard Jaffe, appeared before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, reviewing nasa programs of communications systems, meteorological systems, and future applications satellites. Describing division of responsibility between public interest (nasa) and Communications Satellite Corp., Mr. Jaffe said that “eventually, perhaps” nasa would find way to develop necessary (lower for bouncing radio and TV signals off satellites to “a very arge area of the earth.” Such transmissions would be beyond scope of ComSatCorp. and beyond its charter as common carrier for broadcasters. Yet ComSatCorp. might benefit from NASA-developed technology, particularly in development of tremendous power supplies, under Communications Satellite Act, Mr. Jaffe said, nasa retained responsibility to cooperate with ComSatCorp. and to advise other Federal agencies on the subject, such obligations requiring nasa to maintain independent research capability in communications satellites. (Testimony; Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
Fifth anniversary of orbiting of vanguard i, still orbiting the earth and still transmitting data. The satellite had made more than 19,700 orbits and had slowed about *4 sec. from original 134 min., 27 sec. period. Present apogee: 2,447 mi.; perigee: 403 mi. Scientists estimated vanguard i might have a lifetime of 2,000 years, (dod Release 365-63)
A U.N. space subcommittee addressed a resolution to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space emphasizing the “urgency and importance of the problem of preventing potentially harmful interference with peaceful uses of outer space.” The warning was contained in a diluted version of a resolution in which the Soviet Union had hoped to see a direct criticism of the recent United States launching of millions of small copper wires in a communications experiment. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, the Soviet delegate, had denounced the experiment as a danger to other space studies, including flights by manned satellites. This was denied by Dr. Homer E. Newell, the U.S. representative. In the resolution adopted at the close of a two-week session, the 28-nation subcommittee said that “certain experiments conducted in space may affect present or future scientific activities.” There was no reference to the U.S. “needles” or to any other experiment. (NYT, Western Edition, 5/31/63)
nasa explorer xiv satellite progress report indicated no usable scientific data had been obtained from the scientific satellite since mid-August. In its ten months of operation since launch into highly elliptical orbit Oct. 2j 1962, explorer xiv sent back more than 6,500 hours of data from the six onboard scientific experiments to chart boundaries of earth’s magnetosphere, measure particle population and energies of electrons and protons, and determine how magnetic fields influence these particles. 3,700 hours of data had been processed through computers and scientific analysis was continuing, (nasa Explorer XIV Prog. Rpt. No. 6)
French Scientific Research Minister Gaston Palewski told French National Assembly a satellite launching site would be established in Eastern Pyrenees Department near the Spanish border. France's first satellite was scheduled for launching in 1965; other European satellites may also be launched from the site. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 1/12/63)
dod launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle. (Pres. Reft. on Sface, 1963,1/27/64)
On a date not released, dod launched a pickaback satellite attached to a principal satellite payload boosted by Thor-Agena D. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
In ceremony celebrating establishment of new Australian tracking stations near Carnarvon and Canberra, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented scale model of 85-ft.-diameter tracking antenna to Australian Ambassador Sir Howard Beale. Carnarvon station was being established for Project Gemini and would also monitor Ogo and Oao unmanned satellites. Canberra station would be a portion of Deep Snace Network which tracks space probes to moon and planets, (nasa Release 63-195)
Bell Telephone Laboratories received patent for improved system of controlling satellite attitude. Invented by C. C. Cutler, system operates by two-way radio which receives signals from satellite for measuring its alignment; ground computer analyzes attitude data and figures any necessary attitude changes, relays them to instruments on satellite which makes corrections in satellite’s position. (Jones, NYT, 5/11/63, 28)
cosmos xvn launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. (apogee, 488 mi.; perigee, 161 mi.; period, 94.82 min.; inclination, 49°02' to equator). As with previous Cosmos satellites, Tass said scientific equipment “intended for continuing the study of interplanetary space . . . was mounted on board. (Tass, Izvestia, 5/23/63, 1, afss-t Trans.)
priorities in space as well as article from current issue of Reader’s Digest entitled “We’re Running the Wrong Race with Russia” which said: “The Russians have recently achieved an increase in the effectiveness of nuclear explosions so devastating that it dwarfs all previous records. Confirming this, our own atomic experts have warned that such stupendous forces, let loose above us from a satellite, could, in a few seconds, literally cremate a large part of the United States. There would be nothing left below, no man, beast, vegetation, buildings, nothing at all but the glare of white-hot cinders. “In the face of such a dire threat, it must come as a stunning shock to all thoughtful Americans to learn that the United States has no top-priority programs beamed at preventing, anticipating, or deterring such a terrifying prospect. Our top priorities are all tied up with steamrollering through the moon shot. Many billions of public money, together with the rich cream of scientific talent, are lavished on an effort that could well be aborted in midstride by Soviet enterprise and realism. “There is a crying need for a reappraisal of our space aims, for more specific public information, especially since statements from those highly placed in Washington are so contradictory that they blur rather than clarify our understanding . . . .” {Reader’s Digest, 8/63, CR, 7/31/63,13035-39)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from pmr. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963) During July: nasa Marshall Space Flight Center selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Co. to conduct parallel studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the companies would outline the mission and development program for the Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and selecting mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63; LA. Times, 7/9/63; Marshall Star, 7/10/63,8)
Weather Bureau stopped its portion of the funding of the Nimbus meteorological satellite because the current Nimbus offers an operational lifetime of no more than one year. Weather Bureau would continue using improved Tiros satellite while cooperating with nasa in development of a follow-on satellite with a lifetime of several years, nasa said it would continue the development of the Nimbus r&d models, (nasa Release 63-220; Commerce Release; Wash. Post, 10/4/63,2)
Transfer of Pacific Missile Range from usn to usaf would be accomplished in six months, Missiles and Rockets reported. usn would retain Pt. Mugu portion and continue to operate range instrumentation ships; Pt. Arguello would be merged with Vandenberg afb, which would be transferred from Strategic Air Command to AF Systems Command. New division to be created under afsc would operate pmr, amr, and Satellite Test Center (composed of Sunnyvale facilities and Hickam afb recovery group). (M&R, 8/12/63, 12)
aec announced that “signals from a Department of Defense Satellite launched recently from Vandenberg afb, by a Thor-Able-Star missile are being transmitted successfully with electricity from a nuclear power source developed by the aec.” The device, snap 9-A was boosted into space by a launch crew of the Air Force Space Systems Division’s 6595th Aerospace Test Wing. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan. 1964; AdcAE, Nov. 1963, 1!) ... . .
Invitation to European scientists to participate in ground experiments using lasers to track the nasa Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satellites (S-66) was made at Third International Symposium on Quantum Electronics, Paris, by representatives of nasa Hq. and Goddard Space Flight Center. Under proposed program, nasa would provide orbital prediction data to European participants, who would attempt to track the satellite by bouncing a laser beam from ground off comer reflectors on satellite, nasa would be conducting similar experiments in the U.S. Lasers were expected to provide useful supplement to existing radio and radar tracking systems by providing extremely precise range and bearing data. (Al, Robinson)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite with Blue Scout rocket from Vandenberg afb. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/6/64)
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
rand Corp. report on communications satellites estimated that worldwide revenues from international communications would reach $210 million by 1965, $350 million by 1970, and $620 million by 1975. Large part of these revenues would come from undersea cables. (NYT, 4/24/63)
Value of weather Tiros satellites in giving advance warning of tropical storms was underscored by Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D.-Fla.) : “Yesterday’s discovery of Hurricane Flora is a prime example. . . . Through the efforts of the U.S. Weather Bureau, using data supplied bv a weather satellite, warnings were issued a bare 3 hours before the 110-mile-an-hour winds hit the islands [of Trinidad and Tobago]. Because of the 22-mile-an-hour forward speed of the storm, little or no warning would have been possible without the quick work of U.S. weathermen and their new ally, the satellite. While the damage was extensive, untold lives were saved and property damage prevented by the advance warning.” (CR, 10/1/63,17456)
West Germany joined the list of nations participating in satellite communications with the opening of its narrowband station at Raisting. A wideband station to permit television transmission was under construction. Raisting became the seventh station in the satellite communications network. Other narrowband stations were at Nutley, N.J.; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Fucino, Italy. Wideband stations were at Andover, Me.; Goonhilly Downs, U.K.; and Pleumeur-Bodou, France, (nasa Release 63-250)
Reported in Aviation World (Flugwelt) that West Germany has a $25 million-budget to develop a series of 5 satellites to be built under nasa’s established quality control standards. The satellite would consist of three parts: the satellite capsule with a recovery unit, the sun mirror, the energy converter. The first satellite recovery capsule would descend with the aid of a parachute; later models would include a winged glider version. Telemetric transmissions and subsequent evaluation would commence as soon as the satellite enters an Earth orbit. The second satellite and the remainder of the series would be equipped with engines that will permit changes in the orbital parameters. On the second satellite small solid fuel rockets would be used, but the following models could be equipped with ion engines. The satellite’s mission would include research in the guidance and direction stabilization systems during the launching investigation of the orbital rendezvous problems, as well as a study of the radiation belts. In the case of the fifth satellite, the ion engines could be replaced with nuclear-powered engines to permit continuous orbital changes and accelerate to an escape velocity. (Flugwelt {Aviation World), Nov., 1963; sin, Jan., 1964)
Third command and data acquisition station in Tiros meteorological satellite cda system became operational, the Fairbanks, Alaska, station joining those at Wallops Island, Va., and Pt. Mugu, Calif. cda stations receive cloud-cover photographs and other data from orbiting Tiros satellites, relay them to Weather Bureau’s National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md., for analysis, (nasa Release 63-206)
British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced U.K. had ordered a design study to determine suitable communications satellite system, the satellites to be placed in orbit by eldo vehicle (European Launcher Development Organization). To be undertaken by Royal Aircraft Establishment at Famborough and Signals Research Development Establishment at Christchurch, studies would consider: network of medium-altitude-orbit satellites, probably at least 12; system of stationary-orbit satellites, calling for much smaller number of satellites; use of Woomera rocket range, Australia, for launchings. U.K. was hopeful that such a system could be established in cooperation with European countries but independent of U.S. “No one country should have a monopoly of space,” Amery said. He also announced that contracts to industry for a third Ariel satellite, to be launched by U.S. rockets but to be built entirely by U.K., would be awarded soon. (Wash. Post, 3/30/63; Av. Wk., 4/8/63, 38)
U.S. Navy announced it had successfully permanently stabilized an orbiting satellite through use of 100-ft. boom. Difference in gravitational forces acting on satellite and on end of the boom aligned satellite so that its face will be permanently pointed toward earth. As satellite was tumbling through space with its face toward earth, boom was released from canister, causing entire assembly to rock through 40° arc. Weight attached to boom by 40-ft. spring bobbed yo-yo fashion, slowing oscillation of boom and satellite until nearly all sway was removed. Satellite would remain stabilized indefinitely. Navy announcement said this was first successful stabilization of satellite without fueled mechanical controls, (dod Release 103436)	_
telstar n communications satellite brought live American television to the Soviet Union for the first time in the weekend of reporting on the assassination of President Kennedy and the mourning and funeral that followed. Izvestia devoted one whole page of its four pages to an analysis of the ironic events. Entitled “Texas and Telstar,” the article pointed out that Telstar, “the technical wonder of the 20th century, came into our lives with America’s mourning and brought us the cry of battle, a battle between light and darkness raging this week on the other side of the earth. “Only the darkest Spanish Inquisition could have produced the scenes that were flashed by the American satellite .... “We have seen the grief of the American nation and profoundly sympathize with it. We have seen a mad detective thriller and we reject it with contempt and anger.” (Shabad, NYT, 11/27/63, 17)
nasa and Government of Malagasy Republic announced agreement for installation of transportable tracking station at Majunga, Madagascar, for monitoring injection phase of such U.S. satellites as Nimbus, Echo, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. (nasa Release 63-279)
cosmos xx was launched into earth orbit by U.S.S.R. A scientific satellite for “continuing the study of space,” cosmos xx was stated to have an apogee of 311 km. (193 mi.) ; perigee of 206 km. (128 mi.); period, 89.55 min.; and inclination, 65°. (Komsomolskaya Pravda, Oct. 19,1963, 1, afss-t Trans.)
At annual dinner in New York, American Meteorological Society presented posthumously the Carl-Gustaf Rossby Award for Extraordinary Scientific Achievement to the late Dr. Harry Wex-ler, who had been head of U.S. Weather Bureau’s Office of Research ; Dr. Wexler was cited “for his contributions to knowledge of the atmospheric heat balance and dynamic anticyclogenesis, for his interdisciplinary studies in meteorology, oceanography, and glaciology, and for his outstanding leadership in international programs in the atmospheric sciences.” Other awards: Charles Franklin Brooks Award for Outstanding Service to the Society, presented to Dr. David M. Ludlum “for his continuing effort, on behalf of the Society, to popularize meteorology and to stimulate the interest of young people in the field, for establishing Weather-wise, and for his effective participation in Society affairs over many years”; Cleveland Abbe Award for Distinguished Service to Atmospheric Sciences by an Individual presented to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center, Dallas, Tex., for “his scientific work on the upper atmosphere and for the stimulation he provided to the field of meteorology by his work as Chairman of the Committee on Meteorology of the National Academy of Sciences”; the Meisinger Award, presented to Prof. Edward N. Lorenz of mit “for his introduction of concepts leading to a better understanding of the energetics of the general circulation, and for his recent work on low order systems indicating aperiodic vacillations from one regime of motion to another”; Award for Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, presented to rca Astro-Electronics Div., “for contributions to meteorology through its role in producing the successful Tiros meteorological satellites”; ams Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Advance of Applied Meteorology, presented to Herbert C. S. Thom, Chief Climatologist, U.S. Weather Bureau, “for a quarter century of contributions to applied meteorology, including furnished climatological estimates to the armed forces during World War II, major contributions to the problems of statistical analysis of climatological data, development of wind design data, and development of a much improved formula for calculating annual and seasonal energy use for domestic heating”; Award for Outstanding Achievement in Bioclimatology, presented to Prof. Konrad J. K. Buettner, Dept, of Atmospheric Sciences, Univ. of Washington, “for his distinguished and continuing studies on the influence of the atmospheric environment on man.” (ams Release)
Aerobee 150A rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 147-mi. altitude in experiment to flight-test components of equipment for Eogo satellite and to measure propagation of vlf signals through ionosphere. Flight was joint project of Stanford Research Institute and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-32; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
U.S. tracking data on the Russian polet i maneuverable spacecraft substantiated the Russian claim of change in apogee but indicated that any substantial change in plane had to be made before completion of the first orbit. According to Aviation Week, norad’s initial orbital plane for the Russian satellite was 59.99°, later revised to 58.89°. Whether this 1.1° change was a result of a satellite maneuver or was merely a refinement of earlier data is uncertain. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63,28)
Final approval for contracting the military Medium Altitude Communications Satellite (macs) was being delayed by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara pending a reply from ComSatCorp as to whether a civilian comsat could handle military traffic under wartime conditions, according to Aviation. Week. It was anticipated that the answer would be that several of the military requirements—jam-resistant channels, protection against attack, transportable receiving stations—would not be met by the civilian system. (Av. Wk., 10/28/63, 25)
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite had definitely ceased useful transmission after almost 10 months of successful operation. Scientists at gsfc said trouble began in August, when the satellite’s transmitter failed to modulate—translate instrument signals into telemetry code—properly. Intermittent modulation had occurred since then, but little useful data had been received. The satellite signal is still useful for position reference. explorer xiv, launched on October 2,1962, had an initial elliptical orbit of 61,500-mi. apogee and 173-mi. perigee. After 10 months, gravitational influence of the sun and moon had changed the orbit to 60,220-mi. apogee and 1,280-mi. perigee, with a period of about 37 hours. Some 6,500 hours of data were received from the satellite. While not all the data had been analyzed, Dr. L. Cahill, Univ. of New Hampshire, said a number of new insights had already emerged, among them being: earth’s magnetosphere, as shown by mapping charged particles, flared away from the earth in an ogival—pointed arch—shape; confirmation that the vector magnetic field changes gently from a dipole configuration to a radial field at increasing distance on the night side of the earth near the equatorial plane; and further evidence probably supporting explorer vi’s finding of a ring current flow on the night side of the earth. ( nasa Release 63-223)
Mstislav Keldysh, President of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, reported on Soviet progress in science at annual meeting of the Academy: “New successes have been achieved by our scientists in the field of space radio communications. New data have been obtained as the result of the radar observation of Mercury carried out for the first time and the repeated radar observation of Venus. Communications were made possible by reflecting telegraphy signals from the planet Venus . . . “Research by satellites and rockets . . . [is] opening new possibilities for understanding the powerful effect of cosmic factors on electromagnetic and hydrodynamic phenomena in the atmosphere which, in turn, decisively influence life on earth. I think that very important discoveries will be made in the near future in the field of physics of the atmosphere . . . .”	(Pravda, 2/5/63, afss-t Trans.)
S. Fred Singer, Director of National "Weather Satellite Center, told Metropolitan Board of Trade, Washington, that weather satellites would probably make possible prediction of weather trends by as much as a year. By photographing cloud formations and measuring moisture content of atmosphere, satellites should enable meteorologists to discover conditions causing weather trends. {Wash. Post, 2/13/63, A4)
Boyden Observatory near Bloemfontein, South Africa, had confirmed location of stncom i communications satellite, Harvard Univ. Observatory Director Donald H. Menzel announced. stncom i was tumbling end over end in its orbital path about 19,000 n. mi. high. Boyden’s unconfirmed photographs of the satellite, missing since Feb. 14, were reported Feb. 28, and nasa requested that the findings be confirmed by further observation. “Since then it has been cloudy over the Boyden Observatory until last night, when it cleared and we obtained two good plates showing images in the expected position. With this final confirmation, we have no doubt whatever of the location of the satellite. It behaved approximately as expected.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 3/3/63) March, 3: Whilden P. Breen, Jr., 35-year-old research assistant, spent his 106th consecutive day living in specially constructed isolation chamber in Univ. of Maryland’s Space Laboratory building, in NASA-sponsored experiment to “obtain basic information on how man perform under certain conditions of stress, and methods to deal with such problems so that astronauts of the future [confined for prolonged periods within interplanetary spacecraft, orbiting space stations, or extraterrestrial bases] will be able to perform their duties at highest efficiency.” With no direct view of outside world nor of any other person, volunteer Breen was under constant surveillance by experimenters outside and did communicate with them by teletype and voice. Subject’s activities were programed automatically, with panel of illuminated pushbuttons identifying each activity for him. Experimenters said he had “responded well in the performance of his tasks . . . [and had] displayed heightened capability and richness in those creative activities which are available to him (e.g., writing and painting). He appears to be in good physical and mental condition and is eager to continue the study.” (nasa Release 63-45; nasa Fact Sheet)
usn Transit navigational satellite program was classified, with no further information to be released until fully operational system is placed in orbit, Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported. {A&AE, 5/63,141)
First international art program via communications satellite was presented over nbc-tv. Entitled “Museums Without Walls,” the half-hour program interchanged views of paintings from the Louvre in Paris and the National Gallery in Washington via Relay communications satellite. The program went off without any significant technical difficulties and reception was excellent. (Gould, NYT, 11/18/63,59)
Launch of nasa atmospheric structure satellite (S-6) from amr was postponed because of difficulties in payload checkout. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/29/63, 1)
usaf announced the launch of an unidentified satellite with ThorAgena D vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post. 1/17/63, Al)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations on space cooperation resumed in Geneva with nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and Soviet space expert A. A. Blagonravov heading respective teams. Attempt would be made to reach agreement on cooperative use of satellites to study earth’s magnetic field. Discussion also would center on implementing agreement reached in principle last March concerning exchange of information furnished by meteorological satellites and coordinated experiments with communications satellites. (NYT, 5/17/63, 18; Manchester Guardian, Wash. Post, 5/17/63)
nasa launched kxpioher xvn (S-6) atmospheric structure satellite from Cape Canaveral, using Thor-Delta launch vehicle m (its 16th consecutive success in 17 attempts). Satellite attained orbit of 571-mi. apogee, 158.9-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period, 57.6° inclination to the equator. The sphere-shaped satellite, measuring 35 inches in diameter and weighing 405 lbs., contained instruments (two neutral mass spectrometers, four pressure gauges, and two electrostatic probes) to measure density, composition, pressure, and temperature of the atmosphere; it was equipped to make direct samplings of atmospheric constituents such as helium, nitrogen, and oxygen. Under project management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xvii was the first scientific earth satellite to use new pulse-code-modulation telemetry system, a solid-state system providing output power of 500 milli-watts and capable of supplying 40 separate channels of information in digital form. LTseful lifetime of the satellite was estimated at two-three months. (nasa Release 63-59 ;nasa Project explorer xvii Prog. Rpt. No. 1)
nasa announced preparations for dual launching of satellites with Scout launch vehicle late this year. Under contract to nasa Langley Research Center, State Univ. of Iowa would provide Injun satellite containing instruments to record corpuscular radiation streaming into earth’s upper atmosphere from space. The other satellite, a 12-ft. inflatable sphere to measure air density, was being built by LaRC. The two satellites would be launched into near-polar orbit from pmr. (nasa Release 63-170)
Tiros meteorological satellite discovered Hurricane Flora in the Atlantic off northern coast of South America, (upi, Wash. Post, 10/1/63)
Portions of the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, telecast by nationwide networks within U.S., were transmitted via telstar n communications satellite to Europe. (cbs-TV, 8/28/63; Wash. Post. 8/30/63,5)	_
usaf announced two 1%-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellites (ths) had been ejected into orbit from an unidentified orbiting satellite earlier in 1963. Twin satellites were second and third of series; first trs was launched in 1962. Primary purpose of trs experiments was investigation of radiation damage to spacecraft solar-power systems and evaluating methods of protecting the solar cells from Van Allen belt radiation. Valuable data obtained by the five radiation-damage experiments in each satellite were transmitted back to earth and received by nasa Minitrack telemetry network, cooperating with usaf in the project, (dod Release 1260-63; trs Fact Sheet)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with flight test instrumentation duplicating that intended for installation in the solar-pointed section of the S-17 satellite spacecraft (Oso-B) launched to 119.2 mi. from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Results undetermined until recovery of payload effected, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 6/24/63)
Effective this date, the International Code would designate all orbiting artificial satellites and space probes with Arabic numerals (1963-1, 1963-2, etc.) rather than Greek letters (1963 Alpha, 1963 Beta, etc.), National Academy of Sciences announced. New system had been agreed upon by all national members of cospar in May 1962. ( nas Release)
aec announced second U.S. satellite wholly powered by nuclear energy was launched into orbit recently by a Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg afb, and signals from the satellite were being transmitted sucessfully with electricity from the Snap-9A isotopic power generator. Designed to provide 25 watts of direct electrical current, the Snap-9n. was the same type of generator as that providing power for a satellite launched from Vandenberg earlier this year. The two Snap-9A’s are designed for operating lifetime of five years. However, they are in orbits of at least 900 years so that by the time they re-enter earth’s atmosphere they will be almost completely decayed. At that time they are designed to bum into minute particles which will be widely dispersed in the atmosphere, thus increasing radioactivity in the atmosphere negligibly, (aec Release F-250)
nasa awarded four-month study contracts for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite to Radio Corp. of America and Hughes Aircraft. rca would study camera resolution requirements in synchronous-orbit weather satellite and ways to modify Tiros satellite launched into highly eccentric orbit (about 22,000 mi. apogee and 200-300-mi. perigee). Hughes would study way in which a Syncom communications satellite could be modified for installation of weather satellite cameras. (M&R, 4/22/63, 10)
oso i solar observatory satellite completed its first year in orbit, exceeding its estimated operating life by six months. Eleven of its 13 scientific experiments were still operating, having provided more data on behavior and composition of the sun than any single ground-based observatory and all previous rocket, balloon, and satellite flights combined. Preliminary results from oso i would be presented at a symposium March 14. (Goddard Release)
Results from alouette i topside sounder satellite were discussed at Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, held by nasa in Washington, D.C., Data from alouette showed that ionosphere is usually rough in high latitudes and smooth in lower latitudes, and that electron temperature of ionosphere increases with latitude. This evidence indicated Van Allen radiation belts, which extend to lower altitudes at higher latitudes, possibly are secondary heat source for ionosphere. Where ionospheric and radiation particles collide, ionospheric temperatures rise and F layers of ionosphere become more spread apart—causing radio waves to scatter. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/14/63; Av. Wk., 3/25/63, 26)
cosmos xiv scientific satellite launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit (apogee, 318 mi.; perigee, 165 mi.; period, 92.1 min.; inclination, 48° 57' to the equator). Tass said satellite was carrying equipment “designed to continue the study of outer space,” and that the satellite was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/14/63, 1, afss-t Trans.; NYT, 4/15/63, 25; upi. Wash. Post, 4/14/63)
Speaking in New York at a special seminar at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc director, told scientists that benefits from America’s space program would far outweigh the cost. The revenues from communications satellites alone would, by 1975, exceed the cost of nasa’s program in that area. There would also be benefits on which no pnce tag could be placed, such as discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts and the accomplishments of the weather satellites. Dr. von Braun said that man himself is a very important link in space exploration, and that the value of placing a man on the moon cannot be debated. . “Instrumented equipment can do the job if one knows exactly what he is seeking,” he said. “However, if one doesn’t know, then automated equipment is not quite good enough.” (Goddard News, 2/25/63, 2)
Lt. Col. Robert E. Warren (U.S. Army), nasa Deputy Director of Communications Systems, reviewed launching and performance of syncom i communications satellite before Senate Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Communications. After syncom was successfully launched by Delta vehicle, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had determined apogee of syncom’s elliptical transfer orbit would occur at 21,700-mi. altitude, about 600-mi. short of synchronous altitude but well within allowable error. So that more nearly synchronous orbit could be achieved, signal was sent from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, commanding satellite’s apogee motor to fire 10 min. earlier (at 5:42 a.m.) than firing time set on onboard timer, syncom received and stored signal, and at 5:42 a.m. signal was sent from Kingsport to execute the command. 20.1 sec. later, ground reception of satellite telemetry abruptly ceased. Because apogee motor was to have fired for 21.2 sec., Colonel Warren said it was “difficult to imagine that these two events are unrelated .... “So, what can we make of all this ? First we know that synoom is in orbit. If the apogee motor did not fire, it is still in the elliptical orbit and will eventually be found, either by optics or by radar. If the apogee motor did fire, syncom is in a very high altitude orbit, and without telemetry, there is only a slim chance that it will be found. A search has been organized which will continue until such time as it is found, or until further search seems unwarranted. If it is found, we will have another chance to try out the command system, and if it works, we could again be in business. “Secondly, we know that one of the communications transponders worked well in the transfer ellipse. “Thirdly, we have shown once more that the Delta launch vehicle is a reliable booster, this being its 15th successive flight with performance well within acceptable error.” (Testimony) • Bill to create Commission on Science and Technology (S. 816) introduced in Congress by Senator John McClellan (D.-Ark.). Commission would be charged with bringing about more economy and efficiency in scientific programs carried out and funded by Federal Government. (Space Bits. Daily, 2/20/63, 224)
Video tape of President Kennedy’s address before World Food Congress in Washington was transmitted to European television viewers via relay i communications satellite, (nasa Release 63-121)
Argo D—4 sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., in experiment to measure vertical distribution of ionospheric parameters simultaneously with overhead passage of alouette i topside sounder satellite. The rocket reached 644.6mi. altitude and all experiments functioned normally, but telemetry system failed at approximately 12 min. »o about 7 min. of re-entry data were not obtained, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching) .	.	.
Unnamed nasa spokesman quoted as saying echo i’s orbit was “holding up fine” and could last another year or more. Although partially crumpled, balloon satellite launched Aug. 12,1960, was still visible to naked eye. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63)
U.K. and France were calling conference of European Postal and Telecommunications Administrations to discuss possibility of European communications satellite system, U.K. Foreign Office spokesman said. U.K. had abandoned any plan to develop its own system. Conference participants would be Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom, and West Germany. {NYT, 5/16/63, 19)
Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F. Hornig appeared in the Washington Post, Chairman of the Chemistry Dept, at Princeton Univ., Dr. Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space installations in November, and was recently reaffirmed as Science Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18 members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since 1960. Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic research was distorted by the legacy of World War II when concentrated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific notions into impressive useful devices: “The days of pie-in-the-sky promises of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was one that suggested by turning loose great numbers of scientists miracles happened. Well they did happen, and I suppose it was logical that after the war the same notion would carry over. “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind performed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are no longer concentrated nor are their efforts. They do come, of course, but over periods of years .... “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demonstrated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology; capable, if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” He declined to label the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.” “The moon is, after all, the first important object beyond the earth. . . . There are valid scientific objectives to be pursued on the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cosmology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where we came from. ... (H. Simons, Wash. Post, 12/15/63, E3) December 15: dod decision to develop military communications satellite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported in New York Times. Funds were contained in proposed dod budget for FY 1965, recently presented to the White House. Plans called for 24—30 satellites in random polar orbits with altitudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 ini., linking military forces around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, until discussions with ComSatCorp resolve question of whether dod should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Finney, NYT, 12/16/63,1)
New evidence verifying existence of long-lived solar plasma streams in interplanetary space was published in article by four gsfc scientists in Physical Review Letters. Evidence was based on data gathered by explorer xn energetic particles satellite : On two occasions the satellite observed solar events producing solar plasma streams. Indication that they were long-lived was revealed when the plasma streams caused geophysical disturbances more than 20 days after the streams were created. (gsfc Release G-14-63)
usaf launched unidentified satellite using Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle from Pt. Arguello, Calif. This was the 100th launch of an Agena space vehicle, the first having been launched on February 28, 1959. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/13/63; M&R, 7/22/63, 11; A-N-AF Journal and Register, January 1964; CR, 2/18/64, 2909)
On a date not released, dod launched a pickaback satellite attached to a principal satellite payload boosted by an Atlas-Agena B. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
You now face a new world, a world of change. The thrust into outer space of the satellite, spheres, and missiles marks a beginning of another epoch in the long story of mankind. In the five or more billions of years the scientists tell us it has taken to form the earth, in the three or more billion years of development of the human race, there has never been a more abrupt or staggering evolution.’ ” General LeMay went on to say that the “trained man, whether in a manned space vehicle or in a ground surveillance control point, will be one of our most valuable assets in our national space effort—and for our survival .... “We must remember that any medium . . . can be a region of danger to peace and security. In this new medium of space I believe that the military defenses of the western world must be objective, applicable and evident. “The Air Force will use, to the benefit of military space capabilities, all scientific advances and acquisition of knowledge achieved by nasa. We don’t plan to wait for a program of fallout—if we can hasten advancement or increase its utilization through collateral efforts. This we are doing, in national interest, toward advancing our considerable space testing and development of approved space programs.” {A-N-AF Journal and, Register, 2/9/63, 15; Text, CR, 4/6/63, A1202-1203)
Unnamed usaf spokesman disclosed usaf had orbited “thermonuclear converter” aboard one of its unidentified satellites launched from pmr. Device was designed to convert sunlight into electricity with efficiency of solar cells but with more resistance to space radiation, usaf received signals from the converter for four days, according to spokesman, and “test was considered a major step in proving this concept.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 2/16/63)
Study of Soviet astronautics from 1957 through 1962 (RM-3595— PR) by F. J. Krieger of the rand Corp., under usaf contract, concluded that the Soviet space program is an integral part of the Soviet military program. Krieger listed four main categories of Soviet effort: (1) earth-orbiting man in space; (2) lunar scientific exploration; (3) interplanetary exploration; and (4) Cosmos earth satellites, paramilitary in nature. Cosmos satellites have come in two sizes—large ones similar to the Vostoks, launched from Tyuratam cosmodrome east of the Aral Sea, orbiting at around 65°, and brought back to earth; and smaller ones launched with smaller rockets from Kapustin Yar cosmodrome north of the Caspian Sea, orbiting at about 49°, and not recovered. Kreiger counted 10 Soviet attempts at interplanetary flight, of which 2 have been partially successful (one passing Venus, another Mars, but both with communications failure) and six have failed to get out of earth orbit. (M&R, 6/10/63,16)
rcc released letter to Communications Satellite Corp., indicating ComSatCorp. directors should make definite plans for stock issue. Pointing out that ComSat Act of 1962 required ComSat Corp.’s directors be divided among stock-owning public, communications companies, and presidential nominees, fcc said that “undue delay in tne establishment of the corporation may force the present [appointed] Board of Directors to engage in activities and to make decisions which should be left to the representatives of the owners of the corporation.” ComSatCorp. Chairman Leo D. Welch told press that there was “no basis for the concern expressed by the Commission,” and ComSatCorp. would issue stock “at as early a date as the directors determine to be compatible with the public interest and the carrying out of the purpose and objectives of the Act.” (Clayton, Wash. Post, 7/26/63; Toth. NYT, 7/27/63)
V. Arsentyev of State Astronomical Institute, Moscow, was quoted as saying Soviet Cosmos satellites were planned to map the atmospheric layer between 124 mi. and 995 mi., as well as to provide specific data for space flights and spacecraft design. Cosmos satellites supplied current space weather data before and during flight of vostok hi and iv and were used to study ipicrometeoroid impact on spacecraft. {Av. Wk., 4/1/63)
telstar ii communications satellite placed in elliptical orbit (6,717-mi. apogee, 604-mi. perigee, 225.3-min. period, 42.7° inclination to equator). Thor-Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral boosted the satellite into orbit for its 17th straight success, an unmatched record for U.S. satellite-launching vehicles. telstar ii included design changes aimed at protecting it from radiation damage which affected lifetime of its predecessor, telstar i. With apogee nearly twice that of telstar i, it would provide longer periods of communications between U.S. and Western Europe than did telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar ii was designed and built by at&t’s Bell Telephone Laboratories at at&t expense, launched by nasa with at&t reimbursing nasa for Delta vehicle, launching, and tracking services. Initial communications test, TV transmission from Andover, Me., to Goon-hilly Downs, England, via the satellite on its fourth orbit, was successful, (nasa Release 63-83; nasa telstar ii Prog. Rpt. No. 2; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/7/63)
nasa scheduled the first Synoom communications satellite to be launched into orbit in which the satellite would truly remain stationary with respect to the earth in orbit—synchronous, equatorial, and circular—in the second quarter of 1964. Thrust-Augmented Delta (tad) launch vehicle would boost the spacecraft into 22,300-mi. eccentric orbit from Cape Kennedy, and at apogee Syn-oom’s onboard kick motor would place the satellite in circular orbit. Equatorial position would be achieved by change of orbital plane—once as third stage fires and again as kick motor fires at equatorial injection point. The spacecraft would then move to on-station position at 180° longitude over the Pacific Ocean, where it would be stopped by onboard gas jets. The satellite will provide the first continuous communications link between Asia and North America, (nasa Release 63-263)
After prolonged debate, Senate confirmed nominations of the 14 incorporators of Communications Satellite Corp. (CR, 4/24/63, 6606f; CR, 4/25/63, 6698-99)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites using Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/6/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963. 12764)
explorer xviii (Imp) satellite completed second of its long elliptical orbits (apogee, 122,800 mi.; perigee, 119 mi.), and all systems appeared to be functioning as planned. Lifetime of imp-a, launched Nov. 26 from Cape Canaveral, revised by nasa from estimated 12 months to hundreds of years. (nasa Release 63-265; Ad-A, February 1964, 11)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of Soviet Academy of Sciences announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached agreement on coordinated launching of satellites for measuring earth’s magnetic field. Agreement was subject to final approval by nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences; agreement was expected to be approved in about a month. (NYT, 5/25/63,25)
