At two meetings of European Conference on Satellite Communications in Geneva, representatives proposed plans for regional comsat network independent of the U.S., while not ruling out participation with U.S. in global network. {M&R, 11/9/64,12-13)
Two nasa satellites—explorer xxiv and explorer xxv—were successfully launched into orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., aboard a single four-stage Scout rocket. This marked the first time NASA had orbited dual spacecraft with a single booster. The double payload was designed to provide more detailed information on complex radiation-air density measurements. explorer xxiv (Air Density satellite) was a 12-ft.-dia., 19-lb. polka-dotted sphere identical to explorers ix and XIX. It was covered with aluminum foil to reflect both sunlight and radio waves; approximately 4,000	white spots on the surface provided temperature control. EXPLORER xxiv would provide three types of global comparative measurements: (1) high-altitude air density; (2) sources of atmospheric heat through comparison of data with Injun and other satellites; and (3) density and temperature variations of the atmosphere as a function of latitude. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,550 mi.; perigee, 327 mi; period, 116 min.; and inclination. 81°. EXPLORER XXV (Injun-B), a 2-ft.-dia., 90-lb. metal satellite bearing 16 radiation sensors to measure protons and electrons in various ranges of energy, was roughly spherical in shape with 40 flat surfaces, 30 of them studded with solar cells. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,548 mi.; perigee, 326 mi.; period, 116 min.; and inclination, 81°. Tracking data after one complete orbit indicated that the satellites were close to planned orbit with all instruments operating. (NASA Release 64-284; Goddard News, 11/30/64)
In satellite communications demonstration at AIAA Washington meetings, Lt. Cdr. J. F. Debold, Commanding Officer, U.S. Naval Research and Development Satellite Communications Group, spoke via syncom ii satellite with his second in command on board USNs Kingsport. Kingsport, which can acquire, track, control, and communicate via a satellite while cruising at sea, was built by Navy to complement two Army-developed communications terminals on East and West Coasts, (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64, 2)
Boeing Co. scientists announced invention of lightweight telescope with more than 100-mi. range for use by astronaut in satellite interceptor in spotting another orbiting spacecraft. (SBD, 1/15/64, 74)
Communications Satellite Corp. requested bids from 15 companies for research data and consultant services for defining design and performance requirements of ground terminals for global comsat system. (ComSat-Coxp Release)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Beckman Instruments Corp. to negotiate final contract for three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (Stars) at slightly more than $1,000,000. The contractor would be responsible for manufacture, installation, and maintenance of the system as well as training of Goddard personnel. This second phase of the Goddard Stars project would provide a highly automated method of preparing large quantities of data for later analysis by the scientific community, (gsfc Release G—33-64)
usn announced a solar-powered, 120-lb. satellite was launched pickaback last Sept. 28 along with a previously announced nuclear-powered satellite. On board the solar-powered satellite were six transistors and several radiation detectors, testing means of protecting the transistors from radiation damage. (AP, NYT, 1/10/64, 86)
AEC spokesman said about 2.2 lbs. of plutonium 238 had been lost over the west coast of Africa last month after usn satellite carrying it had failed to orbit (see May 11). Onboard as fuel for Snap—9A generator, the plutonium apparently vaporized on re-entry into earth’s atmosphere and now was dispersed in very fine particles at the edge of space, where it would gradually lose its radioactivity. It posed “no health hazard to the world’s population,” aec spokesman said, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/24/ 64)
Rear Adm. Francis D. Boyle, Deputy Director of Defense Communications Agency’s Communications Satellite Project Office, told National Space Club in Washington of dod plans for a military comsat system. He said Titan III—C launch vehicles would orbit up to 24 comsats during the first six months of 1966, placing six to eight satellites in orbit each launch. Orbiting at more than 22,000 mi., the satellites would be “approximately synchronous.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/64)
General order from afsc established Eastern and Western Test Ranges of the National Range Division, wtr would assume range support for icbm and satellite programs on a phased basis, gaining full responsibility some time between Mar. 1 and Jun. 30,1965. Until then, overall responsibilities for these functions continued with PMR; after that time, pmr would continue to operate as a national sea test range under the Navy, ft would comprise facilities in Pt. Mugu-San Nicholas Island area and certain downrange stations in the area of Hawaii, and would be responsible for Pacific Ocean-based launches. (afsc Release 45-R-61; NASA Announcement 61-161)
explorer xvni, the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) satellite, survived sub-zero temperatures during eight-hour flight in the earth’s shadow, a duration record for satellites, imp remained in the shadow for so long because of its highly eccentric orbit, carrying it out 122,000	mi. at apogee. As it entered the shadow, imp shut off automatically, and temperatures on imp’s surface fell to more than 400° below zero. After it emerged once again, imp’s transmitter signal was picked up by nasa tracking station at Santiago, Chile. Preliminary evaluation of telemetry tapes at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center indicated data from the imp experiments were of good quality, (nasa Release 64-111)
First TV transmission from Japan to the U.S. was made, nsing NASA’s relay II communications satellite. Quality of the live pictures as well as the sound was excellent. In the telecast Prime Minister Hayato Ikeda offered his country’s apologies directly to the U.S. for the “unfortunate coincidence” of the stabbing of U.S. Ambassador Edwin Reischauer by a deranged Japanese youth the previous day. The eight-minute telecast was seen simultaneously on the three national networks. (nasa Release 64-63; upi, NYT, 3/26/64,3 ; AP, Wash. Post, 3/26/64)
At his news conference, President Johnson stated, in reply to a question about reconnaissance of Cuba by means of planes and satellites: “I will say this: that we, at the time of the Cuba missile crisis, attempted to work out an agreement for inspection and that was refused. This nation, in order to protect its people, must have a knowledge of what is taking place and we propose to keep informed. As to what offers the best method, we will have to determine that.” (NYT, 6/3/64, 25)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and aiaa Board Member, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial: “For some years past, it has been asked whether electric propulsion meets a ‘requirement’ in our space program. It may be well to remember that the airplane, the atomic submarine, the radio, and the first satellite were not developed in fulfillment of ‘requirements.’ An artificial atmosphere is certainly a requirement for an astronaut in space, and must Be developed for that reason. But the astronaut does not go into space because it is his requirement, but because our country has decided to excel in the exploration of outer space with the most appropriate means. Electric propulsion promises to be a very appropriate method of vastly expanding our exploration capability in space beyond that of chemical and nuclear systems. For that reason, its development should be pursued with high priority and great vigor.” (A&A, 8/64, 14—15)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in remarks at Univ. of Alabama: “In the 5% years since the launching of Explorer I in January of 1958, scientists in the nation’s universities and in government laboratories, supported by the engineering competence of American industry, have made an impressive record. In this 5% years 42 different university sponsored experiments have been orbited on 22 NASA satellites. Twelve of these experiments on five satellites are still operating. There are pending at the present time a total of 123 experiments representing 36 different experimental concepts contributed by nineteen universities. These experiments have been approved and will be flown on 19 NASA satellites including the orbiting geophysical observatories, the orbiting astronomical observatories, the orbiting solar observatories, and the Explorers. Of great significance is the fact that some of these experiments will be flown on future international satellites, particularly the United States-United Kingdom series.” (Text)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/28/64; hhn-48)
Danish Government announced it would join international telecommunication system based on global communications satellites. (AP, NYT, 2/6/64,6)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced Sylvania Electronics Systems-East had been selected to negotiate $1.8 million contract for transportable ground station (“Advanced Technological Satellite Transportable Ground Station”). Sylvania would design, fabricate, install, test, and check out the system, which featured two sxtremely low noise amplifiers: one a maser and the other a parametric amplifier. These amplifiers operate at temperatures in the range of —440° F and prevent spacecraft signals being overshadowed by heat-induced noise generated inside the receiver. (GSFC Release G—23-64)
Aviation Week stated that a technological war plan task force under the cognizance of afsc had been established at Space Systems Div., to investigate a variety of subject areas as a continuation of the usaf’s Project Forecast. Participants were expected to include key personnel from industry and NASA as well as afsc. Areas to be studied included boron fiber technology for application to structural materials, operational requirements of biological satellites, manned hypersonic vehicles to investigate thermodynamic and aerodynamic regions, and laser applications and requirements. (Av. Wk., 7/20/64, 23)
NASA designer of echo i, William J. O’Sullivan, said he believed the satellite still had its spherical shape after over four years in orbit. An optical investigation made by the Goodyear Aerospace Corp. for NASA Langley Research Center indicated that the satellite’s aluminum surface—which made the balloon highly reflective of light and radar waves, regulated its temperature, and protected the plastic film from space hazards—still reflected like a mirror. From calculations using the known reflective characteristics of echo I when it was launched and his interpretation of the Goodyear measurements, O’Sullivan concluded that echo I “is still essentially spherical and that its very thin coating of aluminum has suffered no measurable degradation in specularity or reflectivity.” (LaRC Release)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
usaf announced launching of Thor-Agena D space booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, JPash. Post, 8/6/64; M&R, 8/17/64,9)
Sonny Liston-Cassius Clay heavyweight title match was first championship fight to be telecast via communications satellite; video tape of the .match was transmitted to 11 European countries shortly after 1:00 a.m. est via NASA’s relay II communications satellite, (nasa Release 64-44)
Unspecified “informed sources” in Paris said that the first foreign base on U.S. territory—a satellite tracking station in Alaska—was to be established by the European Space Research Organization. It was reported that the establishment of die station had been agreed to in principle by the U.S. State Department, and that a formal agreement was expected to be signed in the near future. ESRO had plans for launching about 400 sounding rockets, 6 small satellites, 8 medium satellites, 7 space probes, and an orbiting astronomical observatory during the following 8 years and would use the station to help track, control, and communicate with these spacecraft, esro planned a network of similar stations extending from Alaska across North Pole to the Shetland Islands, Belgium, and Italy. (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/29/64)
syncom ill communications satellite, high above Sumatra in the Indian Ocean, was boosted into near-circular orbit above the equator by its apogee motor. The motor burned for 19.6 sec. at the command of ground station at Salisbury, Australia, which based its command on computer calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The satellite was now in orbit of 23,550-mi. apogee; 21,235-mi. perigee; 14° inclination; and 1,449-min. (24 hr. and 9 min.) period. It was drifting westward at rate of about 3(4° Per day. (NASA Press Conf. Transcript; nasa Release 64-193)
Japan’s first television transmission to Europe by communications satellite was received in Pleumeur-Bodou, France, and fed into France’s television network for European viewing. Reception was excellent. The relay was made by telstar d communications satellite. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/17/64)
fcc approved application of ComSatCorp to build communications satellite for its planned experimental-operational synchronous-orbit network. The authorization was for construction only; further authorization would be required for placing the satellite in orbit and using it in experimental or operational service. (AP, NYT, 4/16/64)
Parade magazine’s Intelligence Report said the U.S. had 50 Samos surveillance satellites in orbit photographing Soviet military installations. Photographs were reported to be parachuted to earth between Calif, and Hawaii. Russians were said to have similar satellites spying on U.S. (Parade, Wash. Post, 6/7/64)
U.S.S.R. launched into orbit three earth satellites—cosmos xxxvm, cosmos xxxix, and cosmos xl—with a single booster rocket “of a new type.” Tass said the three satellites were orbiting in close orbits with initial parameters as follows: 876-km. (544-mi.) apogee, 210-km. (130-mi.) perigee, 95.2-min. period, and 56.16° angle of inclination to the equator. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/19/64, atss-t Trans.)
Howard Simons of the Washington Post was awarded the 1964 American for the Advancement of Science-Westinghouse Science writing award. His winning entry consisted of stories on the Samos satellite, cybernetics in Russia, and the planet Jupiter. (Wash. Post, 12/18/64)
Future Delta launch vehicles with larger propellant tanks, the Thrust-Augmented Delta (tad) , would be used to launch payloads in the Biosatellite, Pioneer, and meteorological satellite families, GSFC reported. (Goddard News, 6/29/64,1)
France planned to launch a series of constant-level balloon weather stations in the southern hemisphere and a satellite to “interrogate” them on their findings. Named Project Eole, it was scheduled for 1967. Up to 256 balloons were to be sent aloft, each carrying four pounds of weather and communications equipment, to remain at fixed altitudes between 16,500 and 33,000 ft. for at least ten days. The French satellite would interrogate each balloon twice during a single pass overhead. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/21/64)
Project Amos, arpa project to develop and operate full-scale infrared astronomical observatory, was described by Howard Simons in the Washington Post. To be installed on 10,000-ft.-high Mt. Haleakala on Hawaiian Island of Maui, the observatory would be used in twofold program: research in locating and identifying missile nose cones and satellites; and study of infrared characteristics of missiles and satellites as well as earth’s atmosphere, the sun, stars, moon, and planets. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/9/64, E3)
A joint British-American group of communications engineers was preparing recommendations for a communications base in the Seychelles Islands, northeast of Madagascar. Station would fill a wide gap between Atlantic and Pacific stations in the present worldwide chain of receiving-transmitting stations for satellites. Existing network, set up by the U.S. Navy, had to rely on shipboard stations for Indian Ocean coverage. British responsibility would be limited to the real estate involved while the U.S. would build and equip the station and furnish most of the operating personnel. (Watson, Balt. Sun, 12/31/64)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
General Accounting Office made public report to Congress charging NASA’s “unrealistic delivery dates” for first two Oso satellites had cost an unnecessary $526,000. GAO was critical of NASA for ordering backup Oso eight weeks before scheduled launching of the first satellite, thus spending $273,000 that was not needed. The GAO report also said NASA had unnecessarily limited competition for Oso construction. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,2; Finney, NYT, 2/7/64,10)
NASA announced Hughes Aircraft Co. had been awarded contract to develop and build five Advanced Technological Satellites (ATS) based on Advanced Syncom design study. The 650-lb. satellites would be used to test several spacecraft techniques, particularly spacecraft stabilization and orientation in higher altitudes, (nasa Release 64-50; Goddard News, 3/9/64, 8)
Sixth anniversary of vanguard i satellite, launched into orbit Mar. 17, 1958. The satellite’s stability of orbit had provided geodetic observations, including the determination that the earth is slightly pearshaped. vanguard I was the only satellite orbited before 1959 that was still transmitting. (A&A/1915-60)
General Curtis E. LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “The Air Force program of research and development seeks to assure that this Nation is first in the development of military capabilities in space. We have some cause for optimism in this area. Our Titan III program is proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, we are undertaking the development of a medium altitude communications satellite program. . . . “The next major step toward the achievement of future space capabilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was approved for development under Air Force management. The MOL will provide a means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire information essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the usefulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve as a platform to support testing of equipment and procedures in the environment in which they will be used. . “Although the Dyna-Soar program has been terminated, a need still exists for development of a maneuverable aerospacecraft capable of controlled reentry and precision recovery, ferrying missions to and from a space laboratory, transfer of men and equipment in space, and a wide range of other roles. . . (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
Soviet Academician Anatoli A. Blagonravov announced in Moscow that U.S.S.R. would participate in three-nation experiment of bouncing radio signals off U.S. balloon satellite echo ii beginning Feb. 22. Signals would be transmitted from Jodrell Bank, England, to echo ii, and reflected back by radioastronomy observatory near Gorki. (NYT, 2/7/64)
NASA and Australian Ministry of Supply announced installation to command flight of Syncom C synchronous-orbit communications satellite would be installed at Salisbury, Australia. Installation would have two functions: monitor the Syncom’s attitude and command its apogee-motor firing, and command the satellite’s control system to make any necessary adj ustments to maintain synchronous position. (NASA Release 64^47)
Soviet annual report to cospar listed 21 satellite and 114 rocket launchings for 1963. Omitting any mention of when U.S.S.R. might launch major spacecraft, report said past manned space flight had “set some new problems before scientists requiring immediate solution for successful preparation and realization of more prolonged space missions. ...” A major question to be answered was whether it was “possible for an astronaut, after two or three weeks stay under conditions of weightlessness, to endure satisfactorily stresses acting on an organism during re-entry.” Also studies must be made of methods to safeguard astronauts’ cardiovascular systems. Longest section of report was on medical and biological problems of manned space flight; it offered evidence that U.S.S.R. was paying increasing attention to weightlessness and other problems of manned space flight. Soviet report was first such version ever submitted in English and was thought to be strikingly free of propaganda. Possibly significantly, report referred to U.S. space research in correlation with Soviet research ; for example, findings of mars I were said to correlate with findings of U.S. explorer x and mariner ii. (AP, 5/9/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/64)
NASA and U.S. Dept, of Commerce announced agreement to develop National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (NOMSS). Signed by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges, agreement provided for NOMSS which would be based on NASA-developed Tiros technology and would become operational in 1965. Compared with earlier plans, this joint program was expected to save Dept, of Commerce some $125,000,000 over five-year period. Once NASA orbited the satellites, Weather Bureau would operate and control the system and analyze, process, and distribute the meteorological data gathered by the satellites. Under reimbursable order from Weather Bureau, NASA would design, procure, test, launch, and track the weather satellites, (nasa Release 64-25; Commerce Dept. Release G 64-20; Text, nmi 2-3-30)
Arthur Kantrowitz delivered 1964 von Karman Lecture at AIAA annual During June: Analysis of infrared radiation measurements of TIROS n meteorological satellite was detailed 'by R. S. Hawkins of afcrl. Hawkins suggested that when discrepancies 'between data from satellite and from other sources are understood and accounted for, infrared data from meteorological satellites could provide an invaluable tool for plotting and predicting course of cold fronts as well as for obtaining information on structure of frontal zones and regions of convective activity, (oar Research Review, 6/64, 3)
British Postmaster General Reginald Bevins said in House of Commons that, under the right conditions, “the United Kingdom will be willing to provide up to £15 million of the capital cost of a world system” for satellite communications. He said U.K. would share in design of comsat system, share in its ownership, and play full part in providing satellite launch vehicles and other equipment. He reported that in recent meeting of representatives of European, U.S., and Canadian governments on problems of establishing a global comsat system, “good progress” was made. (upi, NYT, 4/16/64, 9)
NASA Langley Research Center asked industry for proposals on the kind of launch vehicle it would take to put a small spacecraft into orbit around the sun. The purpose of the program would be to put an instrumented satellite into position for a clear view and study of the sun’s plasma corona. (Newport News Daily Press, 7/24/64)
First meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee, with representatives of 15 nations, adjourned after four days. In its session, the committee approved rules of procedure, appointed Committee Chairman (John A. Johnson, ComSatCorp vice president for international affairs), and heard progress reports on development of global commercial communications system. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 10/4/64, 74)
gao complained nasa had spent money unnecessarily by producing four basically similar films on the flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project, two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation in the space program. The cost of the films ranged from $216,000 for one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT, 11/4/64,40)
NASA’s explorer xx topside-ionosphere sounder satellite was providing new information on “the arrangement of ionospheric irregularities” and “the structure of plasma resonances,” according to Central Radio Propagation of National Bureau of Standards. (M&R, 10/26/64,23)
U.S. Samos (Satellite and Missile Observation Systems) satellites, undiscussed by dod since secrecy policy was adopted in late 1961, had been orbited “periodically” ever since then, Albert Ravenholt said in New Orleans Times-Picayune article. Even though Samos was de-7B6-5D8 0—65-----18 veloped as successor to U-2 high-altitude photographic airplane, Raven-holt said, U.S.S.R. had “made no threatening noises about Samos,” probably because some Russian Cosmos satellites are equipped with cameras; U.S.S.R. has no missile capable of shooting down a Samos; and, if it could down one, the action would open whole new vista of legal problems about control of outer space. (Ravenholt, N.O. Times-Picayune, 8/10/64)
Institute for Satellite and Space Research scientists in Bochum, W.	Germany, reported monitors had picked up both radio signals and voice broadcasts on the same frequency used by the Soviet Union for manned spacecraft. No manned space launch had been announced by U.S.S.R. (Sci. Ser., Wash. Daily News, 11/13/64)
Plans for first operational weather satellite system, to be called Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, were announced, nasa had selected RCa’s Astro Electronics Div. for negotiations leading to manufacture of five Tiros operational weather satellites, at cost expected to exceed $9 million. Dept: of Commerce/Weather Bureau would finance tos system, provide overall management, and be responsible for its operation. NASA was responsible for spacecraft procurement, launch, and initial checkout after satellite is in orbit. After system begins in late 1965, two meteorological satellites would be in orbit at all times, photographing cloud-cover of the entire earth every day. (nasa Release 64-125; Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-9)
120 delegates from 17 European nations met with U.S. and Canadian delegations in Rome for exploratory talks on European participation in an international communications satellite system proposed by the U.S. (NYT, 2/11/64)	_
Spokesman for European conference on satellite communications, meeting in Rome with U.S. and Canadian delegations, said conference had reached agreement on principal points of the U.S. proposed to establish an international comsat system. “They are now discussing the details, upon which the accord isn’t so extensive.” (NYT, 2/12/64,
DOD was reconsidering its tentative plans for a military communications satellite system, instead would rely on satellites of Communications Satellite Corp., John Finney reported in New York Times. Partly in response to Congressional pressure, Finney reported, DOD was proposing to delay development of ground stations and defer or prolong the completion of its military comsats. Final decision would be dependent upon outcome of DOD negotiations with ComSatCorp, still underway. (Finney, NYT, 1/27/64)	_
syncom in was in near equatorial orbit over the Indian Ocean, with mean altitude of 22,395 mi. and 1/4° inclination to the equator, while drifting westward at the rate of about 3° per day. On ground command, the satellite ejected two bursts of steam, correcting its position to 21,890 mi. mean altitude (22,540-mi. apogee and 21,240-mi perigee) and inclination of less than 1° to the equator. It then began drifting eastward; the drift would be halted by onboard control jets, fired by ground command, once syncom ill reached the International Date Line. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/23/64; NASA Release 64-193 & Press Conf. Transcript)
NASA announced syncom hi synchronous-orbit communications satellite was now in such a precise orbit that its rotational speed was only five seconds slower than that of the earth. Positioned over the equator at 22,300-mi. altitude, syncom m drifted less than l/100th of a degree per day. Orbital parameters: 22,311-mi. apogee, 22,164-mi. perigee, 1,436.158-min. period, and .095° to the equator. Same day, spokesman for Communications Satellite Corp, announced syncom ill was successfully relaying test pictures across the Pacific and their quality was “much better than expected.” The experimental transmissions between Kashima, Japan, and Pt. Mugu, Calif., had begun Sept. 21. (NASA Release 64-241; Finney, NYT, 9/24/64, 13)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xlvii artificial earth satellite “for the further investigation of cosmic space.” Orbital data: apogee, 413 km. (256 mi.); perigee, 177 km. (110 mi); period, 90 min.; and inclination to the equator, 64.77°. cosmos xlvii de-orbited Oct. 7. (Tass, Pravda, 10/7/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; GSFC SSR, 10/15/64)
U.S.S.R. announced launching cosmos XLIX artificial earth satellite into orbit: apogee, 490 km. (304 mi.); perigee, 260 km. (162 mi.); period, 91.83 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equatorial plane. Onboard equipment was said to be operating normally and ground tracking station was processing incoming data. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/25/64,1, ATSS—T Trans.)
It was announced that the British government was spending $2.8 million to enlarge its space communications facilities at Goonhilly Downs. Future communications satellites would require more powerful receivers because of higher orbits. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/4/64)
usn disclosed it was developing seagoing tracking system for its ships and submarines to “avoid those areas of the oceans covered at intervals by spy satellites. Submarines would stay submerged, surfacing only when the sky above is clear.” (Wash. Post, 2/28/64)
New gravity gradient stabilization system utilizing earth’s gravitational field to orient the satellite and earth’s magnetic field to assist in damping was developed by General Electric and recently tested onboard a USN satellite, orbited Jan. 11. Within three days the system stabilized the satellite to accuracy of ±5 degrees. (M&R, 2/17/64, 10; Av. Wk., 2/24/64,57)	_
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara issued statement amplifying the President’s Sept. 17 announcement of U.S. systems for intercepting and destroying armed satellites. Secretary McNamara said one of the systems was operated by the Army and used Nike-Zeus missile; other system was operated by usaf and used Thor missile. In tests both systems had “intercepted satellites in space, their missiles passing so close as to be within the destruction radius of the warheads.” Army system became operational Aug. 1, 1963, and usaf system May 29, 1964. (dod Release 673-64)
echo ii passive communications satellite was used for transmission of two radiophotos between Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station at Manchester and Gorki University’s radioastronomy observatory at Zimenki. A third space telegram was sent from Jodrell Bank to Zimenki via the moon, and its quality was comparable to those received via echo n. The U.S. satellite was termed by Tass commentator “the Friendship Sputnik.” (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64; NYT, 3/2/64, 9; Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64, 4, Atss-t Trans.)
ComSatCorp petitioned fcc for rule to give it exclusive eligibility for ownership and operation of the initial ground stations for the global commercial comsat network. Under Communications Satellite Act of 1962, fcc must decide whether ComSatCorp or other commercial communications carrier, or both, shall build and operate the ground stations. (ComSatCorp Release)
Information conditioning unit that converts data for computer use much more rapidly than any before had been tested on usn satellite, according to Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., inventor of the system. System was said to reduce to hours the weeks or months pre-1766-598 0—65----5 viously required for conversion of satellite data into usable scientific information. After recent launch of usn satellite with the unit onboard, scientists obtained more than 50 types of information—analyzed, checked, and printed—from the satellite within 12 hours, (upi, NYT, 2/9/64,91)
Senators Albert Gore (D.—Tenn.) and Ralph Yarborough (D.—Tex.) said dod negotiations to lease channels from ComSatCorp were grounds for repeal of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Labeling the law a “giveaway” of a national resource, Senator Gore said it would be “remarkable and bizarre” for the Government to lease the system. “We will be paying for using what we have given away.” {Wash. Post, 3/26/64)
It was reported that U.A.R. planned to soon launch its own earth satellite— a 40-70 lb. satellite boosted by a three-stage rocket. A source close to German rocket scientists in U.A.R. said the launching would probably be purely a prestige gesture, having little or no scientific value, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/4/64)
A pea-sized rocket motor, called a cap motor, weighing less than threehundredths of an ounce, might be given its first trial in space next year as a stabilizing motor for a Tiros weather satellite. Conceived by the Wright Aeronautical Div. of the Curtiss-Wright Corp. in Wood Ridge, N.J., it was made entirely of plastic, contained igniter material which would be touched off by an electrical impulse, a solid propellant, a combustion chamber, and a flared exhaust nozzle. A string of the expendable motors would be mounted on a tape that would feed through a half-pound triggering device and fire them one at a time or in sequence. One cap motor would yield a pound of thrust for about two-hundredths of a second. Two cap motor units, each containing 300 cap motors, would be placed on Tiros for the test in an attempt to lengthen its useful life beyond an expected three months. The satellite must spin at a certain number of revolutions a minute to stabilize its cameras; the slight friction in its trajectory would tend to slow it down. Computers on the ground would calculate the amount of spin to be imparted; aboard Tiros, 100 cap motors would be fired in each burst. (Hudson, NYT, 12/30/64,1,17)
Dr. Allen E. Puckett, vice president of Hughes Aircraft, said world’s first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird, being built for ComSatCorp, would be completed in less than one year and ready for launch a month later. Early Bird was a first step toward global telecommunications and was a commercial version of Hughes’ Syncom satellite. (Miles, L. A. Times, 7/1/64)
NASA announced it had requested proposals from scientists for experiments on Advanced Technological Satellites to be launched from Cape Kennedy in 1966-68. Primary mission of ATS would be to evaluate advanced communication techniques, meteorological components, and gravity gradient stabilization systems, but additional space for scientific experiments was available. (NASA Release 64-153)
AEC announced a satellite carrying small Snap-9A atomic generator had been launched on Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg afb last April 21, but it did not go into orbit. Preliminary data indicated the satellite burned up upon re-entry into earth’s atmosphere. (AP, NYT, 5/12/64; Av. WL, 5/18/64,38)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists, via Rosman, N.C., tracking station, succeeded in turning on 14 of the experiments onboard OGO I and received scientific data transmitted from the satellite. Power level in the NASA “space bus” was said to be satisfactory. OGO I was obtaining less than half the power it needed for full-time operation of its 20 experiments, because it was spinning slowly in space instead of having its solar panels constantly aimed at the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64; AP, NYT, 9/8/64, 31)
nimbus i experimental weather satellite ceased operating, after producing more than 27,000 remarkably sharp weather photographs. As result of several days’ buildup of friction in motor that turned satellite’s solar paddles, the solar paddles locked, preventing them from rotating toward sun. Lacking adequate solar power to recharge batteries, the satellite control system, three camera systems, and associated electronic equipment could no longer function, nimbus i surpassed all expectations both as a research spacecraft and as a storm-spotter. During its 380-orbit lifetime it provided the first satellite pictures of nighttime cloud-cover and photographed Hurricanes Dora, Ethel, and Florence, Typhoons Ruby and Sally, (nasa Release 64-243)
By this date U.S. still did not know whether U.S.S.R. would participate in tracking Echo II balloon satellite, scheduled for launching Jan. 23. Earlier this month NASA sent cable to Soviet Academy of Sciences outlining launch schedule and inquiring about Soviet tracking plans, agreed on in principle last summer. NASA received cable in reply, acknowledging receipt of U.S. message but providing no details of Soviet plans. NASA planned to launch the satellite as scheduled, hoped to hear further word from U.S.S.R. (Finney, NYT, 1/19/64)
Series of six Sandia Corp. Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets was launched from May to August. The six Nike-Tomahawks, which reached altitudes of about 300 km. (186 mi.), were launched from the Island of Kania, as part of U.S. readiness program for use if space testing of nuclear devices was resumed. Experiment instrumentation for the series was provided by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists. Objective of the experiment was to obtain precise measurements of radiations in the sun’s corona. Another purpose was to demonstrate feasibility of using relatively inexpensive, spin-stabilized, ballistically pointed rockets for solar x-ray spectroscopy. Results of this research were lated reported at the December meeting of the American Geophysical Union (agu). (oar Review, 12/64,22) During the space age: As of the close of 1964, NASA had placed 70 spacecraft into earth orbit, lunar trajectory, or solar orbit since the birth of NASA on Oct. 1,1958. Of this number 52 were still orbiting as of Dec, 31,1964, and 21 were still transmitting signals. Some 55 million data points were being received daily at GSFC, recorded, and stored on magnetic tape at the rate of about 100,000 reels per year. Three of the 70 spacecraft impacted on the moon; 15 re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and burned up. Of the 31 silent satellites in orbit, 6 were in orbit about the sun, 25 about the earth. Satellites still transmitting meaningful data included one deep-space probe (mariner IV), 5 communications satellites (plus the beacon on passive communications satellite echo ii) , 3 weather satellites, 10 scientific satellites. (NASA Release 65—1)
Dr. Eugene Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director, ddr&e ), told Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee that dod was “very close to an agreement” with the Communications Satellite Corp. on working out a system for military satellite communications. Although decision had not been reached as to whether DOD would develop its own comsat system or lease channels from ComSatCorp satellites, Fubini said leasing channels “has proved to be more feasible than our fondest hopes.” He emphasized that there would be “no compromise on security” if the commercial system were chosen. (Finney, NYT, 3/18/64, 15; Av. Wk., 3/23/64,19)
aec scientists were reported to be planning even more sophisticated nuclear radiation detection satellites to follow the two identified by press sources as having been maneuvered into patrol positions during the preceding weekend. The advanced Sentries were reported to carry optical devices to monitor not only space nuclear blasts but also those in the earth’s atmosphere. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/64)
NASA and General Electric Co. announced they had accomplished precision tracking of explorer xxii with a laser device. Tests were conducted at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center using a ruby laser mounted on a telescope. With the telescope aimed along the predicted path, the laser was flashed several times as explorer xxii, containing an array of corner reflectors, passed overhead. The reflectors, made of quartz crystal, were designed to return the beam of the laser almost exactly where it came from. The optical signals were displayed on an oscilloscope. As the laser pulse traveled from the telescope to the satellite, then back to the ground, the elapsed time measured could be converted into distance. Expected accuracy was within 10 ft. {Chic. Trib., 12/7/64)
U.S.-Japan telecommunications cable broke at the peak of traffic from the Olympic Games in Tokyo, including sound track for films telecast from Tokyo and sent via syncom in communications satellite. Japanese officials estimated earliest repair date as Oct. 23. (NYT, 10/17/64,13)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced six companies had responded to its request for proposals for designing international commercial communications satellite, at&t and RCA submitted a joint proposal; Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc., submitted proposal with ITT as principal subcontractor; Hughes Aircraft Co. and Philco Corp. submitted individual proposals. ComSatCorp was evaluating the proposals. (WSJ, 2/12/64)
Opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Tokyo were telecast live in U.S. via ComSatCorp’s communications link using NASA’s syncom hi satellite. Telecast was delayed on West Coast and taped for later showing by nbc, which said it was avoiding interference with commercial programing. Japan was reported to have expressed disappointment to U.S. State Dept., and State Dept, in turn was said to be “deeply concerned” over the procedure. NBC confirmed that future coverage of Olympic Games would be taped or filmed. (ComSatCorp Release; Gould, NYT, 10/11/64,1,25)
explorer xxvi, Energetic Particles Explorer D (epe-d), was launched into an egg-shaped orbit atop a three-stage Delta rocket from Cape Kennedy. The 101-lb. windmill-shaped satellite carried five experiments designed to learn how high energy radiation particles are injected, trapped, and eventually lost in the Van Allen radiation belts. Information obtained from the mission was expected to make important contributions to the Apollo manned lunar landing program, specifically in the design of protective spacecraft shielding and in planning flight trajectories for moon landing. Information on the depth of penetration of the geomagnetic field by high energy solar protons—particles of potential danger to moon-bound astronauts—might also be obtained. Preliminary orbital data: apogee, 16,280 mi.; perigee, 190 mi.; period, 7 hrs. 36 min.; inclination, 20.15°. The satellite was designed for an operational life of one year. (NASA Release 64-302; AP, Benedict, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
Firing of hydrogen peroxide gas jets aboard SYNCOM in communications satellite changed its drift rate from 7° east per day to 3.3° per day. (nasa Release 64-217)
Two-stage French Rubis rocket reached altitude of 1,800 km. (1,118.49 mi.) in launch from Hammaguir base. First stage of Rubis was Agate rocket and second stage was third stage of France’s satellite launcher Diamant. {M&R, 6/29/64,12)
NASA’s syncom III synchronous-orbit communications satellite was launched into preliminary orbit high above the earth by a tad (Thrust-Augmented Delta) launch vehicle, its premiere satellite launching. Preliminary orbit: 23,675-mi. apogee, 695-mi. perigee, 11 hrs. 35 min. period, and 16° inclination to the equator. Four hours after launch from Cape Kennedy, the satellite received and sent back a test recording of music of “The Star Spangled Banner” as well as test voice and teletype message. Further maneuvers during the next 10 days would move syncom III into a synchronous position over the Pacific, where it would be able to communicate with surface stations at Clark afb in the Philippines, at Guam, and at Camp Roberts, Calif. Work was underway to make it possible to transmit the 1964 Olympic Games from Tokyo via syncom m in October, (nasa Release 64-193; nasa Transcript of Press Conference; AP, NYT, 8/20/64, 51)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload aboard a Scout vehicle from Pt. Arguelfo, Calif. Purpose of the shot was not announced. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced it had filed application with fcc for authority to modify at&t ground station at Andover, Me., so it could be used with ComSatCorp synchronous satellite scheduled for launch in March 1965. The application requested fcc approval of technical characteristics of the modified station. ComSatCorp also filed proposed agreement with at&t for modification and operation of the station. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA explorer xxi scientific earth satellite (imp b) was launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy with a Thor-Delta rocket booster. Onboard instrumentation was working excellently, but the satellite’s orbit (59,400-mi. apogee; 120-mi. perigee; 34-hr., 57-min. period; 33°53' inclination to the equator) fell far short of the intended deep-space path which would have enabled the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform to measure magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and solar winds in interplanetary space. Planned apogee was 161,000 mi. Robert H. Gray, Director of Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission success was about 97,750 mi. As in launch of explorer xviii (imf a), the Delta rocket used higher-thrust third-stage motor, the X—258, to give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection. Preliminary tracking data indicated this stage had not provided the required thrust. Designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xxi contained nine experiments. Five of these were provided by GSFC researchers and four by experimenters at Univ. of Chicago, Univ. of California, NASA Ames Research Center, and mit respectively. (nasa Release 64-242; AP, Balt. Sun, 10/5/64; upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64; M&R, 10/12/64, 24)
Astronomers at San Miguel Observatory near Buenos Aires, Argentina, reported seeing a red-colored, unidentified flying object, traveling at four and a half times the speed of an ordinary man-made satellite, cross the sky from west to east at 8:30 p.m. local time, from east to west five minutes later, and then from west to east at 9:05 p.m. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/16/64)
In Aviation Week editorial, Robert Hotz said that until the past two years most nations in the world considered space technology to be monopoly of the competing U.S. and U.S.S.R. Now they were beginning to participate in space programs themselves. Two primary reasons given were technical success of weather and communications satellites and “enlightened and effective” program in international cooperation operated by NASA. Hotz saw international space cooperation as the most powerful force binding nations of the world if early promise of international space technology is realized. “Perhaps the most heartening aspect of the international expansion of space activity is the manner in which the hard technical and financial facts are persuading nations to work together on cooperative projects ranging from global satellite systems to booster development and scientific exploration. “Part of this has been achieved through the NASA international cooperation program for which Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy NASA Administrator; Arnold Frutkin, head of the international programs office of NASA; and Dr. Harry Goett, director of Goddard Space Flight Center, deserve special credit. “The other portion has been achieved through Communications Satellite Corp., currently organizing global communications system with heavy international participation, and through the U.S. Weather Bureau’s leadership in developing a global weather satellite system. . . .” (Av. Wk„ 7/6/64; CR, 7/31/64, A4040-41)
USAF launched Thor-Able-Star rocket toward polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., but did not disclose payload or mission. It later was revealed that the Thor-Able-Star placed three satellites in orbit. (upi, NYT, 10/7/64,19; SBD, 10/8/64, 202; hhn-4s)
The second of two dod satellites, reported by press sources to be one of two Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, maneuvered into station 65,000 mi. above the earth. On signal from the ground a rocket motor aboard the satellite fired, moving it from an eccentric orbit with an apogee of 65,000 mi. into a circular orbit at that altitude. The motor aboard the companion satellite, boosted by the same launch vehicle, was fired successfully on July 17. (AP, NYT, 7/20/64; Wash. Post, 7/20/64)
relay ii active communications satellite launched into orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle from AMR (4,606-mi. apogee; 1,298-mi. perigee; 195-min. period; 46.3° inclination to the equator). The 184-lb. satellite would continue communications tests of relay i, still orbiting the earth, and provide evaluation of improvements in the new comsat. relay II completed its first communications test during its first orbit, receiving radio signals and TV test pattern from Mojave, Calif., ground station and beaming them back to earth, relay n was initially in excellent mutual visibility position between North America and Europe for TV transmission between the two hemispheres. Mutual visibility with Japan, about 40 min. at maximum, would decrease gradually to nothing by mid-July and continue with no mutual visibility again until mid-November, relay n was equipped for transmitting one-way wideband communications (one-way TV, 300 one-way voice channels or high-speed data) or two-way narrow-band communications (12 two-way telephone conversations or teletype, photo-facsimile and data). Unlike its predecesor, relay ii had ho automatic cutoff device; it had negative-on-positive (n-on-p) solar cells for greater resistance to radiation than relay i’s p-on-n solar cells, relay n was 22nd straight launch success of Thor-Delta launch vehicle, (gsfc Historian: Goddard News, 1/27/64,1;AP,AHT, 1/22/64,17)	_
Communications Satellite Corp. held its first stockholders’ meeting and elected its first Board of Directors—six representing public shareholders and six, communications carriers. (Finney, NYT, 9/18/64, 45)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that use of Centaur as a third stage for Saturn IB launch vehicle was now a “matter of study with a serious approach to the various alternatives” it could serve. He mentioned one such use might be as a booster for logistics support vehicle called Stay Time Excursion Module (stem) for establishment of lunar bases. Dr. Mueller also disclosed that payload for Saturn SA-10 flight had been changed from an Apollo boilerplate to a micrometeoroid detection satellite (mds), supplementing those for Saturns SA-8 and SA-9. Added mds was to further confirm that skin thicknesses on boosters and spacecraft can be reduced, thus trimming weight requirements for Project Apollo. (SBD, 4/15/64,83)
Unnamed “high State Department official” told New York Herald Tribune that talks between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. regarding Soviet cooperation in worldwide comsat network had been scheduled for June in Geneva. The official said the talks came in response to Soviet government’s recent expression of interest in such negotiations to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Other sources indicated Soviet representatives had visited Communications Satellite Corp. in Washington and fcc inquiring ajsout procedural arrangements. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/1/64; Av. Wk., 4/6/64,15)
NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dry den announced U.S.S.R. had notified U.S. that it would participate in space communications experiments using Echo II passive communications satellite which NASA would orbit in the coming week. Soviet officials planned to begin optical and radio experiments with the 135-ft.-diameter balloon satellite a week after it was orbited. Soviets would photograph Echo II and track it with telescopes as it passed over U.S.S.R., bounce radio signals off the balloon between U.S.S.R. and England. U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative experiments were based on 1963 agreement reached by Dr. Dryden and Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonravov. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
NASA announced selection of scientific satellites, imp-d and imp—e, that will be placed in orbit around the moon in 1966-67 to study interplanetary phenomena and earth-sun relationships in cislunar space. The eight experiments selected for the Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms were designed mainly to measure magnetic fields, solar plasma, micrometeoroids, and energetic particles in the vicinity of the moon, (nasa Release 64r-270)
According to norad Commander-in-Chief Gen. John K. Gerhart (usaf), manned Soviet satellites have passed over North America 44 times. He added:". . . strong modern aerospace defenses are indispensable; they are a vital part of deterrence—they are essential to survival and they are our insurance to victory.” (J/Armed Forces, 10/24/64,6)
usaf announced it had launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg afb. (AP, 8/21/64)
Morris Forgash, president of United States Freight Co., gave his predictions of transportation in the year 2000, in address at National Defense Transportation Association conference in Frankfurt, Germany. Among his predictions: “By the year 2000 the hydrofoils will be the buslines of the oceans”; “people and things will be transported between all the more distant points on earth by rocket-powered craft.” He concluded: “Before you mark off anything that I have predicted for the next three and a half decades look back on the startling developments of the recent past. The breaking of the sound barrier. Space travel. Substitution of a cushion of air for the ageless wheel. The broadcasting of a message of good will to the world by a President of the United States not by cable, phone, or radio, but from a satellite circling around the globe in outer space—then the erasure of the message and substitution of another while die satellite was in orbit. The Olympic games in Tokyo brought into the homes of people on the far side of the earth through the medium of a relay station in space. Multiply these miracles of science by the rate of change which is being constantly compounded and see if my predictions do not come out on the modest side even to the point of reticence. “I believe the most important fact for us to understand is that transportation, though it opens new worlds and changes old concepts of time and distance, will not shape the world of 2000 A.D. Transportation is the servant of the people—the genie which makes their dreams come true—the magic carpet of their future—the mobility of their desires, their aspirations, and their resources. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/7/65, A70-74)
NASA spokesman said echo ii balloon satellite was still operating with “great success” despite preliminary radar reports that it was deflating and losing its reflectivity. The 135-ft. balloon was tested in transmission between Rome, N.Y., and Ohio State University at Columbus, Ohio. (upi, NYT, 1/30/64,12)
Communications Satellite Corp. re-emphasized to Fee its need to own and operate initial satellite terminal stations in U.S. ComSatCorp was replying to statements filed with fcc by communications common-carriers which requested fcc to deny ComSatCorp’s request, originally filed Aug. 14. (ComSatCorp Release)
U.S.S.R. announced successful orbiting of two satellites, electron in and ELECTRON XV, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellites were studying the earth’s magnetic field and radiation belts, radiation arriving from deep space, and the physical conditions in the upper atmospheric layers, electron iii was orbiting at 7,040-km. (4,375-mi.) apogee, 405-km. (252-mi.) perigee, 2-hr., 48 min. period, and 60.86° inclination to the equator, electron xv was orbiting at 66,235-km. (41,158-mi.) apogee, 459-km. (285-mi.) perigee, 21-hr., 54-min. period, and 60.86° inclination to the equator. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/12/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/11/ 64)
General Dynamics/Astronautics received $6 million contract from usaf for additional standardized Atlas space launch vehicles. Atlases produced under this contract were said to be for sending lunar-orbiting probes on photographic missions. (San Diego Union, 9/8/64) Congress opened with statement by President Edmond A. Brun (France) that deliberations “should undoubtedly contribute towards increasing international cooperation in the field of astronautics.” First report to the entire Congres was on the lunar mission of RANGER vn by JPL Director William Pickering and Harris Schurmeier. ranger vn movie was shown five times during the week to packed audiences. Informative U.S. papers on progress on comsats, weather satellites (including NIMBUS I photographs), manned lunar landing program, and bioastronautics, as well as Consideration of the idea of a Lunar International Laboratory, appeared highlights of the 15th IAF Congress. (NASA Hist.)
Communications Satellite Corp. submitted its annual report to the President and the Congress on its activities February 1—December 31, 1963. ComSatCorp reported it had made plans for development and establishment of commercial communications satellite system with global capability, calling for launching of one or more synchronous-orbit satellites over the Atlantic Ocean in 1965 on an experimental-operational basis and initial launching of satellite for the comsat system in 1966. (ComSatCorp Rpt., 1/31/64)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xxx satellite. Initial orbital data, according to Tass: 383.1-km. apogee (238 mi.), 206.6-km. perigee (128 mi.), 90.24-min. period, and 64.94° inclination to the equator. (Pravda, 5/19/64, atss-t Trans.)
Dept, of Commerce announced opening of World Weather Center in Washington, D.C., composed of the Weather Bureau’s National Meteorological Center and National Weather Satellite Center with assistance provided by other Weather Bureau components. WWC would gather, process, and distribute weather observations and prepare weather analyses and forecasts for as much of the globe as possible; provide opportunity for the training of meteorologists from the U.S. and abroad; conduct basic and applied research on large-scale weather problems; and archive weather information for use of the scientific community for research purposes. The Center would utilize the new direct Washington-Moscow weather communications link as well as the existing international weather communications systems. Plans for the U.N.-sponsored World Weather System would include three World Meteorological Centers: one in Washington, another in Moscow, and a third at a presently undesignated location in the Southern Hemisphere. (Commerce Dept. Release G 64-184)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted by former U.S. Senator William H. Benton (now U.S. representative to UNESCO in Paris) as saying: “If you wish, I can show you photos of military bases taken from outer space. I will show them to President Johnson if he wishes.” Mr. Benton said Premier Khrushchev suggested that U.S. could maintain adequate inspection of Cuba with satellites and therefore should discontinue its aerial reconnaissance flights over the island. (Middleton, NYT, 5/30/ 64,D
dod announced it was abandoning plans to join with ComSatCorp in a space communications system meeting both military and commercial needs. Despite the economies of participation, the factor of international participation in the satellite system and the control foreign nations would have over a communications network that dod wanted for emergency command control over its forces finally tipped the balance against dod cooperation. (Finney, NYT, 7/14/64,15)
Rep. E. Ross Adair (R.-Ind.) said on House floor that a fifth transatlantic communications cable (TAT) would be unnecessary: “It is expected that within the next 6 weeks the . . . [ComSatCorp] will announce its plans for financing a communications satellite system and will tell Congress and potential investors when it expects to have a system in operation. I understand that CSC expects to design its first satellites to handle traffic between the United States and Europe. “. . . based on information filed with the fcc by the International Carriers having an interest in these matters ... I am convinced that there is no need for tat 5. If permission is granted to lay tat 5 it would add at least 128 channels of capacity . . and this would mean that there would be no economic justification for orbiting a satellite system in the immediate future . . .” He recommended adopting Mackay Radio’s proposal to change the route planned for TAT 4: “. . . this route would not only make it possible to establish intermediate relay and terminal facilities in the Azores, but also to provide for extension to Spain and Portugal and even down to the Canary Islands. “The U.S. military might well prefer cable links to the Azores and this route could also serve the interests of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, both in Spain and the Canary Islands, where NASA tracking stations are either in being or being constructed. . . .” (CR, 2/6/64, 2220)
U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of two satellites, electron i and electron II, with a single launch vehicle. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellites were studying “the internal and external radiation belts of the earth and physical phenomena connected with them.” electron I was orbiting at 7,100-km. (4,412-mi.) apogee; 406-km. (252mi.) perigee; 2-hr., 49-min. period; and 61° inclination; electron ii was orbiting at 68,200-km. (42,379-mi.) apogee; 460-km. (286-mi.) perigee; 22-hr., 40-min. period; and 61° inclination. (Tass; Wash. Post, 1/31/64, A14)	_	_
First meeting of Joint Navigation Satellite Committee, composed of representatives from NASA, FAA, and Departments of Commerce, Defense, Interior, and Treasury. Committee would evaluate requirements for improved navigation, traffic control, and search-rescue services, then determine whether navsat system could meet these requirements and at what costs, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 64-253)
Sidney J. Dagle, 29, Ball Brothers technician, died of injuries caused by ignition of X—248 rocket motor three days earlier at Cape Kennedy. This was the first death among the 11 injured personnel. Next day, John W. Fassett, 30, succumbed to bums sustained in the accident. An engineer in GSFC Field Projects Branch, Fassett was the only NASA employee among the 11; the others were employees of Douglas (booster contractor) and Ball Brothers (Oso satellite contractor). One other man remained in critical condition. (AP, NYT, 4/18/64, 12; upi, NYT, 4/19/64, 80; Goddard News, 4/20/64, 3 ; gsfc pio, 5/13/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of GE Command Systems Div. to negotiate contract for additional spacecraft tracking system for Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station at Fairbanks, Alaska. The new system, known as Goddard Range and Range Rate System because it was originally developed by gsfc engineers, was designed to provide improved tracking data for space probes, satellites, and launch vehicles traveling in elliptical or synchronous orbits. Two previously completed systems installed at Rosman, N.C., and Carnarvon, Australia, had proved highly successful in tracking EXPLORER XVIII (imp) . (gsfc Release G-21-64)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket from Vandenberg AFB with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, NYT, 10/7/64, 19; HHN—48 )
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) submitted in Congressional Record “An Accounting of Stewardship 1961—1964,” which included summary of U.S. accomplishments in space: “Since 1961 the United States has pressed vigorously forward with a 10-year, $35-billion national space program for clear leadership in space exploration, space use, and all important aspects of space science and technology. “Already this program has enabled the United States to challenge the early Soviet challenge in space booster power and to effectively counter the Soviet bid for recognition as the world’s leading nation in science and technology. . . .” Among the achievements listed: Saturn I rocket’s successful flight; Saturn IB and V development; mastery of liquid hydrogen as rocket fuel; six manned Mercury space flights; Gemini spacecraft and Titaq II launch vehicle test-flight; Apollo spacecraft development; first close-up observations of another planet (Venus) with mariner ii and pictures of the moon with RANGER vu; orbiting observatory program initiation; Tiros weather satellite operation; and ComSatCorp establishment. “In short, the United States has matched rapid progress in manned space flight with a balanced program for scientific investigations in space, practical uses of space, and advanced research and technological pioneering to assure that the new challenges of space in the next decade can also be met, and U.S. leadership maintained.” (CR, 9/15/64, 21498)
Appointment of David S. Johnson as Director of National Weather Satellite Center, effective April 1, was announced by Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau Dr. Robert M. White. Mr. Johnson succeeded Dr. S. Fred Singer, resigning to become Dean of new School of Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Univ. of Miami. Deputy Director of the Center since its formation in 1962, Mr. Johnson had been engaged in research, development, and technical management of meteorological satellites and sounding rockets since 1958. (Commerce Release WB 64-6)
NASA launched explorer xxii (be-b) beacon-explorer satellite with four-stage Scout launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Orbital data: 669-mi. apogee, 549-mi. perigee, 104.7-min. period, and 80° inclination to the equator, explorer xxii was last of five satellites in first phase of NASA’s ionosphere exploration and first of five satellites in nasa’s geodetic satellite series. Ionosphere experiment involved satellite’s transmitting radio signals down through the ionosphere. Ground stations around the world acquiring the signals measured electron distribution by the Doppler shift method and the Faraday rotation method. The international scientific effort with explorer xxii was the most extensive ever for a U.S. space project. Network of more than 80 ground stations was being operated by some 50 scientific groups in 32 countries. Geodetic experiment involved laser beams sent from NASA Wallops Station to the satellite, on which were mounted 360 one-inch “cube-corner” reflectors to return the light. In addition a small supporting experiment, electrostatic probe, measured electron density and temperature in immediate vicinity of the satellite, (nasa Release 64-237; NASA News Conf. Transcript)
A report in the Journal of the Armed Forces noted that during FY 1964 199 new objects were placed in orbit, norad Space Detection and Tracking Center (spadats), which tracked the objects, reported that as of the end of FY 1964 there were 438 items in orbit. The items included not only satellites and probes, but also “junk” items such as upper stages of rocket boosters. As of the date of this report there were 101 satellites or probes in space. The U.S. had been responsible for 89 of them, the U.S.S.R. for 9, the U.K. for 2, and Canada for 1. Of the 199 objects launched in FY 1964, 122 were pieces of debris, and the other 77 were payloads. 58 were U.S., 18 were U.S.S.R., and 1 was from U.K. (J/Armed Forces, 7/18/64, 8)
The U.S. and the U.S.S.R. reached further agreement during negotiations conducted in Geneva on cooperative efforts in space research. A joint weather satellite program would go into operation by the end of this year. The weather program would consist of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. launching meteorological satellites on a coordinated basis with the data being exchanged via a special telegraphic link between Moscow and Washington. In addition, preliminary agreement was reached for extension of scientific cooperation in space matters to cover biology and medicine. Although details of this agreement were not available, it was reported to cover a wide exchange of information on the biological and medical problems raised by prolonged manned space flights. The negotiations were conducted by Dr. Hugh Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, and A. A. Blagonravov, a member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences; both agreements were subject to the formal approval of their governments. (Wash. Post, 6/6/64; NYT, 6/6/64; upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/6/64)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xxvm. Initial orbital data: apogee, 395 km. (245 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (130 mi.); period, 90.38 min.; and inclination, 65° to the equator. Scientific equipment onboard the satellite was “intended for the further exploration of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass March 16, 1962.” In addition, the satellite contained radio transmitter and telemetering system. All instrumentation was functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/5/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
NASA launched explorer xx scientific satellite into orbit from Western Test Range, Calif., using Scout booster rocket. Initial orbit: 625-mi. apogee, 540-mi. perigee, 104-min. period, and 80° inclination to the equator. The ionosphere Explorer satellite, nicknamed “Topsi,” immediately began mapping the ionosphere and sending data back to earth. The findings of this satellite would be compared with those obtained by alouette, the Canadian-developed “topside sounder.” (NASA Release 64-207; Wash. Post, 8/26/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 8/26/64; Av. Wk., 8/31/64,25)
ARIEL ii (UK—C) scientific earth satellite, the second in series of three U.S.—U.K. satellites, was orbited by NASA Scout booster launched from Wallops Island, Va. Initial orbital data: 843-mi. apogee, 180-mi. perigee, 101-min. period, and 52° inclination to the equator. Under overall administrative responsibility of the British Office of the Minister for Science, the three onboard experiments were designed and built by the U.K. to measure vertical distribution of ozone in the upper atmosphere, measure galactic Tadio noise, and detect micrometeoroids encountered by the satellite. The experiments were chosen by the British National Committee on Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey, in consultation with NASA. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and tested the spacecraft and contracted with Westinghouse Electric Corp. for subsystems. (Wallops Release 64-30; NASA Release 64-56)
British Labor party leader Harold Wilson said Soviet voskhod i spacecraft was forerunner of missile-launching satellites that would make Polaris missile obsolete. Such space-based weapons, he said, “would mean that the all-American deterrent on which Sir Alec Douglas-Home bases his defense argument will soon be made obsolete by space missile development.” British election was three days away. (Cul'hane, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64)
U.S.S.R. launched COSMOS xlv into orbit, carrying scientific equipment to continue the space research program begun in March 1962. Initial parameters reported for the satellite’s orbits: apogee, 327 km. (203.067 mi.); perigee, 206 km. (127.926 mi.); period, 89.69 min.; inclination, 64°54'. (AP, NYT, 9/14/64; FonF, XXIV, 313)
Eight Tiros meteorological satellites had taken more than 350,000 photographs from altitudes above 400 mi. The spectacularly successful weather-forecasting satellites did not live up to the one-time charge of “spying,” for of all the pictures, only two showed any indication of existence of intelligent life on earth—and both of these pictures required corroborative knowledge to identify them, (upi, Phil. Sun. Bull., 5/17/64)
NASA announced that further analysis of results of the first experiments to use the laser beam for satellite tracking indicated that scientists had accomplished precision tracking of a satellite with a laser device. Tests were conducted on 10 passes of the explorer xxii satellite since the first success on Oct. 11. (NASA Release 64-285)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., space editor of Journal of the Armed Forces, discussed the Agena rocket stage, calling it “a highly reliable, extremely versatile piece of hardware which serves triple duty as an orbital injection vehicle for satellites, as an upper stage booster for lunar and planetary probes, and as a spacecraft. From the standpoint of frequency of usage, Agena is far ahead of the field. In the seven years since Sputnik I went up, there have been about 290 spacecraft sent into earth orbit or deep space trajectory; Agena, in various versions, has been in on 142 of them—almost half. It is currently being employed at the rate of about 30 shoots a year and it will figure in some very important upcoming projects. . . Haggerty described Agena contributions, notably its remarkable accuracy in sending ranger vii on its course to the moon. (J/Armed Forces, 10/3/64, 8)
usia communications exhibition to be shown in U.S.S.R. this summer was previewed by Government, industry, and press representatives in New York. Exhibition covered U.S. communications in space satellites, TV and radio, telephone, and business and industry. The space portion featured models of nine satellites and live TV images of visitors bounced off working model of Telstar satellite. (Shanley, NYT, 4/19/64, 47)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed banquet of Aviation/Space Writers’ Association in Miami. Discussing possible hazards to Apollo astronauts, he said that based on data from explorer xvi satellite it was “not anticipated at this time that meteoroids will constitute a major problem in the planning or scheduling of the first manned lunar exploration.” Radiation did not present a hazard either: “. . . In the case of solar flares, we compared the allowable safe dose with what would have been produced within the Apollo command module by the worst flares on record, that of July 1959. If an Apollo spacecraft had been in flight on a lunar mission at this time, the astronauts would have received only 15 percent of the safe dose, calculated on the basis of a report by a group established by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences. . . . “Very recently there have been suggestions that space flight—even relatively short duration flight—is harmful to man. There is no evidence from Project Mercury to support these fears. Based on our experience in Mercury, which included a flight of 34 hours by Gordon Cooper, there is no reason to believe that flights of two weeks or less will be harmful. . . .” Dr. Mueller then outlined nine medical experiments to be conducted during the two-man orbital space flights of Project Gemini. (Text; NASA Release 64^128)
nasa announced it had completed its experimental research and development program with syncom II and SYNCOM III and would transfer operation of the synchronous satellites to dqd, starting Jan. 1, 1965. The transfer would be completed Mar. 31, 1965. dqd would operate the satellites for the remainder of their useful lifetimes and would provide NASA with any significant telemetry and ranging data. Communications ground stations used to relay transmissions via the two Syncoms had been furnished by dod for the past two years, (nasa Release 65-5; dod Release 1/4/65)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists would evaluate two H—10 atomic hydrogen maser clocks for possible use in high-precision satellite tracking as well as experiments testing Einstein’s prediction of the effect of gravity on time. The clocks were developed by the Quantum Electronic Devices activity of Varian Associates and would use the natural oscillation resulting from the interaction of the proton and the electron in the hydrogen atom. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
cosmos xxvi scientific earth satellite was launched into orbit. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite’s initial orbital parameters were: apogee, 403 km. (250 mi.); perigee, 271 km. (168 mi.); period, 91 min.; angle of inclination to the equatorial plane, 49°. Onboard scientific equipment, radio system, and instrumentation were said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/19/64, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
Party of scientists led by Nikolai Yerpylev, scientific secretary of Soviet Academy of Sciences, left Moscow for Cuba to “start the preliminary stage of the work” to establish Soviet satellite observation station on the island. Tass said equipment for the station already had been sent to Cuba, (upi, NYT, 2/27/64,12)
Tass reported Soviet Union had launched COSMOS XXXII, latest satellite in series of launches initiated in March 1962. Initial orbit: 333-km. apogee (206.9 mi.), 209-km. perigee (130.5 mi.), 89.78-min. period, and 51.28° inclination to the equator, cosmos XXXII re-entered earth’s atmosphere June 18.	(Pravda, 6/11/64, in msfc SIN, 7/64; GSFC SSR, 6/30/64)
dod issued rebuttal to report issued the day before by Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee criticizing dod plans for a military communications satellite system. dod said: “The Defense Department is being operated to provide the highest degree of combat readiness at the lowest possible cost. This policy is being followed in the development of communications satellites. As a result, the defense establishment will have a better satellite communications capability than originally foreseen at anticipated savings of $75-100 millions.” (Finney, NYT, 10/10/64,1,14)
U.S.S.R. orbited cosmos xxv scientific earth satellite from unidentified site in Soviet Union. Initial orbital data, according to Tass: 526-km. (320.6-mi.) apogee, 272-km. (169-mi.) perigee, 92.27-min. period, and 49° angle of inclination to equator. Scientific equipment and communication systems onboard the satellite were said to be functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/28/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
NASA launched Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with 90-lb. payload containing instrumentation to measure low-level cosmic radio noise. The experiment was timed to coincide with passage of explorer xx (fixed frequency topside sounder satellite), which also was being used to investigate cosmic noise source at wavelengths which do not penetrate to earth because of shielding effect of ionosphere. The Javelin was sent up through the region of the satellite about 15 min. after explorer xx had passed through the area at about 650-mi. altitude. During the flight 18 min. of scientific data were telemetered from rocket payload, which reached 660-mi. altitude before impacting in the ocean 650 mi. from launch site. Preliminary analysis indicated flight results were good. (Wallops Release 64-77) October 23: Gemini Titan GT—2 spacecraft was mated with the Titan II launch vehicle at Launch Complex 19, Cape Kennedy, preparatory to unmanned ballistic flight later this year, (msc Roundup, 10/28/64, 3)
Wolfgang Cartellieri, West Germany Research Ministry state secretary, announced that preparations had begun for a space satellite program involving small research and telecommunications satellites, (upi, NYT, 11/15/64,56)
SAN MARCO i (SM-1) was orbited from NASA Wallops Station. The NASA-trained Italian crew launched the 254-lb. Italian-designed satellite on a four-stage solid-propellant Scout to an orbit with an apogee of 490.04 mi., a perigee of 124.62 mi., an orbital period of 94.7 min., and an inclination of 37.77°. It was the first time a foreign country had designed, built, and launched a satellite in orbit in the course of nasa’s international program. The satellite would measure air density and ionospheric characteristics related to long-range radio transmissions and would qualify satellite and train crew for subsequent launches from sea platform in Indian Ocean. (Wallops Release 64-91)
Beginning of cable circuit connecting New York and Offenbach, West Germany, announced by Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau, for exchange of meteorological information between North America and Europe. Inauguration of cable circuit, expected to yield improved reception of weather data because of freedom from radio propagation occurring on radioteletypewriter circuit, represented major achievement in global exchange of weather information. International meteorological community now was planning for future exchanges using highspeed computers and communications satellites. (Commerce Dept. Release WB 64-1)
Italy’s largest private monitoring center said it had recorded radio signals indicating a new Soviet space launch. It speculated that the Russians might have placed a satellite in parking orbit around the earth as a base for a Mars launch. {Phil. Inq., 11/7/64)
Soviet news agency Tass said electron i and electron ii scientific satellites continued to function successfully. By 6:00 p.m. Moscow time Feb. 11, electron I had completed 104 orbits and electron ii more than 13 orbits. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/12/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
syncom ill might be in position to relay television pictures from Japan as soon as the first week in September, NASA said. The satellite was drifting eastward on the equator at rate of about 483 miles per day. (AP, Balt Sun, 8/25/64)
Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted to recommend Senate ratification of radio communications treaty, drawn up at 70-nation conference in Geneva last fall. Considered a step toward establishment of global communications satellite network, treaty revised radio regulations, provided for international allocation of radio frequencies for communications, navigational, and meteorological satellites. (AP, NYT, 2/19/64 ,15)
Nicolai P. Erpilev, scientific secretary of the Astronomical Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, announced in Havana that the first Soviet satellite tracking station in Cuba would be installed in Havana in a special observatory and another one would probably be established later at Santa Clara. {NYT, 3/31/64,26) 766-698 O—65—■—9
usaf Atlas-Agena D satellite booster combination was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified payload. It was later disclosed that three satellites were orbited. (AP, NYT, 10/24/64; hhn—48)
Communications Satellite Corp., authorized two years ago by law as a private corporation to establish a global commercial comsat system, was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Incorporated Feb. 1,1963, ComSatCorp had offered 10 million shares at $20 each, five million to communications common carriers and five million to the general public. (ComSatCorp Release)
Capt Robert E. Jasperson (usn, Ret.) recently received patent for invention of “satellite alert,” a hand-held computer for informing ships’ officers when to expect radio reports from navigation satellites and meteorologists when to expect readings from weather satellites. (Jones, NYT, 5/23/64)
Japanese Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications conducted its first TV test with syncom ni communications satellite from ground station at Kashima, receiving return picture with satisfactory resolution. Purpose of test was to investigate parameters of the Station. Transmission tests to Pt. Mugu, Calif., via the comsat were planned for early October. (Av. Wk., 9/21/64,30)
nasa announced selection of the name “Pegasus” for its micrometeoroid detection satellite, to be launched into orbit with Saturn I rocket booster. Named for the winged horse of ancient mythology, the satellite has a wing-like panel 96-ft. long and 14-ft. wide which would record and transmit the penetrations of meteoroids, (nasa Release 64-203)
Third international working conference on satellite communications ended in London after three days of consultation between delegates of U.S., U.K., Canada, Australia, Japan, and European nations. Next conference would be held in Washington in July. (NYT, 6/22/64, 45)
France and Spain signed an agreement to set up a joint satellite tracking station in the jSpanish-owned Canary Islands, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/5/64)
Oran W. Nicks, Director of NASA Lunar and Planetary Programs, presented history and status of the Ranger project to the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, detailing in particular the recommendations of NASA Board of Inquiry (Kelley Board) prior to RANGER VI and the Hilbum Board following RANGER VI. Hilbum report outlined: (1) design changes effected after analyses of RANGER VI flight data; (2) changes agreed to be desirable “if properly evaluated and qualified”; and (3) board recommendations “not entirely resolved by OSSA and JPL.” Notable change in the first category: NASA would closely monitor Ranger test program at JPL, would have to concur in spacecraft’s flightworthiness before it could be shipped. (Testimony) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster combination from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/28/64)
First two-way telephone call between U.S. and Japan via a communications satellite was conducted by personnel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., and Radio Research Laboratory Station, Ka-shima, Japan, using relay II satellite in orbit about 4,000 mi. above the Pacific Ocean. (NASA Release 64-122)
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Arthur Sylvester denied statement made yesterday by Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph Charyk that DOD had demanded, at the last minute, unmeetable conditions for military-civilian comsat cooperation. Sylvester said: “The Department of Defense stated at the outset of negotiations that it would require assurance that the international agreement be so drafted as to protect the technical and security requirements of the national communications system.” (AP, NYT, 8/13/64,17)
At Cape Kennedy press conference following Saturn I SA—5 launch, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans stated, “There is little question that it took us ahead of the Russians in our capability.” He noted that payload equivalent of SA-5’s orbiting body was between 19,000	and 20,000 lbs., far exceeding the 14,292 lbs. reported for heaviest Soviet satellites.. {M&R, 2/3/64,18)
The U.S.S.R. launched another earth satellite, cosmos xxxvi. The initial orbital parameters were as follows: period, 91.9 min.; apogee, 503 km. (300 mi.); perigee, 259 km. (155 mi.); inclination, 49°. {Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/31/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.) 768-598 O—65---18
U.S. and Japanese meteorologists ended week-long conference in Miami where they formulated informal recommendations for increased international cooperation in problems of hurricanes and typhoons. Satellites and rockets were expected to play key role in the program, administered by Japanese Research Council and the National Science Foundation. (M&R, 3/23/64, 8)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from PMR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later disclosed that five satellites were orbited with the single booster. (HHN—48)
Fee ruled AT&T must confine its use of channels in undersea cables to voice and related service, and leave the services of non-voice and combined voice/non-voice to smaller message companies. Although the decision applied to undersea cables, there was speculation that it could affect future commercial communications satellites. As one Fee aide said, “The rationale of the decision would seem to extend to any type of facility.” (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/20/64)
A Commerce Dept, reprint of a Russian scientific article indicated that Soviet satellite cosmos V had detected and reported a high altitude explosion of U.S. nuclear weapon over Johnston Island in the Pacific on July 9, 1962. (NYT, 11/20/64)
Soviet Academy of Sciences announced Soviet ground stations were tracking echo ii passive communications satellite, in first joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. space experiment. Academician A. A. Blagonravov said Soviet ground stations observed the 135-ft. balloon as it inflated in space and three observatories succeeded in photographing the satellite. Observation stations reported the satellite appeared very bright, varying from magnitude-1 to zero. “Observers in Arkhangelsk report that two additional objects are moving in front of and slightly faster than the satellite proper, and a third object is moving behind it. The results of the first observations are being forwarded to the U.S. The optical stations will continue tracking the echo n. The radio communications experiment is slated to begin somewhat later.” (NYT, 1/27/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/27/64; Izvestia, 1/28/64,6, atss-tTrans.)
Performance of its two nuclear-test detection satellites has been excellent in all respects, dod announced. The two satellites, launched more than two months ago for ARPA by USAF, were performing almost perfectly, and their reliability has been excellent, dod anticipated the satellites would provide data on background radiation and other measurements in space for useful lifetime of more than six months. Success of this initial detection effort “has moved the research program forward by more than one year,” dod said, (dod Release 30-64)
Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director of ComSat Systems, Aerospace Corp., before Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations, was first witness to speak out against military usage of commercial comsat system. Speaking both for himself and for Aerospace Corp., Pritchard said military requirements would be so different from commercial requirements that either the national security would be sacrificed or ComSatCorp would have to charge such high rates that there would be no savings to the Government. He proposed alternative system based on simple spin-stabilized satellite, capable of growth and expansion to accommodate increased needs of military satellite communications. (Av. Wk., 3/30/64, 15; SBD, 3/27/64,479)
The U.S. Weather Bureau reported that a hurricane having winds of 75 mph had been located by tiros VII satellite 1,000 mi. southwest of San Diego. (San Diego Union, 7/18/64; U.S. Weather Bureau)
relay i communications satellite continued operating normally and the one-year onboard timer had not cut off as of this date. ( gsfc Historian)
U.S.S.R. launched earth satellite cosmos xxxi. The orbit had the following initial parameters: period of rotation, 91.6 min.; apogee, 508 km. (309 mi.); perigee, 228 km. (141.67 mi.); inclination to equator, 49°. (Izvestia, 6/7/64:, 1, atss-t Trans.)
At press conference, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials said nimbus I meteorological satellite was performing successfully and sending back cloud cover photographs of unexpectedly good quality. First nighttime pictures of cloud cover, made with the satellite’s infrared sensor, were comparable in quality and resolution to the TV pictures made by Tiros meteorological satellites. Unplanned orbit—eccentric rather than circular—reduced the satellite’s earth coverage from 100% every 24 hours to about 70%. (gsfc Press Conf. Transcript; Finney, NYT, 9/3/64,13)
USAF announced launch of Thor-Agena D booster combination with unidentified satellite payload, from Vandenberg afb. (upi, NYT, 11/3/64, 53; hhn-48)
Among persons listed by Aviation Week and Space Technology for significant contributions to the progress of aerospace in the U.S. during 1964 were: Harold Finger and Milton Klein, manager and deputy respectively of the joint AEC—NASA Nuclear Space Propulsion Office for “pushing the Rover program through four successful tests of a nuclear rocket reactor using liquid hydrogen and demonstrating the technical feasibility of nuclear propulsion for manned interplanetary flights of the future.” Harris “Bud” Schurmeier, Ranger program director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and his technical team for “their tremendous technical success with the Ranger 7 that produced the first detailed photographs of the lunar surface.” Paul F. Bikle, Director of NASA Edwards Flight Research Center, and pilots Milton Thompson and Jack Mackay of NASA and Maj. Robert Rushworth and Capt. Joe Engle of USAF for “their continued operation of the North American X-15 research aircraft into a wide variety of unexplored areas both in performance and equipment testing.” John Mengel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for “direction of the global NASA tracking and data acquisition network which produced an average of 50 mi. of taped data per day from payloads in space.” Col. Harold W. Robbins, usaf Space Systems Div., for “technical direction and support of the large solid rocket program that culminated this year in the successful demonstrations of 156-in.-dia. motors and the initiation of a 260-in.-dia. program.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 9) December 28-30: Dr. John H. Wolfe of NASA Ames Research Center suggested the probable source of Van Allen belt radiation at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Seattle. Dr. Wolfe said the Van Allen radiation belts probably had their source in the cometlike tail of the magnetosphere extending from the dark side of earth away from the sun. Spiraling protons and alpha particles emitted by the sun were shielded from solar wind in this area. Affected only by the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of force and conveyed to the Van Allen belts. New data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instruments aboard explorer xxi imp-b (Interplanetary Monitoring Platform) and ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) led to this conclusion. Data collected from as far into space as 96,000 mi. revealed that interaction of the solar wind and the geomagnetic field around the sunlit side of earth created a boundary region 2^ earth diameters thick at a distance of five earth diameters from the point on earth closest to the sun. This expanded to six diameters thick 90° around earth. Hydromagnetic effects in this boundary deflected solar radiation around earth and prevented it from penetrating directly to the relatively low altitudes of the Van Allen belts except during the more energetic solar storms. Satellite data also indicated that the comet-like tail of earth extended directly along the line from the sun through earth, rather than being slightly deflected as had been believed. Wolfe said the tail seemed less tapered and more nearly cylindrical than had been expected, and extended at least as far as the orbit of the moon, (arc Release 65-2; AP, Detroit News, 1/8/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
Water-cooled space suit, employing plastic tubing sewn into long underwear, was in research and development at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Begun by Royal Aircraft Establishment in 1962, suit was undertaken by MSC in 1963 when Dr. John Billingham left RAE to join msc. Dr. Billingham said, “In operation and in theory the suit looks acceptable. But we must test it much more for reliability.” (M&R, 6/22/64, 28) During June: Detailed report on global satellite weather prediction system, “Swami” (Stanford Worldwide Acquisition of Meteorological Information), was completed by 31-man team of Stanford Univ. students. Three 1,200-mi. circular polar orbit satellites orbiting 120° apart would receive meteorological data from global network of weather balloons, transmit the stored information after each two-hour orbit to a single ground command station. (M&R, 6/22/64,25)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., in successful flight to collect solar spectral data in the x-ray and ultraviolet regions, to test adaptation of solar spectrometer designed for Oso-C satellite, and to measure ionospheric electron density. Rocket reached 117.5-mi..altitude and data were collected in all experiments during the flight, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Delegates from U.S., Canada, Australia, and Japan met with the European Conference on Satellite Communications—a body representing 15 European nations—to further negotiate formation of a world-wide communications satellite system. Francis Trew, secretary of the European Conference, said at the London meeting he was hopeful an agreement “would be ready for ratification in the ‘near future.’ ” (Farnsworth, NYT, 5/26/64,11)
In an Astronautics and Aeronautics editorial, Burton I. Edelson, Chairman of the aiaa Communications Committee, said: “In applying earth satellites to practical tasks, we have long passed the stage of demonstration. Now as we approach the stage of extensive operations, we face another major challenge in what industry terms a ‘market survey.’ We must be alert to the possibility of entirely new markets which evolve once an initial experiment demonstrates capability. The professional community can and should make major contributions to the prompt exploitation of its brain-childs.” (A&A, 12/64, 13)
Two U.S. commercial airline pilots reported seeing unidentified object explode in a “spectacular flash” as it entered earth’s atmosphere over the Atlantic Ocean, about 200 mi. west of Land’s End, England. Press sources reported speculation that explosion was part of jettisoned rocket used the previous day in Soviet launch of Cosmos satellite, (upi, NYT, 3/20/64, 2)
General B. A. Schriever, afsc Commander, announced organization for National Range Division (nrd), commanded by Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis. Air Force Missile Test Center, Patrick afb, Fla., was redesignated Air Force Eastern Test Range (etr), and Air Force Space Test Center (Provisional) at Vandenberg afb was redesignated the Air Force Western Test Range (wtr). Both ranges would be assigned to nrd. General Davis also was assigned responsibility for Satellite Control Facility (scf), Sunnyvale, Calif., which has operated dod R&d satellite tracking and control facilities. With Hq. at Andrews afb, General Davis would function as both NRD Commander and afsc Deputy Commander for Global Range, (afsc Release 45-R-50)
A committee had been set up by Prime Minister Harold Wilson to review Britain’s future in space, it was announced. The committee would examine the merits of a national satellite-launcher program based on the Black Knight rocket as well as Britain’s commitment to the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) which would hope to start launching satellites two or three years from now. The space committee’s report would be expected in February. (MacLeod, CSM, 12/9/64)
Communications Satellite Corp. stock reached $48, highest price since it went public June 2 at $20. (Hammer, NYT, 8/20/64, 37)
USAF launched Atlas-Agena D booster combination from Point Arguello, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload. (AP, Houston Post, 4/24/64; M&R, 5/4/64, 8)	_
Communications Satellite Corp. said dod’s last-minute demands on ComSatCorp to change the terms of the international comsat agreement were the reason why DOD-ComSatCorp negotiations fell through. ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk said DOD had insisted on changes which would have barred foreign members from any voice in letting contracts to build the military portion of the network, dod’s demands were presented in July, shortly before the conference that created the new consortium and after all technical details of the proposed military-commercial sharing plan had been agreed upon in June. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/12/64)
Reported that John Stack of Republic Aviation believed U.S.S.R. probably would beat the West with supersonic transport. Stack revealed Soviets had developed 1,200-mph delta-wing bomber, “the Bounder,” which could quickly be converted into transport “because the Soviets have lower performance standards than the U.S. for their aircraft and are not worried about the effects of sonic booms on their cities.” (Parade, 5/31/64) During May: Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., recommended to NASA that a data collection satellite system could be provided by a single satellite in polar orbit between 500 and 700 n. mi. altitudes. Satellite would collect meteorological and oceanographic data from about 1,200 sensors per day, store the information on magnetic tape, then relay it upon command to ground station. Sylvania’s study was performed under $97,000 contract awarded last year by NASA. (M&R, 6/1/64, 11; SBD, 5/13/64, 68) . During May: Sert I (space electric rocket test) payload began final series of tests in large vacuum tank at NASA Lewis Research Center, in preparation for space flight later this summer. (Lewis News, 6/5/64, 2)
SYNCOM in was positioned into near-perfect stationary orbit over the Pacific Ocean. Final corrective maneuvers were completed, and the communications satellite appeared to hang motionless in space above the equator and International Date Line, where it could transmit radio and television signals between Japan and California. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/13/64)	_
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. ( hhn-4 8)
Speaking at Georgetown Univ.’s 175th anniversary convocation, President Johnson said: “For almost the first time the interdependence of nations is not a remote goal or a ringing slogan. It is a fact which we neglect at our peril. “Communications satellites, atomic rockets and jet transports have made distant capitals into close neighbors. Our challenge is to transform this reality into an instrument for the freedom of man. “Today the cost of failure to communicate is not silence or serenity but destruction and dissolution.” (Text, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/3/64)
Managing underwriters of ComSatCorp’s 10-million-share public offering at $20 a share announced the offering was oversubscribed and the books closed. Thus ComSatCorp had enough money to launch the fleet of satellites that was expected to be handling global communications by 1967. (WSJ, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/12/64,47)
NASA announced agreement had been reached by Malagasy Republic and U.S. on the relocation and expansion of NASA tracking station on Madagascar. Previously located at Majunga, the station was being relocated near Tananarive and expanded to include instrumentation for Project Gemini monitoring and communicating and for scientific satellite tracking and recording data. (NASA Release 64-222)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
National Weather Satellite Center was seeking sources for services and material for advanced development models of water-borne automatic unmanned weather stations by January 14,1965. Companies with mooring and static meteorology sensor technology and design capabilities were being sought. (M&R, 12/21/64,8)
usaf Electronic Systems Division announced award of $1,350,000 fixedprice contract to Space-General Corp. for design, fabrication, and testing of satellite payloads, (dod Release 849-64)
Addressing National Space Club in Washington, arpa Director Dr. R. L. Sproull said the nuclear detection satellites orbited last month were operating “without a hitch.” He described the satellites as “experimental”, said they were being used “to determine the most appropriate sensors and the most attractive modes of processing information from them.” He said the success of first launch (October 1963) enabled arpa to revise the program with fewer launches. The satellites were still operating “excellently” and providing information on radiation. (SBD, 8/19/64, 246; NSC Release).
Joint Navigation Satellite Committee (jnsc) established by agreement between Depts. of Treasury, Defense, Interior, Commerce; faa; and NASA, jnsc would evaluate requirements for a nonmilitary satellite system for air-sea navigation, traffic control, emergency and rescue operations, and related functions. If jnsc found navsat system to be the most advantageous means of providing these services, it would recommend appropriate program to develop the satellite system. (Agreement; nmi 2-3-39)
Harlan Cleveland, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, addressed the Conference of U.S. National Organizations of the U.N.: “The technological imperative—the impulse to build worldwide technical agencies—comes of course from the headlong pace of scientific discovery. A world technical community is in the making because international communications, international transport, and international economics demand international organizations—and because you can’t deal with world health or world weather or radio frequencies and a lot of other things except on a world basis. . . . “Taken together, three new kinds of technology—weather satellites, communications satellites, and computer technology—now make it technically possible to work out a global weather reporting and forecasting system, a prospect too valuable to all nations to leave unexploited. The United States is now engaged in a very large program of research and development in this field that will involve the cooperation of more than 100 other countries. This, together with what other countries are doing, will fit into an overall plan for a World Weather Watch being worked out by the World Meteorological Organization, a specialized agency of the U.N.	_	_ “In just 2 years our first Tiros satellites discovered 20 hurricanes, typhoons, and tropical storms and observed the behavior of 62 others. And world data centers to process these and other reports and issue warnings have been established in Washington and Moscow....” (Text, CR,3/18/64,5462-64)
First intercontinental communications tests conducted with relay ii communications satellite were successful; nasa officials described the satellite’s performance as “excellent.” The tests were conducted between ground stations at Nutley, N.J., and Raisting, West Germany, consisted of voice transmissions and radio signals. (AP, NYT, 1/23/64, 7)	_
The first of three giant Pegasus satellites arrived at NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn I space vehicle (SA—9) would launch the 3,200-lb. satellite into an orbit visible from earth and ranging from about 310- to 465-mi. altitude, sometime in the first quarter of 1965. Primary mission of the Pegasus satellites would be to use its 2,000 sq. ft. of capacitator panels to measure, record, and transmit back to earth data on the frequency, size, direction, and speed of meteoroids in nearearth space. This information would be important to development of manned and unmanned spacecraft, (ksc Release 227-64)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite aboard an Atlas-Agena D booster from Point Arguello, Calif. (AP, 5/19/64)
Communications Satellite Corp. stock had more than doubled in price since heing issued to the public in June and was continuing to rise. Michael Getler, in analysis of the situation, attributed rapid price rise to “basically an amazing scarcity of shares for daily grading—in combination with some rather short-sighted short-selling of the issue based in large measure on early, perhaps overly pessimistic, views of its likely performance. . . .” He quoted security consultant George P. Edgar: “ "The instinct of the public, in this case, has operated better than that of Wall Street. For the most part, professionals have missed ComSat and the public took the ball and ran.’ . . .” (Getler, M&R, 9/14/64, 18)
tiros vii completed one year in orbit with all components working as well as the day it was launched. During the past year, the satellite transmitted about 70,000 pictures to earth, 90 per cent of them usable, and spotted 16 hurricanes and typhoons, (nasa Release 64-144)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, appearing before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, reported on NASA’s activities in international cooperation during 1963: “Six new international satellites, to be built and financed by three other nations, were programmed as contributions to the NASA scientific satellite effort over the next six years, bringing to ten the number of such cooperative satellite projects completed, in process, or agreed. . . . Seven foreign experiments were selected in competition with domestic proposals for flight principally on NASA observatory satellites during the next three years. . . . “Nineteen sounding rockets carrying scientific payloads were launched here or abroad in joint projects with nine countries, raising to forty-six the total of such launchings to date. “New agreements were concluded with India and Pakistan under which both countries will j oin the UK and Australia in a year-long test of meteorological sounding rocket systems. ...” After listing NASA activities in the categories of international ground-based experiments and relationships with European agencies (eldo and esro) , Dr. Dryden discussed implementation of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. bilateral agreement for space cooperation: “. . . Correspondence has been maintained [with the Soviet Academy of Sciences], although the Soviet side has not met time schedules on most agreed action items. However, the Soviet Academy of Sciences has just conducted optical observations of the echo ii satellite during its early orbits and we were able to begin the telecommunications experiments with echo II between the Jodrell Bank Observatory in Great Britain and the U.S.S.R. on February 21. While we have not yet received detailed data of the optical observations and have still to evaluate the results of the telecommunications tests, which we have received, I think the real significance is that we are taking advantage of existing programs, approved and executed on their own merits, to provide an opportunity for scientists and engineers of both countries to gain experience in working together for their mutual benefit. This is obviously a pioneer venture and it has purposefully been designed as a coordinated rather than a joint effort. There is no provision for exchange of funds between the two countries, no exchange of equipment is involved and all exchanges of data are to be on a reciprocal basis and made available to all other interested countries. . . .” (Testimony)
Attempt to orbit NASA Explorer Beacon satellite (S-66) failed when third stage of Delta launch vehicle burned for only 22 sec. instead of normal 40. This was only the second Delta failure and followed 22 consecutive successes. The 120-lb. satellite was designed to transmit data on the ionosphere directly to worldwide network of ground stations. In addition to making major ionosphere studies, the satellite was to have served as test bed for two geodesic experiments—reflection of a laser beam directed from Wallops Island, Va., and transmission on two frequencies permitting ground stations to study Doppler method of satellite tracking and influence of ionosphere on Doppler tracking. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/20/64; Av. Wk., 2/23/64,25; nasa Release 64-60)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced two firms would negotiate to provide three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (stars) : Beckman Instruments, Inc., and Electro Mechanical Research, Inc. Negotiations with the two firms would lead to final selection of single contractor for 82.5-million award, (gsfc Release G—30-64)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., predicted that assignment of Manned Orbiting Laboratory to dod was “an ominous harbinger of a reversal in trend, an indication that the military services may play a more prominent role in future space exploration at nasa’s expense. . . . “mol is a starting point. Whether you label it development platform, satellite or laboratory, it is clearly intended as a beginning for space station technology. It is also clearly the intent of this Administration that, at least in the initial stages, space station development shall be under military rather than civil, cognizance. . . .” (A—N—AF J&R, 1/11/64, 10)
Leo D. Welch, Chairman of the Communications Satellite Corp., reported that Soviet officials had refused to answer a question as to whether they were developing their own system of communications by satellite. Welch said that the Soviets would say only that they were conducting experiments in the space technology. The questions were asked when the Soviets attended a meeting in Geneva in June at which they received a briefing on the formation of the 18-nation communications satellite network. (Wash. Post, 7/20/64)
Saturn I SA-6 satellite, consisting of boilerplate Apollo spacecraft and S-IV second stage of the Saturn I vehicle, re-entered earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated over the Western Pacific Ocean about 8:30 p.m. edt, during its 50th orbit of the earth, (nasa Release 64-130)
It was reported dod may coordinate a geodetic survey program combining Secor satellite, a planned Transit satellite, echo ii, and a planned Anna satellite. A ground station would correlate the flashing light of Anna, the optical system of Secor, and the doppler radar system of the Transit, using echo ii as a reference point. (SBD, 6/24/64)
Fourth anniversary of tiros I, first meteorological satellite, orbited with a Thor-Able booster from AMR. The spectacular accomplishments by the experimental tiros weather satellites were to develop into a global cloud-cover reporting system.
RELAY n communications satellite transmitted portions of Soviet-American championship hockey game of the 1964 Winter Olympics at Innsbruck, Austria, to the U.S., the first public demonstration of RELAY n. Transmission of the event was made via French ground station at Pleumeur-Bodou and U.S. ground station at Andover, Me. By this time numerous communications tests of the satellite had been made, and NASA scientists said that all communications experiments were of excellent quality. RELAY n also was sending back information on radiation collected by onboard instrumentation, (gsfc Historian; nasa Release 64-24)
usaf announced Atlas-Agena D launch from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with undisclosed satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/12/64)
usaf advanced development program to investigate laser’s intelligencegathering capabilities in space was reported. Called “Lariat” (Laser Radar Intelligence Acquisition Technology), program was outgrowth of three-year effort by afsc Aeronautical Systems Div. to develop satellite surveillance system at Cloudcroft, N. Mex. ( Av. Wk., 5/18/64,104)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg afb with an undisclosed payload. (M&R, 9/28/64, 9)
A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center by the Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract called for the complete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications system for NASA’s Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ats) . (gsfc Release G-16-64)
It was reported that Douglas Aircraft Co., Santa Monica, had submitted a proposal to NASA for a system which would enable a single booster to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple OrbitMultiple Satellite (moms), consisted of a number of satellites fastened together by explosive bolts. The system was designed for use with a Douglas Delta launch vehicle. Several successful launches of two and three satellites together had been accomplished before, but never as many as five as proposed in the new system. (Houston Post, 7/16/64)
NASA and Pan American Airways announced that a scheduled Pan Am flight operating between San Francisco and Honolulu had successfully received error-free teletype messages for one hour from NASA’s communications satellite, SYNCOM ill, which was in stationary orbit over the mid-Pacific. NASA said that the relay of communications to an aircraft in flight from a station on the ground was another “first” for SYNCOM III. (NASA Release 64-297)
Cape Kennedy, prepared for the onslaught of Hurricane Dora by advance warnings including photographs by nimbus i satellite, escaped the second hurricane in a month with virtually no damage. (AP, 9/9/64)
Soviet satellites electron in and electron iv were successfully conducting scientific investigation of upper atmosphere and outer space, according to Soviet newspaper source. Since their orbiting last July 11,50 communication sessions had been held with electron III and 19 with electron rv, and valuable scientific and engineering data had been obtained. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/2/64, ATSS—T Trans.)
At White House news conference, President Johnson announced his three appointees to the board of Communications Satellite Corp. “I have appointed Mr. Frederick Donner, who is chairman of the board of General Motors, and has been since 1958. . . . “I have Mr. George Meany, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. I will have Mr. Clark Kerr, president of the University of California. Those are the three Presidential appointees. “This has required a good deal of study and discussion, and I feel very pleased that these men have indicated their willingness to make a sacrifice to lend their peculiar and unusual talents to the direction of this great adventure between government and free enterprise. “Needless to say, all of them have a good many duties at the present time, but because I pointed out the need for their experience and their broad knowledge, they accepted membership.” (Transcript, NYT, 9/22/64)
Delegates from 10 nations and the Vatican formally signed in Washington an agreement for a global communications satellite system. Previously initialed by the negotiators, the agreement designated Communications Satellite Corp. of the U.S. as the partnership’s “manager in the design, development, construction, establishment, operation of the space segment.” (Ward, Balt. Sun, 8/20/64)
U.S. Army’s use of orbiting satellite to pinpoint exact locations of land bodies separated by large expanses of ocean was described by DOD. Using secor (Sequential Collation of Range) system with the satellite and overseas ground stations, Army Corps of Engineers’ Army Map Service was for the first time obtaining distance measurements of up to a thousand miles to an accuracy within 30 meters. Nine unknown points were expected to be located in the Pacific during the first year of operations, (dod Release 776-64)
fcc postponed a decision on the question of who would own and operate the ground stations to be set up as part of the communications satellite system and called for further filings on the issue. Detailed arguments were due Jan. 5, and reply comments on Jan. 18. It was estimated it would take the fcc a minimum of six weeks to evaluate all comments. The carriers that had filed protests to exclusive ComSatCorp ground station ownership were American Telephone and Telegraph Co., International Telephone and Telegraph Corp., Radio Corp. of America, Western Union International, and Hawaiian Telephone Co. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64,27; AP, N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/10/64)
At Institute of Navigation meeting in New York, panel discussion on proposed civilian navigational satellite system reportedly indicated only mild interest by potential users of the system. Unnamed NASA officials were said to be optimistic that NASA-FAA-Commerce-DOD-Interior representatives would agree “in the near future” on setting up an ad hoc committee to study the requirements of such a system. {M&R, 6/22/(A,
European Space Research Organization (esro) announced in Paris its plans for satellite development program. First two esro satellites would be launched into orbit from the U.S. with Scout boosters; launch vehicles for later satellites would be supplied by member nations. ESRO set budget of $300 million for eight years. (NYT, 3/25/64, 31; A&A, 5/64,9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed World Affairs Council of Northern California, in San Francisco, discussed national and international aspects of the U.S. space program: “The competition is tough. The U.S.S.R. has the ability to concentrate its efforts without public debate and without the regard for individual freedom of choice or living standards which enjoy high priority in our own country. But it does not follow that our own space effort should be similarly concentrated. The implications of space are broad, broader than we can now know, and they do not end on the moon. The necessary technologies are enormously demanding and therefore enormously promising. And, whatever we do in space, we are critically dependent upon a thorough knowledge of the space environment. Moreover, the Soviet program, which has appeared to many of us to be so narrow and directed almost exclusively to prestigious exploits, more recently gives signs of broadening to include considerable basic research as well as practical investigations, for example, through the use of weather satellites in which we pioneered. “Therefore, we must not be trapped into a narrow competition— focusing our energies on one mission or even on manned flight alone. Our preparations must be broad enough to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort and ability to move in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. “The projects and programs, national and international, in which we are engaged have unprecedented scope and potential. It is this scope and this potential which make space activity a valuable instrument of national and international policy. It is a many faceted tool to be used for the economic and social advance of this and cooperating nations as well as for the preservation of our technological and political leadership in the world. This tool and its importance should be fully understood and appreciated. At the same time, as Lord Hailsham has said, we should remember that international cooperation is not a substitute for national excellence. “Europe has not been alone in recognizing these factors. In the complex of UN organizations, great interest has been evidenced among nations great and small in the problems and benefits of space. “Here again, space has served to bring East, West, and neutrals together in a code of legal principles to govern space activity, which was unanimously adopted in the last session of the General Assembly. In the associated forum of the International Telecommunications Union agreements were reached on the assignment of radio frequencies for space research and space communications. Without these arrangements the future of communications satellite systems would be heavily clouded. And in another UN agency, the World Meteorological Organization, a start has been made in the evaluation and planning of requirements for a world weather satellite system which also promises real economic and human benefits. “Thus it is clear that our national effort in space research and exploration is becoming a powerful force in developing greater international cooperation—cooperation which is not limited to the nations of the Free World, but which spans the Iron Curtain, as well. It is in this context, as a force which joins all mankind against a common enemy, the hostile environment of space, rather than against each other, that the space effort may bring the most significant and enduring rewards.” (Text)
NASA’s ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) was launched from Cape Kennedy by Atlas-Agena B rocket booster into highly elliptical orbit (92.721-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 621%-hr. period, and 31° inclination to the equator). The huge 1,073-lb. satellite carried 20 experiments, inaugurating new “space bus” series of standardized observatories capable of conducting many related space experiments simultaneously in space. However, one of ogoi’s long booms, one short boom including the omnidirectional radio antenna did not deploy. This resulted in abnormal operation of the automatic control system, and most of the control gas was used in attempting to lock the satellite into its earth-stabilized orbit. Project officials attributed the satellite’s inability to lock onto the earth to the fact that its earth-seeking sensor was obscured by one of the undeployed booms. Scientists decided not to attempt turning on experiments for several days while calculating contingency operations for a spin-stabilized satellite. (nasa Release 64-213; gsfc Release G-26-64; AP, NYT, 9/6/64, 26; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64)
nimbus I meteorological satellite, which had lost its electric power and stopped functioning Sept. 23, revived and was returning useful engineering data. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center said the solar paddles, which had been locked, had apparently directed themselves at the sun long enough to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries but the gas for stabilization had been exhausted and the craft was tumbling at about 15 rpm. This caused photographs to be fuzzy and useless, (gsfc Release G-64-34)
nasa announced signing preliminary $800,000 contract with Ball Brothers Research Corp. for construction of five additional Oso (Orbiting Solar Observatory) satellites. Ball Brothers already had built two Oso’s— one of which was orbited in 1962 and the other scheduled for orbit this year—and was in the process of building a third. The five additional Oso’s would study solar cycle through periods of increased activity during the late 1960’s. ( nasa Release 64-51)
Information about the Van Allen radiation belts, obtained from usaf satellite about a year ago, was reported by Dr. Ludwig Katz, of usaf’s Space Physics Laboratory: “These low energy particles are not a serious hazard to men in space. Over a period of time, however, they could affect the performance of electronic equipment carried aboard a satellite. “The instruments carried aboard the satellite were of six types: a proton detector, plasma probe, electron detector, electrostatic analyzer, geiger counter and magnetometer. The data were gathered from more than 100 orbits.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/64)
explorer ix re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated after more than three years in space. The lightweight, 12-ft.-diameter balloon was NASA’s most effective satellite for measuring atmospheric density and temperature. Placed in orbit Feb. 16, 1961, explorer lx traveled more than 340 million mi. during its 14,000 orbits of the earth. It provided a better understanding of upper atmosphere characteristics, determining more precisely the relationships between air density and solar radiations. Measurements of the satellite’s atmospheric drag effects were correlated with those of a similar inflated sphere, explorer XIX, orbited Dec. 19,1963. explorer ix was the first satellite orbited by a solid-fuel launch vehicle (Scout) and the first satellite launched at Wallops, (nasa Release 64-81; Wallops Release 64-35)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxxvii into earth orbit: 300-km. (186.42-mi.) apogee, 205-km. (127.39-mi.) perigee, 89.45-min. period, and 65° angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said the satellite contained scientific equipment intended for carrying on space research according to program announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/15/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
The “complete success” of Project Vela high-altitude nuclear-detection satellites led DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) to expand and revise the project. Future launchings had been rescheduled farther apart so that subsequent satellites could incorporate any major improvements between launchings, according to arpa Director Dr. R. L. Sproull. (M&R, 4/27/64,11)	_
First anniversary of telstaR ii communications satellite. AT&T reported its second communications satellite was “functioning normally in every respect” and had completed 2,340 orbits of the earth. Nearly 60 public demonstrations, most of them overseas TV transmissions, were conducted with telstar ii. Radiation data collected by telstar n enabled scientists to determine that the very high intensity of electrons in inner region of the Van Allen belt had decayed slowly during the past year. Built with stronger shielding against radiation than its predecessor and equipped with specially, developed transistors to better withstand the space environment, telstar ii was orbiting in higher apogee than telstar i, making possible communications experiments of greater length, (at&t Release)	.
ComSatCorp asked 16 companies to propose studies on how to judge the merits of launch vehicles which could be used to put medium-altitude communications satellites into orbit around the earth. ComSatCorp told fcc it planned to launch its first satellite, the Early Bird, in March as a communication link between Europe and North America. The Early Bird would be able to transmit two-way telephone conversations, television computer data, and other types of communications as an experiment in synchronous satellites, placed above the equator at an altitude of 22,300 miles. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 12/9/64>)
New and more detailed information about Van Allen belts gleaned by hitchhiker I satellite was reported to cospar by Ludwig Katz, afcrl project scientist, hitchhiker satellite was launched pickaback on usaf satellite and separated last July 1. In the afcrl measurements the count rate for protons between one and five million electron volts (mev) indicated that for this energy region there were two distinct Van Allen belts. The count was significantly lower in the middle region between two belts. A second feature, found in measurements between 15 and 100 kev, was that more electrons were found in energy region of the radiation belt, although there was decrease in total flux of electrons from the inner to the outer areas of earth’s magnetic lines of force. (usaf oar Release 5-64-2)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials successfully made the first of two final corrections in the orbit of syncom hi communications satellite, raising the satellite’s perigee closer to perfect circle 22,289 mi. above the earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/10/64)
NASA announced two industry teams had presented to NASA and other agencies their feasibility studies for nonmilitary navigation satellite system. General Electric Co. and Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. made one study under $156,000 NASA contract, while Westinghouse Electric Corp. studied another approach under $225,000 contract. The proposed satellite network would provide worldwide, all-weather coverage for ships and aircraft. (NASA Release 64-37)
Fee announced Communications Satellite Corp. planned negotiation of $8 million contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for development, fabrication, assembly, test, maintenance, and service for “Early Bird” communications satellite—the proposed experimental-operational comsat system. The proposed contract would be subject to Fee approval, (upi, Houston Chron., 3/17/64; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/64; M&R, 3/23/64,8)
NASA’s nimbus i meteorological satellite was launched into polar orbit from Western Test Range with Thor-Agena B launch vehicle, and on its sixth orbit began transmitting weather photographs which were called “the best pictures ever” from space. Orbit of the 830-lb. satellite had been planned as circular 575-mi. altitude orbit; Agena B engines burned for only .84 sec. instead of the 3.8 sec. expected for injection bum, so the satellite was orbiting with 578-mi. apogee, 252-mi. perigee, 98-min. period, and 81° inclination to the equator, nimbus I, unlike the Tiros meteorological satellites, was earth-oriented and stabilized in all three axes. It contained Advanced Vidicon Camera System and Automatic Picture Transmission System, both of which operate during daylight portion of each orbit; High Resolution Infrared Radiometer, first to be flown on NASA meteorological satellite, provided first high resolution night-time cloud-cover pictures and cloud-top temperatures taken from a satellite. About 62 apt stations, including those in 12 foreign countries and 4 owned privately, participated in nimbus i picture reception. The apt system was designed for Nimbus and was first tested—successfully—on tiros viii launched last December. Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said at nimbus i news conference: “. . . This much is certain: We are way ahead of the rest of the world. I am certain that if nothing came out of the space effort but the communications satellite, the weather satellite, and the navigational satellites, which will soon be flying, in a limited number of years, it would more than pay back all of the investment that has been made in space.” (NASA Release 64-195; GSFC Press Briefing Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 8/29/64; nasa r&sc Div.)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite aboard a Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 6/15/64,10)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space booster from WTR with undisclosed satellite payload. ( hhn—4 8 )
House Committee on Government Operations’ Military Operations Subcommittee heard testimony from NASA witnesses regarding military communications satellites. In response to questioning, Leonard Jaffe, Director of Communications and Navigation Programs in NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA) and Robert F. Garbarini, Director of Applications in ossa, said NASA had not participated in current dod-ComSatCorp negotiations for possible dod use of commercial comsat channels. ComSat Act of 1962 designated NASA as technical advisor to ComSatCorp. “We are aware of the negotiations and we expect to be informed so that we can respond under the act,” Jaffe said. (Av. Wk., 4/13/64, 32)
Fourth birthday of echo I passive communications satellite, still orbiting the earth in its visible path. G. T. Schjeldahl Co., builders of the 100-ft. sphere for NASA, said echo i’s supply of gas had long ago leaked out through holes made by micrometeoroids, but even so, echo i had “demonstrated the practicability of employing large inflatable and erectable reflectors to rebound intelligent signals beamed at it.” (Schjeldahl Release; Wash. Post, 8/11/64)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
In Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet Academician A. A. Blagonravov was interviewed by Tass correspondent regarding the launching of echo ii :	. . in time, international space cooperation will acquire decisive significance. Each country will contribute its best efforts to the peaceful conquest of space. The knowledge obtained will accrue to the benefit of all mankind. Certain long-range communication problems will be clarified by the joint investigations of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists. There are other equally fruitful points of contact. The coordination of the program of space experiments envisages the use of satellites for weather service on a world-wide scale. Also the combined use of sputniks for compiling charts of the Earth’s magnetic field will be a significant contribution to world science. These projects are part of the Soviet-American collaboration in the interests of mankind.” (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 1/28/64, 4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Britain had expressed interest in joining U.S. and European countries in financing and use of global communications satellite system, John Finney reported in New York Times. After months of favoring cables for international communications in the immediate future, British Post Office expressed approval of participation in global satellite system and urged similar decisions by European nations, at meeting of satellite committee of European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administration in Karlsruhe, Germany. (Finney, NYT, 1/26/64, 1)
NASA ordered a third Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) and took an option on two more, from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor for the current Oao program. If only one satellite were purchased the contract would be more than $20 million, and if all three were purchased the contract would total more than $50 million. (nasa Release 64-142)
relay i and relay II communications satellites were used to broadcast election week previews and results to Europe. Total broadcast time amounted to slightly less than two hours, syncom II synchronous communications satellite, stationed in the Pacific, relayed nearly eight hours of U.S. Presidential election returns to the Far East. Voice of America transmitted the radio signals. (Goddard News, 11/ 16/64,3; nasa Release 64-279)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster combination with unidentified satellite payload into a polar orbit. (AP, Chic. Trib., 6/14/64; upi, Wash. Post, 6/14/64)
Second anniversary of orbiting of anna Ib first satellite designed for use in measuring size and shape of the earth. Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory, builder of the satellite, said anna ib was still flashing its beacon and relaying radio signals to earth upon command. (AP, Houston Post, 10/30/64)
U.S.S.R.’s Ivan Cheprov, speaking at symposium on international space law held in Warsaw in conjunction with IAF congress, criticized the planned global communications satellite network being organized by Communications Satellite Corp. He said it appeared “that the very use of new communications channels by other nations would depend on the whims of Comsat. . . . The right to participate in the management of the space communications system is denied those who are not willing to subsidize and to perpetuate a monopoly in the sphere of producing communications satellites and running space communications business. . . . The other participants merely form a chorus for approving any decisions dictated by Comsat.” He said the U.N. and the International Telecommunication Union could organize an international communications system “on the basis of equality.” (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/11/64)
NASA issued its first exclusive patent license to Satellite Div. of Union Carbide Corp. for commercial development of a nickel alloy invented by John C. Freche, metallurgist at NASA Lewis Research Center. For as long as it develops the alloy for commercial use, Union Carbide agreed to spend at least $20,000 a year for not more than three years. After fully developing it, Union Carbide would hold exclusive marketing rights for not more than four years, at which time exclusive license would expire and product would be made fully available to the public. (nasa Release 64-30)
At conclusion of Rome meeting of European Conference on Satellite Communications with representatives from U.S. and Canada, head of U.S. delegation Abram Chayes said “the most significant result of the conference is that a number of European countries as well as Canada have now expressed serious interest in joining as copartners” in the international comsat system. Discussions would continue, and another meeting was scheduled for mid-March in Washington. (Woll-emborg, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
Ernest W. Brackett, NASA Assistant Deputy Associate Administrator (Procurement Policy), addressed National Association of Professional Contract Administrators in Orlando, Fla. Discussing some NASA contract matters of current interest, he outlined ways in which NASA worked similarly to and differently than dod contract administration, then said: “Perhaps the outstanding difference between NASA and dod in the field? of- contract administration is in the area of quality control and inspection. NASA’s contracts are almost wholly for research and the development of satellites, space vehicles, engines, etc., the like of which have never been made before. There are no production type contracts and these probably will be very few. The system of inspection and quality control as envisaged by NASA is quite different from the sampling type of inspection used on a production line. “We buy only a few of each item and a failure may mean the compromise of a program. Also, development items are very expensive and the loss of a shot may mean the loss of millions of dollars. There have been failures where the cause has been traced to the failure of a small component costing a hundred dollars or so which might have been caught with proper inspection. The Saturn is an example of a project where very high degrees of quality control have been applied and very detailed inspection has taken place. The six Saturn shots have all been successful and it is difficult to criticize success. “nasa has had over 100 space shots. There have been successes and failures. In 1960 only 47% of the shots were successful,t but in 1963 successes had risen to 85%. You can expect continued emphasis on quality control from NASA. Someone described that degree of reliability that nasa is looking for as being the equivalent of 1,000 TV sets made to run continuously for a year without a single one failing. . . .” (Text)
NASA and esro announced signing Memorandum of Understanding for project involving two scientific satellites. Under the agreement, nasa would launch into orbit two satellites, esro l and esro 2, for the nine-nation West European organization. Both satellites would be launched on NASA Scout rocket boosters into near-polar eccentric orbits and were tentatively scheduled during 1967 from Western Test Range. (nasa Release 64-178)
ComSatCorp said it would award three additional study contracts for design of communications satellites systems. AT&T and RCA would design a system of 18 satellites to be placed in random orbits. TRW Space Technology Laboratories would engineer a system of 12 satellites in controlled orbits. Hughes Aircraft would plan an improved synchronous-orbit communications satellite. Based on these preliminary studies, a choice was to be made for use in the initial comsat system to begin operation in 1966-67. (ComSatCorp Release; Wash. Post, 6/9/64; Balt. Sun, 6/9/64; NYT, 6/9/64,25)
ComSatCorp applied to fcc for authority to construct and orbit over the mid-Atlantic a synchronous-orbit communications satellite to provide commercial service on an “experimental-operational” basis between North America and Europe. ITie satellite was described by ComSatCorp as an “initial step in the development of a global communications system.” It would provide 24-hour communications service capable of relaying TV broadcasts or up to 240 telephone calls. Plans called for the satellite to be orbited in spring of 1965 with a TAT-Delta booster supplied by NASA on a reimbursable basis. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA and ComSatCorp jointly announced the signing of an agreement covering the launching by NASA of “Early Bird”—the first communications satellite intended for commercial use. The agreement provided that NASA would launch Early Bird from Cape Kennedy, Fla., into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. altitude above the Atlantic as soon after Mar. 1 as NASA found feasible. ComSatCorp would pay NASA approximately $3.5 million for the initial launch, whether or not the Thrust Augmented Delta launch vehicle was successful in orbiting the satellite, and for each subsequent launch under the contract. The $3.5 million would reimburse NASA for the cost of the Delta vehicle, other launch services, propellants, guidance and tracking services, and data processing. Should the first launch be unsuccessful, nasa would try again on a second satellite. The contract gave ComSatCorp the option of calling for additional launches, after July 1, of synchronous satellites of the same type. (ComSatCorp Release, 12/23/64)
A Thanksgiving Day message from President Johnson was broadcast ‘by relay i, relay ii, and syncom II communications satellites to American armed forces all over the world. (Day, Phil. Eve. Bull., 11/26/64)
NASA employees Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Townsend, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Wtr with undisclosed satellite payload, (hhn-48)
The White House and Communications Satellite Corp. announced television coverage of the Olympic Games from Tokyo to the U.S. and Canada would be attempted via communications satellite. Project would be earned out with cooperation of NASA and dod and with Government of Japan and Japan Broadcasting Corp. NASA’s Syncom 3 experimental communications satellite, planned for launch into synchronous orbit during August, would be made available for transmission of TV coverage of the Games, which would take place Oct. 10-24. (ComSatCorp Release; Finney, NYT, 7/23/64,42)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists conducted interrogation of OGO I satellite through Rosman, N.C., tracking station, and 15 experiments were turned on to confirm their operation. Signals were weaker than previously received, because OGO i’s solar panels were not locked onto the sun; the satellite’s solar panels were successfully commanded to turn 42° into a more favorable sun angle, thus ensuring satisfactory power levels. As of this date, 19 of the 20 onboard scientific experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, which were being evaluated by experimenters. (NASA Release 64-232; GSFC Release G-26-64)
NASA and NBC conducted one-hour test of the syncom II communication satellite hovering in synchronous orbit near the West Coast, testing the satellite’s capability to relay video coverage from Tokyo’s Olympic Games next fall. In the test, signals were transmitted from an antenna at Fort Dix, N.J.; signals returned from the satellite were received at Andover, Me., and relayed to nbc studios by land lines. Quality of the pictures was considered below standard commercial quality but adequate for brief broadcasts of select events. NBC, which had purchased exclusive rights to TV coverage of the 1964 Summer Olympics in the U.S. and Central and South America, would now decide whether to attempt live coverage with satellites or to rely on tapes. (Witkin, NYT, 4/24/64, 55)	_
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25 through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted the hands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 10:00 p.m., when the men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 11:00. Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/64, 11)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at Hq. press conference that U.S.—U.S.S.R. communications experiments with echo II balloon satellite would begin after Feb. 21. In response to question, Mr. Webb said failure of attempts to acquire lunar photographs had not adversely affected Apollo schedule: “. . . up to this time we have not had to make any changes in the program due to this, nor do I think we will.” Asked whether 1969 date for manned lunar landing was a “deadline” or a “planning date”, Mr. Webb said: “The view President Kennedy had . .. was that he was setting a deadline by which he wanted this nation to get the job done, and he was providing resources for us to plan the flight in 1967, or early 1968, giving some leeway for intractable technical problems, for unknown and unforeseeable things, and also to avoid having to put into parallel development systems that would be more expensive if done that way. . . . “Now, the 1967, early 1968 target date that we were setting was to mobilize the effort, to press forward with it, but not to do so in such a way as to run this cost up from $20 billion to something much higher. “So we were thinking of it as pretty much of a deadline that it was in the interests of this nation to meet. “Now, with the cuts last year of $600 million and the reorganization of the effort to all-up systems testing, the cancellation of a number of Saturn flights, things of this kind, I think you’ve got to think of it somewhat differently. I think the target date for the flights, which is a tight date but still attainable, is mighty close to the January 1, 1970 period. “. . . I believe we can do it within the latter six months of 1969 if we proceed vigorously under the plan we have presented to the Congress. But again we don’t have any leeway. . . . We have lost that, and we’ve got no more than what I’d call a fighting chance to do this by January 1,1970.” Mr. Webb discussed NASA relationship with Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of NASA’s lunar and planetary exploration programs. The current three-year contract “expires next June and we have now for some months been examining together with the California Institute of Technology ways and means to make a better relationship from their standpoint and from NASA’s standpoint.” Mr. Webb said NASA was seeking a reorganization of JPL to achieve a “hardheaded type of industrial management.” (Finney,- NYT, 2/12/64; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/12/64; Simons, Wash, Post, 2/12/64; M&R, 2/17/64, 16)	_	_
Senate confirmed President Johnson’s nominations to Board of Directors of the Communications Satellite Corp.: Frederic G. Donner, George Meany, and Clark Kerr, (nasa lar III/187-88)
USAF’s start (Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Test) program was discussed by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces, start, according to Haggerty, “appears to be more than . . . an expansion of the ASSET program. . . . START involves a dozen or more areas of investigation in the general field of re-entry. It could lead to development of a manned re-entry vehicle for use with the Manned Orbital Laboratory, one which could make a maneuvering re-entry to a landing field, as opposed to the ballistic flight path of the Gemini spacecraft which will be the original MOL re-entry vehicle. Looking farther down the road, start technology could provide the basis for eventual development of a large ferry vehicle for shuttling men and supplies to and from an orbiting space station. . . .” First contract for this new type of spacecraft was awarded recently to Martin Marietta Corp. for ablative-type re-entry body, designated SV-5, capable of maneuvering during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere at hypersonic-transonic speeds. SV-5 was said to be only one portion of broad start program, which would investigate a .number of other reentry body shapes, possibly even lifting body types such as M-2 and HL-10 being investigated by NASA. (J/Armed Forces, 9/5/64, 5) September 5: More emigrating scientists and engineers settle in the U.S. than in any other country, according to Dr. Charles V. Kidd, Associate Director for International Activities of National Institutes of Health, writing in UNESCO publication. From 1949 through 1961, 43,000 scientists and engineers (average of 3,350 per year) immigrated to U.S., reaching peak of 5,800 per year in 1957. (O’Kane, NYT, 9/6/64, 20) September 6: NASA announced echo I balloon satellite had been used this summer by French National Geographic Institute to accurately locate satellite tracking stations being built for France and esro across Europe and Africa. According to reports, French National Geographic Institute photographed echo i simultaneously from precisely located cameras in France and Algeria, in order to join the triangulation systems of France and Algeria. Its aluminum-coated mylar skin wrinkled and misshapen, echo i was no longer useful in radio-reflecting communications, but it was still clearly visible in the nighttime sky after more than four years of orbiting the earth. (NASA Release 64-226)
Space Technology Laboratories, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, selected by JPL to provide throttleable vernier engines for Surveyor lunar spacecraft being developed by Hughes Aircraft Co. under JPL supervision. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30) During April: European Space Research Organization (esro) was planning to orbit its first two satellites by late 1967 or early 1968, from U.S. Pacific Missile Range. Using purchased Scout booster, esro would launch the 200-lb. satellites into polar orbits. (Av. Wk., 4>/27/64>, 31)
John L. Sloop, Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, NASA, said in lecture to Santa Clara County Science Teachers, at NASA Ames Research Center: “On the momentous day of the first flight to the moon’s surface, the three astronauts will be using the results of almost a decade of concentrated effort which include knowledge, skills, and equipment of 30,000 people in ten NASA Centers and over a quarter of a million people in more than 5,000 companies. They will have flight experience in space 100 times longer than the total time logged in Mercury. They will have the knowledge gained by dozens of unmanned satellites that have probed space about the moon and beyond. They will have the result of Ranger photographs of the lunar surface plus more detailed surveys made by lunar orbiting and the Surveyor lunar lander. . . .” (Text; NASA R&sc Div.)
NASA launched modified four-stage solid-propellant Javelin (Argo D-4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., carrying 120-lb. instrumented payload to 452 mi. Approximately 15 min. of data were telemetered to ground stations before fourth stage and payload impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 642 mi. from launch site. Primary purpose of flight was to test X—258 solid-propellant rocket motor, and secondary purpose was to conduct scientific investigations in the ionosphere. Test was part of GSFc’s development of the X—258 for NASA use in satellite launch vehicles and possibly in sounding rockets. (Wallops Release 64-36)
The U.S.S.R. launched cosmos xxxv into orbit. The satellite’s initial orbital parameters were: period, 89.2 min.; apogee, 268 km. (161 mi.); perigee, 217 km. (130 mi.); inclination, 51.3°- The satellite, carrying scientific equipment for space studies, was reported to be functioning normally. (Tass, Izvestia, 7/17/64,1, atss-t Trans.; AP, NYT, 7/16/64)
Scientific results from the explorer xvm satellite—-Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP)—was topic of discussion at GSFC symposium. The NASA satellite was orbited in November 1963, with onboard instrumentation including two magnetometers, three plasma probes, and five sets of low and medium energy particle detectors, imp data revealed a shock wave existed 53,600 mi. above earth’s sunlit surface, formed by interaction of interplanetary magnetic field and high-speed constant wind of particles from the sun. Between shock wave and upper edge of Van Allen belts, a region ranging in depth from 12,000 to 20,000 mi., there is great turbulence; moderately energetic particles constantly flow into the region and drain away. (Simons, Wash. Post, 3/13/64; NYT, 3/13/64; Goddard News, 3/23/64, 1-2)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director, ddr&e), disclosed in testimony before House Committee on Government Operations, Subcommittee on Military Operations, that dod planned to use one of the Syncom communications satellites for experimental communications, probably between Hawaii and the Philippines. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/64,14)
U.S.S.R. announced routine launching of cosmos xlviii satellite into orbit, with the following parameters: 295-km. apogee (183-mi.), 203-km. perigee (126-mi.), 89.4-min. period, and 65.07°-inclination to the equator. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/15/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Impact of global communications satellite systems was predicted by Arthur C. Clarke in Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine. During the coming decade, comsat systems would bring about “orbital post office,” “orbital newspapers,” and “orbital telephony.” And eventually global comsat system would underscore requirement for universal language, which Clarke predicted would be met with English; would educate millions with TV visual aids; and would end barriers to free flow of information (such as censorship and jamming). “The inexorable force of astronomical facts will destroy the political fantasies which so long fragmented our planet. For when all major artistic productions, entertainments, political and news events (not to mention disasters) can be observed and experienced simultaneously by the whole world, the parochialism and xenophobia of the past will not be able to survive. “. . . another [influence], perhaps even more fundamental, may be reversal of an historic trend which has proceeded with scarcely a break for 5000 years. The traditional role of the city as a meeting-place is coming to an end; Megapolis may soon go the way of the dinosaurs it now resembles in so many respects. This century may see the beginnings of a slow but irresistible dispersion and decentralization of mankind—a physical dispersion which will take place, paradoxically enough, at the same time as cultural unification.” (Clarke, A/A, 2/64, 45—48)
U.S.S.R launched cosmos xxix into orbit from unspecified site. Soviet press agency Tass said the satellite was in the following initial orbit: 309-km. apogee (192mi.) ; 204-km. perigee (127 mi.); 89.52 min. period; and 65°4' angle of inclination to the equator. Tass said scientific equipment, radio systems, and onboard instrumentation were functioning normally, and ground station was processing incoming information. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 4/26/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
First Soviet-American space communications experiment, with British cooperation, was conducted successfully at 2:00 a.m. Moscow time, Tass reported. Radio signal sent from Jodrell Bank Experimental Station bounced off echo n balloon satellite and was received by Zimenki Observatory near Gorki. Tass said, “This marks a success of the first experiment in super-long distance international cosmic radio communications on ultra short waves.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64)
NASA anounced closing the command and control station for Relay communications satellites at Nutley, N J., and moving the operation to the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network (Stadan) at Blossom Point, Md. The move was made to consolidate personnel and equipment and save operation costs, (nasa Release 64-77)
Reported that NASA was considering University Explorer program, under which universities would design and build their own scientific satellites with NASA funding. The satellites would be launched from Wallops Island with Scout boosters. (Av. Wk., 10/19/64, 35)
United Press International (upi) reported that the Air Force would attempt pickaback launch of a secret satellite (OV—1) next month from Vanden-berg aeb with hopes of proving a method which would save the taxpayers $370,000 per launch. The 300-lb. satellite, carrying its own rocket motor, would ride into space on the side of an Atlas missile making a re-entry test. Near the peak of the Atlas’ flight, OV-1 would spring away, coast for a few seconds, and be launched into orbit by its own rocket. The Atlas would continue on its mission, (upi, NYT, 11/10/64,34)
Among 49 new projects voted by U.N. Special Fund was $582,000 grant to help India establish a satellite tracking station and perform research in space communications. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 6/22/64)
Unnamed DOD officials said they were certain that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos satellites were being used for reconnaissance over U.S. (Hoffman, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/19/64)
usaf launched Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from WTR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later revealed that two satellites were placed in orbit (hhn-48)
U.S.S.R. announced launching of cosmos xliv earth satellite into the following orbit: 860-km. (534-mi.) apogee, 618-km. (384-mi.) perigee, 99.5-min. period, and 65° inclination to the equator. The satellite was said to be carrying on the Cosmos program announced March 16, 1962. (Tass, Pravda, 8/29/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
It was reported that dod had decided to invest $200 million in a military communications satellite system. The first launching was said to be scheduled for late 1965 or 1966. Plans called for seven or eight satellites to he placed in orhit by a single Titan III booster. The satellites, perhaps as many as 24 simultaneously, were to be placed in orbit at around 6,000 mi. altitude (see July 13). (upi, NYT, 7/19/64)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Agena D booster toward a polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. Purpose of the shot was not indicated. (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
William B. Bergen, president of Martin Baltimore, said U.S. had closed the so-called “space gap” of Russian competition “without fanfare, and almost without knowing it ourselves.” Addressing National Space Club in Washington, Bergen said that, with all the “Hollywoodian propaganda” about enormous Soviet satellites, “there seems little doubt that the objective part of the scientific world is now convinced that our modest-sized couriers into space have brought back far more useful information than has been collected by the Russians’ more massive messengers.” (AP, Houston Post, 7/23/64)
NASA announced that Europeans in nine countries would be able to watch the Republican National Convention via NASA’s relay ii communications satellite. Television networks in England, France, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, and Italy were to use relay ii five times during the four-day convention, July 20-23. Similar coverage would be provided during the Democratic National Convention, beginning August 24. (NASA Release 64-170) *	NASA announced that four flight tests of liquid-hydrogen stages in Centaur and Saturn rockets had established liquid hydrogen as a new high-energy fuel for space vehicles. Liquid hydrogen, when mixed with liquid oxygen, produced about 35 per cent more thrust than the kerosene-type fuels normally used, (nasa Release 64-164) *	It was probable that the Soviet space probe zond i, was nearing Venus and would try to send back the first close-up television pictures of that planet, reported Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Radio Experimental Station, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/13/64) *	Aec disclosed decision to discontinue Project Pluto, attempt to build lowflying, atomic-powered missile, despite ten years of effort and $200 million investment. Livermore Radiation Laboratory, initiator and developer of project, had been notified of decision about ten day & earlier. Cause of discontinuation was reportedly combination of indecision, indifference, and lack of support by dod. (Finney, NYT, 7/13/64, 11) July 12: Abraham Hyatt, formerly NASA. Director of Plans and Program Evaluation, was appointed Jerome Clarke Hunsaker Professor of Aeronautical Engineering at MIT. (Boston Sun. Globe, 7/12/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center issued request for proposals for study of deep space laser acquisition and tracking techniques in manned space missions. Specifications called for high priority development of laser tracking techniques between earth and a manned deep space vehicle or between a satellite and two manned deep space vehicles. System must be capable of handling two-way telemetry and voice communications, as well as spacecraft-to-ground TV. 22 companies were invited to bid on the six- to nine-month study, (msc Release 64-3)
Tass announced electron i and electron II scientific satellites were continuing their elliptical orbits of the earth. By 6:00 p.m. Moscow time Feb. 1, electron i had passed repeatedly through the inner radation belt in its 19 orbits and electron ii had moved four times through the outer radiation belt in its two orbits. Tass said the following studies were being made with aid of onboard equipment: outer and inner radiation belts; charged particles having low energy; concentrations of electrons and positive ions; magnetic fields and radiation belts of the earth; nuclear component of cosmic radiation; shortwave solar radiation; propagation of radio waves; radio-radiation of galaxies; and densities of meteoritic material. Tass said the studies, being accomplished under a unified program in various areas of outer space, were being conducted for the first time. These studies were important for conducting the program of the IQSY and for permitting collection of data to assure radiation safety of manned space flights. Tass said all onboard equipment was functioning normally and ground stations were receiving scientific data from the satellites. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/2/64,1, ATSS-T Trans.)
U.S.S.R. announced orbiting of cosmos l satellite into the following orbit: apogee, 150 mi.; perigee, 122 mi.; period, 88.7 min.; inclination to the equator, 51.3°. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/30/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Operations Control Center established that Soviet lunik iv spacecraft, launched April 21, 1963, was in a barycentric orbit—i.e., orbiting around the center of gravity (4,600 km. from earth’s center) of the earth-moon system. This unusual orbit was apparently a coincidence, because final Tass announcement about the probe had said it would become a satellite of the sun. (gsfc, and msfc SIN, 4/64,15-16)
Langley Research Center aerospace engineer Dewey L. Clemmons, Jr., presented a paper at the Symposium on the Establishment of a European Geodetic Network for Artificial Satellites held in Paris, France, describing the U.S. Passive Geodetic Satellite (Pageos) planned for launch during the first half of 1966. He said: “The satellite will be an aluminum-coated sphere 100 feet (30.48 meters) in diameter, a near replica of echo I (1960 Iota 1) that was launched by the United States on August 12, 1960. No instrumentation will be attached to the surface of the Pageos satellite. Pageos will serve the geodesist by simply acting as a point source of light in the sky as it reflects the incident sunlight. Simultaneous photographs of this light source against the star background, taken by two or more widely separated ground-based cameras, will enable geodesists to determine the spatial coordinates of each camera position. An interconnected series of camera positions can be established that will cover the entire surface of the earth, thereby permitting geometric determination of each camera position within a single reference system. The use of this satellite for geodetic purposes will continue for at least five years during which the necessary photo-grammetric observations can be made and to provide a purely geometric determination of the shape and size of the earth.” (Text; AP, NYT, 12/15/64,41)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite. (M&R, 2/24/64,11)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D space booster from WTR with unidentified satellite payload, (hhn—48)
The platform adopted by the Republican National Convention contained a number of statements pertaining to the U.S. space program. The platform stated: “This administration has delayed research and development in advanced weapons systems and thus confronted the American people with a fearsome possibility that Soviet advances, in the decade of the 1970’s, may surpass America’s present lead. Its misuse of cost effectiveness has stifled the creativity of the Nation’s military, scientific, and industrial communities. “It has failed to originate a single new major strategic weapons system after inheriting from a Republican administration the most powerful military force of all time. It has concealed a lack of qualitative advance for the 1970’s by speaking of a quantitative strength which by then will be obsolete. It has not demonstrated the foresight necessary to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple Orbit“It has endangered security by downgrading efforts to prepare defenses against enemy ballistic missiles. It has retarded our own military development for near and outer space, while the enemy’s development moves on. . . . “We pledge . . . replanning of the present space program to provide for a more orderly, yet aggressively pursued step-by-step development, remaining alert to the danger of overdivision of skilled personnel in critical shortage from other vital areas such as health, industry, education, and science.” (Text, CR, 7/28/64, A3934, A3939) Mid-July: The U.S. Weather Bureau prepared a letter to the World Meteorological Organization advising that Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) pictures from TIROS VIII were no longer usable. Useful apt pictures totaled 4,067. (GSFC Historian)
NASA Hq. received telegrams from Soviet Academy of Sciences containing first data from Soviet optical observations of echo ii passive communications satellite. The data were obtained Jan. 25 from Soviet optical observation stations at Tashkent, Ashklabad, Erevan, Vologda, Archangel, Dushanbe, and Vorkuta, were being analyzed along with observations made at NASA stations around the world. Soviet Academy also indicated photographs of echo ii were obtained at five stations. (nasa Release 64-21)
U.S. Committee for International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) and usn announced satellite to monitor solar x-ray emission, instrumented by Naval Research Laboratory scientists, was launched recently to initiate continuous “watch on the sun” during iqsy (1964-65). First signals from the satellite showed the sun now is close to its minimum activity, reported nrl scientists Robert W. Kreplin, Talbot A. Chubb, and Herbert Friedman. Any solar activity that occurs this year should be isolated and relatively uncomplicated, permitting the satellite to record individual storm centers, in contrast to igy which was marked by succession of overlapping storms. Observatories in 14 countries joined U.S. in preparing to utilize continuous data transmissions from the satellite. At press conference, the NRL scientists said that astronauts on lunar flight would be under no more radiation danger during maximum period of solar cycle than during minimum period. Friedman explained: “All available evidence indicates that solar minimum is as bad as solar maximum for superflare eruption.” To date, superflares occur at random and cannot be predicted, (nas-nrc Release; USN Background Statement; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/5/64)
NASA announced Syncom C communications satellite would be assisted into proper orbit later this month by its sister satellite Syncom II, which would provide a reliable relay point in space for communications be« tween ground stations and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA Syncom Project Officer H. N. Stafford said: “As far as we know, this is the first time one satellite has been used to help in the launch of another. Tiros satellites have been used to help predict weather before manned space flights. The Relay satellite carried pictures of the Cooper flight. But this appears to be the first case of direct use of a satellite in an operational role during a launch.” (NASA Release 64-204)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Rice Univ. instrumented payload reached 94-mi. altitude in successful experiment to measure light intensities and particle fluxes. Rocket performed excellently and instrumentation—two photometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers—functioned properly except for one scintillator, which failed at nose cone ejection. The Sammy II instrument package was designed and developed by Rice University’s Satellite Techniques Laboratory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA’s explorer xvni (imp-i) satellite, silent since last June because of low power levels, resumed data transmission; it had reached a more favorable sun angle and was able to operate on power directly from its four solar panels. Data received from the satellite, based on preliminary analysis, were described as “good.” (NASA Release 64-242 Addendum)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center, was presented 1964 Sylvanus Albert Reed Award at aiaa dinner in New York. Dr. Silverstein was cited for “major contributions toward the development of propulsion systems for aircraft and spacecraft and for outstanding leadership in the nation’s programs of scientific satellites and manned space flight.” Also presented were AlAA’s Research Award to Henry M. Shuey and Space Science Award to Herbert Friedman, (lrc Release 64-6; “aiaa Honors & Awards”)
Public sale of stock in Communications Satellite Corp. would be offered in April, New York sources revealed, (nytns, Denver Post, 2/21/64)
COSMOS xxvil satellite was launched into orbit by U.S.S.R. Announced orbital data were: 237-km. (147-mi.) apogee; 192-km. (119-mi.) perigee; 88.7-min. period; and 64.8° inclination to the equator. Soviet news agency Tass said the satellite carried scientific instrumentation intended for the “further study of outer space in accordance with the program announced by Tass” March 16, 1962, as well as radio transmitter and telemetering systems. All onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 3/28/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Echo, Relay, and Syncom communications satellites were presented to the Smithsonian Institution in ceremony at Museum of History and Technology. Among the NASA officials participating in the presentation were Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry Goett. Carl T. Rowan, Director of U.S. Information Agency, said in address at the ceremony: “As we view the unfolding drama of the American space program it can be clearly seen that one of its most significant aspects is that it has been carried out in the full, open view of an interested and anxious world. When it was written into the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 that the activities of the new space agency were to be open to the widest practicable and appropriate spread of information, the Congress cast into law one of the deepest instincts of the American people. It was an act of faith to specify that this enterprise should be carried on openly before the gaze of those who wished us well and those who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of faith in freedom and the ability of Americans to meet the challenges and opportunities of an era when each day unfolds new perils and new promises. “If openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in the entire space program, the decision to carry out a satellite program dedicated to freedom of communications on a global scale represented that concept converted into a highly meaningful fact. . . . “It is obvious that the over-riding quality of communications satellites is their internationalism. A practical system based on communication satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of little use if it did not mean communicating between the peoples of widely separated lands. Its basic premise involves the inclusion of as many countries as possible in the interchange that the system allows. “This presentation of communication satellites to our national museum of science and technology is, therefore, most truly an international occasion. For it is their international utility in the cause of world understanding, peace and progress which gives them their deepest meaning.” (Text)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from WTR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later disclosed that two satellites were orbited with one launch vehicle. ( hhn-4 8)
Radio command signal to syncom II communications satellite pulsed onboard gas jets to increase the satellite’s 6,800-mph speed. The satellite began drifting westward at rate of about 1.3 degree per day, was expected to reach vicinity of the International Date Line in mid-May. There syncom ii would serve as backup for a third Syncom, scheduled for synchronous orbit over the Pacific in May and transpacific communications experiments during the summer. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/64, 14) 706-598 0—65---8
dod announced Army Corps of Engineers’ secor (Sequential Collation of Range) geodetic satellite was performing “exceptionally well,” confirming Dr. Albert Hall’s disclosure of Feb. 18. The 40-lb. satellite was orbiting at about 600-mi. altitude in periods of about 100 min. secor system tests were being conducted by Army’s Geodesy, Intelligence and Mapping Research and Development Agency (gimrada) , which had contracted for the satellite from itt Federal Laboratories. gimrada ground stations were measuring distances by sending and receiving signals through satellite’s onboard transponder, then acquiring ranging data for use in automatic data reduction process by Army Map Service to determine station positions, afsc/ssd had lofted the satellite into orbit for gimrada; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was providing orbital data and telemetry support, (dod Release 156-64)
NASA announced the details of U.S. geodetic satellite program, designed to provide more precise mapping of the earth’s surface and its gravitational field. Program was based on recommendation of NASA-DOD-Dept. of Commerce Geodetic Satellite Policy Board and involved three types of satellites: Beacon Explorer, equipped with reflectors to reflect laser beams from earth and with Doppler transmitter to measure effect of irregularities in earth’s gravitational field; Geodetic Explorer (instrumented to conduct more experiments than the Beacon Explorer), containing flashing lights, variety of electronic beacons, optical reflectors, and when possible radar reflectors; and passive geodetic staellite, sunlight-reflecting lOO-ft.-diameter Echo-type sphere, (nasa Release 64-236)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
NASA and Canada’s Defence Research Board announced reaching agreement for joint multi-satellite ionosphere-monitoring research program, designated Isis (International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies). Agreement called for orbiting of a second Alouette and Isis A, B, and C satellites at intervals between 1965 and 1970. The satellites would continue and expand experiments of alouette i topside sounder, and data obtained from the satellites would be made freely available to the scientific community. Under terms of the agreement, drb would design, construct, and test the satellites, provide basic onboard experiment, and operate at least one ground station to supply data on spacecraft operation. NASA would provide four launch vehicles, conduct launch operations, and provide and launch up to five sounding rockets to test components, subsystems, and experiments for the satellites. NASA also would launch an Explorer satellite in conjunction with the Alouette to obtain coordinated direct measurements. (NASA Release 64-6)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D booster from Cape Kennedy with triple-satellite payload. Press sources reported the booster orbited two dod Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites and a 4.5-lb. tetrahedral satellite. The three satellites were reported to be injected initially into elliptical orbits ranging from 120 to 65,000 mi. altitudes; ground command signal maneuvered one NRDS into 65,000-mi. circular orbit, and similar maneuver was planned for the other nrds two days later. The “Pygmy,” designed to measure electrons in the Van Allen belts, would continue in the elliptical orbit. Unofficially nicknamed “Sentries,” the twin radiation detectors were said to be similar, with minor exceptions, to the first pair, reported to have been successfully launched last October. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/19/64; Av. Wk., 7/20/64,24; M&R, 7/27/64, 22)
U.S. Army presented two pioneer communications satellites, Score and Courier, to Smithsonian Institution during opening of Museum of History and Technology’s Hall of Electricity. Both satellites were developed at present Army Electronics Command, Ft. Monmouth, N.J. (Balt. Sun, 7/8/64)
Soviet Ministry of Defense said Pentagon was spying on Russian military and space installations in Moscow, via radio and radar monitoring stations on borders of U.S.S.R. and other Socialist nations and satellites. Allegation called for increased Soviet vigilance against such “espionage.” American embassy in Moscow called statement “nonsense.” (NYT, 6/11/64,10)
The “strange object” that fell from sky near remote Venezuelan village was identified by two U.S. Army officers as a U.S. satellite, according to U.S. Embassy spokesman in Caracas. The 175-lb. satellite had been charred by re-entry heat, damaged by impact, and partly dismantled by local residents, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/7/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told University Club in New York that NASA’s last 25 attempts to place satellites in orbit were all successful. Of the 25, only one payload failed to function. Mr. Webb pointed out that in 1959, NASA’s first full year of operation, the record showed 6 successes and 13 failures. By 1961, rocket reliability “had improved to the point that we had 54 successful space flights with five successes for each failure.” (NYT, 1/10/64, 85)
oco I satellite probably would obtain 50%—and perhaps as much as 75%—of planned scientific data, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry J. Goett said at Washington news conference. The satellite was still not locked onto the earth but was spinning at rate of 5 rpm. All 20 experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, but only 17 were sending back useful information. Although oco I was “crippled,” Dr. Goett said, “we have quite a vigorous cripple.” For example, the satellite was transmitting 10 times more data bits than ever received from the most advanced Explorer-class scientific satellite. (NASA Transcript)
Soviets launched cosmos xxxiv artificial earth satellite equipped for scientific study of outer space. It was part of program announced by Tass on March 16, 1962. Period was 90 min., apogee was 360 km. (223 mi.), perigee was 205 km. (127 mi.), and equatorial inclination was 64.96°. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 7/2/64, 1, atss-t Trans.)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced its Board of Directors had elected John A. Johnson as Vice President-International. Mr. Johnson had been Director of International Arrangements of ComSatCorp since Dec. 9, 1963. From October 1958 until he joined ComSatCorp in 1963 he had served as General Counsel of NASA. (ComSatCorp Release)
Launch of NASA’s S-48 ionosphere explorer satellite (“Topsi”) was postponed when malfunction was discovered in Scout vehicle’s wiring system during prelaunch checkout at Pt. Arguello. The Scout was returned to manufacturer Ling-Temco-Vought in Dallas for repair. “Topsi” was to have continued NASA’s program to gather information on structure of the upper ionosphere pioneered by three satellites— explorer vni, ARIEL i, and alouette I—and a number of sounding rocket flights, (nasa Release 64-49; Av. Wk., 3/23/64, 23)
British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced at banquet of Society of British Aerospace Companies the government’s decision to develop Black Knight rocket as an experimental satellite launcher. The new rocket, designated Black Prince, would be a three-stage configuration using hydrogen peroxide and kerosene in the first two stages and a solid-propellant spin-stahilized third stage. The first stage would be powered by a cluster of eight engines. Also announced were plans to accelerate research on an ocean-going hovercraft to fill a naval role. (AP, 9/9/64; A&A, 11/64, 116)
Plans for military communications satellite system were described in Aviation Week & Space Technology, which reported that latest dod plan for interim military comsat network called for two or three Titan III—C boosters to place 16-24 satellites into near-equatorial orbit. First launch was scheduled for February 1966. (Av. Wk., 8/17/64, 19)
President Charles de Gaulle approved France’s plan to establish satellite launching center on east coast of French Guiana as an alternative to the Hammaguir complex in Algerian desert. Hammaguir site would come under Algerian control in July 1967 unless new treaty could be concluded. Later on, Gen. Robert Aubiniere, director-general of France’s cnes, said in London that by 1966 France’s space program would stabilize at $100 million per year. By 1966 France annually would launch two Diamant-boosted satellites, about 100 sounding rockets, and 300 balloons. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30)
NASA announced its Ames Research Center would negotiate with J. W. Fecker Co., division of American Optical Co., for satellite attitude control simulator. Contract would amount to about $1 million. The simulator would be used in vacuum chamber to evaluate performance of systems and components being developed for attitude control of spacecraft, (nasa Release 64-188)
NASA announced it would negotiate contract with General Electric Co.’s Valley Forge Space Technology Center to design and build gravity-gradient stabilization system for Advanced Technological Satellite. Contract was expected to exceed $5 million. The GE devices would be flown on three satellites; in addition, GE would supply two prototype and two engineering gravity-gradient system models plus ground operations and data analysis. (NASA Release 64-115)
NASA and Australian Ministry for Supply announced agreement for establishment of space tracking and data acquisition station in the Orroral Valley near Canberra, Australia, for ground support of NASA’s Orbiting Observatory satellites. The facility would be a sister facility to NASA stations near Fairbanks, Alaska, and Rosman,. N.C., which monitor, control, and command the Orbiting Observatories, as well as receive, record and forward to the control center information transmitted from the satellite to the ground, (nasa Release 64-55)
According to press reports, the twin satellites launched July 17 by USAF continued to send back clear signals from space. Press sources had indicated the satellites were Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, said one satellite was in almost perfectly circular orbit ranging from 63,314 mi. to 64,915 mi. altitude, while the other was in slightly higher orbit ranging from 58,686 mi. to 69,387 mi. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/26/64; Wash. Sun. Star, 7/26/64)
usaf Titan III-A space booster was launched from Cape Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight. Midway in its first orbit, approximately 115 mi. above the earth, the 5,250-lb. “transtage” (a third stage with multiple start-stop-restart capability and ability to transfer a payload from one orbit to another) performed a 360° somersault to align the platform’s inertial guidance system gyroscopes. At the end of its first 100-min. orbit, explosive charges automatically kicked a 3,750-lb. cylinder-shaped dummy satellite into a separate orbit. After the Titan III-A firing, Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, project director, said: “The success confirmed our confidence in the system. We feel that the Air Force now has a real purpose in accomplishing space missions.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/11/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/11/64; AP, NYT, 12/11/64,20)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed objectives, progress, and future plans of NASA’s programs in the area of space science (space environment, sun-earth relationships, geodesy, investigation of moon and planets, investigation into nature of the universe, exobiology) and applications (meteorological satellites, communications program, and advanced technological satellites). Some of the space environment results obtained during the past year: “1. The existence of an appreciable number of protons in the outer Van Allen Belts was established. “2. The lifetime in the belt of artificially injected electrons was determined. . . . “3. Trapping lifetimes and rates of enhancement of electrons of varying energies in the outer radiation zone have been correlated with magnetic storms. “4. Large low energy electron fluxes have been found on lines of magnetic force which appear to trail off to immense distances out into deep space. “5. Contours of constant counting rate near the magnetic equator were found to draw closer to the Earth on the night side of the Earth than on the day side. “6. Repeated observations were made of simultaneous vlf electromagnetic emission, auroral optical emission, and particle precipitation into the atmosphere. “7. It was discovered that the Earth’s magnetic tail in the antisolar direction extends at least half way to the Moon’s orbit. “8. Direct observations were made of the way in which solar plasma on the sunward side of the Earth piles up outside the boundary of the Earth’s magnetic field, and in so doing appreciably compresses the geomagnetic field. “9. Direct extended observations were made of the particle density and velocity of solar interplanetary plasma. These densities and velocities were found to have direct correlations with magnetic activity on the Earth and calcium plage activity regions on the Sun. “10. Extended measurements were made of the interplanetary magnetic field and solar and galactic cosmic ray intensities. “11. The true energy spectrum possessed by solar cosmic rays at their source on the Sun was deduced from the observational data. . . . “12. First simultaneous measurements were made of electron temperature, positive ion density, and neutral atmospheric constituents in the Earth’s high atmosphere. “13. A new theory was developed to account for the types of ions found in the ionosphere, specifically the ratio of helium to hydrogen. “14. Sounding rockets furnished important information on the ionospheric D region from 35 miles to 55 miles and the origin of the sporadic effects in the E region of the ionosphere at about 75 miles. “15. Diurnal and seasonal variations in the ionosphere were established. “16. Sounding rockets launched simultaneously with an overhead pass of the satellite Alouette reached within a few miles of the satellite, thereby connecting up ionospheric measurements in the lower atmosphere with those being made by the satellite.” (Testimony)
Forum on Developments and Techniques for Air Traffic System of the Future, sponsored by Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics, held in Washington. At the forum, details of Westinghouse Electric’s concept of navigation satellite system were disclosed by E. S. Keats, Westinghouse project manager for navigation and surveying systems. The single, synchronous-orbit satellite could provide navigation, communication, and traffic service to aircraft over North Atlantic or Pacific. The satellite would interrogate each aircraft periodically, measuring time to determine navigational position. (Av. Wk., 5/4/64, 69)
It was reported that usaf was planning to orbit the third in the Oscar series of satellites. These satellites were built by radio hams in California and had no military significance. It was designed to receive and re-transmit a single word in Morse—“Hi.” The 25-Ib. satellite was to be launched as a pickaback payload on some usaf launch from Vandenberg Afb. (J/Armed Forces, 7/18/64, 8)
A $ 100-million issue of Communications Satellite Corp. stock was put on the market and almost immediately sold out. Five million shares were involved in the stock issue. The maximum allotment was 50 shares per customer from each security house, but the average was only about 15 shares because of the great public demand. The par value of the stock was $20 per share, and it closed at around $23 after having reached a high of $27 in the first few minutes of trading. (NYT, 6/3/64, 59)
Spatial orientation and stabilization of Early Bird, ComSatCorp’s first experimental satellite, was to be achieved using a hydrogen-peroxide reaction jet control system. Developed by Walter Kidde and Co., and originally intended for SYNCOM II, newer version would be capable of at least a 10-yr. lifetime. {M&R, 7/13/64, 27)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite. It was later disclosed that two satellites were placed in orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64,10; hhn-48)
tiros vm meteorological satellite, launched December 21, 1963, was performing highly successfully in automatic transmission of cloud pictures to ground stations around the world, NASA announced. “Reports from 47 ground stations around the world, including five foreign stations, show that with one exception results have been satisfactory. TV signal strength has been good, tracking of the spacecraft based on data furnished daily by NASA has been easy for the ground stations, and picture contrast of the cloud cover photos generally has been excellent.” (NASA Release 64-53)
It was announced that President Johnson had designated December 1964 as United States International Aviation Month to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the International Civil Aviation Organization (icao), a division of the United Nations. The icao was responsible for making the international rules and setting international standards for all civil aviation activity, including the field of general avaiation. (naa Release) December 4: usaf launched Aflas-Agena D from wtr with unidentified satellite payload, (hhn—48)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center officials announced they believed they had successfully “hit” explorer xxii satellite with laser beams fired one-per-second across more than 500 miles. Whether the hits were definitely achieved or not would await further analysis. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/14/64; Wash. Post, 10/14/64)
NASA invited scientists to propose research experiments and studies for manned and unmanned space flights during the last half of the 1960’s. The announcement of deadlines and guidelines for the submission of proposals was distributed by NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications to domestic and foreign scientists in universities, industries, and Government installations. The agency gave the world scientific community detailed descriptions and timetables covering a wide range of space research opportunities, including placing scientific experiments in available space on Gemini and Apollo manned flights, weather satellites, sounding rockets, the X—15 research plane, orbiting observatories, and balloons. (NASA Release 64-177)
Common stock of Communications Satellite Corp. had risen as high as $35 since it was put on sale to the public at $20 last June 2, surprising many Wall Street experts. (Vartan, NYT, 8/7/64,33)
cosmos XXxiii launched into orbit with the following initial parameters: apogee, 293 km. (182.06 mi.); perigee, 209 km. (129.87 mi.); period, 89.38 min.; and inclination to the equator, 65°. Tass said the satellite carried scientific apparatus designed for investigation of space in accordance with program announced March 16, 1962, and onboard instrumentation was operating normally. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 6/24/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
USAF launched unidentified satellite toward polar orbit from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/64; NYT, 7/12/64, 2)
NASA Goddard Space Fight Center announced plans for negotiation with the General Dynamics-Electronics Co. for purchase of approximately $1.25 million worth of unique ground tracking equipment to be used in the Applications Technology Satellite project. ATS Range and Range Rate electronic systems would be installed in three ground stations to provide ground trackers with extremely accurate satellite position, velocity, and range. The systems would also drive displays and digital data consoles. The contractor would design, manufacture, and test the systems under a cost reimbursable contract with incentive provisions. ATS satellites, designed to advance technology in communications, meteorology, and other applications, would require unique ground systems ready for the first launch in 1966. (gsfc Release G—36-64) 76ft-598 O—65- —28
At international conference in Washington, two interrelated agreements for establishment of global commercial communications satellite system were initialed by the negotiators from 13 participating countries. Five other nations planned to join the agreement on or before Aug. 19, date of formal enactment. Under these agreements, ownership in the $200 million enterprise would be shared among 18 nations and Vatican City, with the United States’ Communications Satellite Corp., owning 61% of the shares and serving as manager of the system on behalf of all participants. Agreement would be open for six months beginning Aug. 19 to any nation belonging to International Telecommunications Union. (ComSatCorp Releases;’ Finney, NYT, 7/25/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/25/64; WSJ, 7/27/64)
Reorientation maneuver was made with syncom ill communications satellite, high above the Pacific Ocean, to align the communications antenna atop the spacecraft for optimum coverage of the earth. This positioned the antenna along a north-south axis perpendicular to the orbital plane. Side effect of this maneuver, plus an orbital adjustment made Aug. 31, was to reduce the eastward drift rate from 3.6° per day to less than 3° per day. (nasa Release 64-230)
relay I communications satellite continued transmitting despite an onboard timer set to turn it off after one year. Electrolytic solution was supposed to have eaten through main power lead to switch off transmission power. NASA and rca experts speculated erosion was slowed because environmental temperatures were cooler than anticipated. Launched into orbit Dec. 13,1962, relay i has been used for 2,000 communications experiments with more than 290 hours of transmission time, most of which was wideband transmission or TV. (nasa Release 64-1)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, described in Astronautics & Aeronautics the future space capabilities being developed for the U.S. through Project Apollo. The Saturn IB, Saturn V, and Apollo manned spacecraft would provide capabilities including extended lunar explorations, orbiting laboratory research, manned escape missions, and long-duration operations—including satellite inspection and repair. (A&A, 6/64,26—29) During June: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said in Scientific American article on the supersonic transport that NASA Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center had “devised several aerodynamic designs for what they call a scat, which is an acronym for ‘supersonic commercial air transport.’ Four of these designs, known as scat’s 4, 15, 16, and 17, are the products of eight years of research. Each design has characteristics that make it somewhat different from the others.. . . . “nasa engineers conducted extensive wind-tunnel tests of the four scat models at the Langley and Ames centers to evaluate and compare their aerodynamic characteristics. ... It is evident that we must discover how to combine the supersonic L/D [lift-drag ratio] characteristics of scat 4 with the subsonic performance of scat 16. We are optimistic that this can be done. . . . Discussing special structural problems of sst designs, Dr. Bisplinghoff said the metal fatigue would be accelerated under exposure to high temperatures of supersonic flight, hut at the same time it was essential that the airframe provide safety and serviceability for more than 10 yrs. or 30,000-50,000 hrs. flying time. “Prolonged screening of materials by NASA’s Langley and Lewis laboratories has identified a titanium alloy that appears to meet the unique and stringent requirements for strength, stiffness and high temperatures of an sst. The alloy contains 90 percent titanium, 8 percent aluminum, 1 percent molybdenum and 1 percent vanadium. . . .”	(Sci. Amer.,
A Thor-Agena D booster was used by USAF to launch an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 11/23/64, 8 HHN-48)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) discussed national space program on Senate floor: “If our nation is to remain strong and a leader of men, then it is necessary that we maintain a position of leadership in the greatest adventure of our time. “Not only would a slowdown in this program have an adverse effect on U.S. leadership, but it would cost the taxpayer more money. NASA estimates that for every year the program is stretched out a billion dollars would have to be added to the program. That is not surprising. Any major r&d program requires a tight timetable if it is to be an efficient program and provide the necessary incentive. Without a tight timetable the work drags on through repeated changes and indecision. As in most human endeavors the establishment of a tight schedule in fact provides assurance that the program will in fact be accomplished. “For the present, however, there is the fact that the huge space industry complex—and the space psychology itself—has found a place in the Nation’s consciousness. The United States is more than six years away from its first puny satellite, and in that time the acceleration of progress has been on the edge of the fantastic. The space age has barely been born but we cannot see how anyone can misread the promise of adventure and discovery in the years to come.” {CR, 7/20/64, 15720-2i)
By midnight deadline, 197 communications carriers had filed applications with fcc to invest in Communications Satellite Corp. (AP, NYT, 3/25/64,53)
Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau, said in address before joint American Meteorological Society-American Geophysical Union banquet in Washington: “Man has always had to contend with hurricanes, tornadoes, seismic sea waves, floods, earthquakes, and the like. His scientific, technological, and social advances have now brought him face to face with new environmental hazards. I am thinking of communications blackouts, the effects of atmospheric turbulence on high-speed aircraft, radioactive fallout, and radiation in space. ... “We are now developing revolutionary new methods of acquiring global information about our environment. The space satellite, although still in its embryonic state, offers a potential for acquiring environmental information over the entire globe in a manner hitherto unimaginable. However, satellites are extremely costly, and their cost will require that ‘ a system be devised for multiple uses. A satellite observational system for environmental purposes will have to serve navigational and geodetic functions, make observations of the weather, probe the oceans, and sound the ionosphere. “Any observational platform should be put to multiple uses if it is expensive to build and operate. I am thinking not only of space satellites, but also of ships and aircraft. We can no longer ignore the necessity of using expensive platforms to collect data for many geophysical purposes. The concept of an oceanographic survey without a simultaneous atmospheric survey must be abandoned by force of economics alone. . . .” (Text)
NASA’s SYNCOM iii synchonous-orbit communications satellite was 178.12° east longitude and 0.03° north latitude at noon, and was traveling along the equator drifting eastward at the rate of 2.8° per day. It was expected to reach the International Date Line (180°) tomorrow, syncom in was inclined 0.081° to the equator, and its orbit ranged in altitude from 21,690-mi. perigee to 22,509-mi. apogee. Control maneuvers would be signaled tomorrow to decrease the satellite’s apogee and increase the perigee, thus giving it a more nearly circular orbit, (nasa Release 64-230)
Two satellites were orbited with single Atlas-Agena D booster, launched by USAF from WTR. ( HHN-4 8 )
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1964, at National Space Club’s annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington. Other Space Club awards: Dr. Harold A. Rosen and Donald D. Williams of Hughes Aircraft Co. received the astronautics engineer award for contributions to conception and development of Syncom satellite. Tulane Univ. received a $1,500 grant to further advanced education in the field of science and astronautics; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. and General Dynamics/ Astronautics received Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for performance on Mercury spacecraft and Atlas booster of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; editors and staff of Fortune magazine received the Space Club’s press award for series of articles “which provided provocative insights into the motivations and accomplishments of the nation’s space-exploration programs”; Robert P. Walker, mathematics and physics student at Univ. of Maryland, received $1,500 Goddard Scholarship; and Robert Cargill Hall, historian of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., received $200 Goddard Historical Essay award for second straight year, (nsc Release)
Interviewed in Houston, where he toured NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh commented that U.S.S.R. leads U.S. in “total manned [space] flying hours, aggregate weight lifted into space, and some phases of biomedicine. “But we are ahead in space navigation, communications, weather satellites, and boosters. “I doubt that they now can equal the thrust of Saturn I, although I think they eventually will do so.” (Houston Chron., 1/31/64; Houston Post, 1/31/64)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. began exchanging weather data over special teletype, Weather Bureau spokesman said, although some operating details had not yet been worked out. Spokesman said U.S. was not yet sending to U.S.S.R. any data gathered from meteorological satellites. (AP, NYT, 10/29/64,58)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
nasa’s echo ii passive communications satellite was placed in near-polar orbit by Thor-Agena B launch vehicle launched from Van-denberg afb, Calif. The second-stage Agena fired shortly after booster separation, coasted, then reignited over South Africa, injecting into orbit the canister containing the laminated mylar plastic and aluminum balloon. Canister opened and released the 535-lb. balloon-satellite which inflated to 135-ft. diameter. Initial orbital data: apogee, 816 mi.; perigee, 642 mi.; period, 109 min.; inclination to equator, 81.5°. (nasa Release 64-11; AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/64; Becker, NYT, 1/26/ 64,1)
nasa launched 295-lh. explorer xxni (S-55c) meteoroid detection satellite from Wallops Station, Va,, aboard a Scout vehicle. The satellite was a cylinder 24-in. in dia. and 92 in. long. Its orbital elements: apogee, 614 mi.; perigee 286 mi.; inclination to equator, 52°; period, 99 min. explorer xxiii was expected to have a useful lifetime of one year. Its primary purpose was to provide accurate knowledge of penetration capabilities of meteoroids and the resistance of various materials to penetration, thus facilitating design of spacecraft. The payload contained primary sensors (pressurized cells) designed to record the rate of meteoroid penetration in two different thicknesses of stainless steel; a capacitor-type penetration detector to determine effects of high-energy radiation; cadmium sulphide cells to record the size of impacting meteoroids; impact detectors capable of detecting three levels of meteoroid momentum; two separate telemeter canisters for storing experimental data and relaying it to ground stations. Also onboard the Scout rocket was an experiment to measure air loads on the structure during its ascent through the atmosphere between 25,000 and 40,000 ft. The spacecraft was the successor to explorer XVI (S-55b), launched Dec. 16, 1962, which made the first statistically significant sampling of meteoroids in near-earth space, (nasa Release 64-272; Wallops Release 64r-81; Marshall Star, 11/11/64, 1; NYT, 11/7/64, 9; M&R, 11/16/64,33)	_
Dr. V. A. Bailey, prof, emeritus of physics at Univ. of Sydney, Australia, stated in the British journal Nature his theory that the sun has a large negative electric charge. He proposed that two satellites be launched around the sun, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise, to learn whether or not the sun had electrical charge and whether such a charge was negative or positive. Most physicists believed sun had no electrical charge. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 3/31/64, 21)
Tass announced electron i and electron ii scientific satellites were continuing to send back “valuable scientific information.” electron i had made 53 orbits of the earth and electron ii, 6 orbits. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/64,6)
President Johnson submitted to the Congress his 1963 report on the activities and accomplishments of the U.S. program to establish and operate a commercial communications satellite system. In his transmittal message, the President said: “The year 1963 has been a period of major accomplishment toward the objectives established by the Congress in the Communications Satellite Act. The Communications Satellite Corporation has been organized, established, has employed a competent staff, and is implementing plans for a commercial communications satellite system. All agencies of Government concerned have contributed wholeheartedly to the furtherance of the objectives of the act. . . (CR, 2/10/64, 2714)
relay I began its third year in orbit and could still send clear, high-resolution television and audio signals across oceans and continents. The communications satellite had circled the globe 5,685 times and accomplished 186 demonstrations and 2,139 experiments, with a transponder-on time of 334 hours. The relay i project was directed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 64-213)
The European Space Research Organization (esro) Council approved its program for 1965, which would include setting up tracking and telemeasuring stations in Belgium, the Falkland Islands, and Alaska. The program would also include 41 experiments during 28 rocket firings, four experiments with the polar ionospheric satellite Esro 1 to be fired in September, and six experiments with the Esro 2 satellite for the study of cosmic rays. Payment of $17.2 million was voted and contracts worth $34.6 million were authorized. (AP, NYT, 11/29/64, 20)
usaf Titan II rocket was launched successfully from an underground silo on flight down Western Test Range. Same day, faulty relay box in Thor-Agena launch vehicle postponed launch of NASA’s Nimbus meteorological satellite into polar orbit. (Wash. Post, 8/12/64; M&R, 8/17/64, 9)
UNESCO decided to convene an international meeting of scientists in Paris late next year to study the use of space satellites in mass communications media. No exact date was set for the meeting. (NYT, 11/14/64, 29)
Sixth birthday of explorer I, first U.S. satellite, which was launched into orbit with a Jupiter C vehicle by jpl—abma team, explorer i has traveled around the earth 26,315 times covering some 775 million miles. With initial orbit of 1,573-mi. apogee, 224-mi. perigee, and 114.8-min. period, explorer i now orbits at 1,011.6-mi. apogee, 212.5-mi. perigee, and 104.6-min. period. It was originally expected to re-enter atmosphere and disintegrate after five years, was now expected to last until 1966. Its smaller transmitter relayed information for 105 days; the larger transmitter, 31 days. Onboard instrumentation discovered radiation belt around the earth, named after Dr. James A. Van Allen who provided the experiment. (Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 4; “nasa Chronicle of Earth Sat. & Space Probes, 1957-60”)
NASA and French National Center for Space Studies (CNES) agreed to proceed with cooperative space project of launching satellite to investigate characteristics of vlf electromagnetic wave propagation in the ionosphere. The French satellite would be launched from PMR using a Scout vehicle provided by NASA. This would be Phase II of two-phase CNES-nasa program for vlf investigations, pursuant to Memorandum of Understanding dated Feb. 18, 1963. Phase I consisted of two suborbital launches of French experiments with U.S. Aerobee sounding rockets, to demonstrate the feasibility of scientific experiments to be performed by the satellite. (NASA Release 64-61)
NASA announced that it had selected 22 scientific experiments for the fifth Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-E), scheduled to be launched in 1966. 54 scientists from four countries (U.S., U.K., France, and the Netherlands) representing universities, government, and private industry would take part in designing and constructing the experiments. The satellite was scheduled to be launched into an eccentric orbit, with an apogee of 92,000 mi. and a perigee of 170 mi. The Ogo-E experi766-598 0—65----17	, ments would study energetic particle radiation, earth and interplanetary magnetic fields, effect of solar gases on the earth’s magnetic fields and radio communication, and the effect of solar radiation on the earth. (nasa Release 64-171)
Soviet satellite cosmos xxnr burned up in the atmosphere between the Great Lakes and the northeastern Canadian coast, according to NORAD. Observers in Pendleton, Ore., and Duluth, Minn., reported seeing fiery streak in the sky, and Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory officials at Cambridge, Mass., said they assumed the streak was the reentering cosmos xxiii. (AP, Balt. Sun. 3/28/64; AP, NYT, 3/29/64, 31)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was criticized by Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee in report on military communications satellite. Subcommittee said his concern with economizing had resulted in “overmanagement and underperformance” in the comsat area. “We do not believe, however, that economizing efforts should throttle programs essential to the national security. Satellite communications is one of the most vital and relatively less costly of our major defense programs.” Subcommittee said Secretary McNamara’s proposal last October for joint military-civilian comsat system was “ill-advised, poorly timed and badly coordinated. . . . Valuable time has been lost. Had the department moved ahead according to plans and policies laid down two years ago by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a system could have been operating now. . . .” Subcommittee also recommended dod begin comsat program using Atlas-Agena satellite booster instead of Titan III-C experimental launch vehicle. (Finney, NYT, 10/9/64, 1, 16; M&R, 10/12/ 64,10)
GSFC announced engineers Barbara Lunde and William D. Hibbard had invented a valve with no moving parts for controlling flow of liquid propellants to satellite reaction jets. Valve freezes and thaws the propellant in the feed line. (Goddard News, 5/18/64,2)
The ground station at Rao, Sweden, about 225 mi. southwest of Stockholm, joined the world network of communications satellite ground stations and would receive taped television messages via NASA’s relay i satellite. The station was the joint effort of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden. (M&R, 11/30/64,20-22)
